## MODERNIZATION OF THE MODERNIZATION OF THE DEFENSE SECTOR DEFENSE SECTOR

##### Principles and characteristics of the argentine model

 2007

###### MINISTRY OF DEFENSE
PRESIDENCY OF THE NATION


-----

|Report Documentation Page|Col2|Col3|Col4|Form Approved OMB No. 0704-0188|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB control number.||||||
|1. REPORT DATE 2001||2. REPORT TYPE||3. DATES COVERED 00-00-2007 to 00-00-2007||
|4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE Modernization of the Defense Sector||||5a. CONTRACT NUMBER||
|||||5b. GRANT NUMBER||
|||||5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER||
|6. AUTHOR(S)||||5d. PROJECT NUMBER||
|||||5e. TASK NUMBER||
|||||5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER||
|7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) Ministry of Defense,Azopardo 250 (C1107ADB) Ciudad Aut?noma de Buenos Aires,Argentina,,||||8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUMBER||
|9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)||||10. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S ACRONYM(S)||
|||||11. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S REPORT NUMBER(S)||
|12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved for public release; distribution unlimited||||||
|13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES||||||
|14. ABSTRACT||||||
|15. SUBJECT TERMS||||||
|16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF:|||17. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT Public Release|18. NUMBER OF PAGES 11|19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON|
|a. REPORT unclassified|b. ABSTRACT unclassified|c. THIS PAGE unclassified||||


**Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98)**
Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18


-----

###### Dr. Néstor Carlos Kirchner President of the Nation

 Dra. Nilda Garré Minister of Defense

 MINISTRY OF DEFENSE

Azopardo 250 (C1107ADB) Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires
Telephone.: 4346-8800 - Email: prensa@mindef.gov.ar - Web: www.mindef.gov.ar


-----

###### MINISTRY OF DEFENSE

 Dra. Nilda Garré Minister of Defense

 Lic. José M. Vásquez Ocampo Secretary of Military Affairs

 Lic. Oscar Julio Cuattromo Secretary of Planning

 Dr. Raúl Alberto Garré Chief of Staff

 Lic. Esteban Germán Montenegro Undersecretary for Technical-Military Affairs

 Lic. Gustavo Sibilla Undersecretary of Armed Forces Institutional Strengthening

 Lic. Hugo Cormick Undersecretary for Coordination

 Dra. Ileana Arduino Nacional Human Rights Director

 Lic. Jorge Luis Bernetti Public Affairs Director


I. Overall diagnosis

he return to a democratic order in the Republic of Argentina created the political conditions necessary for a legally-constituted civil

# T

leadership to rethink national defense policy and,
therefore, determine the new role of the Armed
Forces under such framework.

The bases to enable the re-institutionalization of
the Armed Forces according to democratic rules
–especially in compliance with the principle of subordination to civilian control and the limited assignment of roles and responsibilities—were laid down
through the enactment of a series of laws comprising the corpus iuris of national defense, namely:
National Defense Act 23,554 (1988), Domestic
Security Act 24,059 (1992), Volunteer Service Act
24,439 (1994), Armed Forces Reorganization Act
(1998) and National Intelligence Act 25,520 (2001).

In spite of the progress represented by the creation of a regulatory framework for the sector, the
efforts to make defense policy a truly consistent
and agreed-upon State policy encountered several
hindrances due to a complex range of factors.

It is important to underscore, among those factors,
the dynamic nature of the global and regional context in which the defense sector is inserted (the
profound reconfiguration of the world after the end
of the cold war, followed by the dramatic turningpoint of the post-cold war era represented by the attack on the World Trade Center on September 11,
2001), as well as the direct incidence of domestic
political factors. In the latter case, we cannot ignore
the particular characteristics of the country’s democratic transition process triggered by the political,
economic and military collapse of the last de-facto
government. Some of the most significant features
of such process were the large and chronic reduction of resources allocated to Defense –resulting in
a decrease of more than half its share in budget priorities over the last twenty years—and the lack of


PRINCIPLES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF THE ARGENTINE MODEL

### Modernization of the
 Defense Sector


a clear guideline by the political leadership regarding what military instrument model was required.

Such has been the context in which the defense
sector has lived, marked by a delegation approach
whereby civilian functions were delegated to the
Armed Forces, as well as a real demobilization of
their logistic capabilities and components.

With such basic diagnosis, it is essential to elaborate a comprehensive modernization program for
the defense system, which may allow its insertion
in today’s world and to respond to the country’s
own national requirements, by optimizing existing
capabilities and efficiently managing its available
resources.

With the adoption of such course of action, Argentina’s current modernization program has been designed around four dimensions:

(1) Operationalizing the existing legal framework
and adapting Defense’s strategic planning process accordingly, prioritizing the demilitarization of
strictly civilian roles;

(2) Restructuring the resource management subsystem, recovering the Services’ operational capability, coordinating and streamlining the areas of
science, technology and production;

(3) Adjusting the subsystems of intelligence and
military justice;

(4) Reorganizing the subsystem of civil and military education and training, introducing the human
rights and gender perspectives.

Based on such considerations, this paper is aimed
at describing the current modernization process
undertaken by the Argentine Defense sector, considering its background and principles, as well as
its strategic guidelines and key features.


I. Overall diagnosis


MODERNIZATION OF THE DEFENSE SECTOR | 5


-----

###### Modernization of the Defense Sector Modernization of the Defense Sector


###### Modernization of the Defense Sector


lished the organic-functional bases of the defense
system around general parameters aimed at ensuring: the exercise of civilian authority, the non-intervention of the Armed Forces in internal political
affairs, the regulation -from a restrictive perspective- of military involvement in domestic-security
matters, and the reinforcement of a military organization based on criteria of efficiency and jointness.

Likewise, the Domestic Security Act (24,059) specifically regulated the involvement of the Armed
Forces in domestic security activities, ensuring
that such role be exceptionally exercised in accordance with clear regulatory parameters.

Also, while the Volunteer Military Service Act
eliminated the system of conscripts, National Intelligence Act 25,520 assigned to the military intelligence activities strictly limited to the sector, and
established a level of coordination and civil-political
conduct of the entire system.

**Defense Policy in the Region**

Concurrently with this period of legal and institutional order, the consolidation of a new defense
policy was framed by a series of decisions focused
on confidence-building measures in the regional
arena which could enable to untangle the country’s
historical conflicts with neighboring countries,
mainly as to border demarcation and nuclear proliferation.

These circumstances became more evident with
Chile and Brazil, countries with which the Republic
of Argentina had had historical conflicts susceptible to a military resolution, and with whom significant progress has been made in the area of cooperation.

The ratification of the Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (1993) and the Treaty of Nuclear Non-Proliferation (1995), as well as the final and peaceful
settlement of “Laguna del Desierto” border dispute
with Chile (1994), and the Memorandum of Understanding of Consultation and Coordination signed
with Brazil (1997) are clear indicators in this respect.

It is also necessary to highlight that this process


###### Modernization of the Defense Sector


of more relaxed relations and progressive confidence-building was shaped and influenced by a
strong tendency towards economic integration and
cooperation, the promotion of a political bilateral
and multilateral dialog, and the gradual establishment of democratic regimes in the region.

**Importance of Peace-keeping Missions**

It is also important to note that such redesign of national defense policy has also meant a strong commitment of Argentina in Peace-keeping Operations
(PKO) under the United Nations mandate.

At present, our country has large military contingents and material in various missions under the
UN flag, especially in Cyprus and Haiti, totaling almost 1,000 troops among such deployments.

To that end, the Argentine PKO Training Center
(CAECOPAZ) continues to play an active role and
is internationally recognized for the education and
training of personnel assigned to peace-support operations.

**III. Necessity and grounds for change**

he legal architecture on which roles and responsibilities are assigned in terms of defense
policy, as in any other government policy, re
# T

quires a constant adaptation to the environment, in
order to fulfill the main mission for which it was
conceived.

This is most critical in the Argentine case, if we
consider the major changes taken place both internationally and domestically, which have framed
its defense policy since the new post-1983 period,
namely: the end of the East-West confrontation; the
consolidation of a process of integration, economic
cooperation and political dialog at a regional (Latin American) level and subregional (South Cone)
level, and the absence of armed political sectors or
groups in the domestic sphere.  os armados en el
plano interno.

Derived from such complex scenario, we find an
array of demands the Ministry of Defense must
constantly respond to. In that regard, at the start
of 2006, the following issues were still pending,


**II. Historical background**


**The inherited traditional model**

nce democratic order was reinstated in the
country, it was essential to set the foundations for the consolidation of a defense pol
# O

icy that could enable to put an end to the tutelary
footprint (“impronta tutelar”) whereby the Armed
Forces had guided national life in previous decades, sustained on a domestic-security concept of
national defense which encompassed both external
military aggressions and internal conflicts under
the same prism of analysis and resolution.

In fact, the so-called traditional model of defense
organization and military institutions was shaped
mainly in the second half of the 50’s, consolidated
during the 60’s and continued until the 70’s. As previously mentioned, it was based on a domestic-security (“seguritista”) concept of national defense,
in a context also characterized by a “protector” projection of the Armed Forces as actors in the political system.

This concept was framed in the period known as
the Cold-War era, and was based on the thinking
that national defense was a state effort aimed at
achieving national security, encompassing both the
protection against military aggressions from other
countries and, more importantly, against risks in
the domestic security arena. Consequently, national defense had to respond to a series of threats and
conflicts derived from three spheres, namely:

(i) In the global scenario, antagonisms and
competition derived from the strategic
East-West confrontation.

(ii) At the subregional level, border and/or
territorial disputes.

(iii) In the domestic sphere, conflicts
resulting from confrontation against
internal, political groups under the
framework of the so-called “fight against
subversion”.

In that sense, it is important to underscore that
along such period, the Armed Forces adopted an
organization that could be called “bifront”.


This means that, on the one hand, its architecture
was designed around the possibility of a conventional military confrontation with a neighboring
country. To that end, the Armed Forces embarked
in expensive procurement programs that led to regional arms-races, the creation of large structures,
the transformation of the employment doctrine,
and the capillary deployment of military units in
such zones considered key in the event of a military confrontation of that type.

Likewise, as the Armed Forces consolidated a tutelary role over the Argentine political system, an
intelligence and domestic security structure was
gradually shaped to exert control and a prospective direct action over opposing political and social
actors.

Such structure, directly aimed at internal security
matters, attained its highest expression in the years
of the last military dictatorship, with the so-called
domestic security zones and sub-zones, the deployment of operational intelligence structures, strong
operational ties with law-enforcement and security
forces –of which it exerted the effective conduct
of such activities-, and the development of a counter-subversive strategy which, to a great extent, escaped legal and moral parameters and ended up as
one of the most significant cases of State terrorism
in the region.

**Corpus Iuris of National Defense**

The first step towards the creation of a new national defense policy under the democratic framework
was made through the construction of a firm political and social consensus around the very concept
of national defense, its relationship with, and differentiation from, domestic security, the role of the
Armed Forces as military instrument of defense
and the administrative-functional decision-making
scheme.

The above-mentioned corpus iuris for national defense was the natural corollary of such consensus,
which made it possible to delineate the regulatory
foundations on which the Argentine defense policy
would be elaborated and implemented thereafter.

As regards National Defense Act 23.554, it estab

**III. Necessity and grounds for change**


MODERNIZATION OF THE DEFENSE SECTOR | 6 MODERNIZATION OF THE DEFENSE SECTOR | 7


-----

###### Modernization of the Defense Sector Modernization of the Defense Sector


###### Modernization of the Defense Sector


and the civilian defense leadership decided to start
solving them:

   - The lack of a presidential regulation
(in some cases, a ministerial regulation) of
key legal instruments for the sector, such as
the National Defense Act itself, resulting in
an inadequate enforcement of its provisions.

   - The permanence of strictly-civilian
functions under the Armed Forces
competence, a remnant from the old holistic
concept of their institutional role.

   - The sustained lack of investment on
maintenance and recovery of the Services’
material means, thus resulting in a
significant reduction of operational
capabilities.

   - Evidence of inefficiencies present in the
defense resource management system.

   - The mismatch between the areas of
science, technology and production and the
operational needs of the Services.

   - The non-existence of a military justice
regulation, tailored to new international
standards.

   - The distorsion between curriculum
contents and methodologies of educational
and training processes both for civilian and
military personnel, to respond to new
national defense challenges and needs.

The elaboration of a comprehensive defense system modernization program enabling to coordinate
response channels to solve these and other issues
is thus essential to revert the abovementioned delegation of roles to the Armed Forces and their empiric demobilization.

**IV. The Argentine Modernization Model**

In view of such situation, the Ministry of Defense
has suggested to start up a comprehensive adjustment and modernization of the defense system,
aimed at achieving a modern and efficient military


###### Modernization of the Defense Sector


instrument for the protection of the Nation’s vital
interests.

It is essential to underscore that the modernization process consists in consolidating operational
capabilities required by the military instrument, in
keeping with a defensive strategy to ensure the full
exercise of the nation’s inherent right to legitimate
defense.

Consequently, the Defense System Modernization
Process is supported on nine large lines of action,
revolving around the underlying aim of strengthening civilian control in the sector, namely:

1) Implementation of National Defense’s
legal framework

2) Reorganization of Defense’s strategic
planning system

3) Reorganization of the resource
management subsystem

4) Recovery of operational capabilities

5) Coordination of the areas of science,
technology and production

6) Activation of the subsystem of military
strategic intelligence

7) Changes to the civil and military
education and training subsystem

8) Implementation of human rights and
gender perspectives

9) Changes to the military justice subsystem

###### I) Implementation of National Defense’s
**legal framework**

Act 23,554 (1988) is the cornerstone of the national
defense system, and as such sets forth the aforementioned guiding principles on which it is to be
structured: civil authority supremacy, non-intervention of the Armed Forces in internal political affairs, restrictive military involvement in domestic
security, efficient and joint organization.


Its regulations (Decree 727/06, dated June 13th
2006), neglected for 18 years, are established as
one of the mainstays of the ongoing modernization
process, laying down the foundations for a true civilian control of military matters.

Such Decree is aimed at making the aforementioned principles and guidelines fully operational,
mainly in relation to organizational joint planning,
geographic deployment, training, and procurement
of weapons and equipment.

As regards the Joint Staff, Decree 727/06 strengthens its role as the main executor of strategic decisions taken by the civilian leadership, and the ultimate military body responsible for the command
and organization of the Armed Forces.

Likewise, the regulation respects and reaffirms
the spirit of the Defense Act, by specifying that the
Armed Forces’ primary responsibility is the defense against state military aggressions to the Nation’s territorial sovereignty and integrity. Therefore, the military can only confront non-military
threats, including transnational drug trafficking
and terrorism, from time to time when called upon
by the domestic security system in accordance with
Domestic Security Act provisions.

Regarding the aforementioned, the National Defense Act, the Regulatory Decree 727/06, and the
Armed Forces Reorganization Act are highly restrictive as regards the division of military-specific
competences. In article 4, Act 23,554 is clear when
underscoring that the difference between national security and domestic security shall always be
taken into account. Decree 727, in Article 1, establishes that the military instrument of national defense shall be used in case of foreign aggressions
perpetrated by (an)other State(s), notwithstanding
Acts 24,059 and 24,948 which specify the events
and scope of Armed Forces participation in domestic-security support operations.

Consequently, both the domestic security and national defense systems respond to assumptions unmistakably different and mutually exclusive in their
implementation: the former, primarily responds to
the prevention, pursuit, and punishment of illicit
acts contained in the Criminal Code and in special
laws, and the latter seeks to repel external aggres

sions against the United Nations charter provisions.
Such assumptions where both systems interact are
clearly specified, including mechanisms of coordination between both systems, and the occasional
and exceptional use of the military instrument in
domestic security matters or others not related to
their main mission (for example, community support).

An example of the above is the ongoing process of
Air Regions Command (Air Force civil aviation directorate) transfer from the Argentine Air Force to
a new agency that will fall under the Secretariat of
Transport in the Federal Planning Ministry (Ministerio de Planificación Federal), aimed at transferring civil-commercial air traffic to civilian hands. It
is worth noting that this process is conducted with
the advice of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).

###### II) Reorganization of the Defense Strategic
**Planning System**

Once the regulatory basis of national defense is fully consolidated, it is essential to proceed with the
organization and implementation of a comprehensive planning scheme which, based on diagnoses
and short, medium and long-term strategies, may
enable to build the defense policy as a true State
policy.

The first step in this path was to convene the National Defense Council (CODENA in Spanish) for
the first time, as stipulated in the aforementioned
Decree 727/06. Its purpose is to perform a full strategic profile diagnosis about the national, regional
and international frameworks where our defense
system is inserted, laying down the foundations
for a subsequent drafting of the appropriate public
policy.

For the purposes of strengthening the system’s
planning process, the National Executive Branch
issued Decree Nº 1691/06, representing the first
political guideline for the operation and organization of the Armed Forces. According to the criteria
adopted by the higher political leadership and the
Corpus Iuris of Defense, this guideline sets forth
the parameters and principles based on which the
Armed Forces shall structure their mission, modes


**IV. The Argentine Modernization Model**


MODERNIZATION OF THE DEFENSE SECTOR | 8 MODERNIZATION OF THE DEFENSE SECTOR | 9


-----

###### Modernization of the Defense Sector Modernization of the Defense Sector


###### Modernization of the Defense Sector


of employment, organization, deployment, and capabilities.

Likewise, in close cooperation with the Armed
Forces Joint Staff, the Ministry of Defense is working on the elaboration of a Defense Planning Cycle
in order to provide the National State with a regulatory tool that may set forth a number of guidelines
and documents of a political, military-strategic, and
specifically-military nature, as well as working procedures, in whose context the defense policy shall
be elaborated, implemented and evaluated.

The ministerial resolution implementing the new
Defense Planning Cycle will enable to plan the defense policy and its military aspects for the short,
medium and long term, based on a foreseeable
scheme which, in turn, may allow for the implementation of the necessary adjustments according
to the present circumstances and the strategic horizon.

###### III) Reorganization of the defense resource
**management subsystemnsa**

Given the aforementioned concepts, we can assert
that since the return of democracy, in the area of
civil-military relations, a sort of implicit pact was
consolidated between the various government
administrations to demand the military sector to
recognize its full institutional submission to the
Executive, which in turn would not become deeply
involved in substantive military aspects such as its
organization, deployment and equipping.

Such implicit pact of non-intervention was made evident, as we have seen, in the Ministry of Defense’s
excessive delegation of structural decisions to the
Armed Forces and other government agencies.

In terms of resource management, it was reflected in the ministry of defense’s low involvement
in the elaboration of annual defense budgets. The
Ministry systematically let the Economy Ministry
define, year after year, not only the initial amount
of resources allocated to the sector (a prerogative perfectly understandable given a global fiscal
policy strategy), but also the resource allocations
among the services, thus giving up the role of setting strategic criteria to support such relevant re

###### Modernization of the Defense Sector


source-sharing decisions.
Additionally, the Ministry of Defense (without further critical analysis) would post-facto put together
the budget draft proposals that each service would
separately submit to it, thus acting as a formal coordination body, thus validating draft budgets which
were based on each Service’s own strategic guidelines.

As a proof of that, the defense policy, reflected in
the budgets of the last 20 years, shows a dramatic
military instrument “downsizing” as the most relevant change. From 1983 to 2003, the total budget
assigned to Defense was reduced by 58.7% and the
sector’s share in the national budget plunged from
13.78% to 7.7%, a tendency which has continued to
date.

Such shrinking took place in a purely gradual and
marginal manner. In other words, it did not respond
to a medium and long term centralized strategic
decision, defining which military capabilities were
to be kept, promoted or eliminated. It is possible
to see how successive weapon systems have been
decommissioned because they reached the end of
their operational life rather than as a result of a deliberate political decision based on a tactical-military analysis.

In terms of processes, the natural ageing of systems
and the uncoordinated prioritization of capabilities
by each service were key criteria taken when the
“red pencil” had to be used to cross out capabilities
the defense system had to give up in order to adapt
to budget restrictions imposed.

As mentioned before, National Defense Act regulation lays the foundations to start a process which
could not be deferred any longer: the creation of a
definitely coordinated and organized defense system that may enable to respond to the National Executive guidelines with global coherence. In this
sense, the strategic thinking CODENA will provide
shall be the “input” for the development of the military-strategic planning, an ulterior and unavoidable
guideline for the redesign of the military instrument from a joint perspective. Core aspects such as
the size, deployment and equipping of the military
instrument will be defined thereafter from a necessarily systemic and joint perspective.


The procurement of defense means will be the last
link in the chain of a sequential and concatenated
planning and programming process. The Armed
Forces re-equipping will be aimed at strengthening
jointly-defined operational capabilities, and will be
in line with the defensive strategic posture adopted. The allocation of resources will be based on
medium and long term policies set by the Ministry
of Defense and executed under the supervision of
the Joint Staff.

For the purposes of guaranteeing efficacy and
transparency of the procurement process and the
system’s resource management, a number of reforms have been started, encompassing the budget dimension, specifically in relation to public and
military investments and the purely logistic dimension, as well as the operational dimension to be
dealt with in the next section.

In relation to the budgeting system, we seek to have
a more detailed breakdown of the sector’s budget,
with more defined representative goals and a better matching of resources with specific budget allocations.

To consolidate said reforms, a Committee of Budgetary Policy was created by Ministerial Resolution
1267/06. Its role is to coordinate the process of formulation, execution and review of the budgets for
the Armed Forces, the Joint Staff and decentralized
bodies under the Ministry of Defense.

Such improvements have led to the creation of efficacy, efficiency and capability-utilization indicators,
to be used on a Control Board under construction
to monitor operations on a permanent basis. Its implementation is aimed at making profound organizational changes for the consolidation of a “management by results” model which, in turn, may
promote accountability based on the performance
of organizations. Thus, decisions will be supported
by sound, precise and consistent management information.

As regards the sector’s investment management,
the new Comprehensive System of Defense Investment Management (SIGID in Spanish) has been
approved and implemented, allowing the Ministry
to have a permanent and standardized assessment
tool for public and military investment projects.


This system ensures that every project be reviewed based on its contribution to the capabilities
required by the defense strategic planning. Thus,
the only military investment projects to be given
funds will be those which, adhering to peremptory
times and preparation guidelines imposed by the
SIGID, have been proposed by the Joint Staff and
approved by the Planning Secretariat under the
Ministry of Defense.

From the logistic perspective, it is important to
highlight the creation of the Joint Logistic Committee (CLC in Spanish), an integration instance of
technical support aimed at assisting the Ministry
of Defense in the supply, storage, transportation,
maintenance and final disposal of the Armed Forces’ material resources, to comply with the President’s guidelines and responsibilities arising from
the defense strategic planning.

In addition to this, we can mention the regulation
of Act 23,985 (Real Estate of the Armed Forces)
and the constitution of the Joint Equipment Procurement Plan for Peace-Keeping Operations (PECOMP in Spanish). The first initiative is aimed at
improving the mechanism by which real estate to
be dispensed with by the Armed Forces is annually defined, as well as the intended destination of
resources obtained from the disposal of such real
estate. The second initiative responds to the need
to restore the operational capabilities of forces
committed to deploy material means in peace-keeping operations. Thus, the PECOMP, whose funding
comes from reimbursements paid by the United
Nations, is the first experience of joint equipment
procurement towards a common end for the Armed
Forces benefit.

On the other hand, a pleiad of specific projects intended to strengthen the strategic and operational
capabilities of the three services is being implemented. In this sense, it is important to underscore
both the purchase of new radars for civil and military use to consolidate the airspace surveillance
and control capabilities, and the recovery of Tandanor shipyard for the Ministry of Defense, following a process of fraudulent privatization that took
place in the previous decade.

Finally, it is especially relevant to mention that an
external audit has been conducted on the Armed


MODERNIZATION OF THE DEFENSE SECTOR | 10 MODERNIZATION OF THE DEFENSE SECTOR | 11


-----

###### Modernization of the Defense Sector Modernization of the Defense Sector


###### Modernization of the Defense Sector


Forces aviation material, to technically assess its
maintenance condition and propose alternatives for
its prompt modernization. This audit is the first in
Argentine military history and constitutes an unprecedented experience in the region.

###### IV) Operational capabilities improvement

Our modernization model grants a key role to the
military instrument’s logistic and operational areas, especially to the recovery and strengthening of
relative capabilities, which have been undermined
over the years (and in many cases have disappeared), as a result of the above-mentioned historical background.

The determination of what capabilities to recover
is based on military strategic appreciations so far
made by the Armed Forces, as well as on the need
to guarantee adequate safety levels to protect operators’ lives and physical integrity.

One of the first steps taken in this process was the
creation of the Joint Logistic Committee (CLC in
Spanish), an coordination technical support body
aimed at assisting the Ministry of Defense in the
supply, storage, transportation, maintenance and
final disposal of the Armed Forces’ material resources, to comply with the President’s guidelines
and duties derived from the defense strategic planning.

The Committee, made up of civilian and military
specialists, where all the system’s logistic bodies
are represented, reviews on a monthly basic the
readiness of Armed Forces material, and plans
such actions necessary to ensure its upgrading and
recovery based on efficiency and transparency criteria and a joint perspective.

Under its leadership and follow-up, the so-called
Program of Joint Supply of Common Items (Programa de Abastecimiento Conjunto de Insumos
Comunes, PACIC) was created and implemented.
Such program is intended to identify, standardize
and procure, in a consolidated manner coordinated
by the Joint Staff, such items required by the three
Services simultaneously (including ammunitions,
financial services, medicines, fuel, vehicles and insurance). The initiative seeks to create a central

###### Modernization of the Defense Sector


ized mechanism to acquire material means for civilian and military use, thus gradually streamlining a
joint logistic system which, by economy of scale,
may achieve better negotiation and price conditions.

Also under the CLC, with the technical support of
SECADE (Defense Cataloguing Service), we have
advanced in the start-up of an Armed Forces Maintenance Capability System (SICAMAN in Spanish).
With the intention to provide each Service with realtime information on services and materials offered
by the other services for material means maintenance, SICANAM has been built around an on-line
catalogue of such available capabilities, which can
be accessed by all military units with logistic support duties.

As a supplement to these measures and to fulfill its
objective of overseeing each Service’s maintenance
program progress, the Ministry has decided to create, under its area of responsibility, a political-technical body solely devoted to Defense logistical and
operational planning.

Such initiative is also closely linked to the conclusions and results of the external audit on Armed
Forces aviation material requested by the Ministry
in early 2006: the first experience of this kind in
Argentine -and regional- military history. The audit
was carried out by national renowned academic entities, to technically assess the maintenance status
of aviation material and propose alternatives for its
rapid modernization.

The audit results provided an impartial and updated diagnosis of the military instrument’s logistics
system –its aeronautical dimension-, and became
the starting point of a series of specific programs
for the recovery and strengthening of all strategic,
operational and productive capabilities (namely, air,
naval and ground) for the three Services.

In the aviation arena, it is important to mention
the procurement of new civil-use radars (eleven
2-D radars acquired from the Argentine company
INVAP) and military-use radars (four 3-D type), as
well as the upgrading of key area control centers
(ACC) to reinforce national air-space surveillance
and control capabilities. It is worth noting that the
technology presently applied dates back to the 70’s.


Hence, though the necessary technical upgrading
has been made to render it operational, the modernization of equipment is considered imperative,
and will be achieved by 2010 as planned, when all
the above-mentioned acquisitions are completed.

Also in this year 2007, a phased action plan was
launched to recover in a 5-year period 100% of aviation capabilities for all three Services, in the following priority order: 1) Transport aircraft, 2) Liaison
and training aircraft and helicopters, and 3) fighterbombers. The plan implies a total expenditure of
$819 million pesos ($226 million for this year (2007)
have already been spent), and provides for not only
the upgrading of air means but also infrastructure,
tools, technical handbooks and related professional
training.

Moreover, the implementation of a military airworthiness regulation for the Armed Forces aircraft
that perform operations in the civilian sphere was
instructed for the purposes of certifying them according to similar requirements as those set forth
by the aviation authority for civilian aircraft. This is
further enhanced with the drafting of guidelines for
licensing military crewmembers and technical personnel who operate or perform maintenance duties
on aircraft used for purposes other than their defense-specific tasks. Such licensing guidelines shall
also be consistent with civilian regulations, thus
specifying similar requirements and training.

In terms of naval-operational capability, a $65 million (peso) budget increase was decided in 2007
to address key material priorities. This is coupled
with the completion (for about $50 million pesos)
of the half-life repair of Frigate ARA Libertad, an
Argentine true floating embassy which set sail this
year with the first women ensign class on board.

Furthermore, the Ministry continues to support
the modernization of the Marine Corps material
after the development of the Track Amphibious Vehicle (Vehículo Anfibio a Oruga, TAV), and plans to
have two new units ready in 2007. The acquisition
of basic engineering to build Multipurpose Ocean
Patrol Boats (POM) intended for territorial sea
control and surveillance, and the recovery of antisubmarine capabilities through the half-life repair
of Submarine ARA San Juan at the Argentine shipyard Domecq García are other imminent actions.


It is also proper to mention the beginning of recovery activities, with a cost of $15 million pesos, to
repair Icebreaker Almirante Irízar, a key piece of
our Antarctic Campaign and undisputed symbol of
Argentine presence in “the white continent”.

Also, as regards naval aviation’s tactical capacity,
with the results rendered by the aforementioned
external audit, it became necessary to increase the
Naval Aviation Command’s budget by $10 million
pesos, to enable the organization to implement a repair program for detected failures. Along the same
lines, the introduction of 4 helicopters offered by
the US Navy is also anticipated.

Regarding ground operational capabilities of the
military instrument, an increase of almost $68 million pesos was granted in 2007, in order to strengthen the professionalization of the sector’s human resources and the recovery, modernization and safe
operation of its material resources.

With respect to combat transport capabilities, the
implementation of the upgrading program for M113
mechanized vehicles was accelerated, reaching two
thirds (2/3) of the fleet considered as necessary.

The consolidation of the “Gaucho” project deserves
a special consideration. The “Gaucho” vehicle, capable of accomplishing missions such as exploration, air-assault, command and control post, material transport and evacuation of wounded people,
was jointly designed and executed with Brazil.

Moreover, a decision was made to acquire 700 parachute gears, thus resulting in full renewal of such
parachutes about to reach the end of their service
life, while doubling the existing operational equipment stock.

Regarding the Army’s vehicle fleet, in addition to
the restoration of repair shops in 2003, we decided
to procure 39 fuel tankers and 5 semi-trailer heavy
trucks for the transport of ammunitions, in strict
compliance with current safety standards.

Additionally, it was decided to strengthen the field
communication capabilities with the acquisition of
high-frequency equipment, essential to conduct operations in the field.


MODERNIZATION OF THE DEFENSE SECTOR | 12 MODERNIZATION OF THE DEFENSE SECTOR | 13


-----

###### Modernization of the Defense Sector Modernization of the Defense Sector


###### Modernization of the Defense Sector


Continuing with management actions aimed at consolidating the Army’s air means, and to respond to
the observations made by the external audit report,
we instructed the implementation of an improvement plan in the Aviation Command’s sphere. Such
plan includes investments on infrastructure, tools
and service bulletins, as well as the recovery of personnel and cargo hauling capabilities, and community support capacity in case of emergencies.

Such initiatives intended to strengthen air capabilities of the land military instrument also include the
speeding up of “Hornero” project (transformation
of UH-1H helicopters to Huey II) through extra
budget allocations.

Finally, it is important to mention the regulation of
Act 23,985 (Real Estate of the Armed Forces), and
the creation of the Joint Equipment Procurement
Plan for Peace-Keeping Operations (PECOMP in
Spanish), the former aimed at improving the mechanism by which real estate to be disposed of by the
Armed Forces is annually defined, as well as the
intended destination of the proceeds of such real
estate.

PECOMP responds to the need to restore the operational capabilities of the Services committed to deploy material means in peace-keeping operations,
which, as mentioned before, is one of the subsidiary missions of the three Argentine Armed Forces
and one of the country’s priorities in the area of
foreign policy and international cooperation. Thus,
PECOMP, funded from reimbursements paid by
the United Nations, is the first experience of joint
equipment procurement towards a common end
for the benefit all the Armed Forces as a whole.

###### V) Coordination of Science and Technology

The research and development functions have always played a leading role within the concepts of
defense all over the world. While for developed
countries these have been the matrix for the creation of new war fighting techniques, for the rest of
the world they have represented the opportunity to
adopt and adapt them, thus obtaining benefits that
were internalized and extended to other sectors.

Therefore it is essential to institutionalize proc

###### Modernization of the Defense Sector


esses for the unification and strengthening of the
scientific and technological system of defense, in
order to achieve a more flexible coordination with
the national science and technology system. In
that sense, the Ministry has identified research
and development projects the Armed Forces were
conducting separately and without coordination
among the services, trying to direct them under a
joint vision that may allow the synergic utilization
of those efforts.

Along the same lines, the process for the organizational redesign of the Ministry has been completed
with the creation of a competent political instance
for the areas of research and development. The purpose is to make this organization a coordinator of
activities within the sector as well as with the other
agencies in government having similar responsibilities.

It is essential to underscore that the modernization process currently under way grants a central
role to enhancing capabilities of the Institute of
Scientific and Technical Research of the Armed
Forces (CITEFA), currently working, among other
projects, on re-equipping laboratories for the performance of analyses, tests and measurements of
a chemical, environmental and ballistic nature, as
well as on a stabilized camera system which, when
installed on board any kind of vehicle, can detect
and track objects in a passive way.

The coordination of activities between CITEFA,
the Military Geographic Institute (IGM), the Naval Hydrology Institute, the National Meteorology
Service –to be dealt with below- and Research Institutes from the Services, including joint work with
the national science and technology system, under
the coordination of a new political organization created in the Ministry, are the operating pillars of this
model.

It is specially relevant to note the transfer of the
National Weather Service (Servicio Meteorológico
Nacional, SMN), from the Air Regions Command
(Commando de Regiones Aéreas, CRA) within the
Air Force to the Ministry of Defense, thus fulfilling the fundamental premise of the modernization
model, consisting in the demilitarization of strictly
civilian tasks.


This initiative was specifically intended to promote the institutional strengthening of the agency
through: I) the creation of a new organizational
structure that may allow a substantial improvement in professionalism, II) the assignment of a
higher degree of budget autonomy to apply currently available practices and technologies so as to
provide a high quality and effective service.

Specifically regarding the naval industry, it is important to note the recovery of Tandanor shipyard
into the Ministry of Defense, as a result of a process
of fraudulent privatization in the previous decade.
Tandanor (a unique shipyard in the country, with
its Synchrolift-model elevator), along with Domecq
García shipyard, make up the core of a true naval
industry complex, which will allow the country to
significantly increase its autonomy as regards recovery and upgrading of sea units.

A similar process is currently under way in the
aviation industry, where priority has been given to
the interaction and complementation of installed
capacities among the countries of the region.

Furthermore, cooperation and assistance agreements have been signed with INTI (National Institute of Industrial Technology), National University
of La Plata, University of Buenos Aires, the Professional Council of Aeronautical and Space Engineering (CPIAYE), and the Argentine Science and
Technology Secretariat, thus proving the Ministry’s
willingness to involve the academic and specialized
sectors into its modernization efforts.

At the international level, further progress has
been made in terms of technical cooperation with
Brazil, Italy, Spain, Chile, United States, People’s
Republic of China, and the Russian Federation. As
a result, we have achieved the above-mentioned
“Gaucho” vehicle, jointly produced with Brazil, and
we will soon be able to announce the construction
of the Multipurpose Oceanic Patrol Boats (POM),
a subregional project which will provide its members shared and interoperable capabilities for the
control and surveillance of surrounding territorial
seas.


###### VI) Implementation of the military intelligence
**subsystem as a part of the Defense Intelligen-**
**ce System**

In countries where the processes to consolidate
a participatory democracy with high-institutional
quality have been underway for many years, one
of the challenges is to continually reformulate its
military intelligence doctrine. In more recent democracies such as ours, the challenge is even more
difficult and less explored, as it necessarily implies
more profound changes, such as doctrinary and
operational reforms which substantially change the
bureaucratic production of intelligence previously
at the service of non-democratic regimes.

Before Act 25,520 was passed in 2001, military intelligence was a duty planned and executed by the
Armed Forces without any civilian involvement.
Though with some delay, the statute finally became
the first formal landmark that turned this situation
to normal, by creating the military strategic intelligence subsystem under civilian authority directly
reporting to the Minister of Defense.

As a result of the profound restructuring of military
intelligence agencies, started in December 2005,
continued in 2006, and intensified in 2007, they became an integrated and subordinated component
of the recently created defense intelligence subsystem.

In keeping with this reform, a series of measures
have been set in motion to consolidate the subsystem, based on the following guiding principles:
oversight, operational transparency, professionalism, and democratic accountability.

First, the National Military Strategic Intelligence
Directorate (Dirección Nacional de Inteligencia
Estratégica Militar) was strengthened. This was an
agency that had so far had only one non-military position, that of Director. Next, the subsystem’s operation was regulated to make it follow the guidelines
set in a yearly ministerial directive. Such guideline
shall issue precise instructions for the planning
and production of intelligence. Thirdly, in 2006 it
worked jointly with the whole National Intelligence
System, generating the first joint publications on
military capabilities and components relevant to
the current defense policy.


MODERNIZATION OF THE DEFENSE SECTOR | 14 MODERNIZATION OF THE DEFENSE SECTOR | 15


-----

###### Modernization of the Defense Sector Modernization of the Defense Sector


###### Modernization of the Defense Sector


In addition, it is important to note that the regulation has unequivocally delineated the division of
roles among various subsystem components, thus
limiting the competence of military agencies solely
to operational and tactical strategic intelligence
production. To consolidate the latter guideline, the
military have been instructed to –after making a
thorough review of all manuals, plans and regulations –update, adapt and match them for consistency.

###### VII) A Changes to the defense training and
**education subsystem**

Another axis underlying the modernization of the
sector is the global adjustment of the educational
processes of defense to the demands of a dynamic
and complex regional and international context
that calls for the eradication of unilateral and reductionist approaches and the emphasis of interdisciplinary learning.

The Ministry of Defense, following the deep sense
of public service contained in the military function, consolidated the integration of the Services
in the national educational system, in accordance
with article 13 of the Law for the Restructuring of
the Armed Forces. In addition, that integration is
achieved based on the concept that, besides the
specific functions of military corps and specialties,
education must be uniform for the whole military
instrument and in accordance with the policy implemented through the Joint Staff.

Education for defense and the education of military
“citizens” are primary concepts in the new educational system, which is based on democratic values,
guidelines and practices that reaffirm their role as
citizens and specialized public servants. This creates a new institutional culture in the Services,
which will be reflected in their day-to-day activities, habits, and skills. Hence, a profound reform of
the educational system has been undertaken since
2006 in order to train the officers and NCOs from
our Armed Forces, as well as properly professionalize such civilians who are responsible for National
Defense.

To that end, the Ministry of Defense has taken a
series of actions intended to consolidate such process, which are coordinated by the Unit of Education


###### Modernization of the Defense Sector


and Training Coordination especially created to
oversee and follow up the educational activities of
the Armed Forces, training of civilians on Defense,
and the implementation of reforms conceived.

Such Unit is supported and assisted by the United
Nations Development Program (UNDP), through
the so-called PNUD-MINDEF ARG 06/019 project,
mainly for the reform of the Armed Forces higher
education system and its coordination with the national education system.

It also is relevant to underscore the creation of the
Consultative Council for the Educational Reform
of the Armed Forces, made up of representatives
from universities, the Executive and Legislative
branches, the Armed Forces, non-governmental
organizations and the Ministry of Defense itself. Its
purpose is to guide the curriculum reform at officers and NCOs schools and colleges from the three
services.

One of the main advances in the modernization
process, apart from the consolidation of the military aviation schools, has been the creation of the
Joint War College (Escuela Superior de Guerra
Conjunta) in 2007. Such effort involved a definition
of themes and subject areas to be taught, a distribution of curriculum contents, times and extra activities appropriate for the training and further education of the Armed Forces senior officers.

As regards the training of civilians on defense matters, we have advanced in the definition of a training
program aimed at professionalizing future civilian
officials to be responsible for the Nation’s defense,
in the form of a postgraduate course including
technical contents specific to the sector, currently
not available in the national academic offering, and
implemented through agreements with universities from the national university system.

In relation to the curriculum reform of the training
institutes for Armed Forces officers, a proposal was
drafted and agreed upon to be implemented soon,
to introduce a core set of new humanistic subjects,
namely: State, society and market; Argentine history; International Affairs; Sociology of organizations; Constitutional and administrative law; Military law, military justice code and law applied to
each Service; and International law, human rights


and international humanitarian law.

Likewise, a “Train the trainers” workshop is
planned to be given to both current teachers at
the Schools and new faculty, to understand the nature of the proposed academic change. As way of
example, a course is also being designed to train
qualified personnel to teach military training, taking into account the various factors that may put
at risk both the physical and psychological integrity of military officers under training. The course
will have a ninety-day duration and its curriculum
will include concepts about Human Rights, Physical Training Techniques, Sports Medicine, Group
Conduct and Leadership.

Much progress has also been made in the process
of curriculum changes in the NCO Schools, to be
completed in 2007. Additionally, a team was set up
to revise and modify the admission system, both at
Officer and NCO Schools, thus starting the collection of pertinent data in each Service.

In relation to another area, the Armed Forces
University Institutes have had to comply with the
requirements of the Higher Education Law and
undergo quality assessment processes led by the
National Committee of University Evaluation and
Accreditation (CONEAU).

Finally, as regards training and further education
of air controllers and inspectors, the Ministry has
signed agreements with national universities to
collaborate in this process. These institutions will
strengthen the Education, Training and Updating
Plan to be provided this year by CIPE (Center of
Research, Education and Experimentation), an institution that trains technicians and air traffic controllers.

Specifically, they will be given English language
courses, so that they may achieve the international
standards required by ICAO (International Civil
Aviation Organization), as well as training on technical issues relating to navigation systems.

###### VIII) Implementation of the human rights and
**genre perspectives**

The Modernization Program also includes a set of
measures intended to introduce the human rights


issue in the design and implementation of policies
for the sector. These focus on the ideas of Executive Order 825/03 which authorized the Ministry to
“participate in the enforcement and dissemination
of International Humanitarian Law and the International Law of Human Rights”.

Consequently, the Ministry is devoted to the organizational and functional strengthening of its
structure in this area, through the creation of the
National Center of Human Rights and International
Humanitarian Law that will operate as a coordinator of related efforts and initiatives.

In fact, also for the purposes of promoting discussion that may include key issues of Democratic
Rule of Law, the Ministry has coordinated, under
the auspices of the Inter-American Institute of Human Rights (IIHR), the Basic Course on Human
Rights, given to 150 service members (officers and
NCOs) from our country and the region.

A Permanent Seminar on Democracy, Citizenship
and Human Rights is being organized jointly by the
Ministry of Defense and the Latin American Institute of Democratic Security (ILSED), supported by
the Royal Netherlands Embassy in Argentina, and
targeted to officers and NCOs from the three Services. The program is conducted simultaneously
in the cities of Buenos Aires, Córdoba and Bahía
Blanca. By the end of 2007, a total of 600 members
from the three Services will have attended such
seminar voluntarily. The activity consists of threehour meetings held every two weeks, follow-up and
discussion activities via a virtual platform, and the
development of curriculum contents that will allow
the Armed Forces to have a basic training kit on
the subject.

On the other hand, the Modernization Program
awards high importance to the consolidation of a
genre perspective in the civilian conduct of military
affairs, mainly centered on the professional relationship, the possibility to have access and make
progress under equality conditions, and the eradication of various forms of violence against women
in the military environment.

The coordination of a Cooperation Agreement with
the National Women’s Council, the implementation of a Comprehensive Plan for Strengthening


MODERNIZATION OF THE DEFENSE SECTOR | 16


MODERNIZATION OF THE DEFENSE SECTOR | 17


-----

###### Modernization of the Defense Sector


the Role of Women in the Armed Forces, and the
creation of an Observatory on the status of Women
in the Armed Forces, a tool for the collection of information, analysis and diagnosis of information on
the situation of women and their insertion in the
military environment, are key indicators in that respect.

Along the same line, the Ministry has passed Resolution 849/06 by which the Ministry of Defense
urges the Armed Forces to amend the requirements for admission and permanence in their training institutions according to national legislation
provisions with respect to females and women with
children, or women who become pregnant during
their military career.

The same principle has led to the promotion of the
modification of the Executive Decree on Voluntary
Military Service, which prevented those people
with dependents from having access to said service. Although the prohibition did not make a formal
distinction between men and women, as a result of
the social and cultural context women were in fact
the most affected by this limitation.

A book has been published in order to disseminate
the information collected during the first year of
operation of the Observatory on the situation of
women in the Armed Forces, simultaneously with
the systematization of the measures adopted by
this Ministry in the matter of genre. Furthermore,
the Ministry has created and summoned the Council on Policies of Genre for the area of Defense,
which gathers specialists in the matter and female
members of the three Armed Forces -officers and
NCOs- in order to promote an agenda of changes
based on the search for answers to obstacles still
posed by the military career to their integration.

###### IX) Changes to the military justice subsystem

Finally, it is necessary to underline the importance
of adapting the military justice system to the modernization process under way, which essentially
implies adjusting it to the new international standards.

Under this premise, a Multidisciplinary Commission of Specialists was created with the mission to


draft a project for the reform and modernization of
the current Military Justice System from a truly
global perspective, which mainly implies:

a) Elimination of the military jurisdiction
for the prosecution of crimes committed
by members of the Armed Forces, which
in the future will be tried under the same
conditions as all citizens;

b) Elimination of offenses that do not affect
third parties, as they constitute behaviors
within the privacy and individual autonomy
of the person;

c) Inclusion of behaviors such as sexual
harassment and disciplinary harassment as
serious offenses;

d) Elimination of the capital punishment
from the Argentine legal system;

e) Full redesign of the disciplinary system,
balancing needs, limiting opportunities for
arbitrariness and strengthening the value of
due process.

The project is currently under consideration of the
Legislative Branch for its enactment as National
Law.

**V. Conclusion**

he modernization model being developed represents the strategic option by which Argentina has decided to adapt its defense system

# T

to its vital interest requirements, having a special
consideration for the contribution to the consolidation of the region as a true peace zone.

Strengthening the defense policy as a State policy,
a priority interest of any State to ensure its preservation, is the ultimate mission of the current modernization process, not only intended to complete
and complement the initial period of reform following democratization, but also to establish a new
concept that enables the national defense policy to
meet the challenges present at the onset of the 21st
century.


**V. Conclusion**


MODERNIZATION OF THE DEFENSE SECTOR | 18


-----

###### MINISTRY OF DEFENSE

Azopardo 250 (C1107ADB) Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires
Telephone.: 4346-8800 - Email: prensa@mindef.gov.ar - Web: www.mindef.gov.ar


-----

