## NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA

##### A RESILIENT ARMENIA IN A CHANGING WORLD


-----

### PRIME MINISTER’S REMARKS

I believe that, in discussing our national security, one
first has to reflect on our national identity, since national
security is about preserving that national identity—
shielding it from physical and substantive threats.
Nevertheless, national identity is not static. Our nation
and its people have existed for millennia. However, the
notion of what it means to “be Armenian” has changed
over time, in light of a range of circumstances, events,
and factors.

Today, we may not know the meaning that a subject of
King Artaxias I attributed to the word “Armenian”, but
we do know that it differed from how we understand
it today. At minimum, they were unaware of our current existence; whereas, we surely are aware
of theirs. This fact, in itself, indicates that national identity does evolve.

We are unaware if the Armenians of 2,000 years ago considered our current existential interests
as part of their decision-making, or whether such reasoning existed at all. However, in our
current time, we can factor that in—knowing the past, we can reflect beyond just the present
day and immediate future, but also project onto the horizon of the millennia to come.

This may be the pivot whereupon a national outlook becomes an existential imperative, as an
institution up to the task of drawing on our past and present experience to focus beyond just
the needs of today, but project its message into the future—a message that would connect the
Armenian living a thousand years from now with the Armenian who lived a thousand years ago.

Perhaps this is how national identity and national awareness evolve: through historical
experience, through awareness of that history, through the positive and negative impressions
that accumulate over that experience, and through future aspirations, connected organically
with both the past and the present. Over the years, our national identity has developed to an

II


-----

extent that allows us to define our purpose—to ensure the existence and development of our
generations on this planet, on the territory of the Armenian state for millennia to come—and
to view our present endeavors within this context.

The Armenian who lives on this planet 2,000 years from now will be different from us, just as
we differ from the Armenians who lived 2,000 years ago. One such difference is that we can
convey our message to the Armenians of the future. The central idea of that message should
focus on what connects them with us and with the Armenians who lived 2,000 years before us,
and what conditions would strengthen this connection and make it viable. At the same time,
this connection should not become constraining.

It should not hold us back but, rather, push us forward, motivate and inspire us. It should
not become a suffocating presence, but rather provide an incentive for every Armenian to
view themselves as integral to a millenia-old mission, and thus expand its scope and enrich
its content. It should instill trust and a longing for self-acknowledgment and self-recognition.

The most vital element of national identity is the connection with one’s roots, a sense of
ownership over a national legacy and values, crystalized through history. It strengthens every
individual’s faith in and reliance on their abilities and, consequently, the faith in and reliance on
the abilities of the entire nation and its people. For this reason, in the preamble to the National
Security Strategy, I consider it necessary to chart a trajectory best formulated by poet Vahan
Teryan in the following lines:

**Babylon was once our adversary, see**
**How it has been lost, passed on—like an ominous mist.**

**- Vahan Teryan**

We have been conceived in the Armenian Highland, our patriarch was Hayk, and we are called
Armenians. We are the heirs of the Kingdom of Van, the Orontid dynasty, the Artaxiad dynasty,
the Arsacid dynasty, the Bagratid dynasty, the Kingdom of Cilicia, and the First Republic of
Armenia.

We acknowledge the exceptional role of the Armenian SSR in the development of education,
science, culture, and industry in Armenia.

We are the proud citizens of the Third Armenian Republic, the sons and daughters of the
Armenian nation, who founded the Third Armenian Republic and liberated Artsakh.

The Republic of Armenia is the guarantor of the security and liberty of the Armenians of
Artsakh. The Republic of Armenia is a Pan-Armenian state and represents all the Armenians of
the world.

The Armenian nation has survived many historical ordeals and has acquired the strength and
vitality to make it to the 21st century through the skills, knowledge, and character it has
developed by exercising statehood. Drawing on this historical knowledge, the Armenian nation

III


-----

succeeded in re-creating its independent state in the very wake of the Armenian Genocide—
the Mets Yeghern.

The Armenian State is the sole guarantor of the existence and development of the Armenian
nation.

Therefore, the Armenian State must persist eternally because the Armenian nation shall exist
forever and ever.

###### National values

_The values of the Armenian nation are:_

– The Armenian state, citizenship of the Republic of Armenia, the Armenian Army;

– The history of the Armenian nation, its folklore, epics, beliefs, legends, and myths;

– The Armenian language and its alphabet, Armenian literature including translated works,
knowledge, and science;

– The Pan-Armenian potential, the Armenian Diaspora;

– The homeland, the family, the individual;

– The Holy Armenian Apostolic Church, the Armenian Catholic Church, the Armenian Evangelical
Church, Christianity;

– Armenian music of the ashough, goussan, folk, classical, bard, and popular traditions,
Armenian dance, Armenian visual arts, Armenian theater, and Armenian architecture;

– The nature and biodiversity of Armenia;

– Progress, liberty, self-respect, hospitality, education, work ethic, abidance of the law, respect
and tolerance toward other people, nations, and religions. Fraternity with the ethnic minorities
living in Armenia and Artsakh, with whom an unbreakable unity is expressed via citizenship of
the Republic of Armenia and Artsakh;

– Armenian cuisine, all examples of tangible and intangible heritage that express, portray,
describe, or symbolize the values described herein.

###### National goals

_The goals of the Armenian nation are:_

– Ensuring the ideological, security, social, political, legal, economic, demographic, inter­

national, educational, intellectual, and cultural institutional conditions necessary for the
perpetuity of Armenian statehood;

– International recognition of Artsakh’s right to self-determination without preconditions;

– International recognition of the Armenian Genocide, overcoming and eliminating its
consequences;

– Securing and protecting Armenian citizens’ rights to security, prosperity, liberty, and
happiness, as well as other universal rights;

IV


-----

– Guaranteeing equality before the law, equality between women and men, equal opportunities
for women and men to partake in social, administrative, and economic activities, and ultimately
affirming national unity through the protection of rights and fulfillment of duties;

– Protecting and developing the national and state identity, autonomy, and sovereignty of the
Armenian people, including the restoration and development of identity among Armenians
whose national self-awareness has waned or is waning, through substantially increasing the
level of Armenian language proficiency among all Armenians, as well as those who hold
Armenian citizenship;

– Consolidating the Pan-Armenian potential around the national goals, as well as preserving
and developing the national values.

###### Rules of co-existence for all Armenians

1. The toolkit for resolving any and every Intra-Armenian issue shall exclude violence. All
factions and individuals who consider violence as a means of resolving an Intra-Armenian
issue must be shunned. The vision of a society and a nation free from violence must become
the cornerstone of national unity. This principle still allows for the lawful use of force in
preventing and exposing crime, securing the public’s orderly way of life, and defending the
homeland from aggression.

2. The people and its free will are the principal source of authority. Any attempt to subvert or
distort the free expression of the people’s will shall be viewed as an action directed against
the state and the nation.

3. The sovereignty of Armenia and Artsakh, of the Armenian nation, is a primary value. Factions
willing to bring in external actors to Intra-Armenian issues or issues internal to Armenia, and
willing to act as conduits for foreign interests, must encounter the firm opposition of the
Armenian people and its legitimate agent—the Government of Armenia.

4. Armenia and Artsakh must be free from corruption, and all its manifestations, including
favoritism, artificial monopolies, and fabricated impediments to competition, must be
eradicated. Material damages to the state and the people caused by corrupt practices must
be indemnified.

5. The supremacy of rights and the law, equality before the law, the protection of rights, and
fulfillment of duties must be the crux of internal relations. Courts susceptible to external
or domestic influence are threats to national security. The courts must be independent. No
group or individual should be entitled to exclusive privileges in the economy, politics, or any
public sphere.

6. The goal of the negotiation process on the settlement of the Artsakh issue should be to
consolidate the outcomes of the liberation war, fought for the self-determination and
security of the people of Artsakh. No government-negotiated solution can be acceptable
unless deemed as such by the people of Armenia and Artsakh.

V


-----

###### The world and us

Positioned at “the West of the East” and “the East of the West” throughout its history, Armenia
often found itself center-stage to civilizational conflict. We dismiss the presumption of
civilizational conflict and position ourselves as a proponent for dialogue between civilizations.
Our vision for foreign relations rests upon international and inter-ethnic dialogue, based on
mutual respect and an aspiration to understand and be understood. Facilitating dialogue and
multilateral relations between civilizations, nations, and states must become the manifestation
of our commitment to peace and stability in the world. Armenia is ready to become a platform
for such dialogue.

Nikol Pashinyan
Prime Minister of the Republic of Armenia

VI


-----

### CONTENTS

**1. INTRODUCTION........................................................................................................................2**

**2. ARMENIA’S SECURITY ENVIRONMENT......................................................................................4**

**3. NATIONAL INTERESTS OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA...........................................................8**

**4. ENSURING THE INDEPENDENCE, SOVEREIGNTY, AND TERRITORIAL**
**INTEGRITY OF ARMENIA, AND THE SECURITY OF ARTSAKH.......................................................10**

**Formation of a more favorable external environment.....................................................11**
**Deterrence and neutralization of military threats...........................................................12**
**Ensuring the security of Artsakh.......................................................................................15**

**5. PEACE AND ENHANCED INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION........................................................17**

**Promoting international cooperation, security, and peace.............................................18**
**Genocide prevention..........................................................................................................19**
**Armenia-Diaspora relations: a Pan-Armenian outlook.....................................................20**

**6. SECURING DEMOCRACY, HUMAN RIGHTS, AND THE RULE OF LAW.......................................23**

**7. ENSURING THE SECURITY AND WELL-BEING OF THE CITIZENS**
**OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA, AND THE STATE’S SUSTAINABLE**
**SOCIO-ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT..............................................................................................27**

**Developing a resilient public security system...................................................................28**
**Ensuring open and safe information and cyber domains.................................................29**
**Developing a competitive economy and ensuring food security......................................30**
**Developing a self-sufficient and stable energy system....................................................31**
**Promoting social well-being and improving the demographic situation........................32**
**Directing intellectual potential towards**
**the high-tech and defense sectors....................................................................................33**
**Promoting public health and biosecurity.........................................................................34**
**Rehabilitating, protecting, and improving the environment...........................................36**

**8. CONCLUSION...........................................................................................................................38**

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 1


-----

### 1. INTRODUCTION

1.1 The main goal of the National Security Strategy of the Republic of Armenia is to establish
guidelines for ensuring the secure and forward-looking development and well-being of Armenia
and the citizens of the Republic of Armenia. An independent, sovereign, and powerful Republic
of Armenia is the guarantor of this goal and the homeland of Armenians dispersed throughout
the world. The Strategy specifies the national interests of Armenia and the strategic means of
their effective protection.

1.2 The international and regional security environment has undergone significant changes
since the first National Security Strategy of the Republic of Armenia was adopted in 2007. These
changes have created more sophisticated and multi-layered challenges for Armenia. Armenia
itself has also changed. The non-violent Velvet Revolution of 2018 set a high standard for
ensuring state security, development, and prosperity. In this new context, Armenia’s security
policy hinges upon the democratic system of governance laying sound foundations for the
strengthening of the country’s economic, political, intellectual, and consequently, military
potential. These realities require a new and more ambitious National Security Strategy.

1.3 The Strategy is based on three fundamental principles. First, a strong and prosperous
Armenia is the guarantor of its own security. There is no alternative to a strong and prosperous
Armenian state for ensuring Armenia’s security. As a state interested in maintaining peace
and stability, Armenia shall continually develop capacity along these dimensions and make
continuous efforts towards enhancing its role in providing peace, security, and stability in the
region. Armenia shall continue to invest in international security through the involvement of
Armenian peacekeepers in international peace support missions, not only as a consumer, but
also a provider of international security.

1.4 Second, this Strategy aims to contribute to a far-reaching goal: ensuring the perpetuity of
Armenian statehood, preparing us to withstand whatever threat that may emerge to jeopardize
it. The Armenian nation shall, once and for all, override the previous vicious cycle of acquiring
and losing statehood, often caused by geopolitical factors beyond our control. The citizens

2 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA


-----

of the Republic of Armenia and the Armenian nation must hereafter assert their autonomy
over the issue of Armenian statehood, the existence of which does not hinge on geopolitical
factors, but emanates solely from the will of the Armenian nation. Attaining this goal presumes
unifying Pan-Armenian efforts and capacities. Armenian statehood embodies the centuriesold aspirations of the Armenian people—and belongs both to the citizens of the Republic of
Armenia and the entire Armenian nation, who are the bearers thereof and the protectors of its
interests.

1.5 Third, in the constantly changing world, Armenia’s internal and external resilience
should develop alongside its readiness to effectively respond to new and unforeseeable
challenges. Currently, in the context of on-going, large-scale geopolitical changes, such as
power shifts, the weakening of multilateral international platforms, and the erosion of mutual
confidence among states, the main principles of the contemporary world order have become
uncertain. Apart from addressing traditional and predictable threats, states and societies also
need to counter unpredictable threats. The most salient example is the outbreak of the novel
coronavirus, which shocked the health systems of the world’s leading states and plunged
the global economy into a crisis. Armenia’s National Security Strategy aims to enhance
resilience through a nationwide approach to planning and maintaining national security. The
comprehensive provision of national security necessitates a convergence of the efforts at both
the state administrative and societal levels. It is no coincidence that the Strategy includes both
external political and military components together with social, economic, energy, health,
scientific, information, and technological aspects of security.

***

1.6 In order to withstand the threats and challenges of the changing world, ensure its
own security, and effectively contribute to regional and international security, Armenia shall
continue to enhance its international standing. Toward this purpose, Armenia shall develop its
ability to employ the full range of the power toolkit, including soft power, putting its focus on
its most important resource—human capital. It is within this context of human capital that the
convergence of the potential of globally dispersed Armenians is viewed.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 3

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|


-----

# 2. ARMENIA’S  SECURITY ENVIRONMENT

4 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA


-----

2.1 Alongside traditional threats, rapid and unanticipated changes in the contemporary
world order and security architecture bring forth new challenges for Armenia.

2.2 International relations display trends of weakening security systems, expressed in
particular through increasing competition between states that have played a major role in
maintaining global security, eroding arms control regimes, intensifying arms races, weakening
multilateral platforms, as well as increasing inclinations to resolve conflicts through the use
of force. Meanwhile, the evident trends of emerging new power centers intensify international
rivalry, further contributing to the use of force.

2.3 Tensions between international and regional power centers and institutions detrimentally
affect the prospect of Armenia’s cooperation with them. Concurrently, some regional states’
aspirations to play a more active role threatens to destabilize the existing balance of power and
jeopardizes regional stability.

2.4 The fragmented and non-inclusive development of transportation, energy, and
communications infrastructure deepens regional divisions, and subsequently contributes to
regional instability.

2.5 Security threats in the modern world often appear in the form of hybrid warfare,
including not only military elements, but also the use of economic means, cyber attacks, fake
news, and disinformation.

2.6 Armenia is also concerned about a weakening commitment to democracy and human
rights in the region and in the world.

2.7 Unresolved conflicts continue to loom over the sustainable development of regional
states. Azerbaijan’s unconstructive position periodically frustrates and threatens the process
of peaceful resolution for the Artsakh conflict, expressed through inclinations to resolve the
conflict through the use or threat of force, an expansionist and uncompromising stance,
unequivocal claims over the territory of the Republic of Armenia, Armenophobic policies, and
the distortion of history. The adversary’s desire to resolve the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict by
military means, manifested in military actions unleashed against Artsakh in April 2016, as well
as continual ceasefire violations, acts of incursion, military build-up, and the movement of
troops, coupled with military exercises at both the Artsakh-Azerbaijan Line of Contact and the
Armenian-Azerbaijani state border, all pose an immediate threat to Armenia. The continuous
military build-up of a state that professes a hostile policy toward Armenia and Artsakh jeopardizes
regional peace and stability.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 5


-----

2.8 From the perspective of regional security, we are
concerned about the possibility of deepening discord between
military-political alliances, and the member states they are
composed of, that impact the South Caucasus region. Equally
concerning is the potential weakening of those alliances and
the specter of hostility among such states, that could harm
Armenia’s interests. Particularly, the sale of arms to Azerbaijan
further jeopardizes regional peace and stability. Our attention
is also focused on possible political and military instability in
neighboring states.

2.9 Turkey’s policy towards Armenia is unneighborly. It
continues its blockade of Armenia, refusing to establish
diplomatic relations without preconditions, denying and, in
certain instances, justifying the Armenian Genocide.


###### Armenia is also concerned about a weakening commitment to democracy and human rights in the region and in the world.


2.10 At the same time, Turkey’s military-political assistance to Azerbaijan further strengthens
the latter’s aspirations to resolve the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict by military means. Turkey’s
readiness for covert or overt intervention in the case of Azerbaijani-initiated military actions is
particularly problematic.

2.11 Turkey’s unlawful use of force against its neighboring states and nations in turn
jeopardizes the stability of the broader region, and increases the unpredictability of its possible
actions against Armenia.

2.12 The decline of democracy and human rights in Turkey and Azerbaijan has a detrimental
impact on their compliance with their international commitments, increasing the unpredictability
of these countries for Armenia.

2.13 Armenia’s security environment is also affected by processes underway in the Middle East,
which include, in particular, the expulsion of religious and ethnic minorities, the consolidation
and spread of religious radicalism, internal conflicts, wars of attrition, and non-traditional and
proxy warfare.

2.14 Terrorism and transnational organized crime, the transit and dissemination of weapons of
mass destruction, drug trafficking, money laundering, illegal migration and human trafficking
also pose threats to Armenia.

2.15 Domestic threats include current demographic trends negatively impacting Armenia’s
security and its sustainable social and economic development. A decline in the birth rate,
emigration, transformation of the population’s age structure, and uneven economic development
pose substantial challenges and threats to Armenia, particularly in the form of brain drain, a
reduced workforce, and an increasing burden on the social security system.

2.16 The increasing penetration of information communication technologies (ICTs) into every
aspect of society has resulted in both opportunities and challenges. Concurrently with the
development of the ICT sector, the security of the individual, society, and the state has become
more vulnerable, and therefore needs protection in both the information and cyber domains.

6 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA


-----

2.17 Any form of corruption poses a serious threat to Armenia’s government system. Corrupt
practices diminish the state’s capacity to withstand national security threats.

2.18 Any manifestation of the criminal subculture, violence, hatred, and xenophobia divides
society and poses a challenge to the state and society.

2.19 Despite positive trends in economic growth, we still face the challenges of possible
financial instability, the scale of the shadow economy, limited economic diversification, and
impediments to the investment environment and entrepreneurship.

2.20 Poverty, social inequality, and social polarization continue to exacerbate Armenia’s
security challenges and threats.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 7

|2.1|7|
|---|---|

|2.1|8|
|---|---|

|2.1|9|
|---|---|


-----

# 3. NATIONAL INTERESTS OF THE REPUBLIC  OF ARMENIA

8 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA


-----

Armenia’s principal national interests are:

3.1 Ensuring the independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of Armenia, and the

security of Artsakh. Armenia’s independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity are the
prerequisites for the security, development, and achievement of the goals of the Armenian
people.

3.2 Peace and enhanced international cooperation. Being the guarantor of Artsakh’s security
and having its contribution to the process of regional and international security, the Republic
of Armenia is an advocate for peace and equitable cooperation.

3.3 Securing democracy, human rights, and the rule of law. Democracy, the protection
of human rights, and the rule of law guarantee effective state governance and enhance the
country’s internal resilience. The sole source of authority in the Republic of Armenia is the free
will of its people.

3.4 Ensuring the security and well-being of the citizens of the Republic of Armenia, as well

as the state’s sustainable economic development. Ensuring the security and well-being of the
citizens of the Republic of Armenia and the continued development of Armenia’s economic
resilience is aimed at securing a dignified livelihood in the homeland and achievement of the
people’s goals.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 9


-----

# 4. ENSURING THE INDEPENDENCE, SOVEREIGNTY, AND TERRITORIAL INTEGRITY OF ARMENIA, AND THE SECURITY OF ARTSAKH

**NATIONAL INTERESTS OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA**

10 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA


-----

###### FORMATION OF A MORE FAVORABLE EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT


4.1 Armenia’s foreign policy objectives are to ensure the sovereignty, security, and
development of the state, as well as the formation of a more favorable external environment for
the security and well-being of its citizens. In its foreign relations, Armenia draws on civilizational
and democratic value systems, as well as the continual development of mutually beneficial and
equal relations with all states.

4.2 The Republic of Armenia implements its foreign policy priorities on the basis of three
fundamental, comprehensive, and interrelated principles: sovereignty, as the fundamental basis
for carrying out foreign policy; a Pan-Armenian outlook, the idea of understanding and realizing
collective Armenian interests; cooperation, as a means of establishing mutually beneficial and
equal relations with states.

4.3 The Republic of Armenia is the guarantor of the security of Artsakh. This role is
conditioned by Azerbaijan’s policy of resolving the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict through military
means, posing an existential threat to the population of Artsakh.

4.4 If Turkey were to cease its unneighborly policy toward Armenia and the Armenian people,
it would cease to be a security threat for us.

4.5 Armenia views democracy and the protection of fundamental human rights and
freedoms as vital components of peace and stability in the region. It will continue to support
the entrenchment of these principles.

4.6 Given the increasing tensions between international and regional power centers
and institutions, Armenia ascribes importance to the role of multilateral international
platforms, including international security organizations, as well as the maintenance and
strengthening of cooperation within them, respect for each other’s interests, and the
principles of mutual assistance among allies. At the same time, Armenia shall continue
its close cooperation with those global power centers and regional actors that pursue a
policy of preserving peace and stability and are willing to cooperate in containing threats
to peace.

4.7 Armenia’s foreign policy priorities include deepening and expanding its strategic alliance
with the Russian Federation in the spheres of politics, trade and economy, defense, security,
culture, and humanitarian assistance based on the historical friendship between the two
nations. Guided by the principles of equality and the thorough consideration of each other’s
interests, efforts shall be made to advance cooperation in both a bilateral format and within
the framework of multilateral and integration associations, towards strengthening regional
stability and security.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 11


-----

4.8 Armenia shall continue advancing its friendly
partnership, as well as deepening its strategic dialogue,
with the United States of America in the spheres of
Armenia’s development, the implementation of its reform
agenda, democracy, the protection of human rights, and
the strengthening of international stability and security.


###### In its foreign relations,
 Armenia draws on
 civilizational and
 democratic value


4.9 Armenia ascribes paramount importance to

###### systems, as well as the

deepening friendly relations and expanding its bilateral

###### continual development

and multilateral partnership with the European Union,
its member states, and other European countries. The **_of mutually beneficial_**
implementation of the Comprehensive and Enhanced

###### and equal relations

Partnership Agreement (CEPA) with the EU continues to

###### with all states.

contribute to Armenia’s development reform agenda.
Armenia ascribes special importance to strengthening
and advancing cooperation with France and Germany.
We shall continue steadily fostering people-to-people
contact and mobility between Armenia and EU member states.

4.10 Stability in neighboring Georgia and Iran is of great importance for Armenia. Based on
mutually beneficial and special good-neighborly relations with Georgia and Iran, Armenia shall
advance its effective cooperation with them in various dimensions, while taking care to shield
these relationships from extraneous geopolitical influence.

4.11 We shall continue to strengthen the Armenia-Greece-Cyprus tripartite relationship and
deepen mutually beneficial cooperation.

4.12 We shall consistently deepen friendly relations with the People’s Republic of China by
expanding broad, multi-sector, and mutually beneficial cooperation.

4.13 Armenia shall also work with India to develop and deepen friendly and multidimensional
cooperation.

4.14 Continuously expanding our cooperation with Middle Eastern states is among our
priorities. Armenia must be involved in reforming the regional security system of the Middle
East, aimed also at securing the historical presence of Armenians in the region.

4.15 Armenia ascribes importance to multilateral cooperation with like-minded states aimed
at neutralizing global and regional security threats, preserving international order and peace
on the basis of common values and principles.


###### DETERRENCE AND NEUTRALIZATION OF MILITARY THREATS


4.16 Armenia’s defense policy intends to protect the security and national interests of the
state and its citizens. The main objective of the defense policy is to define and execute Armenia’s
defense priorities by anticipating and evaluating military threats, containing them with

12 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA


-----

political-diplomatic tools, as well as deterring and neutralizing them with defense capabilities.
We fulfill this mission through the comprehensive development of military capabilities and
application techniques, in order to neutralize the adversary’s quantitative advantage with our
qualitative excellence. As the guarantor of Artsakh’s security, the Republic of Armenia directs
its defense policy towards ensuring the security of Artsakh.

4.17 In pursuit of our defense objectives, we shall continue to modernize our armed forces,
develop command and control systems, improve military capabilities, raise the institutional
efficiency of the armed forces, protect critical infrastructure, improve cybersecurity, and
accelerate the progress of science and technology that contributes to the military industry. We
shall also develop comprehensive mobilization capabilities.

4.18 In order to resolve issues that threaten regional security and contain potential
aggression against the Republic of Armenia and Artsakh through peaceful means, a
defense-security system that can effectively withstand military-political threats is required.
In particular, we shall improve the readiness of our Armed Forces, adopt new approaches
to warfare, develop Armenia’s military-industrial potential, and expand the scope of its
military-economic cooperation.

4.19 We shall improve coordination among state administrative bodies in security-related
decision-making, enhancing the state’s internal resilience.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 13

|.1|7|
|---|---|

|.1|8|
|---|---|

|.1|9|
|---|---|


-----

4.20 If necessary, the Armed Forces of the Republic of Armenia, alongside stakeholder state
agencies, shall partake in ensuring international security by involving Armenian peacekeepers
and specialists in international peacekeeping missions, and broadening Armenia’s commitments
in this area.

4.21 We are committed to improving democratic oversight of the defense sector to ensure
the effective management of the Armed Forces, their political neutrality, the protection of the
rights and interests of military personnel, and transparency, with the goal of making the Armed
Forces an inseparable element of democratic governance.

14 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA


-----

###### ENSURING THE SECURITY OF ARTSAKH


4.22 The use of force by Azerbaijan in the
context of the Karabakh conflict is the principal
threat to Armenia’s security.

4.23 For the last three decades, Azerbaijan
has continued to justify the mass slaughter of
Armenians in Sumgait, Baku, Maragha, and
Gandzak, and its Armenophobic policy has
hindered the reconciliation process.

4.24 The military aggression unleashed by
Azerbaijan in April 2016, coupled with the atrocities
and war crimes committed by the Azerbaijani
Armed Forces against the peaceful population of
Artsakh, reaffirmed that the population of Artsakh
faces an existential threat.

4.25 While committed to the peaceful resolution of the conflict, the Republic of Armenia,
as the guarantor of Artsakh’s security, supports the government of Artsakh in defending its
population from Azerbaijan’s military aggression and coercion. The Republic of Armenia will
prevent any new attempt to exterminate or expel the population of Artsakh.

4.26 Armenia is faithful to the peaceful resolution process under the aegis of the co-chairs
of the OSCE Minsk Group. The question of Artsakh’s status and security is the very basis of the
peace process. In this context, Armenia finds security and confidence-building measures by
all parties to the conflict as a necessary component for shaping an environment conducive to
peace. All parties to the conflict should make equal efforts towards preparing their respective
populations for peace.

4.27 We shall continue to support the right of the people of Artsakh to self-determination
without restriction or coercion. Ensuring the security of the people of Artsakh in the process of
conflict resolution and in the post-resolution phase is a mandatory condition and is not subject
to concession. Artsakh must have the necessary defense lines that will safeguard its security
and provide a system of safe, secure, and diversified communication with the external world,
including the Republic of Armenia.

4.28 The right of peoples to self-determination, recognized by the co-chairs of the
OSCE Minsk Group and all OSCE member states as one of the fundamental principles
for the resolution of the conflict, provides a basis for the people of Artsakh, represented
by its legitimately-elected government, to fully participate in all stages of negotiations
determining their destiny.

4.29 The indefinite ceasefire agreements, signed in 1994-1995 between the Republic
of Armenia, Artsakh, and Azerbaijan, created a solid military-political equilibrium and the
conditions necessary for the peace process. Azerbaijan’s attempts to disrupt this military-political

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 15


-----

equilibrium, its periodic ceasefire violations, and its expansionist stance in negotiations are
aimed at forcing Artsakh to relinquish its statehood and legitimate rights, and thus impede the
peaceful resolution of the conflict.

4.30 The Republic of Armenia shall continue to support human rights and democratic
institutions in Artsakh, as well as further strengthen its economic and environmental security.
Human rights, including political, civil, economic, social, and cultural rights, are inalienable
values, the protection of which should be a collective goal of the international community.

4.31 The Republic of Armenia is determined to ensure that the collective rights of the population
of Artsakh to determine its own future, its governing structure, its economic development
models and approaches, and its universal right to elect its own democratic government are
both exercised and recognized.

4.32 The Republic of Armenia will provide necessary assistance to Artsakh for expanding
and deepening its international relations so that its population can benefit from international
cooperation, fulfill its potential, and exercise its rights.

16 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA


-----

# 5. PEACE AND ENHANCED INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION

**NATIONAL INTERESTS OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA**

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 17


-----

###### PROMOTING INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION, SECURITY, AND PEACE


5.1 In the context of strengthening capacity in the defense sector, forming an external
security environment favorable to Armenia, and supporting global and regional stability,
Armenia ascribes importance to international military-political cooperation.

5.2 In the defense and security sectors, Armenia shall continue to develop both bilateral
and multilateral formats of military, military-political, and military-technical cooperation with
the Russian Federation, including the expansion of collective defense capabilities and continual
advancement of allied relations.

5.3 Armenia actively participates in joint initiatives within the framework of the CSTO,
aimed at the effective protection of mutual interests of member states and the development of
institutional capacity. Armenia shall continue to work towards ensuring the fulfillment of allied
commitments by the member states of the CSTO and increasing its organizational effectiveness.

5.4 We shall continue to ascribe importance to military-political consultations and
cooperation in our relations with the USA, aimed at reforming defense institutions and the
development of the Armenian Armed Forces’ interoperability.

18 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA


-----

5.5 Reforming the defense sector and assisting international peacekeeping operations is a
major direction of Armenia-NATO cooperation. We shall continue political dialogue with NATO
in the defense and security sectors as an element of building Armenia’s defense capacity.

5.6 In the context of national security, Armenia is committed to pursuing its interests
within international institutions of economic integration, diversifying and strengthening the
interconnectivity of regional transportation and energy infrastructure, and participating in
infrastructure corridors formed on the basis of inclusivity.

5.7 Armenia is both an active player and an initiator within the Eurasian Economic
Union, ascribing importance to its integration processes. Cooperation between economies
and economic entities of other regions and the EAEU are a means of expanding Armenia’s
opportunities for international economic cooperation.

5.8 We ascribe importance to sectoral cooperation with the European Union and shall
consistently work towards maximizing existing opportunities, particularly the Armenia-EU CEPA
economic dialogue and the implementation of its economic components.

5.9 Armenia shall conduct proactive and effective multilateral diplomacy with the conviction
that effective multilateralism fosters equitable cooperation between large and small states, and
is a prerequisite for international security, peace, and development.

5.10 Effective cooperation within the framewok of the UN contributes to the localization
of international best practices and the use of resources in Armenia’s programs aimed at
sustainable development. It also holds important significance in increasing Armenia’s capacity
in the prevention of genocide and the struggle against terrorism, other violent manifestations
of extremism, cyber crime, the illicit drug trade, and other transnational crimes, as well as in
disaster risk management.

5.11 Armenia shall remain active in the military-political, economic-environmental, and
human dimensions of the OSCE, viewing them as important components of regional security
and stability.

5.12 We shall continue to support the instilling and disseminating of human rights, democracy,
rule of law, and tolerance within the framework of the Council of Europe.


###### GENOCIDE PREVENTION


5.13 Preventing genocide and crimes against humanity is one of the most important
components of Armenia’s security and foreign policy, reflected in Armenia’s strategic approach
to both regional security and international cooperation.

5.14 The responsibility to protect the population of the Republic of Armenia and Artsakh is a
cornerstone of our foreign and defense policy.

5.15 Genocide prevention in the international arena is not only a legal obligation for us but
also a moral one. As descendents of the victims of the first genocide of the 20th century, the

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 19


-----

Armenian nation and the state it founded are committed to
protecting the right to life of ethnic, religious, and racial
groups and their members.

5.16 On the global level, the Republic of Armenia honors
this commitment by engaging and assuming a leading role
in international cooperation based on the UN Convention on
the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.

5.17 International recognition and condemnation of the
Armenian Genocide greatly contributes to the prevention of
new genocides.


###### The responsibility to
 protect the popula tion of the Republic of
 Armenia and Artsakh
 is a cornerstone of our
 foreign and defense
 policy.

|5.1|6|
|---|---|

|5.1|7|
|---|---|


5.18 Turkey’s respect for the comprehensive security of
Armenia and the Armenian people must be part of protecting the rights of the victims of the
Armenian Genocide and their descendants.

5.19 Turkey’s recognition of the Armenian Genocide and the rights of its victims and their
descendants shall form the necessary basis for overcoming the consequences of the Armenian
Genocide.

|5.1|8|
|---|---|

|5.1|9|
|---|---|


###### ARMENIA-DIASPORA RELATIONS: A PAN-ARMENIAN OUTLOOK


5.20 Among the most important components of Armenia’s national security policy is the
further development of relations and cooperation between Armenia and its Diaspora to a new
pinnacle. Ascribing importance to the unity between the Republic of Armenia, Artsakh, and the
Armenians dispersed throughout the world, the Republic of Armenia adopts a Pan-Armenian
outlook, one of forming a unified Pan-Armenian agenda.

5.21 Armenia-Diaspora relations aim to create a Pan-Armenian format, based on a participatory
principle, for resolving pan-national issues and priorities. In the context of developing a PanArmenian outlook, the Holy Armenian Apostolic Church, with its hierarchic Dioceses, the
Armenian Catholic Church, and the Armenian Evangelical Church, as well as the Pan-Armenian
structures of the Diaspora, play an important role.

5.22 The primary goal of Armenia-Diaspora relations is protecting Armenian interests, as well
as ensuring progress through collective action.

5.23 The Diaspora is part of Armenia’s competitive and powerful potential. We shall undertake
steps to involve the abilities of the Diaspora in resolving state-building, security, economic,
scientific-educational, demographic, technological, modernization, and other strategic issues
that pose a challenge to the country.

5.24 The main threats to the development of Armenia-Diaspora cooperation include
the assimilation of diasporan Armenians, the endangered condition of both Armenian
spiritual-cultural values abroad and the Western Armenian language, and the deterioration

20 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA


-----

in living conditions and endangered physical existence of Armenian communities in zones
of conflict.

5.25 With the purpose of advancing the security of the Republic of Armenia and Artsakh,
as well as strengthening the position of Armenians in the Diaspora, we shall support
the realization of the political, economic, social, and cultural potential of Armenians
worldwide.

5.26 We shall stimulate the implementation of programs with collective participation from
the Republic of Armenia, Artsakh, and the Diaspora, which, in parallel to contributing to the
development of the Republic of Armenia and Artsakh, also enrich the abilities and the potential
of the Diaspora.

5.27 Armenia is committed to preserving Armenian identity and developing Armenian
educational and cultural life in the Diaspora, as well as to exerting efforts toward the
inclusion back into the Armenian collective of those who have been separated from the
Armenian environment.

5.28 We are committed to creating new connections between various diasporan communities
and to stimulating an environment conducive to inter-community cooperation, as well as to
strengthening the global Armenian network through the use of modern technology and the
transnational transfers of resources, skills, and ideas that it provides.

5.29 Armenia shall encourage repatriation through individual initiatives and state programs.
With this purpose in mind, we shall ensure sufficient conditions for Armenians to assemble in

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 21


-----

Armenia and integrate into the educational-cultural and socio-economic spheres. Armenia shall
also encourage organized repatriation, with the purpose of ensuring the safety of Armenians,
in times of geopolitical confrontation.

5.30 Within the limits of its capacity, Armenia, in cooperation with the countries of citizenship
of its diasporan compatriots, shall continue to provide necessary support to the Armenian
communities of the Diaspora, in order to withstand immediate security challenges.

22 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA


-----

# 6. SECURING DEMOCRACY,  HUMAN RIGHTS,  AND THE RULE OF LAW

**NATIONAL INTERESTS OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA**

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 23


-----

6.1 Strengthening democratic institutions and the rule of law contribute to Armenia’s
national security. Reinforcing the rule of law and the principle of checks and balances through
the separation of powers, as well as ensuring social justice and high levels of public trust in
state institutions contribute to our stability and development.

6.2 An independent and effective judicial system is of strategic importance for
strengthening justice and democracy. Armenia shall proceed with judicial reforms
impacting both courts and prosecutorial and investigative bodies. Our objective is to
ensure the effectiveness and independence of the judiciary, as well as the integrity and
accountability of judges before the public, subsequently fostering public trust in the
judiciary.

6.3 In Armenia, the individual holds ultimate value. We are committed to fully protecting
the rights and freedoms of every person residing in Armenia, as well as fully integrating
ethnic minorities and vulnerable groups into every area of public life and the system of state
governance.

24 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA


-----

6.4 Considering that all manifestations of corruption
as threats to the state, public security, and the democratic
system of governance, Armenia has adopted a zero-tolerance
policy towards corruption. Our anti-corruption policy shall
result in the creation and development of the institutional
foundations for the prevention and detection of corruption,
as well as setting high standards of conduct for state officials.
We shall also promote anti-corruption education and awareness.


###### In Armenia,  the individual holds ultimate value.


6.5 We are committed to continually improving the institutional mechanisms of free, fair,
and transparent elections, as well as increasing public trust in elections.

6.6 The low level of women’s participation in various areas of social and political
life—and especially in state governance—prevent Armenia from fully utilizing its
human capital towards national security and sustainable development. The state shall,
therefore, make sure to grant equal rights, opportunities, and conditions to women
and men, as well as stimulate the integration and participation of women in political
decision-making.

6.7 Armenia shall continue developing decentralized, effective, and transparent local
government entities.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 25


-----

6.8 We ascribe importance to the development of civil society institutions, including
trade unions defending labor rights and social interests. The state shall look to increase the
involvement of civil society in political decision-making. Since civil oversight is an important
guarantor of effective governance, the state shall encourage dialogue with society and expand
cooperation platforms.

6.9 Armenia ascribes special importance to freedom of expression, pluralism, and an
independent mass media. At the same time, zero tolerance shall be afforded to terrorism,
extremist propaganda, discrimination based on race, ethnic or social origin, religion, sex,
political or other views, or to hate-speech and incitements to violence.

26 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA


-----

# 7. ENSURING THE SECURITY AND WELL- BEING OF THE CITIZENS OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA, AND THE STATE’S SUSTAINABLE SOCIO-ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

**NATIONAL INTERESTS OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA**

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 27


-----

###### DEVELOPING A RESILIENT PUBLIC SECURITY SYSTEM


7.1 Our vision for ensuring state and public security
is the development of a highly resilient system of state **_Our vision for ensuring_**
governance. In this regard, high levels of both legal and

###### state and public security

public awareness are of pivotal significance. Our goal is to

###### is the development of a

become one of the safest states in the world.

###### highly resilient system of

7.2 Armenia shall continue harmonizing and increasing

###### state governance.

the effectiveness of the state governing system, law
enforcement agencies, special services, and state audit
institutions. From this perspective, we ascribe importance
to those kinds of legal-bureaucratic reforms of security institutions that are distinctive to
democratic, parliamentary states, thus ensuring not only transparency, but also higher levels
of parliamentary, political, and civil oversight.

7.3 In the context of ensuring state and public security, Armenia ascribes importance to
improving the capacity of state and local government institutions to employ a permanent and
comprehensive risk management system, as well as advancing risk management capabilities. From
this perspective, we shall emphasize the development of an evidence-based, interdisciplinary,
and interministerial system of identifying, evaluating, and classifying risks on a national scale,
which shall contribute to increasing the efficiency of the risk management process.

7.4 Armenia shall consistently continue to reduce the risk of man-made and natural disasters
to improve its systems of rapid and targeted response, ensure organized and timely elimination
of consequences, increase the level of public awareness during emergencies, and improve
disaster-resistant rehabilitation systems.

7.5 The continual reduction of domestic crime rates is one of our priorities. Considering
the concept of a violence-free society as an important prerequisite for social solidarity, we shall
seek to reject the culture of violence. We shall pay special attention to preventing the spread
of the criminal subculture—the particular behavior and set of rules prescribed and recognized
by criminal networks. Violence, xenophobia, and the criminal subculture have no place in our
society.

7.6 Armenia shall consistently combat the disruptive intelligence activities carried out by
special services of foreign states, as well as organizations and individuals harming Armenia’s
national interests. We shall also combat other violent manifestations of international terrorism
and extremism, domestic and transnational organized crime, illicit trade in arms and ammunition,
illegal migration, human trafficking, and money laundering. We shall also expand and deepen
international cooperation in the fight against various forms of criminal activity.

28 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA


-----

7.7 In its migration policy, Armenia is committed to safeguarding the free and safe mobility
of people, while simultaneously balancing the provision of national security. We shall continue
to ensure border security and increase the efficiency of integrated border management,
particularly through the prevention of illicit border crossings, the effective and humane
management of irregular migration, and the reduction of irregular migration of citizens of the
Republic of Armenia. The state shall employ effective procedures to prevent the infiltration of
infectious diseases posing a public health threat. Given the possibility of regional emergencies,
we shall develop clear measures for the management of a potential mass influx of people into
Armenia due to military actions or natural disasters.

7.8 Armenia shall improve its capacity for preventing the development, dissemination, and
use of nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons of mass destruction.


###### ENSURING OPEN AND SAFE INFORMATION AND CYBER DOMAINS


7.9 The main goal of Armenia’s information security policy is to balance and protect the
interests of the individual, society, and the state. We base our information and cyberspace
policy on the principles of human rights and freedoms, as well as state sovereignty. Armenia is
an advocate of open, interoperable, reliable, and secure information and cyberspace.

7.10 Cyberattacks against information resources by foreign states, international terrorist
organizations, criminal groups, and individuals threaten Armenia’s information security.
New and unique challenges are posed by private entities, including foreign state-funded
cyberattacks, which target Armenia’s critical information infrastructure and its government
structures.

7.11 In the modern world, information wars, including propaganda, manipulations, fake
news, and other disinformation tools are becoming more prevalent, and often target democratic
values. In this context, we will work to raise public awareness and media literacy to strengthen
the capacity of society and the state to counter such information wars.

7.12 A major challenge is the imperfection of a comprehensive state policy regulating the
information and cybersecurity sector, the absence of legislation to ensure the protection of
critical information infrastructure, the insufficient level of institutional capacity of computer
emergency response teams, and the absence of a national
cybersecurity center.

###### We base our

7.13 In the fields of information, technology, and cybersecurity,
we are working to increase the efficiency of institutions and **_information and_**
processes, and develop the underlying infrastructure. Armenia **_cyberspace policy_**
is committed to developing state information, technological,

###### on the principles of

and cybersecurity policies and strategies, as well as introducing
comprehensive mechanisms for the management of the sector. **_human rights and_**
We will develop a legal-normative framework in order to regulate **_freedoms, as well as_**
the relationship between the operators of critical information

###### state sovereignty.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 29


-----

infrastructure, digital service providers, and the state. As a result, a national cybersecurity
center and computer emergency response teams will be established.

7.14 Concerning technological security, Armenia pursues the elimination of vulnerabilities
stemming from technologies and technological components used in critical spheres
and infrastructure, the reduction of risks due to technologies of foreign origin, and
the development of a national technological base, including through cooperation with
technology suppliers.

7.15 To increase resiliency in the information space, we will develop national information and
cyber capabilities by effectively managing risks, developing qualified professional potential,
localizing international standards, and increasing the level of digital literacy.

7.16 Given the diversity of players, the absence of international borders in the
information space, and the involvement of both private and public actors in various
capacities, it is crucial to increase the level of cooperation between the public, private,
and international sectors.


###### DEVELOPING A COMPETITIVE ECONOMY  AND ENSURING FOOD SECURITY


7.17 To ensure Armenia’s economic security, we prioritize the continuous and technologybased development of the economy, resilience against internal and external economic threats
and shocks, adaptability to the rapidly-changing environment of the global economy, national
competitiveness in global markets, and mechanisms for organizing and coordinating the
uninterrupted operation of the economy and the financial system.

7.18 Our economic policy shall continue to focus on maintaining macroeconomic
stability, ensuring free competition driven by market forces, shrinking the shadow
economy, continually improving the business environment, attracting foreign investment,
promoting exports, diversifying economic sectors, and increasing their productivity and
technological capacity.

7.19 The state shall continue to create favorable conditions for entrepreneurship. Every citizen
of the Republic of Armenia can participation effectively in the development of the economy
and creating their own prosperity. The state shall pay special attention to strengthening
voluntary tax and customs compliance among society, as well as improving tax and customs
administration.

7.20 The state shall take active steps towards ensuring physical and economic access to
sufficient, safe, nutritious, and diversified food for all sectors of society. Our policy aims at
increasing the resilience of the food security system.

7.21 Armenia shall make efforts to develop its agri-food system and increase the levels of
self-sufficiency for most important foodstuffs by improving land productivity, supporting the
development of the agricultural sector, and assisting local production.

30 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA


-----

7.22 Armenia shall adopt measures to diversify its import and export markets, as well as
to introduce effective mechanisms for the formation and management of material reserves,
replenishing these reserves with important staples, and increasing their capacity by utilizing
mechanisms of public-private partnership.

7.23 The replenishment of material reserves is essential for meeting Armenia’s mobilization
needs, preventing emergency situations—or in the event of their occurrence, mitigating and
eliminating their repercussions—as well as for rescue and urgent disaster relief operations,
implementing civil defense measures, withstanding temporary disruptions in the food supply,
and providing humanitarian assistance.


###### DEVELOPING A SELF-SUFFICIENT AND STABLE ENERGY SYSTEM


7.24 Ensuring Armenia’s energy independence and energy security is one of our strategic
priorities. We shall strive to develop a self-sufficient, export-oriented, highly reliable and
technologically-advanced electricity system with modern infrastructure.

7.25 Our energy policy aims at neutralizing the threats facing the sector: dependence on
imports of liquid and gaseous fuels, possible disruptions in transit infrastructure, the economic
blockade imposed by Turkey and Azerbaijan, and attempts to isolate Armenia from regional
projects.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 31


-----

7.26 Armenia shall continue to work towards diversifying its means and routes of energy
supply by deepening energy cooperation with partner states and the integration of energy
systems.

7.27 As a long-term goal, Armenia shall exert targeted efforts toward becoming a regional
energy hub, linking the energy systems of neighboring countries and the Eurasian Economic
Union’s common electricity market.

7.28 On the road to developing and diversifying the energy system, we shall utilize domestic
primary (renewable) energy resources in conformity with all applicable environmental standards,
aim for efficient and reasonable economic consumption, adopt alternative technologies for
energy generation and accumulation, liberalize energy markets, and introduce energy-efficient
and energy-saving technologies.

7.29 In the context of ensuring energy independence and energy security, we shall also commit
to the development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, specifically the construction of
new nuclear energy units in Armenia.

32 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA


-----

###### PROMOTING SOCIAL WELL-BEING AND IMPROVING THE DEMOGRAPHIC SITUATION


7.30 Armenia has set itself the goal of attaining public
well-being and solidarity through human rights-centered **_We are committed to_**
social policy. **_ensuring equal oppor-_**

7.31 We are committed to substantially reducing poverty **_tunities and social and_**
levels and eradicating extreme poverty, as well as improving **_economic inclusion for_**
citizen welfare through structural reforms in social security

###### various social groups

programs and the establishment of an effective system to
exercise social rights.

7.32 To ensure social security, Armenia shall take steps directed at reducing unemployment,
providing the population with permanent and temporary employment, improving living
standards via job creation, and expanding the middle class.

7.33 We are committed to ensuring equal opportunities and social and economic inclusion
for various social groups, including ensuring dignified aging, equality between women and
men and violence prevention, as well as the effective protection of the rights of persons with
disabilities and children.

7.34 Considering demography as an essential component of progressive development and
security, Armenia has set the goal of stabilizing its population size and creating the prerequisites
for demographic growth.

7.35 Armenia shall take precise steps toward increasing the birth rate and encouraging
repatriation by ensuring prosperous and dignified living conditions, and a state-funded social
safety net.


###### DIRECTING INTELLECTUAL POTENTIAL TOWARDS  THE HIGH-TECH AND DEFENSE SECTORS


7.36 Armenia conducts a state policy of fostering intellectual potential, which aims to increase
the resilience of the country’s security system and its further development. The multifaceted
inclusion of scientific potential in all critical sectors, including defense, allows the continuation
of their effective modernization and development.

7.37 In this context, we ascribe importance to the role of the public scientific-educational
system in Armenia’s development as a high-tech center. The restructuring of the scientificeducational system, apart from achieving other objectives, shall allow us to incentivize excellence
in research of dual-use high technologies, as well as increase the country’s competitiveness,
and contribute to its overall security.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 33


-----

7.38 It is crucial to define strategic priorities for the spheres of education and science to
ensure their organic connection with the needs of the state and the private sector, as well as
with global development trends. The state will support the Armenian high-tech sector and its
domestic and foreign sales by arranging mutually-beneficial mechanisms to attract public,
private, and foreign investments.

7.39 The development of the military-industrial complex as a key factor in the continuous
expansion of the Armed Forces’ power, economic growth, and scientific and technological
progress is a strategic priority for Armenia. In this sector, we shall emphasize state
investments and the implementation of state contracts, encourage private investment
in the military-industrial sector, diversify and increase the production volume of the
military-industrial complex, and the incorporation of the latest technologies in the
military-industrial sector. This will allow Armenia to reduce its dependence on imports
of weapons and military equipment, and will drastically increase the competitiveness of
domestically-produced military and high-tech equipment in the international market.

34 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA


-----

###### PROMOTING PUBLIC HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

7.40 Armenia’s public health policy aims at preserving, strengthening, and improving
individual and public health. To implement this goal, we shall continue to emphasize disease
prevention, lowering rates of mortality and disability, improving the healthcare system
through the introduction of the latest advances in medical science, improving the quality of
the healthcare system, ensuring access to care, encouraging healthy lifestyles, and increasing
awareness about public health.

7.41 In the context of ensuring public health and turning Armenia into a technologicallyadvanced industrial country, we shall encourage the domestic production and export of hightech products in the health sector.

7.42 We shall continue to develop and expand a comprehensive health insurance system
aimed at offering more effective and affordable healthcare services.

7.43 In the context of ensuring public health, we shall continue to ascribe importance to
the prevention, early diagnosis, and treatment of widespread non-communicable diseases,
the prevention of infectious disease oubreaks and epidemics, the prevention of both new
and recurring diseases, as well as the prevention of manageable infectious diseases by
administering vaccinations through a national immunization program and combatting the
spread of disinformation about vaccination.

7.44 Armenia shall strengthen its capacity to prevent and respond to emergencies caused by
radioactive, chemical, and biological factors.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 35

|7.4|0|
|---|---|

|7.4|1|
|---|---|

|7.4|2|
|---|---|

|7.4|3|
|---|---|

|7.4|4|
|---|---|


-----

7.45 We shall pay special attention to the protection of mothers

###### We shall continue

and children, continually reduce infant mortality rates, and
encourage higher birth rates. **_to develop_**

###### and expand a

7.46 We ascribe importance to ensuring the biosecurity of
the individual, society, and the state, as well as protecting the **_comprehensive_**
animal world and the surrounding environment from the impact

###### health insurance

of biologically hazardous elements.

###### system aimed

7.47 Armenia will implement an integrated state policy to ensure

###### at offering

the biological security of the population. We shall strengthen

###### more effective

system response mechanisms and risk management techniques
for biological hazards and threats, and epidemics. We will also **_and affordable_**
develop the professional capacities of reference laboratories and

###### healthcare services.

their staff.

7.48 We shall continue international cooperation on
biosecurity and bioprotection through both bilateral and multilateral formats by emphasizing
the development of collaborative, equal, and appropriate partnerships and strengthening the
Republic of Armenia’s self-relience in this sector.

|7.4|5|
|---|---|

|7.4|6|
|---|---|

|7.4|7|
|---|---|

|7.4|8|
|---|---|


###### REHABILITATING, PROTECTING,  AND IMPROVING THE ENVIRONMENT


7.49 Protecting the environment and the effective management of natural resources are
imperative factors for the natural livelihood and national security of Armenia. Armenia balances
its policy of environmental management with social justice and economic efficiency.

7.50 Acknowledging Lake Sevan as Armenia’s strategic water resource reserve, we are
committed to the rehabilitation and preservation of its ecosystem and the productive
management of water resources, including the Ararat artesian well and river ecosystems, as
well as the preservation of vital water basins and wetlands.

7.51 We shall take effective steps towards the sustainable management and expansion of
fauna and flora, forests, and protected nature reserves, as well as reducing soil erosion and
desertification. Our priorities include the reasonable use of natural resources, the remediation
of damaged land, ensuring the safety of tailing ponds, preserving biodiversity, and ensuring
biosecurity.

7.52 With the purpose of ensuring a safe environment, we shall improve the management of
radioactive, chemical, and biological hazardous waste. We will establish a system for the safe
management of chemical substances.

7.53 Armenia intends to develop and implement a policy aimed at the introduction of the
green economy, develop state-of-the-art technologies and environmentally-clean production,
and invest in and apply a monitoring system that is based on scientific evidence and risk
assessment.

36 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA

|7.4|9|
|---|---|


-----

7.54 Our priorities in the sector include raising public awareness and instilling an environmental
mindset, as well as ensuring the introduction of environmental education.

7.55 We ascribe importance to international cooperation in the domains of environmental
protection and the use of natural resources, specifically aimed at mitigating the negative impacts
of global climate change and increasing resilience and adaptability, including a reduction in
land damaged by mining, preventing the loss of biodiversity and the degradation of natural
areas, as well as a reduction in levels of atmospheric air pollution.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA | 37

|7.|54|
|---|---|


-----

### 8. CONCLUSION

8.1 The National Security Strategy of the Republic of Armenia is adopted as a guiding
document for defining the main directions, threats, challenges, and priorities of security policy.

8.2 All sectoral documents on Armenia’s security and sustainable development that contain a
security component emanate from the fundamental provisions and the framework of Armenia’s
National Security Strategy.

8.3 State administrative bodies submit annual reports on the implementation of the
provisions included in the National Security Strategy to the Office of the Security Council,
which are then summarized and presented to the Prime Minister.

8.4 The Strategy is subject to review at least every five years, or more frequently if necessitated
due to changing circumstances and priorities in Armenia and the world.

38 | NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF RA


-----

-----

