PREFACE

The Military Doctrine of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the «Doctrine») is a set

of official views embracing the political-military, military-strategic, military-economic and military
technical basis for ensuring the military security of the Republic of Armenia . The Doctrine defines

the political-military provisions of military security, elaborates the Defence Strategy of the Republic

of Armenia, formulates a system for ensuring military security, and coordinates the activities of all

relevant state bodies, agencies and ministries of the Republic of Armenia aimed at ensuring the

military security of the state. The Doctrine stipulates the course of reforms and modernization of the

Armed Forces of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the «Armed Forces»),

concurrently with the development of different spheres of public life, and the forging of the Defence

Strategy and the military construction of the Republic of Armenia in both short- and mediumterm

perspectives.

The Doctrine develops and details the relevant provisions of the «National Security Strategy of the

Republic of Armenia » (hereinafter referred to as the «Strategy»), approved by the President Decree

No. NH-37-N of 7 February, 2007, which pertain to the military field. The Doctrine is based on the

analysis of:

- regional and international political-military situation;

- strategic forecasts;

- current and prospective issues of ensuring military security;

- requirements of the Military Security System and actual capabilities of the economy;

- actual threats and challenges to military security;

- nature of armed conflicts;

-international commitments of the Republic of Armenia in this area and given the opportunities

provided by cooperation;


-----

- national and foreign experiences of military construction and modern warfare.

The Republic of Armenia is a guarantor and supporter of security for the population of the Nagorno

Karabakh Republic and the course of development it has chosen. It is derived from:

- the reality of suffering from new ways and means of ethnic cleansing in the territory of nowadays

Azerbaijan (1980-1990 in Sumgait, Baku and other places) for an Armenian nation that survived the

Genocide;

- military attacks directed against the population of Nagorno Karabakh in response to their

aspirations for legal and peaceful self-determination and the policy of the Azerbaijani Republic aimed

at coercive involvement into the war in 1988-1994;

- the necessity to ensure the security of the population of the Nagorno Karabakh Republic, which

continues to be under a permanent threat of physical annihilation, based on the aspirations by the

Azerbaijani Republic to resolve the Nagorno Karabakh conflict by military means;

- the historical and territorial, religious, ethnic and cultural identity and links shared between the

Republic of Armenia and the Nagorno Karabakh Republic and their populations;

- the irrefutable political and legal basis justifying the fact of selfdetermination for the people of

Nagorno Karabakh within their historical fatherland;

- the irreversible reality of the establishment of the Nagorno Karabakh Republic as a democratic,

social and legal state;

- the inter-relationship and shared perception of issues related to ensuring the security of the

Republic of Armenia and the Nagorno Karabakh Republic .

The Doctrine is defensive in nature. It is aimed at ensuring the constant protection and security of

the fundamental values of national security of the Republic of Armenia, the military security through


-----

the capabilities of the military security system of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as

the «Military Security System») and wider interoperability, strengthening peace and stability in the

region. The legal basis for the Doctrine is provided by the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia,

international agreements and laws of the Republic of Armenia related to the matters of military

security, the Strategy, as well as other respective legal acts.

The provisions of the Doctrine may be amended based on the shifting realities and developments in

the political-military situation, the changing nature of military threats and challenges, the building,

development and application of the Military Security System, and according to other factors deemed

necessary for ensuring military security, as well as specified and articulated by the President of the

Republic of Armenia through addresses and public speeches.

The provisions of the Doctrine are implemented through the application of Defence Strategy and

military planning.

SECTION I

POLITICAL-MILITARY PROVISIONS

CHAPTER I

MILITARY SECURITY ENVIRONMENT AND THREATS

1. The current military security environment of the Republic of Armenia is composed of a

combination of several internal, regional and extra-regional factors, which influence the fundamental

values of national security of the Republic of Armenia.

2. The threats to military security are a set of complex factors, activities and conditions that

negatively influence the defence capabilities of the Republic of Armenia and that endanger the

sovereign existence and stable development of the country and are of internal and external nature.

3. The external threats to military security include:


-----

1) infringements by other countries upon the physical existence and safety of the population of the

Republic of Armenia, challenges to the state independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity,

inviolability of borders, as well as interference in the internal affairs of the Republic of Armenia;

2) the Nagorno Karabakh conflict, the Republic of Azerbaijan’s aspirations to gain military superiority

over the Republic of Armenia and to resolve the Karabakh conflict through military means, and, to

this end, prepare military activities against the Republic of Armenia and/or Nagorno Karabakh;

3) the trend of an uncontrolled arming and re-arming process, the arms race, the formation of groups

of troops, their deployment, and largescale accumulation and movement, at times under the guise of

military exercises conducted along the borders of the Republic of Armenia;

4) the establishment, strengthening and expansion of alliances against the Republic of Armenia,

especially the strategic alliance between the Republic of Turkey and the Republic of Azerbaijan, their

activities aimed at maintaining the blockade of the Republic of Armenia, which are viewed as use of

force;

5) the destabilization of the internal political environment in bordering countries of the Republic of

Armenia, and their internal clashes and military activities, as well as ethnic conflicts, which can

endanger the military security of the Republic of Armenia;

6) differences in views of international security systems and among states that may result in

tendencies to create current and possible dividing lines, contribute to a weakening of friendly and

supportive politicalmilitary alliances or activities aimed at their break-up;

7) economic, trade, transport and communications isolation or attempts to isolate the Republic of

Armenia, including the disruption of transit routes through bordering countries;

8) the activities of foreign organizations, illegal armed groups and special services directed against the

Republic of Armenia;

9) anti-Armenian and hostile propaganda against the Republic of Armenia and its nationals, including

the spread of disinformation about the Republic of Armenia and conduct of an informational war by

other means, and the instigation of religious and ethnic extremism;


-----

10) transnational crime, including international terrorism, proliferation of weapons of mass

destruction, its components and technology, and the illegal trade and transit of drugs and

psychotropic substances.

4. The internal threats to military security include:

1) the direct threat to the constitutional order of the Republic of Armenia;

2) the diminishment of public administration effectiveness, especially in terms of the Military

Security System;

3) the formation and activities of illegal armed groups in the territory of the Republic of Armenia, the

illegal import and accumulation of arms, armament and other materiel, as well as means and items

posing a threat to the environment;

4) activities or attempts aimed at discrediting the Republic of Armenia and the Armed Forces of

Armenia;

5) negative demographic tendencies, especially in border regions, the emigration of nationals of the

Republic of Armenia, and activities and factors fostering this process;

6) threat from emergency situations within the territory of the Republic of Armenia and bordering

regions, as well as the protection of the population from the consequences of war and deficient

economic stability;

7) the ineffectiveness of the economic security system of the Republic of Armenia and decline of

economic indicators;

8) the obfuscation of moral and patriotic education, due respect for statehood, healthy life-style, the

traditional role of family and the national identity.


-----

5. The following factors are recognized as reducing threats to military security:

1) the Armed Forces capable of neutralizing threats to military security;

2) international integration processes that create favorable conditions for establishing cooperation in

the field of military security;

3) factors aimed at reducing the possibility of armed conflicts among regional countries and that of

new threats;

4) the activities of the United Nations (UN), the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), the

North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Organization for Security and Co-operation in

Europe (OSCE), and other international organizations and individual states aimed at strengthening

stability in the region.

CHAPTER II

ENSURING MILITARY SECURITY

6. Ensuring military security of the Republic of Armenia is one of the important functions of state

and includes the timely identification and evaluation of threats and dangers, the forecast of their

development as well as their prevention, suppression and neutralization. The Republic of Armenia

ensures its military security through the combined use of all forces, means and resources at its

disposal.

7. The national guarantee for ensuring military security is the Armed Forces which are combat

capable, equipped with modern armaments, endowed with high combat and moral standards, capable

to protect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Armenia, and ready to prevent

and completely neutralize threats to military security.

8. The international guarantee for ensuring military security, based on provisions of the Strategy, is

the undertaking of adequate commitments for ensuring international security by the Republic of


-----

Armenia, which is reflected within the frameworks of international security systems and the

establishment and constant development of allied and partnership relations with different countries.

9. For ensuring military security, the Republic of Armenia utilizes the Military Security System of the

state through the coordination, centralization and purposeful management of all of the country’s

political, economic and military potential. The coordination is mainly implemented through:

1) the development of the defence potential of the country, reforms in the Military Security System

and the Armed Forces aimed at improving the defence capabilities of the state, increasing combat

capabilities and readiness, modernization, constant development and ensuring civil control over the

Armed Forces;

2) deepening of comprehensive international cooperation in the defence sector, gaining and

introducing international leading experience for the political-military and military strengthening of

the Republic of Armenia;

3) the establishment and purposeful use of forces, means and resources, introduction of modern

information systems for ensuring military security based on the study of practical achievements in

international military science, warfare, and military-technical progress;

4) the collection of accurate information regarding developments related to the international and

regional political-military situation, the reliable and effective forecast of relevance of these

developments to the national, political-military and military interests of the Republic of Armenia,

identification and classification of military threats, undertaking necessary measures for adequate

response to them, ensuring protection and resolution of tasks of political-military and military

interests of the Republic of Armenia .

SECTION II

DEFENCE STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA

The Defence Strategy of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the «Defence Strategy»)

is a system of necessary activities for ensuring the military security of the Republic of Armenia,

which forges the defence policy of the Republic of Armenia .


-----

The Defence Strategy is guided by principles that correspond to the priorities of state development of

the Republic of Armenia . It defines the objectives derived from the necessity of ensuring the military

security of the Republic of Armenia and specifies the tasks to be implemented for the Military

Security System.

CHAPTER III

PRINCIPLES

10. The Republic of Armenia views the guarantee of its military security within a context of

establishing a state based on democracy, the rule of law, the protection of human and citizen’s rights,

implementation of social-economic reforms and the formation of civil society.

11. For ensuring military security, the Republic of Armenia is guided by the development of equal

and friendly allied and partnership relations, a peaceful settlement of conflicts, the improvement of

peace and stability, maintaining the military balance, and by the principle of creating a

comprehensive security environment.

12. The Defence Strategy is guided by state interests ensuing from fundamental values of the national

security of the Republic of Armenia, taking into consideration the current realities of ensuring

international security, collective interests of ally and partner states, comprehensive principles of the

military field and undertaken international commitments.

13. The Defence Strategy is based on the principle of being defensive in nature, with a preference for

diplomatic and other non-military means to ensure military security, prevention and neutralize the

threats. In case of direct military attacks threat, however, the Republic of Armenia reserves the right

to undertake military activities aimed at their neutralization.

14. To ensure its military security the Republic of Armenia can appeal to its allies and partners for

necessary assistance within the frameworks of their allied and partnership commitments.

15. The Republic of Armenia views all those countries and security organizations as potential

partners, whose policies do not contradict the fundamental values of national security of the Republic

of Armenia and are based on similarities while implementing Defence Strategy.


-----

CHAPTER IV

OBJECTIVES AND TASKS

16. The military objectives to ensure the necessary defence potential for securing the independence,

sovereignty, territorial integrity and inviolability of borders, as well as physical security of the

population of the Republic of Armenia and the Nagorno Karabakh Republic are:

1) to prevent and neutralize threats to military security of the Republic of Armenia and the Nagorno

Karabakh Republic through development and implementation of operational, short- and

mediumterm defence programs and plans;

2) to overcome crises, to eliminate the consequences of natural and technogenic disasters;

3) to fight against international terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and its

components, trafficking in drugs psychotropic substances, and combat other transnational crimes

posing a threat to the security of the Republic of Armenia;

4) to strengthen and develop the military capabilities of the Republic of Armenia in a constant and

comprehensive way;

5) to develop balanced multilateral and bilateral military cooperation;

6) to organize military-patriotic education for the versatile generations;

7) to develop and introduce modern systems for ensuring informational security.

17. For the realization of the military objectives, the tasks of the Defence Strategy consist of reliable

defence capabilities, reorganization and modernization, as well as military engagement.

18. The reliable defence capability is the combination of capabilities of the Armed Forces for

countering current and foreseeable dangers and threats due to the real analysis of the security


-----

environment of the Republic of Armenia, as well as their sufficient neutralization. The reliable

defence capability consists of:

1) Three main components for peacetime:

a) planning of use of Forces, covering the structure and strength of the Armed Forces, the

recruitment, acting and Reserve Forces, resource management, military-technical and military
economic provision, as well as conscription policy;

b) prevention and containment, which include adequate activities of the Armed Forces with use of

acting and Reserve Forces;

c) required combat readiness, including planning for readiness of the Armed Forces;

2) During wartime, the partial or complete use of the Armed Forces until the tasks, assigned in any

situation, are fully accomplished;

19. The reorganization and modernization, both in short- and medium-term perspectives, are the

correspondence of the Armed Forces actual capabilities with the requirements for the achievement of

military objectives to be conducted through reforms in the Military Security System. Reorganization

and modernization consist of three components:

1) resource evaluation, which implies a complete assessment of current capabilities of the Armed

Forces, including military, military-technical and military-economic, defining priorities of the

development of the Republic of Armenia statehood and their correspondence with the tasks ensuring

military security now and in foreseeable prospective;

2) clarification of needs, which is aimed at revealing the requirements of stable development of the

Armed Forces and realization of national military objectives, and development of the types and

means to meet them;

3) reforms, designed for attainment of the required military capabilities.


-----

This implies the development of management, operational, combat and logistics support, which will

be more effective, modern, mobile, flexible and with high abilities of deployment and use.

20. The military engagement is the enhanced participation of the

Armed Forces in the activities of different security structures and multinational forces for ensuring

international security. It aims at complete undertaking of the Republic of Armenia ’s share in

providing international security and engagement of international security systems guaranteeing

security of the Republic of Armenia . The military engagement has three components:

1) comprehensive military cooperation aimed at establishing multilateral capabilities of the Armed

Forces, and application of these opportunities of cooperation to carry out reforms in the Military

Security System;

2) widening of interoperability possibilities in order to establish units capable of participating in

international cooperative and joint activities;

3) operational cooperation, the objective of which is the participation of interoperable units of the

Armed Forces in multinational joint activities aimed at strengthening international stability and

peace.

CHAPTER V

INTERNATIONAL MILITARY AND MILITARY-TECHNICAL COOPERATION

21. The Republic of Armenia implements international military and military-technical cooperation

according to the fundamental values of its national security and based on the tasks of ensuring its

military security, as well as to promote international security.

22. The main objectives of international military and military-technical cooperation are:


-----

1) to ensure comprehensive military security and to improve its political-military posture;

2) to maintain collective capabilities of the Armed Forces, as well as the relative balance of military

and political-military alliances in the region;

3) to use international experience and assistance for the modernization of the Armed Forces;

4) to meet the personnel training and retraining, armaments and military equipment requirements of

the Armed Forces;

5) to develop and restructure the military industrial complex.

23. The priority directions for military and military-technical cooperation are the following:

1) the strategic partnership with the Russian Federation . The Republic of Armenia establishes

permanently acting combined forces with the Russian Federation, such as joint formation of troops

(Forces) of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Armenia and the Russian Federation;

2) active and practical participation in the programs of the Collective Security Treaty Organization

(CSTO) such as:

a) elaboration of the main direction of military policy;

b) development of a collective security system based on a regional principle;

c) improvement of the air defence systems of the CIS and CSTO;

d) military-technical cooperation;


-----

e) development of military infrastructures;

f) preparation of military personnel and military science;

g) fight against international terrorism and other international crimes;

h) bilateral cooperation with the member states of the CSTO;

3) bilateral military cooperation with the United States of America in the direction of defence

reforms, the establishment of interoperable units, and participation in international stabilization and

peacekeeping activities;

4) cooperation with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and its member partner states within the

frameworks of the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council and Partnership for Peace program. To develop

prospective and proper relations and developing interoperable capabilities with the NATO, the

Republic of Armenia implements the Individual Partnership Action Plan with the NATO and

participates in the NATO Planning and Review Process, and carries out bilateral military cooperation

programs with the NATO members and partner states,

5) cooperation with regional and non-regional states, the policy of which does not contradict the

fundamental values of national security of the Republic of Armenia,

6) international cooperation, especially in the area of arms control and within the frameworks of the

United Nations (UN) and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

SECTION III

MILITARY SECURITY SYSTEM

CHAPTER VI

STRUCTURE, COMMAND AND ACTIVITY OF MILITARY SECURITY SYSTEM


-----

24. The Military Security System is set of state authorized bodies and state officials of the Republic of

Armenia, the Armed Forces and military-industrial complex, institutions and organizations

designated for resolving military security tasks. It conducts a wide range of activities aimed at

ensuring military security, including:

1) military, political, economic, social, legal and other means and measures to prepare the Armed

Forces, the territory of the Republic of Armenia, society and economy for defence;

2) the application of mechanisms of international guarantees of military security.

25. The tasks and functions of state bodies responsible for the command and management of Military

Security System are defined by the Constitution and laws of the Republic of Armenia .

26. The President of the Republic of Armenia coordinates the activities of the state bodies in the area

of defence.

27. General command of the Armed Forces is exercised by the

President of the Republic of Armenia as the Supreme Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, and

the Government of the Republic of Armenia within its authority. The Minister of Defence of the

Republic of Armenia executes direct command over the Armed Forces.

28. The accumulation and preservation of material reserves are organized by the Government of the

Republic of Armenia, according to the plan of the establishment of state and mobilization reserves

approved by the President of the Republic of Armenia and according to the plan for mobilization

preparedness approved by the Government of the Republic of Armenia .

29. The activity of the Military Security System is carried out by state activities preparing the Armed

Forces, territory, society and economy as well as creating international guarantees for military

security through state activities.

30. The preparation of the Armed Forces includes:


-----

1) further improvement of the Armed Forces, recruitment, armament and military equipment

supplies, accumulation of material reserves;

2) establishment of necessary military formations, entities and units, their appropriate deployment,

ensure combat-ability, combat and mobilization readiness, and operational and strategic planning;

3) organization of troops command, operational, combat and mobilization readiness of all troops and

the integrity of the chain of their command;

4) moral and psychological preparation of the personnel.

31. The preparation of the territory of the Republic of Armenia includes:

1) development of a system of transport communication;

2) correspondence of necessary standards for the realization of functions of the Armed Forces with

technical capabilities of civil aviation airports;

3) establishment of state storages and depots for material stocks and civil defence structures;

4) development of management and communication systems and base for energy supplies;

5) establishment and improvement of repairing, refitting and renewing enterprises for armament and

military equipment;

6) preparation of medical facilities;

7) improving the protection of strategic entities;


-----

32. The preparation of the society includes:

1) morale and psychological stable conditions, military-patriotic education;

2) training of reserve force, development of civil defence system;

3) improvement of public health care system;

4) ensuring communication between the public and the Armed Forces, which is implemented

through the Public Information Strategy and according to its defence related provisions.

33. The preparation of the economy includes:

1) development of military-economic and military-technical policy of the state;

2) elaboration of plans for mobilization preparedness;

3) coordination of economic planning, ensuring necessary human, material-technical and financial

resources for the Armed Forces for peacetime and wartime;

4) ensuring the priority fulfillment of tasks deriving from the interests of the Armed Forces by civil

communication all the infrastructures during wartime.

34. Establishment of international guarantees for military security includes:

1) establishment and constant development of allied and partnership relations within the frameworks

of collective security systems;


-----

2) contribution to international military security.

CHAPTER VII

ARMED FORCES AND OTHER TROOPS, THE BASIS AND MEANS FOR THEIR USE

35. The Armed Forces are a state military structure and constitute the basis of the country’s Military

Security System, which ensures the armed protection of the independence of the Republic of

Armenia, its territorial integrity, inviolability of frontiers and security.

The Armed Forces maintain neutrality regarding all political issues and are under civilian control.

36. The organizational structure of the Armed Forces consists of the central command, military units,

and entities, types of forces and units which are under central command. During wartime, the Armed

Forces also include other troops. The personnel of the Armed Forces are made up of Active and

Reserve Forces.

37. The other forces include the troops of the Police of the Republic of Armenia and the frontier

troops of the National Security Service of the Republic of Armenia and those armed units, the

command and management functions of which are held by respective agencies during peacetime and

according to the legislation. During wartime, other troops are transferred to the direct operational

command of the General Staff of the Armed Forces. The planning, accumulation, location and

preservation of other troops‘ material are carried out by respective agencies. The operational depot is

the responsibility of the Ministry of Defence of the Republic of Armenia during wartime.

38. The main functions of the Armed Forces are:

1) to ensure the necessary combat capabilities for military objectives;

2) to protect the fundamental values of national security;

3) to prevent the possible armed aggression, neutralize tension areas, enforce cease-fire or truce by

the entire or partial deployment of the Armed Forces;


-----

4) to participate in the prevention of emergency situations, the reduction and elimination of possible

crises consequences, and civil defence activities such as evacuation, rescue and search, emergency and

restoration, and humanitarian activities;

5) to detect military threats and counteract them;

6) to maintain arms, military equipment and materiel resources for ensuring combat and mobilization

capabilities;

7) to implement plans for operational application and mobilization;

8) to meet all commitments defined by international treaties, including participation in international

humanitarian and rescue, peacekeeping and stabilization activities;

9) to prevent and neutralize subversive-intelligence and terrorist activities;

10) to ensure informational security in the Armed Forces and realize activities aiming at

neutralization of disinformation propaganda;

11) to accomplish other tasks related to the Military Security System.

39. The Armed Forces are deployed in the territory of the Republic of Armenia on account of the

following factors:

1) possibility and scale of military threats on that strategic direction;

2) nature and directions of potential activities of enemy;


-----

3) consideration of the military-political situation in the region, and relations of the Republic of

Armenia with neighboring states;

4) stationing of special entities within the territory of the Republic of Armenia;

5) special strategic territories, provinces, transport routes and passages;

6) allocation of necessary transport infrastructure;

7) defensive and camouflage capabilities of location and ensuring the mobility of troops;

8) conditions for troops accommodation and activities, as well as for solution of social and living

problems;

9) mobilization capabilities.

40. The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, national laws and international agreements

constitute the basis for the use of the Armed Forces.

41. The main means of using the Armed Forces are:

1) strategic, operational, tactical and special activities;

2) elimination of activities posing threats to the constitutional order according to the legislation of

the Republic of Armenia;

3) activities deriving from allied commitments,

4) international peacekeeping activities;


-----

5) necessary activities in times of natural disasters and other emergency situations.

CHAPTER VIII

MILITARY-ECONOMIC AND MILITARY-TECHNICAL SUPPORT OF MILITARY SECURITY

SYSTEM

42. The task of military-economic and military-technical support is to provide the Military Security

System with a sufficient and adequate level of material, financial, modern military equipment, arms

and other means.

43. The principles of military-economic and military-technical support are:

1) constant modernization and improvement of the military-economic and military-technical systems

of the Republic of Armenia by the effective involvement of the combined respective financial,

material and intellectual potential of the state and by improving accumulation mechanisms;

2) development of the military-industrial complex;

3) organization of military industry based on its own scientific-technical, technological and industrial

potential;

4) creation of material-technical, technological, informational bases for production and export of

different materials of military significance.

44. The main tasks of military-economic and military-technical support are:

1) reorganization of military-economic and military-technical spheres and elaboration of plans for

their development;


-----

2) preservation and improvement of economic readiness for mobilization and mobilization readiness

system, while ensuring a stable system of management;

3) establishing an effective management system of the main branches of defence industry;

4) ensuring necessary financial, material and technical reserves, effective planning and management

of their use and supplies;

5) effective coordination, interconnection and planned development of Military Security System

infrastructures;

6) preservation, improvement and strengthening of the scientific technical and industrial bases of

Military Security System, and the development of more efficient «new generation» defence systems;

7) restoration, modernization and renovation of the arms and military equipment, development of

structures of military engineering;

8) improvement of the system of military-technical equipment standardization and codification;

9) ensuring the use of efficient measures for communication and intelligence, radio electronics,

troops management, warning and counteraction;

10) increase in the living standards of military and civilian personnel serving in the Armed Forces

and for their families,

11) fulfillment of international commitments in military-technical and military-economic areas.

45. The main directions for preparedness of the economy for mobilization are:

1) preparation of human resources and allocation in the Armed Forces and economy;


-----

2) preparation of economy’s management system, stable functioning during military situations and

wartime;

3) development of mobilization plans for the Armed Forces;

4) improvement of mobilization system of those organization which have mobilization tasks;

5) development of mobilization capabilities and facilities;

6) accumulation, renewal and preservation of material reserve in mobilization and state depots;

7) preparation of systems for providing the population with essential food and non-food products,

health care, communication and transport means during periods of mobilization and wartime;

8) preparation of financial credit, tax and monetary circulation systems for functioning in special

regime during martial law;

9) establishment and improvement of mechanisms for legal regulation of martial law and

mobilization preparedness of economy and local selfgoverning bodies;

10) preservation and development of those branches of economy which contribute to viability and

stable activities of population during martial law;

11) legal regulation, planning, scientific-methodical support, training and re-training of personnel,

international cooperation, assessment of preparedness for mobilization.

SECTION IV

REFORMS IN MILITARY SECURITY SYSTEM


-----

CHAPTER IX

OBJECTIVES AND TASKS

46. The objective of reforming the Military Security System centers on the creation of a more flexible

and modern Military Security System based on democratic fundamental principles of civil control,

defence planning and management, able to ensure the effective military security of the Republic of

Armenia and to protect the fundamental values of national security and the fulfillment of

international commitments of the Republic of Armenia .

47. The reforms in the Military Security System should also ensure the improvement of legislation

regulating the military security field, the strengthening of legality within the Armed Forces, protect

the rights and freedoms of all nationals of the Republic of Armenia, as defined by the Constitution of

the Republic of Armenia, adhere to international agreements and the laws of the Republic of

Armenia, including guarantees of the right to alternative military service, according to the objective

to ensure the military security of the Republic of Armenia .

48. The important priorities of reforms in the Military Security System are the improvement of

military standards of the Armed Forces, the development of compatibility and interoperability with

leading security systems and defence systems of allied countries and the Armed Forces, as well as the

development of rapid reaction capabilities in crises situations to address national problems and carry

out international missions.

49. The reforms in the Military Security System provide for the elaboration of conceptual documents,

necessary amendments to legislation and the practical realization of reforms in the system based on

the strategic review.

50. The strategic review of the Military Security System includes the specification of the current

capabilities and required needs of the Armed Forces for ensuring military security of the Republic of

Armenia as well as their adaptation to the current and future political-military environment.

The strategic review of the Military Security System implies:


-----

1) pursuit of defined directions of the Military Doctrine to develop plans and concepts for the

Military Security System, including the Armed Forces, aimed at the performance of assigned tasks

through a guiding process of defence reforms;

2) revaluation of current threats and the specification and approval of priorities of military strategy in

a long-term perspective;

3) increasing contract-based military service within the Armed Forces through the introduction of

professional non-commissioned (NCO) and Warrant Officers personnel, and with professional private

personnel serving in professional units;

4) specification of the required level of combat readiness of all units of the Armed Forces for dealing

with military threats;

5) definition of the structure, readiness, priorities for procurement and modernization of armament

and equipment, directions of development of infrastructures and military industrial complex, and the

needs for mobilization and Reserve Forces, taking into consideration the security environment and

current resources;

6) establishment of the Armed Forces with modern armaments and equipment, endowed with a high

degree of mobility and combat capabilities for a rapid reaction to security threats, ensuring the

fulfillment of international commitments of the Republic of Armenia and with the capability to

accomplish different national and international military missions and tasks.

51. Based on the legislation established due to the strategic review of the Military Security System, as

well as on the conceptual documents, the following problems should be addressed according to the

spheres:

1) In the field of Military Security System Command: the improvement of proceedings and functions,

in conformity with the logic of Military Security System modernization programs and deriving tasks

and requirements.

The reform in Military Security System command field implies:


-----

a) a review of the chain of command of the Armed Forces based on principles of command systems

from the President of the Republic of Armenia to the Minister of Defence, from the Minister of

Defence to the Chief of General Staff of the Armed Forces, and from the Chief of General Staff of the

Armed Forces to structural units of the Armed Forces;

b) specification of functions of the Ministry of Defence of the Republic of Armenia through defining

clear-cut powers of defence policy, conscription, defence budget formation and centralized

procurement;

c) the specification of functions of the General Staff of the Armed Forces through defining a

comprehensive management of troops, including combat and logistical support, the development of

operational combat plans of the Armed Forces, and articulating clear-cut powers of planning and

coordination for all types of forces: the Armed Forces, frontier troops, and Police troops during

peacetime;

d) improvement of defence planning bodies;

e) introduction of a civil service component in the system of the Ministry of Defence of the Republic

of Armenia .

2) In field of Personnel Management: the preparation and development of effective and transparent

mechanisms of management mechanism of military and civilian personnel based on analyses of

personnel requirements for the Armed Forces and related to resource planning. The reform in

Personnel Management field implies:

a) clear definition of the responsibilities, obligations and rights of military and civil personnel;

b) analysis of personnel requirements for the Armed Forces, exact planning of personnel resources, a

clear definition and description of each position, according to educational, professional backgrounds

and age groups;


-----

c) clear definition of mechanisms for personnel promotion, remuneration, social welfare, and

discharge through the establishment of a joint and transparent system;

d) changes in the list of members of staff for the purpose of effective activities of the Armed Forces;

e) replacement and substitution of identified military positions by civilians in respective units that do

not deal directly with military functions within the system of the Ministry of Defence and the

General Staff of the Armed Forces,

3) In the field of the Reserve Force: establishment of effective mechanisms for the realization of

Reserve Forces’ capability of the Armed Forces in ensuring military security, taking into

consideration the limited mobilization resources of the Republic of Armenia, which is recognized to

be in an unstable environment and under constant military threat, and by necessity, requiring a large

number of Armed Forces in terms of manpower.

The reform in the Reserve Forces field implies:

a) establishment of mechanisms for organization and realization of Reserve Forces with military

qualifications;

b) introduction of a contract-based Reserve Forces system.

4) In the field of Military Education: gradual and committed development of an infrastructure and

military capability for preparing and training military and civil personnel of the Armed Forces. The

reform in military education field implies:

a) improvement and development of the military education and personnel preparation system using

international leading experience;

b) modernization of training programs for the qualification of command abilities of Warrant Officers,

non-commissioned officers (NCOs), officers and staff officers introducing courses on peacekeeping,

counterterrorism, crisis response and foreign languages, which develop and enhance the necessary

skills for dealing with current challenges and participating in international activities;


-----

c) participating in joint trainings and military exercises to enhance the professional skills and

development of personnel, including all types of forces;

d) development of one-year educational and training programs for different units of the Armed

Forces based on modern standards, conformity of learning processes with those standards, and the

improvement of evaluation mechanisms;

e) elaboration and introduction of necessary retraining plans and procedures for civilian personnel

serving in military field;

f) elaboration and implementation of training programs for Reserve Forces and pre-conscription

training for conscripts.

5) In the field of Defence Planning and Budgeting: establishment of a more transparent and effective

system for planning of capabilities for financial allocations based on the emphasis on both a

quantitative and qualitative definitions, and evaluation of the needs of the Armed Forces.

The reform in the Defence Planning and Budgeting field implies:

a) an improvement of the chain of defence planning, with the development of required capabilities

necessary for the establishment of a system to assess, plan and finance defence needs utilizing

planned and designed methods based on macroeconomic forecasts of social-economic developments;

b) an appropriate budget policy to ensure the financial, material and technical needs of the Armed

Forces in parallel with the activities within the frameworks of international cooperation in military

and military-technical area;

c) the modernization of auditing and accounting procedures;

d) improvement of mechanisms for a more effective and target use of resources and civil control.


-----

6) In the field of Logistics: ensuring reliable, flexible, economically feasible, and rapid supply and

servicing of the Armed Forces. The reformation of logistics implies:

a) development of the concept of centralized logistics based on longterm planning and mechanisms,

which should be decentralized and under control on the operational level;

b) amending and updating logistics management directives and technical guidance;

c) establishment of support systems with required capabilities of commanding, receiving, storing and

providing with required supplies for units of the Armed Forces;

d) development of storage plans for maintaining, storing, and reshaping means and required

maintenance capabilities;

e) modernizing transport systems to support an efficient and speedy movement of units, personnel

and material in realizing general tasks and responsibilities;

f) modernization of services providing logistical support to the units of the Armed Forces.

7) In the direction of Widening Interoperability: establishment and development of forces compatible

with different security systems and separate countries, including the formation and development of a

rapid reaction peacekeeping brigade capable of fully participating in activities of international

security and stability to meet the allied commitments stipulated by the international agreements of

the Republic of Armenia.

CHAPTER X

CONCLUDING PROVISIONS

52. The principles and views of the Military Doctrine are specified and embodied in planning

documents and respective legal acts related to ensuring military security.


-----

53. The Military Doctrine is being implemented through the activities of all of the Military Security

System, bodies of public administration, organizations and society with the purpose of ensuring the

military security of the Republic of Armenia according to the laws of the Republic of Armenia .

54. The provisions of the Doctrine embody the timeline of reforms in the Military Security System

and specific objectives typical to that timeline. The reforms in the Military Security System are

anticipated to be completed by 2015, whereupon the principles and objectives of the Doctrine will be

reviewed.

CHIEF OF STAFF

OF THE RA PRESIDENT A. GEVORKYAN


-----

