##### 2023–27

 Defence Corporate Plan


-----

#### Foreword

Australia faces the most challenging set of strategic circumstances since the end
of the Second World War.

Australia’s region, the Indo-Pacific, is seeing growing competition across multiple levels — economic,
military, strategic and diplomatic — alongside competing values and narratives.

To meet these challenges, the Albanese Government has set an agenda for ambitious, but necessary, reform
to Defence’s posture and structure. The Defence Strategic Review is the most significant review of the Defence
enterprise in over 35 years. The Government’s response sets out a blueprint for Australia’s defence policy,
planning and resourcing over the coming decades.

Defence is making steady progress in implementing the outcomes of the Defence Strategic Review. But this is just
the start of the journey — realising the ambition of the Defence Strategic Review will require long-term reform
that will affect every part of Defence. The inaugural National Defence Strategy in 2024 will be a pivotal part of
this journey.

In line with the priorities the Government has identified, we are committed to acquiring conventionally-armed,
nuclear-powered submarines through AUKUS — the single largest capability acquisition in Australia’s history.

We’re focused on enhancing the Australian Defence Force’s ability to precisely strike targets at longer range
and on manufacturing munitions in Australia. We’re improving the Australian Defence Force’s ability to operate
from Australia’s northern bases. And we’re working closely with industry to lift our capacity to rapidly translate
disruptive new technologies into Australian Defence Force capability.

Underpinning these reforms is Defence’s most important capability — its people. Those in the Australian
Defence Force risk their lives to defend Australia and protect our national interests. To support our people,
the Government is investing in the growth and retention of a highly skilled Defence workforce and is committed
to ensuring it is adequately trained, appropriately equipped and fully prepared to carry out its duties. The
Government deeply appreciates those who have served our country and those who have given their lives in
service to our nation, as well as their families and loved ones who have supported them.

We will also continue to deepen our engagement with our partners and regional neighbours to address shared
challenges in our strategic environment. We will work together to shape an open, stable and prosperous region,
operating by agreed rules and where sovereignty is respected.

These reforms will ensure Defence has the capabilities it needs to defend Australia and our national
interests. Accordingly, building on the Government’s commitment to implement the recommendations
of the _Defence Strategic Review, Defence spending as a proportion of Australia’s gross domestic product_
will lift above its current trajectory to be 0.2 per cent higher by 2032–33.

Collectively, these actions set the course for the defence of Australia over the coming decades
in a manner that promotes peace and stability, and helps keep Australians safe. I am pleased to
launch the 2023–27 Defence Corporate Plan.

**The Hon Richard Marles MP**

Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Defence


**Acknowledgement**
**of Country**

Defence acknowledges the
Traditional Custodians of
Country throughout Australia.
Defence recognises their
continuing connection to
traditional lands and waters
and would like to pay respect
to their Elders both past and
present. Defence would also
like to pay respect to the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples who have
contributed to the defence
of Australia in times of peace
and war.

Indigenous cultural
performers conduct a
smoking ceremony during
the Indigenous Veterans
Commemoration Service
in Hyde Park, Sydney.
The annual ceremony
commemorates the service
and sacrifice of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander
veterans. CREDIT: Leading
Seaman Imagery Specialist
Susan Mossop


**Statement of preparation**

I, as the accountable authority of Defence,
present the 2023–27 Defence Corporate
_Plan as required under paragraph 35 (1)(b)_
of the Public Governance, Performance
_and Accountability Act 2013._


**Greg Moriarty**
Secretary of the
Department of Defence
August 2023


© Commonwealth of Australia 2023 ISSN 2205–5282 (online) ISBN 978–1–925890–45–7

This publication is available for your use under a Creative Commons BY Attribution 3.0 Australia licence, with
the exception of the Commonwealth Coat of Arms and the Defence logo, signatures and where otherwise stated.
[The full licence terms are available at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/au/legalcode.](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/au/legalcode)

Use of Defence's materials under a Creative Commons BY Attribution 3.0 Australia licence requires you
to attribute the work but not in any way that suggests Defence endorses you or your use of the work.

Defence allows for materials to be used 'as supplied' provided you have not modified or transformed the
Defence material in any way including, for example, by changing Defence text. Defence prefers the following
attribution: Source: The Australian Department of Defence.

Material: If you have modified or transformed Defence's material, or derived new material from those of
Defence in any way, then Defence prefers the following attribution: Based on the Australian Government
Department of Defence's data.


-----

#### A message from the Secretary  of the Department of Defence and the Chief of the Defence Force

On 24 April 2023, the Prime Minister, the
Hon Anthony Albanese MP, and the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Defence,
the Hon Richard Marles MP released
the Defence Strategic Review and the
_National Defence Statement 2023._

The Defence Strategic Review acknowledged the strategic
challenges outlined in Australia’s 2020 Defence Strategic
_Update continue to accelerate. Our region is being_
reshaped and our strategic environment is becoming more
challenging. There is increasing competition economically,
militarily, strategically and diplomatically, alongside a
contest of values and narratives. Our region is experiencing
a large-scale military build-up without transparency or
strategic reassurance, and rising tensions and reduced
warning times are contributing to the risk of military
escalation or miscalculation. The effects of climate change
are amplifying these challenges.

The Government’s response to the Defence Strategic Review
will be the blueprint for Australia’s defence policy, planning
and resourcing over the coming decades. It demonstrates
Australia’s continued commitment to working seamlessly
with our closest partners; maintaining our technological
edge; operating in a manner consistent with our domestic
and international legal obligations; and demonstrating
transparency with partners about how our evolving defence
posture contributes to our shared vision for the region.

In response to the Defence Strategic Review, government
has directed that Defence must have the capacity to defend
Australia and our immediate region, including to deter
through denial any adversary’s attempt to project power
against Australia through our northern approaches. Defence
must have the capacity to protect Australia’s economic
connection to our region and the world and contribute with
our partners to the collective security of the Indo-Pacific and
the maintenance of the international rules-based order.


Defence is focused on enhancements to Defence’s capabilities in the following
six priority areas identified by the Government for immediate action:

-  the acquisition of conventionally-armed, nuclear-powered submarines
through our partnership with the United Kingdom and the United States,
known as AUKUS;

-  developing the Australian Defence Force’s ability to precisely strike targets
at longer range and manufacture munitions in Australia;

-  improving the Australian Defence Force’s ability to operate from Australia’s
northern bases;

-  investing in the growth and retention of a highly skilled Defence workforce;

-  lifting our capacity to rapidly translate disruptive new technologies into
defence capability, in close partnership with Australian industry; and

-  deepening our diplomatic and defence partnerships with key partners
in the Indo-Pacific.

We will require significant reform across the Defence enterprise to deliver on the
Government's direction. As part of its response to the Defence Strategic Review, the
Government directed Defence to move away from white papers and instead produce
a National Defence Strategy on a biennial basis, with the first to be delivered in 2024.

The delivery of the 2024 National Defence Strategy will be a pivotal part of
Defence’s reform journey. The National Defence Strategy will set out a holistic,
comprehensive reform of Defence policy, planning, capabilities and resourcing,
including reprioritisation of the Integrated Investment Program in line with the
recommendations of the Defence Strategic Review.

Defence is at a critical point of transition throughout 2023–24. Defence must meet
government direction with a focused sense of urgency whilst remaining agile and
responsive to support the development of the 2024 National Defence Strategy.

To maximise deterrence, denial and response options for the Government, we will
strengthen the Australian Defence Force into a fully integrated and focused force and
deliver enhanced and joined-up combat power across the maritime, land, air, space
and cyber domains.

Defence’s success in operating the capabilities that we are acquiring and carrying
out our mission lies in the character of our people and the culture of our teams,
underpinned by our unified Defence values and behaviours. They are at the heart
of all that we do and are the most important component of our military capability.

We are facing significant challenges to recruit and retain elements of our workforce,
particularly in occupations where national competition for skills is high. There
are also increased operational demands on our people both within Australia and
overseas. We will continue to look for opportunities to improve our employee value
proposition and workplace conditions.


OPERATION
KUDU ROT-1

Australian Army soldiers
instruct and mentor
Ukrainian trainees
performing a section
attack during a field phase
of Operation KUDU,
which is the Australian
Defence Force’s
commitment to the
training of Armed Forces
of Ukraine recruits in
the United Kingdom.
The training conducted
under this operation
will generate additional
capacity within the
Armed Forces of Ukraine
and will focus on basic
infantry tactics for urban
and wooded environments,
helping Ukrainian
recruits gain the military
skills needed to defend
their homeland.
CREDIT: Corporal
Jonathan Goedhart


-----

#### CONTENTS

i Foreword

ii A message from the Secretary of the Department of Defence
and the Chief of the Defence Force

3 2023–27 Defence Corporate Plan on a page

4 Our Mission and Purpose

4 Our Outcomes

5 Our Strategic Objectives

6 Our Key Activities

9 Our Strategic Environment

14 Our People

17 Our Capability

18 Our Innovation, Science and Technology

19 Our Security, Estate and Infrastructure

20 Our Climate Commitment

21 Our Portfolio Structure

23 Our Governance

27 Our Performance

28 Outcome 1

28 Outcome 2

32 Portfolio Budget Statements Programs

33 Changes since the 2022–26 Defence Corporate Plan

33 List of requirements


Defence is committed to supporting our personnel at all stages of their Defence journey and fostering
positive workplace experiences. To create the necessary conditions for this culture to flourish, it is
essential that we acknowledge and confront those occasions when we have failed to live up to the
standards that we and the wider Australian community expect of our nation’s defence force.

Supporting the Royal Commission into Defence and Veteran Suicide as it heads into its final year is
a priority for Defence. The Royal Commission is an opportunity for Defence to further understand the
complex issue of suicide and our approach to mental health, wellbeing and welfare, and how we can
better reduce the associated risks for our people. Every effort is being made to encourage and support
current and former serving Australian Defence Force members to come forward and share their
experiences.

Defence is also fully committed to responding to all of the findings and recommendations of the
Inspector-General of the Australian Defence Force Afghanistan Inquiry report, through the Afghanistan
Inquiry Reform Program. Work being delivered through the reform program goes beyond simply
addressing Inquiry recommendations; it is considering and responding to the range of complex
issues raised by the Inquiry.

We are confident the significant work that is now underway in Defence, and with our allies and
partners, is setting the conditions for Defence’s success in ensuring Australia’s security and prosperity
into the future.

In 2023–27, Defence will continue to support and deliver the Australian Government’s priority — to keep
Australia safe, secure and prosperous. We are pleased to present the 2023–27 Defence Corporate Plan,
which covers the period 2023–27 as required under paragraph 35(1)(b) of the Public Governance,
_Performance and Accountability Act 2013 and in accordance with section 16E of the Public Governance_
_and Performance Accountability Rule 2014._


**Greg Moriarty**

Secretary of the
Department of Defence
August 2023


**Angus J Campbell AO DSC**

General
Chief of the Defence Force
August 2023


-----

**1 – F-35A Lightning II**
aircraft from
No. 75 Squadron fly
from RAAF Base Tindal
in the Northern Territory
to Royal Malaysian
Air Force Base Butterworth
for the air-to-air fighter
interaction Exercise
Elangaroo 22. CREDIT:
Leading Aircraftman
Adam Abela

**2 – An Australian**
Army gunner from
the 4th Regiment,
Royal Australian Artillery,
waits for an airlift during
Exercise Brolga Run 23
at the Townsville Field
Training Area, Queensland.
CREDIT: Lance Corporal
Riley Blennerhassett

**3 – After five months**
in Western Australia
preparing for service,
patrol boat Australian
Defence Vessel Cape
_Naturaliste departs_
Fleet Base West to sail
to her homeport of Darwin,
Northern Territory. CREDIT:
Petty Officer Imagery
Specialist Craig Walton

**4 – United States Navy**
Virginia Class submarine
USS Mississippi arrives at
Fleet Base West, Western
Australia, for a routine visit
to provide respite for the
crew. CREDIT: Chief Petty
Officer Imagery Specialist
Yuri Ramsey

**5 – First-year trainee**
officers at the Australian
Defence Force Academy in
Canberra are marched on
to the main parade ground
to join their squadrons for
the annual Chief of the
Defence Force Parade.
CREDIT: Thomas Lucraft

**6 – Defence Space**
Command participating
for the first time at the
Australian International
Airshow 2023 at Avalon
Airport, Victoria. CREDIT:
Leading Aircraftwoman
Kate Czerny


### 2023–27 Defence Corporate Plan

MISSION AND PURPOSE:

To defend Australia and its national interests in order to advance Australia’s security and prosperity.


OUR VALUES:


**Service: We have**
the selflessness
of character to
place the security
and interests of
our nation and its
people ahead of
our own.


**Courage:**
We have the
strength of
character to say
and do the right
thing, always,
especially in the
face of adversity.

Be
adaptable,
innovative
and agile.


**Respect:**
We have the
humanity of
character to
value others
and treat them
with dignity.


**Integrity:**
We have the
consistency of
character to align
our thoughts,
words and actions
to do what is right.


**Excellence:**
We have the
willingness of
character to strive
each day to be the
best we can be, both
professionally and
personally.


OUR BEHAVIOURS: Act with
purpose for
Defence and
the nation.


Collaborate
and be
team-focused.


Be accountable Reflect,
and trustworthy. learn and
improve.


Be inclusive
and value
others.


**1: Defend Australia and its national interests**
through the conduct of operations and
the provision of support for the Australian
community and civilian authorities, in
accordance with government direction.


**2: Protect and advance Australia’s strategic interests**
through the provision of strategic policy, the development,
delivery and sustainment of military, intelligence and
enabling capabilities, and the promotion of regional and
global security and stability as directed by government.


OUTCOMES:


STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES:

**Shape Australia’s strategic**
environment


**Respond with credible**
military force, when required


**Deter action against**
Australia’s interests


Our capacity to shape, deter, and respond must be focused and integrated through the lens of a strategy
of denial.

KEY ACTIVITIES:

Conduct
operations and Enable
deployments to intelligence- Promote Advance
defend Australia informed strategic regional and Australia’s
and advance its policy and overseas global security prosperity
national operations and stability
interests

Be a Invest Deliver
strategy-led in Defence future
organisation people capability


PERFORMANCE:

An effective performance framework that ensures we are measuring and reporting on our performance
to the Australian Government and the Australian people and demonstrating how we achieve our mission
and purpose, and strategic objectives.





-----

#### Our Strategic Objectives

Our strategic objectives operationalise the delivery of our mission and purpose.
Our strategic objectives are to: shape Australia’s strategic environment; deter
actions against Australia’s interests; and respond with credible military force,
when required. These strategic objectives will be supported through the
development of the 2024 National Defence Strategy.

Shape Australia’s strategic environment

Australia is an advocate for stability, security and sovereignty in our region.

Defence works closely with other government agencies and international partners to
shape Australia’s strategic environment. Defence continues to expand its diplomacy,
cooperation and capacity building activities, supporting shared interests with our
Indo-Pacific partners.

Deter actions against Australia’s interests

Defence is strengthening its posture and defence capabilities so no potential
aggressor can ever conclude that the benefits of conflict outweigh the risks.

Respond with credible military force, when required

Defence is able to respond, including with credible force when required and in
support of regional partners in times of need. Defence will continue to enhance
its lethality and readiness, as well as improve the logistical support required for
high-intensity warfighting.


Defence encompasses all of the Groups and Services
within Defence, their functions, outputs and their people
— military, Australian Public Service and contractors.
Together, we will implement the directions coming out
of the Defence Strategic Review.

#### Our Mission and Purpose

Defence’s mission and purpose is to defend Australia and
its national interests in order to advance Australia’s security
and prosperity.

Defence serves the government of the day and is accountable
to the Commonwealth Parliament, which represents the
Australian people, to efficiently and effectively carry out the
Government’s defence policy.

#### Our Outcomes

Outcome 1

Defend Australia and its national interests through the conduct of
operations and provision of support for the Australian community
and civilian authorities in accordance with government direction.

Outcome 2

Protect and advance Australia’s strategic interests through
the provision of strategic policy, the development, delivery and
sustainment of military, intelligence and enabling capabilities,
and the promotion of regional and global security and stability
as directed by government.


**1 – French Air and**
Space Force members
assist the crew of
a Royal Australian
Air Force C-27J Spartan
to unload cargo during
Exercise Croix Du Sud
2023 in New Caledonia.
CREDIT: Corporal
Dustin Anderson

**2 – Australian**
Army soldiers from
the 3rd Battalion,
The Royal Australian
Regiment, conduct an
assault on the enemy
main defensive position
during Exercise Brolga
Run 23 at Townsville
Field Training Area,
Queensland. CREDIT:
Lance Corporal
Riley Blennerhassett


Command of
HMAS Canberra was
handed over from
Captain Jace Hutchison,
RAN to Captain Brendan
O'Hara, RAN during a
ceremony onboard the
ship’s flight deck while
alongside Fleet Base East
in Sydney, New South Wales.
CREDIT: Leading Seaman
Imagery Specialist
Matthew Lyall


-----

#### Our Key Activities

In 2022, Defence commenced a major review and update of its performance
measurement and reporting system. We streamlined our approach to better
align our mission and purpose, outcomes, strategic objectives, the key activities
and priorities we undertake to deliver on them, and the performance measures
and targets that help us determine whether we are successful.

In 2023, we have further refined our key activities to align with the
Government’s response to the Defence Strategic Review.

We expect to make more substantial changes in the 2024–28 Defence
_Corporate Plan following the release of the 2024 National Defence Strategy._

###### Key Activity 1: Conduct operations and deployments to defend and advance Australia’s national interests

Defence conducts operations and deployments both within Australia and
overseas, in accordance with direction from the Government. When required,
Defence responds with military force to defend Australia and its national
interests. Defence also works in close collaboration with our international
partners; and federal, state and territory governments to support our response
to crises and disasters at home and abroad.

###### Key Activity 2: Be a strategy-led organisation

Defence is a strategy-led organisation and sets strategic objectives in line
with government direction in order to achieve our mission and purpose. The
_Defence Strategic Review highlighted the strategic circumstances faced by_
Defence and government. The 2024 National Defence Strategy will encompass a
comprehensive outline of Defence policy, planning, capabilities and resourcing.
It will become Defence’s key strategic policy document and focus the enterprise
to achieve government objectives. The Defence Strategy Framework informs how
strategy cascades through the enterprise, and will be revised in line with the
Government’s directions in response to the Defence Strategic Review.

###### Key Activity 3: Enable intelligence-informed strategic policy and overseas operations

Classified intelligence assessments and products support Defence and
government to make informed decisions on matters that may affect Australia’s
national interests, including Defence’s strategic policy and overseas operations.


###### Key Activity 4: Invest in Defence people

Defence has an integrated workforce comprised of Australian Defence Force
members, Australian Public Service employees and contractors. We are committed to
investing in the growth and retention of a highly skilled workforce to meet Australia’s
defence and national security requirements.

###### Key Activity 5: Promote regional and global security and stability

In our current strategic circumstances, it is more important than ever for Defence
to promote regional and global security and stability so that Australia contributes
to the strategic balance of power that keeps the peace in our region, making it harder
for countries to be coerced against their interests.

###### Key Activity 6: Deliver future capability

Defence will accelerate the development of important capabilities over the next
decade to build an integrated, focused force across the maritime, land, air, space
and cyber domains. This will ensure the Australian Defence Force has the capacity
to defend Australia and its national interests in our evolving strategic circumstances
and deter adversaries through a strategy of denial.

###### Key Activity 7: Advance Australia’s prosperity

The Government’s significant investment in Defence over the coming decade will
advance Australia’s prosperity through expenditure on defence capabilities, support
to new and existing defence industries and the creation of jobs.

Our performance measures and targets are detailed in the Performance section
of this Defence Corporate Plan.


Captions for page 6:

**1 – Australian**
Defence Vessel Cape
_Naturaliste after_
completing officer of
the watch manoeuvres
with HMAS Broome
while deployed on
Operation RESOLUTE
to support wholeof-government
efforts to protect
Australia’s borders
and offshore maritime
interests. CREDIT:
Acting Sub Lieutenant
Elise Cowley

**2 – Priscilla Thwaites,**
Dr Bianca Capra,
Dr Stacy Oerder,
Harbans Mann and
Samantha Williams
at Russell Offices in
Canberra. CREDIT:
Kym Smith

**3 – No. 35 Squadron**
loadmaster, Corporal
Jakeb Thorogood,
loads soldiers from
the Australian Army's
3rd Brigade on a
Royal Australian
Air Force C-27J Spartan
at Cormorant Airfield,
west of Townsville,
Queensland, during
Exercise Ready Spartan
Prove. CREDIT: Flight
Lieutenant Greg Hinks

**4 – A CH-47 Chinook**
hovers over the
water off Townsville,
Queensland, as
Australian Army
soldiers from the
2nd Battalion, The
Royal Australian
Regiment, and the
5th Aviation Regiment
conduct helo-casting
activities during
Exercise Black
Cutlass 2023.
CREDIT: Corporal
Daniella Volling














-----

REGIONAL
ENGAGEMENT

**1 – Australian aid pallets**
are unloaded from a
Royal Australian Air Force
C-17A Globemaster III at
Wattay International Airport
in Laos during Indo-Pacific
Endeavour 2022. CREDIT:
Sergeant David Said

**2 – Personnel from**
HMAS Anzac and Royal
Malaysian Navy KD Gempita
compete in a tug-of-war
during Exercise Bersama
Shield 2023 on Tioman
Island, Malaysia. CREDIT:
Leading Seaman Imagery
Specialist Jarryd Capper

**3 – The Australian Army's**
1st Brigade soccer team
play with children from
St Mateus School in Dili,
Timor-Leste, during
Indo-Pacific Endeavour
2022. CREDIT: Corporal
Brandon Grey

**4 – Australian Defence**
Force personnel deployed
on Operation SOLANIA 2023
attend a church service
at the Methodist Church,
Ekalesia Metotisi, Fale’ula,
Samoa. CREDIT: Corporal
David Cotton

**5 – Australian Defence**
Vessel Reliant at the
Port of Apia, Samoa during
its inaugural deployment
through the Pacific region
to enhance Australia’s
support to our Pacific family.
CREDIT: Sergeant
Jarrod McAneney

**6 – Australian Army soldiers**
from the 2nd Battalion,
Royal Australian Regiment,
and members from the
Royal Brunei Armed Forces
conduct a joint military
exercise during Indo-Pacific
Endeavour 2022. CREDIT:
Leading Seaman Imagery
Specialist Jarryd Capper

**7 – HMAS Hobart’s**
embarked MH-60R
helicopter practices
deck landings in the
Indonesian Archipelago
during a regional presence
deployment. CREDIT:
Leading Seaman Imagery
Specialist Daniel Goodman


#### Our Strategic Environment

Australia and the broader Indo-Pacific region is facing the most complex and challenging strategic
environment since the Second World War. Our strategic circumstances are rapidly evolving and the risks
we face as a nation are now radically different from those we have faced in the past.

The return of great power competition in the Indo-Pacific has become a defining feature of our region
and time. As articulated in the National Defence Statement 2023, Australia’s region, the Indo-Pacific, faces
increasing competition that operates on multiple levels — economic, military, strategic and diplomatic.

A large-scale conventional and non-conventional military build-up, along with the rapid translation of
emerging and disruptive technologies into military capability without strategic reassurance, is contributing
to the most challenging strategic circumstances our region has faced in decades. Combined with rising
tensions and reduced warning time for conflict, the risks of military escalation or miscalculation are rising.

While the direct invasion of Australia is only a remote possibility, a strategic balance underpinned by a
region that is open, stable and prosperous remains central to our national interests. However, potential
remains for Australia’s interests to be negatively affected throughout the region, including our sea lines
of communication and in parts of our exclusive economic zone.

At the same time, the effects of climate change across the region are amplifying our challenges, while
other actions that fall short of kinetic conflict, including economic coercion, are encroaching on the ability
of countries to exercise their own agency and decide their own destinies.

Since the 1980s, globalisation and the opening of the Australian economy have given rise to decades
of growth and increased prosperity for the Australian people. Australia’s economy has become more
interconnected with the Indo-Pacific and the world. In turn, this means Australia has a fundamental
interest in protecting our connection to the world and in the international rules-based order upon which
global trade depends.

In this environment, the Government has directed Defence to sharpen its focus on what our interests
are, and how to uphold them. This focus needs to be on: how we ensure our fate is not determined by
others; how we ensure our decisions are our own; and how we protect our way of life, our prosperity,
our institutions, and our economy.

These interests require strong sovereign defence capabilities with the aim of changing the risk calculus
of potential aggressors so that they never conclude that the benefits of conflict outweigh the risks.

To protect Australia’s interests and meet our strategic challenges, the Government directed in the
_National Defence Statement 2023 that Defence must have the capacity to:_

-  defend Australia and our immediate region;

-  deter through denial any adversary’s attempt to project power against Australia through our
northern approaches;

-  protect Australia’s economic connection to our region and the world;

-  contribute with our partners to the collective security of the Indo-Pacific; and

-  contribute with our partners to the maintenance of the global rules-based order.























-----

Workforce 2024 National Defence Strategy

Our people and culture are fundamental to all we can As outlined in the Defence Strategic Review, Defence must adopt a whole-of-
and must achieve. Consistent with the broader national government and whole-of-nation approach to security, focused on statecraft
context, Defence faces significant workforce challenges. and diplomacy in our region — a National Defence approach.
Defence remains committed to building a capable

Defence’s role in this whole-of-nation strategy is critical. To inform this,

and diverse workforce that reflects the Australian

Defence is developing an inaugural National Defence Strategy to be delivered

community we serve.

in 2024. The 2024 National Defence Strategy will provide a comprehensive

The Defence Strategic Review highlighted the need outline of Defence policy, planning, capabilities and resourcing, including
for investment in the growth and retention of a highly reprioritisation of the Integrated Investment Program, in line with the
skilled, integrated Defence workforce. The Defence strategic intent of the Defence Strategic Review.
_Strategic Review emphasised the need for a new Defence_
people system, which brings together a number of Partnerships
personnel functions to best focus on, enable and support
all of our people. Our future Defence People System Australia continues to strengthen regional and international partnerships as
must enable a One Defence and whole-of-government we navigate our increasingly complex security environment. We are committed
approach while ensuring we are positioned to meet our to working with partners, especially in the Pacific and Southeast Asia, to
global and regional security challenges. maintain a peaceful and prosperous region, where sovereignty is respected.

Australia will use all levers of statecraft to deter conflict and maintain strategic

The Defence People System will deliver the required

balance, encouraging great powers to manage competition responsibly.

whole-of-enterprise effects needed from Defence’s
most valuable capability — its people. Our partnerships in the Indo-Pacific are central to Australia’s security. The

_Defence Strategic Review identified that deepening our diplomatic and defence_
partnerships with key partners in the Indo-Pacific is a priority. We continue

EXERCISE KEEN to enhance cooperative engagement and interoperability to meet shared
SWORD 2022 challenges. On 1 July 2023, Defence established a Pacific Division to deliver

Personnel from enhanced support for Pacific security priorities, including defence cooperation,
HMAS Hobart cover infrastructure, and maritime security.
a burst water pipe

We support leadership of regional architecture in the Indo-Pacific. The

during a damage

Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the Pacific Islands Forum

control exercise during
Exercise Keen Sword are central to the region, and we continue to contribute to the collective
2022. The exercise was responses to security issues derived from these forums.
part of HMAS Hobart’s

Participation in regional exercises is part of Defence’s enduring commitment

regional presence

to working alongside Indo-Pacific partner nations. Exercise Bersama Shield —

deployment through
the Indo-Pacific region, a biannual military exercise with Five Power Defence Arrangements nations
undertaking exercises and — is a valuable opportunity to enhance combat readiness and interoperability
engagements to enhance between Australian forces and our partners.
our regional partnerships

Likewise, Exercise Talisman Sabre — now in its 10th iteration — is a bilateral

and ability to operate

exercise with the United States involving more than 30,000 military personnel

with partner nations.
CREDIT: Leading Seaman from 13 nations, including Canada, Fiji, France, Germany, Indonesia, Japan,
Imagery Specialist New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Republic of Korea, Tonga and the
Daniel Goodman United Kingdom. India, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand also attended

as observers. Exercise Talisman Sabre is an opportunity to exercise high-end,
multi-domain warfare capabilities, build and affirm military-to-military ties
and interoperability, and strengthen strategic partnerships across the region.

As emphasised in the Defence Strategic Review, Australia has a strong alliance
with the United States. The alliance is becoming even more important and
remains central to Australia’s security and strategy as we pursue greater
advanced scientific, technological and industry cooperation, as well as an
enhanced United States rotational force posture in Australia.


-----

Industry

Defence industry continues to play a vital role in equipping and sustaining the Australian
Defence Force. We need to continue to work together, pivoting our workforces, to deliver
the priorities our nation requires. A strong defence industry is part of our national power
and contributes to regional stability. The Defence Industry Development Strategy will establish
the framework and principles for the direction of defence industry policy for what will be
an important decade in Australia’s national security.

Force posture and force integration

The defence of Australia’s national interests lies in the protection of our economic connection
with the world and the maintenance of the international rules-based order. To maximise
deterrence, denial and response options for the Government, the Australian Defence Force
harnesses effects across all five domains: maritime, land, air, space and cyber.

The Australian Defence Force’s operational success will depend on the ability of the
integrated force to apply critical capabilities, including:

-   undersea warfare capabilities (crewed and uncrewed) optimised for persistent,
long-range sub-surface intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, and strike;

-   an enhanced integrated targeting capability;

-   an enhanced long-range strike capability;

-   a fully enabled, integrated amphibious-capable combined-arms land system;

-   enhanced, all-domain, maritime capabilities for sea denial operations and localised
sea control;

-   a networked expeditionary air operations capability;

-   an enhanced integrated air and missile defence capability;

-   a joint expeditionary theatre logistics system with strategic depth and mobility;

-   a theatre command and control framework that enables an enhanced integrated force; and

-   a developed network of hardened and resilient northern bases to provide a platform for
logistics support, denial and deterrence.


Our commitment to the enhanced trilateral security and technology
sharing partnership between Australia, the United Kingdom and
the United States — known as AUKUS — is gathering pace. Under
AUKUS, Australia will acquire conventionally-armed, nuclear-powered
submarines and cooperate on crucial advanced defence capabilities.

Through AUKUS Advanced Capabilities, we will fast-track the
delivery of leading edge warfighting capabilities into the hands of
the Australian Defence Force, maintaining its capability edge and
modernising capability development across the three nations. The six
key areas chosen for advanced capabilities — undersea capabilities,
electronic warfare, hypersonics and counter-hypersonics, advanced
cyber, quantum technologies, and artificial intelligence and autonomy
— are those that will make the most significant contribution to future
warfighting. Developing targeted advanced capabilities such as these
are vital for Defence to meet emerging threats. Our collaboration with
partners to accelerate the delivery of these capabilities is a prudent
response to our changing strategic environment.

Australia’s continued support for Ukraine as it defends its people,
its territory, and its sovereignty demonstrates our commitment to
promote stability and protect the international rules-based order.
We continue to work with the Ukrainian Government to provide
assistance that addresses Ukraine’s needs and complements
support provided by our partners. Defence contributes to the
Australian Government’s response through military assistance to
deliver important capabilities and supplies to the Armed Forces
of Ukraine. Defence, along with other partners, is also providing
critical training to Ukrainian troops.

Climate change and support to domestic
and international disaster relief

Climate change is a national and regional security issue. Countries
across the world are experiencing increased frequency and severity
of climate-related disasters. The effects of extreme and severe
climate events — such as rising sea levels and temperatures — are
amplifying geostrategic challenges in the Indo-Pacific. If climate
change accelerates over the coming decades, it has the potential
to increase the challenges for Australia and Defence — such as
mass migration, increased demands for peacekeeping and peace
enforcement, and intrastate and interstate conflict.

As climate change is the greatest threat to the livelihoods, security
and wellbeing of the peoples of the Pacific, Australia is committed
to continuing to take a regional approach to humanitarian relief
and strengthening support for disaster preparedness, working
closely with our Pacific family to support their responses to crises.
We remain steadfast in our commitment to and support for the
_2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent._


COMBINED
UNIT TRAINING
ACTIVITY

Australian Army riflemen
from the 6th Battalion,
The Royal Australian
Regiment, take part in
the final assault during
7th Brigade's combined
unit training activity at
Shoalwater Bay Training
Area, Queensland.
CREDIT: Private
Dean Armstrong


-----

#### Our People

Our diverse, committed and capable Defence workforce is our first priority. Stewards
of Australia’s Defence capability, our people are critical for Defence to achieve its
mission and purpose at home and overseas. Defence is focused on attracting and
retaining people within its workforce, regardless of background, gender, age, culture,
religion, ability or sexual orientation.

The Defence Strategic Review highlighted significant workforce challenges for Defence.
In response, the Government has committed to grow and retain a highly skilled
Defence workforce as a priority for immediate action. Defence is responding to the
Government’s commitment with efficiency, focused on building a workforce that is
stronger, more integrated and more effective. Defence will deliver innovative people
solutions to grow our workforce and support and enable our people.

The establishment of a new and integrated Defence People System is a once in a
generation reform to bring together a number of personnel functions. This includes
the appointment of the inaugural Chief of Personnel to lead the Military Personnel
Organisation, focused on building a single, integrated system of Australian Defence
Force personnel management and supporting people through the career lifecycle.
The new Defence People System will challenge the existing approaches and structures
around design, planning and management of our workforce, and the experiences
of our people. Through the Defence People System, led in partnership by Deputy
Secretary Defence People and the Chief of Personnel, we will ensure Defence is
positioned to meet the nation’s security challenges now and into the future. We will
ensure a workplace culture where our recruited, trained and educated people are
provided support to be professional sailors, soldiers, aviators and public service
personnel that deliver the Defence mission and purpose.

Defence has committed to reducing its reliance on external contractors and increasing
its Australian Public Service workforce. Defence aims to reduce its contractor
workforce by 2,000, or approximately 20 per cent, by the end of 2024. The reduction
will be focused on contractors who are engaged for skills that would normally be
maintained within the Australian Public Service. It will not include consultants with
specialist skills or outsourced service providers.

Consistent with broader national workforce challenges, Defence needs to remain
competitive in attracting and retaining the necessary workforce to implement the
_Defence Strategic Review. This includes planning for the increased workforce growth_
of an additional 18,500 people by 2040. We will prioritise both the growth and retention
of a highly skilled workforce, through a range of workforce initiatives that support
government direction on the Defence Strategic Review. These measures will assist in
establishing the preliminary workforce actions for the 2024 National Defence Strategy.

Defence is committed to modernising and reflecting contemporary practices across
our workforces, including through pay and conditions, education and different ways
of working. Defence will continue to make enhancements to its employee value
proposition, including through the Australian Defence Force Employment Offer
Modernisation Program and piloting a continuation bonus payment for eligible
Australian Defence Force members as an ongoing investment in our junior ranks.

Our people now also have increased access to tertiary and vocational education
through Studybank for Australian Public Service employees and the Defence Assisted
Study Scheme for Australian Defence Force members.


The mental health and wellbeing of our workforce is critical and we must maintain and promote a
culture where people are supported. The Government is continuing its investment in the ADF Family
Health Program, including doubling the annual allowance to $800 per dependant and expanding
services that families can claim.

Work has also commenced on the development of a national Defence and Veteran Family Support Strategy
to improve the experience of Defence families, who play a vital role in supporting Defence members
and veterans.

With the nominal end to the Pathway to Change: Evolving Defence Culture 2017–2022 strategy, Defence
has been developing the next culture strategy, the Defence Culture Blueprint which will be launched in
2023–24. The Defence Culture Blueprint, and our focus on mental health and wellbeing, will play key
roles in supporting recruitment and retention and are critical to enabling the workforce to remain agile
in complex operating contexts.

To ensure our workforce reflects the diverse community we serve, we are enhancing our
Australian Defence Force recruitment framework to improve the eligibility pool of potential applicants
and to align service recruitment requirements to military employment, particularly in key technical
and specialist trades. Working closely with a new recruiting capability partner, Defence is building a
modernised recruiting system that introduces new practices to increase recruitment volume, decrease
application processing times and provide a positive candidate experience to all who choose the
rewarding path of an Australian Defence Force career.

These investments in our people are important to ensure that Defence meets its workforce growth
goals and we have the highly skilled workforce needed to keep Australians safe.

**FIGURE 2: Defence values and behaviours.**





# Our values

The selflessness of character
to place the security and
interests of our nation and
its people ahead of our own.

The strength of character to say
and do the right thing, always,
especially in the face of adversity.

The humanity of character
to value others and treat
them with dignity.

The consistency of character
to align my thoughts, words
and actions to do what is right.

The willingness of character
to strive each day to be the best

Service

Courage

Respect

Integrity

Excellence

we can be, both professionally
and personally.


# Our behaviours

The Defence values are underpinned
by these behaviours.

Act with purpose for Defence
and the nation

Be adaptable, innovative and agile

Collaborate and be team-focused

Be accountable and trustworthy

Reflect, learn and improve

Be inclusive and value others





**1 – Warrant Officer**
Liz Crean takes a selfie
with outgoing Warrant
Officer of the Air Force
Fiona Grasby in front of
Recruit Course 18/22 at
the changeover ceremony
for the Warrant Officer
of the Air Force in
Canberra. CREDIT:
Nicole Mankowski

**2 – Royal Australian**
Navy Chaplain
Simon Edds, the first
Buddhist chaplain in the
Australian Defence Force,
meditates in the Spirit
House at the Art Gallery
of New South Wales
in Sydney. CREDIT:
Leading Seaman
Imagery Specialist
Daniel Goodman


-----

#### Our Capability

Strengthening our defence capabilities fundamentally contributes to our ability to shape and respond
to our strategic environment and deter conflict. Due to the significant changes in Australia’s strategic
circumstances, Defence will invest in capabilities that are relevant to the risks we face. We will accelerate
important capability development and reprioritise capabilities that are no longer fit-for-purpose.

The Australian Defence Force will continue to evolve as an integrated, focused force across the maritime,
land, air, space and cyber domains. Our Navy must have enhanced lethality through its surface fleet
and conventionally-armed, nuclear-powered submarines, reinforced by a continuous naval shipbuilding
program. Our Army must be optimised for littoral operations in our northern land and maritime domains
and continue to provide a long-range strike capability. Our Air Force must provide the air support for
integrated operations in our north by conducting surveillance, air defence, strike and air transport.
Our space and cyber capabilities must continue to expand to assure our access to these critical domains.

The Government is investing $9 billion over four years in conventionally-armed, nuclear-powered
submarines through the AUKUS partnership; and nearly $150 million to provide the skills and training
for a home-grown workforce to build and maintain Australia’s nuclear-powered submarines. We will also
develop the AUKUS Submarine Workforce and Industry Strategy and update the National Naval Shipbuilding
_Enterprise Strategy and supporting Naval Shipbuilding and Sustainment Plan._

Long-range strike and other guided weapons are fundamental to the Australian Defence Force’s ability
to hold a potential adversary at risk. Over the next four years, the Government is investing in long-range
strike capabilities, including the establishment of an Australian missiles and munitions industry.

The 2024 National Defence Strategy will set out a comprehensive plan for Defence capabilities
and resourcing, including reprioritisation of the Integrated Investment Program in line with
government direction.

In 2023, the Government will release a Defence Industry Development Strategy in order to build the defence
industry needed to support Defence. Defence is committed to removing unnecessary barriers to
acquisitions; streamlining strategically important projects and low-complexity procurements; making
faster decisions in the delivery of Defence projects; and developing practical solutions in close consultation
with defence industry.


OPERATION
RESOLUTE

Australian Defence
Force soldiers from
the Regional Force
Surveillance Unit
deployed on Operation
RESOLUTE regroup while
conducting water patrols
on Maret Island in remote
Western Australia. The
patrols searched the
islands for foreign fishing
vessels and evidence
of illegal activities
by conducting foot
patrols, water patrols,
observation posts, and
information gathering.
Operation RESOLUTE is
the Australian Defence
Force’s contribution to
the whole-of-government
effort to protect
Australia’s borders
and offshore maritime
interests. CREDIT:
Sergeant Jarrod McAneney


-----

#### Our Innovation, Science and Technology

Defence innovation, science and technology has a significant impact on the character
of warfare and deterrence, and is critical to enhance and accelerate capability
development in order to defend Australia and its national interests.

Defence will continue to develop innovation, science, technology and research through
collaboration with industry, academia, our partners and international agencies.

Our strategic circumstances require us to adapt our approach to innovation. In line
with the Government’s response to the Defence Strategic Review, Defence will focus
on new disruptive technology and asymmetric advantage to ensure we maintain
parity or a qualitative advantage in critical military technology areas.

The More, Together: Defence Science and Technology Strategy 2030 is being refreshed
to ensure the national science and technology enterprise is strengthened and
explicitly leveraged to achieve scale and address the strategic and geopolitical
challenges we face.

The Government is investing $3.4 billion over the next decade to fund Defence’s new
innovation entity, the Advanced Strategic Capabilities Accelerator, which became
operational on 1 July 2023. It will be guided by senior Defence leaders, take a flexible
and agile approach to procurement, and deliver vital capabilities that will give the
Australian Defence Force an asymmetric advantage to deter future conflicts.

Within the innovation, science and technology program we will prioritise hypersonics,
directed energy, trusted autonomy, quantum technology, information warfare and
long-range fires. The development of these technologies in Australia will grow
advanced technology companies in Australia, creating more jobs for Australians in
defence industry.

To help secure an innovation, science and technology workforce that better represents
the diverse talent of our nation, Defence will work towards achieving a 50 per cent
target for women’s participation across key research and innovation career pathways.


#### Our Security, Estate and Infrastructure

Enhanced security, estate and infrastructure are essential to strengthen Defence’s posture to defend
and protect Australia’s national security.

Security

Defence is committed to protecting Australian-developed capabilities and ensuring our continued access to
sensitive partner technologies through the provision of layered protective security, robust information and
communications technology security, and effective security vetting of personnel. As global strategic competition
increases, we are strengthening Defence and defence industry protective security to meet increasing threats to
our people, systems, capabilities and assets.

Defence is making security an even greater priority through security culture, resources and vetting to ensure
the Government has the trusted workforce required. We ensure robust security behaviours are part of Defence’s
culture, as well as for the industries that work alongside us.

We will reinforce Australia’s cyber security, develop a comprehensive framework for managing operations in
the cyber domain, and enhance cyber security arrangements in close collaboration with the Australian Signals
Directorate and the National Office of Cyber Security.

Estate and infrastructure

Defence is the largest landholder in the Commonwealth with more than 2.8 million hectares, 70 major
bases, over 100 training ranges, and more than 1,000 leased or owned properties. Defence will conduct
an enterprise-wide audit of the Defence estate by the end of 2023.

A key priority of the National Defence Statement 2023 is to improve the ability of the Australian Defence Force
to operate from Australia’s northern bases. The Government is investing $3.8 billion to upgrade and develop
our northern network of bases, ports and barracks over the next four years. This includes:

-  $2 billion for critical air bases from RAAF Base Learmonth to the Cocos (Keeling) Islands, as well as
air bases in the Northern Territory and northern Queensland;

-  $1 billion for upgrades to land and joint estate capabilities such as facilities, infrastructure and
engineering services;

-  $600 million in maritime estate investments including HMAS Coonawarra, HMAS Cairns and the
Harold E Holt Naval Communications Station; and

-  $200 million towards the acceleration of additional projects.

Work across northern air bases will include upgrades to runway and apron capacity, fuel supply and storage,
accommodation and security. Investment in land and joint estate will be centred on major training area
upgrades in the Northern Territory, and upgrades at Robertson Barracks in Darwin and Lavarack Barracks in
Townsville. Infrastructure will also be delivered to support United States Force Posture Initiatives across the
Defence estate at Robertson Barracks, and RAAF Bases Darwin and Tindal in the Northern Territory.

Defence will work closely with the newly established Australian Submarine Agency as they develop infrastructure
to support the optimal pathway with an initial priority focus on HMAS Stirling in Western Australia.

The Base Services Transformation Program is in a procurement phase for the delivery of capability-enabling
people, estate and facility infrastructure services. Transition to new base services contracts will commence
in 2024.

Defence will continue to evolve the Defence estate to provide modern facilities across Australia for our
personnel to work, train and live.








**1 – Lachlan Symonds**
and Monique Hollick during
a Buccaneer Main Mission
cube-satellite orbit
simulation. CREDIT:
Peter Hoare

**2 – Australian Army**
soldiers with the School
of Armour train on the
Ghost Robotics Vision 60
‘robot dogs’, being charged
through the electronic
Protected Mobility Vehicle,
in the Puckapunyal Military
Training Area, Victoria.
CREDIT: RD Consulting


-----

#### Our Climate Commitment

The National Defence Statement 2023 affirms that the effects of climate
change across the Indo-Pacific are amplifying our strategic challenges.

Defence supports the Government’s climate agenda and is committed
to reducing greenhouse gas emissions, accelerating its transition to
clean energy, and building national and regional climate resilience.

The Defence Strategic Review recognises climate change as a national
security issue. The effects of climate change will heighten challenges
for Defence, including harsher conditions within which to operate, and
increased humanitarian assistance and disaster relief pressures at
home and overseas.

The Defence Strategic Review recognises that Defence is not
structured to concurrently act as a domestic disaster recovering
agency and achieve its core function to defend Australia. The
Government will work with states and territories to develop national
resilience and response measures for adverse climate change
impacts, with the aim of reducing dependencies on Defence.

As the Government’s largest landholder and energy user, Defence
is committed to reducing greenhouse gas emissions and investing
in renewable energy to support Australia’s national target. We are
focused on minimising Defence's impact on the environment, building
climate resilience and a pathway to a carbon-neutral future.

Defence is developing a net zero strategy to provide a clear path on
how Defence will reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions. Defence
will move to renewable energy across the Defence estate, improve
building and transport efficiency, transition to alternate lower
emission fuel types, and use carbon insets to mitigate the remaining
emissions produced by capability-based assets.

As agreed in the Government’s response to the Defence Strategic
_Review, Defence will accelerate its transition to clean energy to increase_
our national resilience, with a plan to be presented to the Government
by 2025. As we modernise our bases and military platforms, lower
emission fuels and renewable energy will be part of making Defence
more resilient while meeting the Government's emission reduction
targets, and boosting clean energy throughout Australia.

The Defence Renewable Energy and Energy Security Program is
contributing to our mission to reduce emissions, make Defence more
energy secure, alleviate stress on local energy grids, and save money
that we can redirect towards Defence capability.


#### Our Portfolio Structure

The Defence portfolio consists of a number of component organisations that are collectively
responsible for supporting the defence of Australia and its national interests in order to
advance Australia’s security and prosperity.

The Secretary of the Department of Defence and the Chief of the Defence Force jointly
manage Defence as an integrated enterprise under a unique Commonwealth public service
governance structure known as a ‘diarchy’. The Secretary has primary responsibility
for providing timely policy advice to government, budget and resource allocation, and
stewardship of the Australian Public Service workforce.

The Chief of the Defence Force has primary responsibility for the command of the
Australian Defence Force, and is the principal military adviser to the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Defence on matters that relate to military activity, including military operations.

Defence also contains a number of smaller entities, including some statutory agencies
and offices, and various trusts and companies. In 2023, three new entities were announced.
On 1 July 2023, the Nuclear-Powered Submarine Taskforce transitioned to the Australian
Submarine Agency and the Advanced Strategic Capabilities Accelerator became operational
(within Defence) with a phased start up over the first 18 months. Legislation to establish the
independent statutory Australian Nuclear-Powered Submarine Safety Regulator is expected
to be brought before the Australian Parliament during 2023–24. Organisations and entities
within the Defence portfolio publish their own planning documents.

**FIGURE 3: Defence portfolio structure as at 1 July 2023.**

Deputy Prime Minister
Minister for Defence
The Hon Richard Marles MP


Minister for Defence Industry
Minister for International Development
and the Pacific
The Hon Pat Conroy MP


Minister for Veterans’ Affairs
Minister for Defence Personnel
The Hon Matt Keogh MP


Assistant Minister for Defence
Assistant Minister for Veterans' Affairs
Assistant Minister for the Republic
The Hon Matt Thistlethwaite MP

In addition, the following minister has been sworn
to administer the Department of Defence
Minister for Home Affairs
Minister for Cyber Security
The Hon Clare O'Neil MP

Chief of the Defence Force


Secretary

Department of Defence


Other Portfolio Entities


Australian Defence Force


Australian Signals Directorate

Australian Submarine Agency

Defence Housing Australia

Department of Veterans' Affairs

Military Justice Appointments


HMAS STIRLING
WALK TO WORK
DAY 2022

Defence personnel
and their families cross
the 6.4km causeway
to HMAS Stirling in
Western Australia for
their annual Walk to
Work Day to promote
regular exercise and
a cleaner environment.
CREDIT: Chief Petty
Officer Imagery Specialist
Yuri Ramsey


-----

#### Our Governance

Our enterprise committees

Defence’s enterprise committees facilitate enterprise decision-making and set the organisation’s strategic
direction. As a complex, multifaceted organisation, our enterprise committees bring together our most
senior leaders to make the critical decisions that ensure Defence delivers on our mission and purpose,
and government priorities.

The Defence Audit and Risk Committee provides independent advice to the Secretary of the Department
of Defence and the Chief of the Defence Force on the appropriateness of Defence’s financial and
performance reporting; system of risk oversight and management; and system of internal controls.

**FIGURE 4:** Defence enterprise committees as at July 2023.

|Chair: Se|ecretary Risk Committee|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
||Chair: External|||
|Inves Com tegic||tment mittee Enter|prise Chie|


Defence

Defence

Audit and

Committee

Risk Committee

Chair: Secretary

Chair: External


Strategic
Policy Committee
Chair: Secretary


Investment
Committee
Chair:
**Vice Chief**
**of the Defence**
**Force**


Enterprise
Business Committee
Chair: Associate
**Secretary**


Chiefs of
Service Committee
Chair: Chief of the
**Defence Force**


EXERCISE LA
PEROUSE 2023

Able Seaman Marine
Technician Chloe Halley
conducts routine
inspections in the
engine room onboard
HMAS Perth during the
French-led multilateral
maritime Exercise
La Perouse 2023 in
the Bay of Bengal.
The exercise involved
ships, aircraft and
personnel from Australia,
France, India, Japan,
the United Kingdom
and the United States.
Participating nations
conducted officer of the
watch manoeuvres, live
fires, replenishment
at sea approaches and
engagement activities
such as ship visits,
receptions and personnel
cross-decks. CREDIT:
Leading Seaman Imagery
Specialist Sittichai
Sakonpoonpol


-----

Our risk management

Defence recognises risk is inherent in our work and can present both opportunities and threats to
the achievement of our strategic objectives. The Defence Risk Management Policy and the Defence
_Risk Management Framework set the approach and expectations for managing risk in line with the_
_Commonwealth Risk Management Policy and aligns risk at all levels to meet Defence’s strategic objectives._

Defence’s risk appetite, as articulated by the Overall Defence Risk Appetite Statement, informs and guides
our decision-making and supports a culture of effective risk management that enables calculated risks
to be taken when prudent to do so, and supports proper use of public resources.

These framework documents are supported by risk tolerances that operationalise Defence’s risk
appetite by specifying the levels of risk-taking that are acceptable across key focus areas of risk.

**FIGURE 5: Defence risk ecosystem.**


Defence focuses on five particular areas of risk to support the achievement of enterprise priorities. Each of
these focus areas is overseen by an appointed risk steward who maintains mechanisms of internal control
and management. These risks, and the operation of the internal controls, are periodically reviewed by
Defence enterprise committees.

**FIGURE 6:** Defence risk focus areas.


Shared risks

Emerging risks


Risks

Defence is unable to defend Australia
and its national interests through the
conduct of operations and provision of

Preparedness

support for the Australian community
and civilian authorities in accordance
with government direction.

Defence is unable to develop

Capability

and/or deliver capabilities

delivery

as directed by government.

Systems of
control and

The Defence workforce does not

management

Workforce have the capability and capacity
to meet required outcomes.

Inadequate security threatens
Security the defence and advancement
of national and strategic interests.

Defence does not protect our

Work health people against harm to their health,
and safety safety and welfare so far as is

reasonably practicable.


**Strategic risks**

External risks
that threaten the
achievement of
strategic objectives
and may impact
enterprise capacity.

**Delivery risks**

**Enterprise risks**

Risks that may impact

Risks that have day-to-day business
the potential to as usual activities,
impact ability to including projects and
achieve strategic exercises. They may
objectives. impact on enterprise

risks.


-----

VANUATU
ASSIST 2023

More than 600 Australian
Defence Force personnel
deployed on Operation
VANUATU ASSIST 2023
as part of the Australian
Government’s response
to support Vanuatu
following Tropical Cyclones
Judy and Kevin. The
Australian Defence Force
delivered humanitarian
aid and provided support,
including hydrographic
reconnaissance, route
clearance, emergency
medical evacuations,
transport of local
government officials, and
clean-up and remediation
of local infrastructure.

**1 – Students of the**
Etas Grace Primary School
in Port Vila during a
completion of engineering
works ceremony at the
school. CREDIT: Leading
Seaman Imagery Specialist
Matthew Lyall

**2 – An Australian Army**
CH-47 Chinook takes off
from HMAS Canberra near
the coast of Futuna Island,
Vanuatu, to conduct a
vertical replenishment.
CREDIT: Leading Seaman
Imagery Specialist
Matthew Lyall

**3 – Members of Australian**
Clearance Diving Team
One conduct a salvage
diving operation in
Port Vila Harbour.
CREDIT: Able Seaman
Communications and
Information Systems
Michaela Bennett

**4 – Personnel from the**
Vanuatu Mobile Forces
unload Australian aid from
a Royal Australian Air Force
C-17A Globemaster III
aircraft at Port Vila
International Airport.
CREDIT: Sergeant
David Gibbs

**5 – Australian Army**
soldiers from the
5th Aviation Regiment load
a flyaway toolkit aboard a
CH-47 Chinook helicopter
at RAAF Base Townsville
in Queensland, ahead of
its deployment to Vanuatu.
CREDIT W t Offi


# Our Performance


-----

The 2023–27 Defence Corporate Plan enhances the 10 performance measures and associated targets published
in the 2022–26 Defence Corporate Plan. The enhancements provide alignment to the Defence Strategic Review.
These performance measures focus on assessing the delivery of our key activities at the whole-of-Defence
level. For the duration of the 2023–27 Defence Corporate Plan, Defence will assess and measure its performance
through a mix of qualitative and quantitative data.


Defend Australia and its national interests through the conduct of operations
and provision of support for the Australian community and civilian authorities
in accordance with government direction.

|KEY ACTIVITY 1|Conduct operations and deployments to defend Australia and its national interests|
|---|---|
|1.1 PERFORMANCE MEASURE TARGET|Defence maintains ready forces, plans and conducts operations, activities and actions as directed by government to achieve Defence’s strategic objectives.|
||Defence responds to Australian Government requirements and conducts operations as directed. This will change year-on-year.|
|1.2 PERFORMANCE MEASURE TARGET|Defence commits Australian Defence Force and Australian Public Service assistance to whole-of-government national disaster and emergency response, as directed by government.|
||Defence responds to Australian Government direction as required. This will change year-on-year.|



Protect and advance Australia’s strategic interests through the provision
of strategic policy, the development, delivery and sustainment of military,
intelligence and enabling capabilities, and the promotion of regional and
global security and stability as directed by government.


**OUTCOME 1**

KEY ACTIVITY 1

**1.1 PERFORMANCE**
**MEASURE**

**TARGET**

**1.2 PERFORMANCE**
**MEASURE**

**TARGET**

**OUTCOME 2**

|KEY ACTIVITY 4|Invest in Defence people|
|---|---|
|4.1 PERFORMANCE MEASURE TARGET|Defence is able to attract and retain an Australian Defence Force and Australian Public Service workforce with the necessary culture, skills and capabilities to contribute to Australia’s national interests.|
||Defence makes progress against recruitment and retention milestones to meet 2039–40 workforce growth requirements.|
|4.2 PERFORMANCE MEASURE TARGETS|Defence supports Australian Defence Force members and their families by providing access to support services and programs.|
||• Defence continues to strengthen support for whole-of-life health, their wellbeing and safety outcomes for Australian Defence Force members and families. • Increased Australian Defence Force member and family satisfaction with support services and programs.|


|KEY ACTIVITY 2|Be a strategy-led organisation|
|---|---|
|2.1 PERFORMANCE MEASURE TARGETS|Defence develops internal policy guidance to implement government direction.|
||• Defence revises the Strategy Framework. • Defence develops the National Defence Strategy for government agreement as directed by the Defence Strategic Review.|

|KEY ACTIVITY 5|Promote regional and global security and stability|
|---|---|
|5.1 PERFORMANCE MEASURE TARGETS|Defence builds and maintains relationships with international partners that promote regional and global security and stability.|
||• International engagement activities are directed and focused to maintain a regional balance of power in the Indo-Pacific through regular review of international engagement policies to align resourcing and prioritisation of effort. This will be demonstrated by Defence international engagement bilateral and regional policies being reviewed at least annually through the Defence International Engagement Committee. • Defence relationships are strengthened through established ministerial dialogues. This will be demonstrated by at least 80 per cent of outcomes from ministerial meetings being on track to be delivered.|
|5.2 PERFORMANCE MEASURE TARGETS|Defence conducts operations, activities and investments, which provide presence and posture in the Indo-Pacific.|
||• The Australian Defence Force has a persistent operational presence in the Indo-Pacific through regional presence deployments. This will be demonstrated by at least 90 per cent of planned regional presence deployments being conducted. • The Australian Defence Force conducts exercises with Northeast Indian Ocean, Southeast Asia and Pacific partners throughout the year. This will be demonstrated by the majority of Australian Defence Force exercises being conducted with Indo-Pacific partners. • Defence invests in international partnerships through personnel exchange and overseas representational network. This will be demonstrated by the percentage of personnel exchanges directed towards the Indo-Pacific compared to the previous year.|

|KEY ACTIVITY 3|Enable intelligence-informed strategic policy and overseas operations Defence intelligence assessments and products inform the planning and conduct of overseas operations and the development of strategic policy.|
|---|---|
|3.1 PERFORMANCE MEASURE TARGETS||
||• 100 per cent of overseas operations — both in planning and conduct — are informed by Defence intelligence assessments and products. • 100 per cent of strategic policy products are informed by relevant Defence intelligence assessments and products.|


-----

|KEY ACTIVITY 6|Deliver future capability|
|---|---|
|6.1 PERFORMANCE MEASURE TARGETS|Defence is delivering the right future capability at the right time within the Integrated Investment Program to ensure it is equipped to respond to future security challenges as described by the Defence Strategic Review.|
||• 80 per cent of approved Integrated Investment Program projects by domain are on track to deliver the scope approved by government. • 80 per cent of approved Integrated Investment Program projects by domain are on track to deliver within the schedule approved by government. • 80 per cent of approved Integrated Investment Program projects by domain are on track to deliver within the cost (including contingency) approved by government.|

|KEY ACTIVITY 7|Advance Australia’s prosperity|
|---|---|
|7.1 PERFORMANCE MEASURE TARGETS|Defence contributes to Australia’s prosperity through the inclusion of Australian businesses and enterprises in supply chains for capability and services.|
||• Defence direct economic contribution to the Australian economy. A target to demonstrate performance will be set during the reporting period. • Defence contributes to strengthening sovereign defence industry. This will be demonstrated by an increase in the Australian contract expenditure of Capability Acquisition and Sustainment Group and Naval Shipbuilding and Sustainment Group contracts. • Australian defence industry exports. Defence’s facilitation of defence industry exports will be demonstrated by: – an increase in Australian industry applications to attend international trade shows with Team Defence Australia; – an increase in the number of Australian suppliers engaged under the Global Supply Chain Program; and – an increase in the number of approved export permits, noting that permits granted do not equate to actual exports. • Defence invests in innovation, science and technology as approved by government. • Percentage of Defence’s contracts to Indigenous enterprises to meet the annual portfolio targets as calculated by the National Indigenous Australians Agency to comply with the Indigenous Procurement Policy. – 2023–27 — Australian Government annual targets for volume and value.|


AUSTRALIAN
INTERNATIONAL
AIRSHOW 2023

A Royal Australian
Air Force F/A-18
Super Hornet during
an air display at the
Australian International
Airshow 2023 at Avalon
Airport, Victoria. The
Australian International
Airshow is the southern
hemisphere’s premier
showcase for military
aviation and the
aerospace industry.
The Australian Defence
Force showcased its
current capabilities
and future concepts to
government, military
allies and partners,
defence industry, and the
Australian public. CREDIT:
Leading Aircraftwoman
Kate Czerny


-----

#### Portfolio Budget Statements Programs

|TABLE 1: Key activities and Portfolio Budget Statements programs.|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|KEY ACTIVITIES|||||||
|1: Conduct operations and deployments to defend Australia and its national interests|2: Be a strategy-led organisation|3: Enable intelligence- informed strategic policy and overseas operations|4: Invest in Defence people|5: Promote regional and global security and stability|6: Deliver future capability|7: Advance Australia’s prosperity|



PROGRAMS


#### Changes since the 2022−26 Defence Corporate Plan

Since the publication of the 2022−26 Defence Corporate Plan, Defence has refined its performance measures
and targets. These changes have been designed to better demonstrate to the Australian Government and the
Australian public how Defence effectively uses its resources to deliver on our mission and purpose.

These changes have been made in alignment with the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013
and the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Rule 2014 requirements.

#### List of requirements

The 2023–27 Defence Corporate Plan has been prepared in accordance with the requirements of:

-  Subsection 35(1) of the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013, and

-  Section 16E of the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Rule 2014.

**TABLE 2:** Requirements met by the 2023–27 Defence Corporate Plan and the page references for each requirement.

**Topic** **Requirements** **Page(s)**

Introduction -  A statement that the plan is prepared –  A message from the Secretary of
for paragraph 35(1)(b) of the Public Governance, the Department of Defence and the
_Performance and Accountability Act 2013._ Chief of the Defence Force, page ii.

-  The reporting periods for which the
plan is prepared.

-  The reporting periods covered by the plan.

Purpose -  The purposes of the entity. –  Our Mission and Purpose, page 4.

Key Activities -  The key activities that the entity will undertake –  Key Activities, page 6.
in order to achieve its purposes.

Operating -  The environment in which the entity will operate. –  A message from the Secretary of
context -  The strategies and plans the entity will implement the Department of Defence and the

to have the capability it needs to undertake its key Chief of the Defence Force, page ii.
activities and achieve its purposes. –  Our Strategic Objectives, page 5.

-  A summary of the risk oversight and management –  Our Strategic Environment, page 9.
systems of the entity, and the key risks that the –  Our People, page 14.
entity will manage and how those risks will be

–  Our Capability, page 17.

managed.

–  Our Innovation, Science and

-  Details of any organisation or body that will make

Technology, page 18.

a significant contribution towards achieving the
entity’s purposes through cooperation with the –  Our Security, Estate and
entity, including how the cooperation will help Infrastructure, page 19.
achieve those purposes. –  Our Climate Commitment, page 20.

-  How any subsidiary of the entity will contribute to –  Our Governance, page 23.
achieving the entity’s purposes (not applicable).

Performance -  Details of how the entity’s performance in –  Our Performance, page 27.
achieving the entity’s purposes will be measured –  Outcome 1, page 28.
and assessed through:

–  Outcome 2, page 28.

– Specified performance measures for the entity
that meet the requirements of section 16EA
of the Public Governance, Performance and
_Accountability Rule 2014._

– Specified targets for each of those performance
measures to which it is reasonably practicable
to set a target.

|Operations contributing to 1.1 the safety of the immediate neighbourhood Operations supporting 1.2 wider interests Defence contribution to national 1.3 support tasks in Australia 2.1 Strategy, Policy and Industry 2.2 Defence Executive Support 2.3 Defence Finance 2.4 Joint Capabilities 2.5 Navy Capabilities 2.6 Army Capabilities 2.7 Air Force Capabilities Australian Defence Force 2.8 Headquarters Capability Acquisition and 2.9 Sustainment 2.10 Security and Estate 2.11 Chief Information Officer 2.12 Defence People 2.13 Defence Science and Technology 2.14 Defence Intelligence Naval Shipbuilding and 2.15 Sustainment 2.16 Nuclear-Powered Submarines 2.19 Defence Trusts and Joint Accounts Defence Force Superannuation 2.20 Benefits Defence Force Superannuation 2.21 Nominal Interests 2.22 Housing Assistance 2.23 Other Administered|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|


**Topic**

Introduction

Purpose

Key Activities

Operating
context

Performance


-----

and prosperity.


Defend Australia and its
national interests in order to
advance Australia's security

## defence.gov.au


-----

