###### 2 F ei  cy hi aper
Opportunity, Security, Strength


-----

###### 2 F ei  cy hi ap


-----

-----

#### Prime Minister’s introduction Malcolm Turnbull
Prime Minister of Australia

Change, unprecedented in its scale and pace,
is the tenor of our times. These are the most
exciting times, the times of greatest opportunity,
but they are also times of uncertainty, of risk,
indeed of danger.

But in the midst of such change, Australia’s
values are enduring. We are one of the
oldest democracies and the most successful
multicultural society in the world.

We are creating the competitiveness and
flexibility our economy needs to thrive in an

interdependent, fast-changing world. But we must also acknowledge we are facing
the most complex and challenging geostrategic environment since the early years
of the Cold War. We cannot assume that prosperity and security just happen
by themselves.

The 2017 Foreign Policy White Paper is grounded in our national foundations of
freedom, equality, the rule of law and mutual respect. Our commitment to those
values and the institutions which uphold them gives us confidence and credibility
in the global competition for customers, capital and talent. That same commitment
serves to strengthen the stability of our region and reduce opportunities for coercion.
This White Paper shows how our economic and security interests are converging.

More than ever, Australia must be sovereign, not reliant. We must take responsibility
for our own security and prosperity while recognising we are stronger when
sharing the burden of leadership with trusted partners and friends.

This Foreign Policy White Paper shows Australia to be focused on our region,
determined to realise a secure, open and prosperous Indo–Pacific, while also
strengthening and diversifying partnerships across the globe. It shows how we
are meeting the challenges of an uncertain future with confidence, open to the
world and its opportunities, while resolutely resisting threats to our way of life. Profile photograph of Malcolm Turnbull,
Prime Minister of Australia

Malcolm Turnbull
Prime Minister of Australia


-----

-----

#### Ministerial foreword


Julie Bishop
Minister for Foreign Affairs


Steven Ciobo
Minister for Trade, Tourism
and Investment


The 2017 Foreign Policy White Paper sets out a comprehensive framework to advance
Australia’s security and prosperity in a contested and competitive world.

Informed by our values, it describes Australia’s national interests and the Government’s
international engagement priorities. It is our agenda for opportunity, security and strength.

Over the decade ahead, technological change, challenges to globalisation and the
rules-based international order, continued economic dynamism and growth in Asia,
shifts in strategic power regionally and globally, Islamist terrorism and climate change
are among the significant trends shaping our world.

Some of these developments challenge Australian interests. Others bring opportunity.
Australia should respond with confidence. We are a regional power with global interests.
Our strong economy and institutions, innovative businesses, educated and skilled
population and secure borders provide solid foundations for success.

As this White Paper makes clear, in a complex and uncertain environment we will have
to work harder to maximise our international influence and secure our interests.

We will need to keep reforming our economy, boost our competitiveness and
resilience, and invest in the other domestic foundations of our national strength.

A framework for the future demands active and determined diplomacy and strong
partnerships to help advance a secure and prosperous Indo–Pacific and strengthen the
rules-based international order. We must step up our efforts to support a more resilient
Pacific. A diverse and evolving set of national security threats requires strong defences
at home and resolute action abroad to keep Australia safe, secure and free.


-----

We must guard against protectionism and build robust support for open economic
settings by ensuring all Australians have the opportunity to benefit from our growing
economy. Our trade and investment agenda will assist by boosting jobs and supporting
higher living standards.

It has been 14 years since the last comprehensive white paper on Australia’s international
engagement. While national interests are enduring, the international environment in
which we pursue them has changed significantly, and so too has Australia.

We hope that future Australian governments regularly take the opportunity to engage
the Australian community on our place in the world and explain the reasons for our
international engagement. For our part, the Government will keep the policy settings
in this White Paper under review against a changing external environment.

We thank state and territory governments and the many individuals and organisations
who made submissions to the White Paper and who engaged directly in our public
consultation process.

The development of the White Paper encouraged a wide-ranging public discussion
about Australia’s place in the world and promoted greater understanding of our
diplomatic activities and how the Government seeks to enhance Australia’s security
and prosperity through foreign policy.

This has been immensely valuable and we will ensure it continues.


Julie Bishop
Minister for Foreign Affairs


Steven Ciobo
Minister for Trade, Tourism
and Investment


Julie Bishop


-----

#### Contents

###### Prime Minister’s introduction iii

 Ministerial foreword v

 Overview 1

 Chapter one: Foundations for success 11

Australia’s values 11

A strong and resilient Australia 11

###### Chapter two: A contested world 21

An evolving international order 21

Power shifts in the Indo–Pacific 25

Terrorism will remain a critical global threat 27

Constraints on global growth 27

The Indo–Pacific will create opportunity 28

Technological change 31

People, cities and migration 31

Fragile states 32

An environment under strain 33

###### Chapter three: A stable and prosperous Indo–Pacifc 37

The United States and China 38

Indo–Pacific partnerships 40

Grave and growing threat posed by North Korea 42

Working with Southeast Asia 43

Geo-economic competition 44

Building collaboration 46

Fault lines 46

Safeguarding maritime security 47

###### Chapter four: Our agenda for opportunity 49

Defending and supporting an open global economy 52

Securing opportunity globally 58

Supporting our commercial interests 64

Competitiveness 65


-----

###### Chapter fve: Keeping Australia and Australians safe, secure and free 69

Countering terrorism and violent extremism 69

Securing our borders 71

Tackling transnational organised crime 72

Open, free and secure cyberspace 74

Guarding against foreign interference 75

Assisting Australians overseas 76

###### Chapter six: Global cooperation 79

Our global partnerships 80

The United Nations 81

Shaping rules and institutions 82

Countering the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction 83

Climate change 84

Promoting sustainable development 87

Advancing human rights 88

Responding to the challenge of displaced people 92

Strains on food, energy and water 94

Protecting the oceans 94

Guarding against global health risks 96

Security in space 97

###### Chapter seven: A shared agenda for security and prosperity 99

An enduring partnership with Papua New Guinea 100

Stepping up our engagement in the Pacific 101

Bilateral and regional partnerships in the Pacific 104

Supporting Timor–Leste 104

###### Chapter eight: Partnerships and soft power 107

Foreign policy partners 107

Soft power 109

_Glossary of terms_ 117

_List of figures_ 121

_List of boxes_ 122


-----

-----

-----

#### Overview

###### The Government is publishing this White Paper to chart a clear course for Australia at a time of rapid change. Over the coming decade Australia will need to pursue its interests in a more competitive and contested world.


Our world is now more interconnected
and interdependent than at any other time.
Scientific and technological advances and
the speed with which ideas and knowledge
can be transmitted have driven economic
growth and helped millions of people live
longer and better lives. Australia and
Australians will have great opportunities
to prosper.

At the same time, concerns about
globalisation and levels of political
alienation and economic nationalism in
many countries are on the rise. The same
connectedness that empowers individual
citizens increases risk and volatility in the
international system. Similarly, it amplifies
the reach and impact of non-state actors,
including those who would do us harm.

In the Indo–Pacific,[1] the economic growth

that has come with globalisation is in
turn changing power balances. The
United States has been the dominant
power in our region throughout Australia’s
post-Second World War history. Today,
China is challenging America’s position.

Australia and our regional and global
partners face a diverse range of security
threats, from North Korea’s long-range
missile and nuclear programs to Islamist
terrorism.


State fragility, demographic shifts and
environmental challenges like climate
change will continue to shape our world
and demand policy responses.

Powerful drivers of change are converging
in a way that is re-shaping the international
order and challenging Australian interests.

In the decade ahead, Australia will need to
be competitive and agile to take advantage
of the opportunities that will come from
dynamic Asian economies and technological
and scientific advances.

In parallel, risks to our interests are building.
In particular, the stability of the Indo–Pacific
region, which has underpinned its economic
transformation, cannot be assumed.

Any significant rise in protectionism globally
could create strategic friction, damage
economic growth and undermine the rules
that support flows of trade and investment.

Similarly, the rules and institutions that
help maintain peace and security and
guide global cooperation are under strain.
In some cases, major powers are ignoring
or undermining international law. With
many divergent interests and shifts in
power between states, it is more difficult
to get governments to respond collectively
to some security and economic challenges.
In the United States, there is greater


1 We define the ‘Indo–Pacific’ as the region ranging from the eastern Indian Ocean to the Pacific Ocean
connected by Southeast Asia, including India, North Asia and the United States.


-----

debate about the costs of sustaining
its global leadership.

In this dynamic environment, Australia
must seek opportunity while protecting
our interests in the face of complexity
and uncertainty.

In a more contested and competitive
world, our domestic and international
policies will have to work together to
maximise our national power and
international influence. We will require
active, determined and innovative
foreign policy built on strong domestic
foundations—-a flexible economy,
strong defence and national security
capabilities and resilient democratic
institutions within a cohesive society.

These broad themes—-opportunity,
security and strength—-sit at the heart
of this White Paper. They recognise
that an outward-looking Australia fully
engaged with the world is essential
to our future security and prosperity.

###### Foundations for success

The Government’s starting point is that we
should approach this period of change
with confidence. Australia has the strength
to shape its own future.

At home, our democratic institutions, open
society and strong economy underpin
significant defence, foreign policy, border
protection, law enforcement and security
capabilities. Our economy has grown for
26 consecutive years. We are a member
of the Group of 20 (G20). Our standard
of living is one of the highest globally.
We live in the most economically dynamic
region of the world and have the minerals,
energy, goods and services sought by
growing Indo–Pacific economies.


These are strong foundations for
international success. They give us
advantages in a period of uncertainty
and change that many other nations
will not enjoy. Even so, in the decade
ahead Australia will have to work harder
to sustain our influence and secure our
interests.

A strong, competitive economy will be
fundamental to our future prosperity.
A growing economy helps to maximise
our weight in the world as countries in
our region gain in strength and influence.

Innovative, outward-looking and
well-governed countries will also enjoy
advantages in a competitive and
interdependent world. Nations with flexible
economies and resilient institutions will
better withstand occasional systemic
shocks. Countries positioned to adapt and
innovate will be able to seize opportunities
and to support citizens through periods
of change.

In the decade ahead, strong diplomatic,
defence and national security capabilities
will be essential to shape events to our
advantage. Our development assistance
will support efforts to build a stable and
prosperous world, with a focus on the
Indo–Pacific.

Our dynamic commercial sector, the
stability of our policy settings, our
reputation as a reliable trading partner
and the excellence of our institutions
and standards magnify our international
influence.

Australia’s values are a critical component
of the foundation upon which we build our
international engagement. Our support for
political, economic and religious freedoms,
liberal democracy, the rule of law, racial
and gender equality and mutual respect
reflect who we are and how we approach


-----

the world. They underpin a strong, fair and
cohesive society at home and are a source
of influence for Australia internationally.

###### A framework for opportunity, security and strength

The policies described in this White
Paper serve the national interest by
advancing the prosperity of Australia, the
independence of our decision-making
and the security, safety and freedom of
our people. They provide a framework to
guide the deployment of our resources
and capabilities in pursuit of our highest
foreign policy priorities.

We identify five objectives of fundamental
importance to Australia’s security and
prosperity. The Government will:

R promote an open, inclusive and
prosperous Indo–Pacific region in
which the rights of all states are
respected

R deliver more opportunities for our
businesses globally and stand against
protectionism

R ensure Australians remain safe, secure
and free in the face of threats such as
terrorism

R promote and protect the international
rules that support stability and
prosperity and enable cooperation
to tackle global challenges, and

R step up support for a more resilient
Pacific and Timor–Leste.

Collectively, these priorities and the policies
that support them provide a clear-eyed and
active agenda for Australia’s international
engagement. They are bound by a
common thread—-each seeks to respond


to the opportunities and uncertainties of
a contested world. In many instances, they
build on current policy settings with new
approaches and higher levels of activity
and ambition.

While the Indo–Pacific is of primary
importance to Australia, these priorities
also reflect the global scope of our
national interests and foreign policy.

Planning for an uncertain decade is
inherently difficult. In the current
environment, it is possible that some of
the trends identified in this White Paper
will move against Australia’s interests in
ways that require further responses.
Agile policy and regular reviews of our
foreign, defence and national security
frameworks will be important.

###### A stable and prosperous Indo–Pacifc

Australia’s interests are clear as the
distribution of power in the Indo–Pacific
changes. We want peace to help sustain
the growth that has brought the region
to the centre of the global economy.
Equally, we want a region where our
ability to prosecute our interests freely
is not constrained by the exercise of
coercive power.

For Australia, the stakes could not be higher.
The Indo–Pacific encompasses our most
important economic partners and its
dynamism supports economic growth in
Australia, creating jobs and increasing our
standard of living.

Our cultural, educational and
people-to-people links are also deep.
The region is the source of many of our
biggest migrant communities, which are
vital to our modern, vibrant nation.


-----

Navigating the decade ahead will be
hard because, as China’s power grows,
our region is changing in ways without
precedent in Australia’s modern history.

North Korea’s destabilising nuclear and
missile programs also raise the risk of a
conflict that would dramatically re-shape
Asia’s security landscape and have severe
economic and humanitarian consequences.

The starting point is to be clear about the
kind of Indo–Pacific region we want. We
set out our vision for a neighbourhood in
which adherence to rules delivers lasting
peace, where the rights of all states are
respected, and where open markets
facilitate the free flow of trade, capital
and ideas.

Our alliance with the United States is
central to Australia’s approach to the
Indo–Pacific. Without strong US political,
economic and security engagement,
power is likely to shift more quickly in the
region and it will be more difficult for
Australia to achieve the levels of security
and stability we seek. To support our
objectives in the region, the Government
will broaden and deepen our alliance
cooperation, including through the
United States Force Posture Initiatives.

The Government is committed to strong
and constructive ties with China. We
welcome China’s greater capacity to share
responsibility for supporting regional and
global security. We seek to strengthen our
Comprehensive Strategic Partnership for
the benefit of both nations.

To support a balance in the Indo–Pacific
favourable to our interests and promote
an open, inclusive and rules-based region,
Australia will also work more closely with
the region’s major democracies, bilaterally
and in small groupings. In addition to the
United States, our relations with Japan,


Indonesia, India and the Republic of
Korea are central to this agenda.

As competition for influence in the
region grows, the Government will
increase Australia’s efforts to ensure
we are a leading security, economic
and development partner for
Southeast Asia. We will also reinforce
the regional forums that promote
economic and security cooperation.

We will work to ensure regional trade,
investment and infrastructure building are
inclusive and based on market principles.
We want an open, outward-looking
regional economy strongly connected
to global markets. This will maximise
economic growth and help guard against
protectionism and strategic rivalry. Our
long-term vision is for a region-wide
free trade area that includes all major
economies.

Australia will boost defence engagement
to enhance the capacity of our regional
partners to manage security challenges.
Our development assistance program will
help to support stability and prosperity.
We will promote high-quality Australian
regulatory models.

Australia will continue to work with others
to impose the strongest possible economic
and other pressure on North Korea to stop
its dangerous behaviour. North Korea’s
actions underline the importance of the
United States’ extended deterrence to
Australia’s security and the security of the
Republic of Korea and Japan.

###### Maximising opportunity in a globalised world

In the decade ahead, the linkages between
globalisation, technological change and
new forms of production, consumption and


-----

trade will shape economies and societies
in profound ways.

For Australia, there will be significant
opportunities. We will use science and
technology to improve our productivity
and harness new sources of economic
growth including in the digital economy.

Australia will continue to benefit from
the complementarity of our economy
with those of our neighbours. Asian
economic growth, urbanisation and
expanding middle classes will sustain or
increase demand for minerals and energy,
premium agricultural products, and
services. We are also building stronger
economic partnerships with—-and
finding new opportunities in—-Europe,
Latin America, the Middle East and Africa.

Equally, there will be challenges to
manage. Globalisation, greater use of
digital platforms for trade and business,
and further advances in automation will
bring competitive pressures on many
industries. The nature of some jobs will
change even as new jobs are created.

Responding to these changes, especially
if they occur rapidly, will be a focus for
communities, businesses and governments
globally. In some countries, weaker public
support for free trade and doubts about
the benefits of openness could further fuel
economic nationalism and trade tensions.

Australia’s policy response must prepare the
country to seize opportunity and manage
risk. Our domestic and international
approaches will need to reinforce each
other. Policies to strengthen the resilience
and competitiveness of our economy and
enable communities and businesses to
harness innovation, science and technology
to drive growth will be essential.

The Government will continue to work


hard to ensure community support
for our openness to trade, investment
and skilled migration. Australia’s open
economy improves our competitiveness,
generates more and better paying jobs,
gives us access to new ideas and
technology, supplements our pool of
domestic savings and lowers prices
for consumers and producers.

We balance this approach with policies,
such as our migration and foreign
investment screening regimes, that
maximise the benefits to Australia
of openness. Our policies will also
assist workers through change and
help ensure all Australians have
access to the opportunities offered
by our growing economy.

The Government will be a determined
advocate for an open international
economy. We will stand against
protectionism and promote and
defend the international rules that
guard against unfair trade actions
and help resolve disputes.

At the same time, because comprehensive
deals in the World Trade Organization
(WTO) are unlikely, we will pursue new
opportunities for our companies and
strengthen trade rules through bilateral
and regional free trade agreements
(FTAs). We will work to support the
competitiveness of Australian businesses
and to advance our commercial interests
in overseas markets.

The Government will continue our strong
commitment to international economic
governance. In a world of considerable
systemic risk, the engagement of all
major economies in institutions such as
the G20 and International Monetary Fund
(IMF) is essential to a stable international
monetary system and an open global
economy.


-----

###### Keeping Australians safe, secure and free

The Government’s first duty is to do
everything possible to keep Australians
safe and protect our freedoms, our way
of life and our values.

Australia remains one of the safest and
freest countries in the world. Our
democracy and our institutions are robust
and transparent. The risk of direct military
threat to Australia is low. The security
of our nation supports our prosperity.

Even so, globalisation and technological
change, including the reach and
vulnerabilities of the internet, state
fragility, and environmental stresses,
will at times amplify a range of threats to
Australia’s people, borders, economy
and infrastructure.

These threats will endure for the
foreseeable future. In some cases—-such
as Islamist terrorism, cyber attacks and
transnational organised crime—-the threat
could worsen over the decade ahead.
Australia and other countries must also
deal with challenges from efforts to
interfere in democratic decision-making
and to shape public opinion through
misinformation, including through the
use of new technologies.

Our national strengths and international
partnerships give us the confidence and
resources to deal with these threats. Our
strategies in response must be long-term
and flexible. We will need to safeguard
community cohesion and the resilience
of our society.

The Government will continue to ensure
Australia’s law enforcement and security
agencies have the legal authority and
funding to enhance safety and security
at home. We will work closely with a


wider range of international partners
in our region and globally to address
threats at their source. Our cooperation
with Five–Eyes intelligence partners
(the United States, the United Kingdom,
Canada and New Zealand) and others
will remain critical to our ability to
address terrorism and other threats. In
the period ahead, we will place particular
importance on strengthening counterterrorism cooperation in Southeast Asia.

For some issues, including in cyberspace,
our ability to deter others will be enhanced
by a willingness to use offensive capabilities
to respond to threats.

###### International rules and cooperation protect Australian interests

We have entered a period of sharper
challenge to the rules and principles
that underpin international cooperation.
Anti-globalisation, protectionism,
changes in the balance of global power
and geopolitical competition are testing
the international order.

These challenges present risks to
Australia’s national interests. Our security
and prosperity have been supported by
US global leadership, an increasingly open
world economy and the development of
international institutions and rules.

It is difficult for countries like Australia,
even working with others, to influence an
international system that is predominantly
shaped by the actions of much larger
nations. At a time of challenge, we could
choose to narrow our global vision and
ambition. Such an approach would not,
however, serve Australia’s long-term
interests nor align with our values.


-----

Australia will work with others to protect
and promote those elements of the
international order that help ensure
that all states can pursue their interests
securely. We will act on the principle
that Australia will be safer and more
prosperous in a global order based on
agreed rules rather than one based on the
exercise of power alone. Such an approach
is complemented by the development
of Australia’s own defence and security
capabilities and our alliance with the
United States.

Australia will also act to preserve a world
in which all countries enjoy access to
the sea and the air as provided for under
international law. We seek to ensure that
new domains, such as cyberspace, are
governed by rules that reinforce stability,
support openness and facilitate trade.

Similarly, in an interdependent world,
a system that promotes collective
responses to problems that cannot
be solved by countries acting by
themselves best serves our interests.
For example, we support cooperation
to stop the spread of weapons of mass
destruction, address climate change
and promote the 2030 sustainable
development agenda. We will continue
to work internationally to respond to
global health and humanitarian crises.

Australia will continue strongly to support
US global leadership. The Government
recognises there is greater debate and
uncertainty in the United States about
the costs and benefits of its leadership
in parts of the international system. We
believe that the United States’ engagement
to support a rules-based order is in its
own interests and in the interests of wider
international stability and prosperity.
Without sustained US support, the
effectiveness and liberal character


of the rules-based order will decline.

It is strongly in Australia’s interests,
therefore, to support US global leadership,
including by maintaining the strength of
our alliance, keeping our commitment to
increase defence expenditure to two per
cent of GDP and contributing to coalition
operations in support of global and
regional security.

Beyond the United States, our cooperation
with like-minded partners is also
increasingly important to collective efforts
to limit the exercise of coercive power
and support an open global economy
and a rules-based international order.

Australia will support reforms that give
new and emerging powers a greater role
in the international system. Some change
to institutions and patterns of global
cooperation is inevitable, necessary and
appropriate to reflect the greater weight
of countries such as China, Indonesia, India,
Nigeria and Brazil.

Reform should be a shared project.
Australia is a willing partner. At the same
time, Australia’s national interests are
best advanced by an evolution of the
international system that is anchored
in international law, support for the
rights and freedoms in United Nations
declarations, and the principles of good
governance, transparency and
accountability.

###### A shared agenda for security and prosperity

Australia will remain committed to
working with Papua New Guinea, other
Pacific island countries and Timor–Leste
to support their economic growth and
governance, and to strengthen our


-----

cooperation. Their security and stability is
a fundamental Australian strategic interest.

The Government is delivering a stepchange in our engagement with Pacific
island countries. This new approach
recognises that more ambitious
engagement by Australia, including
helping to integrate Pacific countries
into the Australian and New Zealand
economies and our security institutions,
is essential to the long-term stability and
economic prospects of the Pacific. Our
partnership with New Zealand will be
central to advancing this agenda.

###### Working with partners and leveraging our infuence

In a globalised world, our work with
business, development partners and
state and territory governments will be
critically important to our foreign policy.

In addition to our five main policy
priorities, the Government will develop
new approaches to harnessing Australia’s
soft power assets in ways that add to our
international influence. We will work to
improve how we market our commercial,
educational and cultural credentials in
a competitive global market.

Australia’s institutions and expertise
are themselves important sources of
influence internationally, as is an effective
and responsive development assistance
program. We will continue to promote
Australia’s excellence in education, science
and research and the creative industries.

We have been proud to host hundreds
of thousands of students from across
the Indo–Pacific. We aim to welcome
many more in the decade ahead. The


New Colombo Plan is designed, in turn,
to support young Australians to
embrace study, work and travel in the
region as a rite of passage. This will
build a generation of Australians with
greater understanding of our region.


-----

-----

-----

CHAPTER ONE
#### Foundations for success

###### Fundamentally important to our ability to navigate a world of dynamic change and uncertainty are our strength and resilience at home, the hard and soft power that give us influence internationally, and the values that reflect who we are and how we approach the world. We build our international engagement on these foundations.


###### Australia’s values

All government policies, including our
foreign policy, must give expression to,
and be formed on the basis of, the values
of our community.

Australia does not define its national
identity by race or religion, but by shared
values, including political, economic and
religious freedom, liberal democracy, the
rule of law, racial and gender equality and
mutual respect.

Our adherence to the rule of law extends
beyond our borders. We advocate and
seek to protect an international order
in which relations between states are
governed by international law and other
rules and norms.

Australia is pragmatic. We do not seek
to impose values on others. We are
however a determined advocate of
liberal institutions, universal values
and human rights.

The Government believes that our support
internationally for these values also serves
to advance our national interests. Societies
that observe these values will be fairer and
more stable. Their economies will benefit
as individual creativity is encouraged and
innovation rewarded.


Australia’s development assistance
program similarly reflects our values
while supporting our interests. Our
investment in the stability and resilience
of developing countries works to improve
our own security and prosperity.

###### A strong and resilient Australia

In the decade ahead, more than ever,
strong and resilient economies and
institutions will be the springboard for
international success. Countries that
are well-governed, innovative and
outward-looking will be better placed
to seize economic opportunity and
maintain community cohesion.

###### Our democracy

Australia is a stable and peaceful
democracy, one of the world’s oldest.
We have a vibrant civil society and
robust independent media. Our
freedoms of speech, association
and religion underpin the strength
not only of our economy, but of our
civic life and political discourse. Our
independent institutions support


-----

###### Figure 1.1  Percentage of population born overseas (select countries)

rn overseas with New Zealand, Canada, USA and UK, showing that at 26% Australia's is the largest.

bo

n

io

at

l

u
This grap h compares the pe rcentage of A ustralia's pop

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics; United Nations


effective government and a dynamic
market economy. Institutional
independence reinforces impartiality
and public confidence, and is
balanced with clear accountability.

The rule of law, freedom, independent
institutions and a market economy
constitute the fabric of Australian
democracy. They support our national
strength and high-income economy,
and provide an enduring basis for
social and economic progress.

We are committed to protecting our
democracy and to using the advantages
it bestows on our country to deliver
opportunity and security for all
Australians. The Government will
ensure that national decision-making
is transparent and our institutions
remain free from foreign interference.
This is one of our most important
national interests.


###### Community cohesion

Australia is one of the world’s most
successful multicultural societies. We are
a harmonious, egalitarian and enterprising
nation that embraces its diversity. One
in four Australians were born overseas
(Figure 1.1) and almost half of all Australians
were either born overseas or have at least
one parent born overseas. We come from
virtually every culture, race, faith and nation.
We are as old as our First Australians, who
have cared for this country for more than
50,000 years, and as young as the new
baby in the arms of her migrant mother.

We are united by common values—freedom, democracy, the rule of law and
equality of opportunity. The Government
this year launched a Multicultural Statement
to reaffirm its commitment to an Australia
in which racism and discrimination have
no place.


-----

The Government is determined to defend
our nation, our people and our values and
to protect the foundation on which our
freedoms have been built and maintained.

Our focus is on ensuring that Australia
remains an open, inclusive, free and
safe society. We will resolutely tackle
extremist ideologies that incite violence
to achieve religious or political goals.
We will not tolerate attempts to divide
Australians on the basis of race or religion.

###### A fexible and competitive economy

Our strong economy has been, and will
remain, the foundation of our international
strength and influence. We are a top 20
economy and a member of the G20,
the world’s premier forum for international
economic cooperation. Sound economic
policy and further domestic reform are
essential to improve the competitiveness,
flexibility and resilience of our economy to
better position Australia to compete for jobs,
investment and markets in the 21st century.

By generating more and better paying
jobs, a strong and flexible economy
reinforces the cohesion and resilience
of Australian society. It helps Australia
to adjust to external economic shocks,
such as financial crises or an economic
slowdown in our major trading partners.
It will better position the country to invest
in the substantial defence, security and
foreign policy capabilities necessary to
safeguard our interests.

The Government’s national economic
plan is designed to deliver a stronger,
more diverse, economy that is ready to face
the changes and challenges to come. Our
trade agreements are giving Australian
businesses the chance to prosper in some
of the fastest growing markets in the
world. We will continue to give investors
commercial certainty to ensure Australia


remains an attractive place to invest.
We promote growth to create more
and better jobs by cutting taxes,
boosting education and improving
infrastructure. We will take a fair and
responsible approach to budget repair.

In a world of rapid and disruptive
technological change, success requires
investment in our human capital. We will
help Australians prepare for the jobs
of the future, including by promoting
adaptability, resilience and innovation.

We start from a strong position. Australia
has six universities in the world’s top
100, a number only exceeded by the
United States and United Kingdom.
Our vocational education and training
are recognised internationally and offer
valuable training for a productive
workforce. The Government is raising
the status of vocational education and
training as a pathway to employment.

We also have world‑class scientific and
research institutions, access to modern
research infrastructure and strong
intellectual property protections. We
produce more than seven per cent of
the world’s most highly cited research
publications despite having less than
half a per cent of the world’s population.

The Government’s education, innovation
and science policies build on this
foundation. All Australian children
will benefit from an improved national
curriculum and increases in education
funding. The Government’s reforms will
drive quality and excellence in education
and ensure industry has a skilled workforce.
Through the National Innovation and
Science Agenda (NISA), the Government
is investing $1.1 billion to encourage
innovation and entrepreneurship, reward
risk taking, and promote science, maths
and computing in schools.


-----

###### Strength through openness

Our openness to the world is vital to
our economic strength. This connects
our goods and services to larger, often
faster growing markets. In turn, it enables
Australia to benefit from the world’s best
goods, services, people, capital and ideas
to grow our economy and create jobs.
Being open to trade and investment
boosts competition, creates new wealth
and supports high living standards.

Openness, of course, is a means to an end,
not an end in itself. Nor is it an absolute.
We exercise strict sovereign control to
protect the cohesion of our society, the
integrity of our institutions and the security
of our borders and national infrastructure.

The Government will continue to consider
the national interest when reviewing foreign
investment proposals. We will balance our
need for skilled migration with ensuring
new migrants can integrate into our labour
market and society. The Government will
ensure multinational companies pay their
fair share of tax.

The Government’s policies to boost
economic growth and promote
innovation and flexibility will maximise
the opportunities that come from
technological change. We recognise the
adjustment costs borne by parts of the
community in the face of competition and
disruptive technological change. Many
countries are dealing with similar issues.

Our investments in education, retraining,
and employment services, and assistance
to communities adjusting to economic
changes, will help Australians adapt. The
Government’s regional jobs and investment
package supports the diversity and resilience
of regional communities, including by
helping people to retrain for new industries.

The Government will keep our economy


open because this supports some of the
highest living standards in the world. Open
trade gives Australians more choices, better
services and lower prices. This applies even
if other countries adopt protectionist
measures.

Our businesses are also more competitive
through cheaper inputs and components.
Competition from imports reduces the
cost of many essential items, benefitting
Australian consumers (Figure 1.2).

Our policies to support an open economy
give us the flexibility to respond to changes
in world conditions, and to adopt and
benefit from new technologies. Resources
can be redeployed to respond to market
demands, keeping us competitive and
maintaining growth.

Our openness to trade and investment
also drives job creation. Employment in
a number of regional and rural parts of
the country depends on their connection
to global markets. Today, one in five
Australian jobs are trade-related. Exporting
firms on average employ more people
and pay higher wages than firms focused
on the domestic market alone (Figure 1.3).

Further, by supplementing domestic
savings with foreign investment we create
more opportunities than can be achieved
from domestic savings alone. Investment
from overseas improves the efficiency
of our economy, including through the
transfer of new ideas and technology.
Australia has always been and will remain
a capital importing country so we will
continue to rely on foreign investment.
Without it, production, employment
and incomes would all be lower.

Today there is more than $3 trillion of foreign
investment in Australia. Foreign-owned
companies generate large revenues and
employ more than 700,000 Australians.
Our world-leading minerals and energy


-----

###### Figure 1.2  Benefits of imports to Australian households and businesses since 2000

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics; Treasury


sector has long been powered by foreign
investment.

Two-way investment also helps connect
Australian businesses to foreign markets
and to global value chains, which account
for about 75 per cent of global trade and
investment activity. It exposes Australian
businesses to international standards
and best practice. Figure 1.4 shows the
level and main sources of foreign direct
investment into Australia in 2016.

Australia’s migration program will continue
to add to our economic growth, including


by attracting younger, skilled workers who
help offset our ageing population. We want
migrants who contribute to the Australian
economy, help alleviate skill shortages
and enhance the size and productivity
of the Australian work force. Our visa
reforms will support these objectives.

Openness makes sense for Australia
and for global growth and prosperity.
We support an open global economy
because a more integrated world will be
more prosperous and more secure than
one characterised by protectionism and
geo-economic rivalry.


-----

###### Figure 1.3  Benefts of trade for Australians


###### that 50,000+T
, in four p arts, illush trates

# Austri
#### alian bu


###### export, contributings

**i $3,337 billion in**

exnport income in 20f


sinesses are inv
olved in


## 16 and employi

ng more people at h igher wages; that 1 i


##### n 5 jobs rely on trad

###### e; that 1 in 7 jobs rely on eo xports; and that trade liberalisation delivers $8,448 extra income a year for the average family.

Source: Centre for International Economics; Australian Bureau of Statistics;

Department of Industry, Innovation and Science


###### Building infuence and advancing interests internationally

The resilience and quality of our democracy,
institutions and economy sit at the core
of our national strength. As discussed in
Chapter 8, they are also fundamental to
our soft power—-our ability to help shape


events and outcomes internationally
to our advantage through persuasion
and ideas rather than coercion.

This influence is enhanced by our reputation
as a good place in which to live, visit and
invest and by the commercial strengths
of Australia’s companies.


-----

Australia has a well-earned reputation
as a reliable trading partner. The
quality of our institutions and standards
enhance our international influence.

Crucial to Australia’s influence is the
quality and reach of our diplomacy
and development assistance, and the
strength of our defence, intelligence, law
enforcement and border capabilities.

Our diplomacy works to make Australia
stronger, safer and more prosperous by
promoting and protecting our interests
internationally and contributing to global
stability and economic growth. It works
to open overseas markets and increase
opportunities for Australian companies.
Our diplomacy promotes regional stability,
security and prosperity, through our work
with bilateral partners and in multilateral
forums.


We cannot impose our views or our will
overseas. Our ability to protect and
advance our interests rests on the quality
of our engagement with the world.
This includes the ideas we bring to the
table, our ability to persuade others to
our point of view and the strength of
the relationships we build with other
governments and, increasingly, with
influential non-government actors.

Australia’s global diplomatic network
enables us to pursue our international
interests and provide assistance to
Australian businesses and citizens
overseas, including consular and passport
services. Already the Government
has implemented the single largest
expansion of the network in 40 years,
with 12 new posts opened or announced
including in China, Indonesia, Colombia This interactive map shows the levels of foreign direct investment in Australia from key countries at the end of 2016. Hover bubbles show: US $195 billion; Japan $90.9 billion; United Kingdom $67.9 billion; Netherlands $50.4 billion; EU (excluding UK, NL) $46.6 billion; China $41.9 billion; Singapore $31.2 billion; Canada $29.1 billion; ASEAN (excluding Singapore) $12.7 billion; Hong Kong $12.1 billion; New Zealand $7.2 billion. Text on the lower right hand side indicates: Other $211.2 billion.


###### Figure 1.4  Level of foreign direct investment in Australia (2016)

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics


-----

and Morocco. Over the next 10 years
we will open more missions, and use
more efficient and cost‑effective
technologies and practices to do so.

The Government recognises that Australia
faces mounting international challenges at
a time when the budgetary environment is
tight. A strong economy requires Australia
to live within its means. The Government
will therefore continue to use more efficient
means and cost-effective technologies to
support our international engagement,
including as we expand our diplomatic
network.

We will also continue to build the
capabilities needed by the Australian
Public Service to respond to the trends
outlined in this White Paper. The Australian
Public Service Commission is developing a
Core Skills 2030 strategy to help ensure the
public service has the foundational skills to
meet the challenges and opportunities of
a changing world, including by promoting
an entrepreneurial culture and stronger
digital literacy and communication skills.

A new Diplomatic Academy in the
Department of Foreign Affairs and
Trade is training Australian officials in
international engagement tradecraft,
including in areas such as advocacy,
negotiation, forecasting and strategic
planning. The Academy focuses on our
agenda in the Indo–Pacific and will
collaborate closely with other foreign
ministries.

A complex world requires a multidisciplinary approach to policy
development and systematic ways
of thinking about alternate futures.
The Government will strengthen
its advanced analytical techniques
capability to test policies against
possible shifts in our environment.


Australia’s development assistance
program, currently $3.9 billion a year
—‑with 90 per cent of our bilateral
and regional funds focused on the
Indo–Pacific—‑supports our partners
in their efforts to become more
stable, prosperous and resilient.

Our assistance alleviates suffering and
serves our national interests by helping
countries to advance economic reform,
fight threats such as extremism, guard
against the spread of infectious diseases,
and build resilience to natural disasters
and economic shocks. We support better
state capability to improve governance
and reduce poverty and inequality. Our
development program magnifies the
influence that Australia brings to bear on
pressing regional and global problems,
including efforts to meet the Sustainable
Development Goals (Chapter 6).

Our international weight is underpinned
by a strong Australian Defence Force and
a willingness to deploy hard power to
protect our national interests. Our military
strength is a deterrent against armed
coercion and the (still low) prospect
of a direct military threat to Australia. Our
high-end military capabilities enable us
to monitor approaches to our territory and
to respond to security crises in our near
region. The Government’s substantial
investments in intelligence, surveillance
and reconnaissance capabilities allow us
to anticipate risks in our air and maritime
approaches, as well as help our partners.

A strong and capable defence force
maximises our ability to operate effectively
with international partners, particularly the
United States. Our military capabilities also
allow us to support global security, notably
by contributing to coalition operations to
combat terrorism. The Australian Defence
Force is able to undertake humanitarian


-----

and disaster relief operations, including
in cooperation with our police and disaster
response teams.

As outlined in the 2016 Defence White
Paper, the Government is increasing
defence spending to two per cent of
GDP by 2020–21 to create a more
capable, agile and potent Australian
Defence Force. We will increase the
pattern of regular defence deployments
into the region and our program of
international exercises. We will expand
our Defence Cooperation Program to
boost our ability to work with partners.

Strong intelligence capabilities are essential
to safeguard Australia’s interests. The
National Intelligence Community protects
Australia from security threats through
intelligence collection, assessment, action
and advice for Government. It also engages
in extensive cooperation with overseas
counterparts to respond to security threats.

Building on our investments in capability,
Australia’s cooperation with our Five–Eyes
partners magnifies the potency and
effectiveness of our security capabilities
by providing irreplaceable access to
information and cutting edge capabilities.

Our international policing and law
enforcement capabilities protect Australia’s
interests at home and abroad from criminal
activity. Together with broader law
and justice cooperation and capacity
building, they help to strengthen stability
and governance in partner countries.
The Government is investing additional
resources to strengthen our policing
capabilities in intelligence, covert
surveillance, forensics and tactical response.

The Government ensures that our border
arrangements facilitate legitimate travel
and trade, so Australia benefits from
rapidly increasing flows of people and


goods. At the same time, we protect our
security and sovereignty against those
who seek to circumvent our border
controls. Each week, more than 840,000
people arrive in or depart from Australia,
and this number is expected to grow
by more than 20 per cent over the next
four years. We are investing in new
technologies to meet this challenge.
The Government is also ensuring our
civilian Maritime Border Command has
the advanced capabilities necessary to
protect our maritime security interests.

In view of an increasingly complex
threat environment, the Government is
reforming Australia’s national intelligence
and domestic security arrangements.
We are restructuring and strengthening
Australia’s national security community,
establishing a Home Affairs Portfolio
and enhancing oversight of Australia’s
intelligence, security and law enforcement
agencies. These reforms will better
integrate our intelligence and security
arrangements and ensure closer
cooperation between our security
and law enforcement agencies.


-----

-----

CHAPTER TWO
#### A contested world

###### This chapter considers some of the significant trends shaping the world and their implications for Australia. Where possible, it looks 10 years out. The Government recognises that often we will be responding to unexpected events. Even so, understanding the forces driving change is essential to navigating uncertainty and influencing events to our advantage.


Australian foreign policy in recent decades
has focused on advancing our interests as
globalisation deepened and economies in
Asia grew strongly. In the decade ahead,
both trends will continue profoundly to
influence our prosperity and security.

Other major trends will shape our
world, including the pace and scale of
technological advances, demographic
shifts, climate change and new global
power balances. The threats posed
by North Korea and terrorism and
other transnational issues will require
resolute, long-term responses.

The United States remains the most
powerful country but its long dominance
of the international order is being
challenged by other powers. A post-Cold
War lull in major power rivalry has ended.
These trends are converging to create an
uncertain outlook for Australia.

###### An evolving international order

How countries conduct themselves
globally and act to meet common
challenges matters greatly to Australia.
In the post-Second World War period,


we have benefitted significantly from an
international order shaped by US power
and global leadership. Our world has
been characterised by an increasingly
integrated economy and the development
of international rules and institutions.

The principles embedded in the post-war
order have strongly supported Australia’s
interests and our values. These principles
include the promotion of open markets,
the importance of international law and
other norms to guide international
cooperation, the articulation of universal
rights and freedoms and the need for
states to work cooperatively on global
challenges. US leadership has supported
global security, including through the
network of US alliances and the US
military presence in Asia and Europe.

Significant forces of change are now
buffeting this system. How the
international order evolves in response
has important implications for Australia.

###### Anti-globalisation intensifes

Debate about the future course of
globalisation has intensified. Starting in
the 1990s, globalisation—-the integration
of the world economy through flows of


-----

goods, services, capital, skilled workers
and ideas—-accelerated. Global trade and
investment grew strongly (Figure 2.1). So
too did manufacturing in Asia (Figure 2.2).
Following Japan and the Republic of Korea,
China became an economic powerhouse
hungry for Australia’s minerals and energy,
boosting our economy and increasing
our living standards. Other economies
in Asia also grew.

For much of this period, China’s economy
expanded by around 10 per cent a year.
Hundreds of millions of people in Asia
escaped extreme poverty. Asia drove
global economic growth (Figure 2.3)
and consumers everywhere benefitted
from access to goods and technologies
from around the world at lower prices.
In many developing countries, greater
wealth and transmission of knowledge
and technology drove increases in
literacy and life-expectancy.

At the same time, as manufacturing
shifted to Asia and technological


advances increased automation,
advanced economies lost jobs in
some industries. This disruption,
together with low wage growth in
advanced economies, has led some
communities to question whether the
gains from globalisation have come
at their expense. The global financial
crisis and its aftermath deepened
doubts about economic openness.

Concerns about globalisation are not
new. But the pace and scale of change
in the past two decades have had
significant political impact, particularly
in Europe and the United States. Doubts
about openness to the world have grown,
as have concerns about the effect of
globalisation, mainly immigration, on
cultural identity and social cohesion.

Politics in many countries has also
become more fragmented and volatile.
Nationalism has become a stronger
political force and protectionist sentiment
has increased. The dislocations caused


###### Figure 2.1   Value of global trade and investmentThis line graph illustrates the value of global trade and direct investment Australia's exports of goods and services (in orange), and foreign direct investment (in purple), in $US trillions for each year the period 1990-2016. Figures indicate exports of good and services have grown by almost four times and foreign direct investment has grown more than ten fold.

Source: World Trade Organization; United Nations


-----

###### Figure 2.2 Asia’s share of world manufacturing output


ra

g


ne

li


s

hi


T

or


ph i llus trat es A sia' s pe rcen tage sha re o f wo rld manufacturing output for each year across the period 1991-2016. Figures start at 27.3% and end at 48.6%, showing mostly steady growth, barring a dip in 1998 and a plateau in the early 2000s.

Source: World Bank


###### Figure 2.3  Asia’s share of world merchandise trade


f

de


ra

t


se

di
es A sia' s sh are of w orld mer chan


Source: World Trade Organization


-----

by globalisation are arguably one factor
in the decline of some measures of
global freedom and liberal democracy
over the past decade.

###### Global governance is becoming harder

These economic, political and social
changes are adding to other pressures
on the international system.

While the United States remains the
preeminent global power and most
important influence on international
affairs, it now shares the stage with
a number of countries with large
populations and economies. Since
1950, the United States’ share of the
world economy has nearly halved,
from 27 per cent to 15 per cent today
(in purchasing power parity terms).[2 ]

This contrasts with China’s rapid
increase, growing from two per cent in
1980 to nearly 18 per cent today. As a
consequence, China along with other
major and emerging powers such as
Indonesia, India, Nigeria and Brazil have
growing weight in international affairs.

Non-state actors, such as multinational
companies, civil society groups and
private foundations, are also able to
mobilise resources and communities of
interest globally. They are increasingly
able to shape international responses
to issues as diverse as climate change,
sustainable development, education
and health standards.

The net result is that global governance
is becoming more complex. Many global
institutions are finding it difficult to
respond to the scale and complexity of


international challenges. A greater
number of major and emerging powers
with divergent interests and values makes
finding consensus difficult.

###### Rules are being contested

The international order is also being
contested in other ways. Some states
have increased their use of ‘measures
short of war’ to pursue political and
security objectives. Such measures
include the use of non-state actors and
other proxies, covert and paramilitary
operations, economic coercion, cyber
attacks, misinformation and media
manipulation. In the United Nations,
we have seen coordinated efforts to
dilute universal human rights standards.
Some states are active in asserting
authoritarian models in opposition
to open, democratic governance.

International rules designed to help
maintain peace and minimise the use
of coercion are also being challenged.
Australia’s security is maintained primarily
through our own strength, our alliance with
the United States and our partnerships
with other countries. Australia’s security
and prosperity would nonetheless suffer
in a world governed by power alone.
It is strongly in Australia’s interests to
seek to prevent the erosion of hard-won
international rules and agreed norms of
behaviour that promote global security.

Refusal to act in ways consistent with
international law and these norms, such as
Russia’s coercive and aggressive actions in
Ukraine, Syria’s use of chemical weapons,
and North Korea’s missile and nuclear
programs, weakens global security.


2 In this White Paper, economic calculations are based on purchasing power parity (see glossary). Using
market exchange rates, the US economy accounted for 65.4 per cent of the global economy in 1950 and
24.7 per cent in 2016. Over a similar timeframe, China accounted for 4.5 per cent of the global economy
in 1952 and 14.9 per cent in 2016.


-----

Forging rules on a range of new issues,
such as cooperation in outer space and
governance of the internet, will also
remain difficult because of differences
in political systems, interests and values.

###### There is much at stake for Australia

We do not know yet how far these shifts
will change the way nations conduct and
organise themselves globally.

Economies and businesses will still trade
with each other. The world will remain
highly interconnected. Innovation and
new technology will create employment
and new ways of doing business that we
can only begin to imagine. International
cooperation on many issues remains not
only possible but essential. Much of the
institutional architecture of the international
order has proven resilient and is valued
by countries large and small.

Even so, the potential risks of the shifts
described above are also clear. A more
inward-looking and contested world
would be less prepared to respond to
major crises and work collectively to
address global challenges. Multilateral
institutions could see their effectiveness
decline further. The rules and principles
on which the international system has
been built could erode. New approaches,
contrary to our interests, might develop
and ultimately prevail.

Over time, we can also expect the nature
of work to change further as more jobs—-or
parts of more jobs—-are automated. Digital
platforms will allow more tasks to be done
anywhere in the world. Without policy
responses to manage change and seize
the opportunities that will come from
innovation, there is a risk that income
inequality in some countries could worsen.


One implication is that pressures on
governments to deliver access for their
citizens to the benefits of national prosperity
in a globalised world are unlikely to abate.
Any pronounced shift towards protectionism
as a result would impede flows of trade and
investment, dampen economic growth
and undermine the international rules
that govern trade and allow economies
to prosper together. It would also reduce
living standards, including in Australia.

###### Power shifts in the Indo–Pacifc

Economic growth in Asia continues to
re-shape our strategic landscape. The
compounding effect of China’s growth
is accelerating shifts in relative economic
and strategic weight (Figure 2.4). In parts
of the Indo–Pacific, including in Southeast
Asia, China’s power and influence are
growing to match, and in some cases
exceed, that of the United States. The
future balance of power in the Indo–Pacific
will largely depend on the actions of the
United States, China and major powers
such as Japan and India. The responses
of major Southeast Asian states, such
as Indonesia and Vietnam, will also be
important.

By some measures China’s economy is
already the largest in the world. China
is the most important trading partner
for most of the region’s economies and a
major investor, including in infrastructure.
China’s military modernisation is rapidly
improving the capability of its armed
forces. It has the largest navy and air
force in Asia and the largest coast guard
in the world. It is a large aid donor and
lender to the region.


-----

ares Au his cha

stralia rt comp

China. Using a n oran


T ares Au

stralia

China. Using a


6 to 2

030 ag


ge ci rcle to show 2016 projected GDP within a purple circle indicating projected 2030 GDP, in USD trillion, we see that China's GDP is the highest at$24.1 trillion in 2016 and projected to be $42.4 trillion in 2030.

Source: Treasury (Australian projections consistent with the 2015 Intergenerational Report)

Note: Figures are in 2016 US$ trillion, converted on a PPP basis; Australian forecasts are for

2015–16 and 2029–30


ainst tT

hat of

pean Union and


sts fr

om 201


Like all great powers, China will seek
to influence the region to suit its own
interests. As it does, a number of factors
suggest we will face an increasingly
complex and contested Indo–Pacific.
Even as China’s power grows and it
competes more directly with the United
States regionally and globally, the
United States will, for the foreseeable
future, retain its significant global lead
in military and soft power. The United
States will continue to be the wealthiest
country in the world (measured in
net asset terms), the world’s leader in
technology and innovation, and home to
the world’s deepest financial markets.

The Australian Government judges that
the United States’ long-term interests
will anchor its economic and security
engagement in the Indo–Pacific. Its
major Pacific alliances with Japan, the
Republic of Korea and Australia will
remain strong. Most regional countries,


's GDP

6 to 2

foreca

030 ag


including Australia, clearly consider a
significant US role in the Indo–Pacific as
a stabilising influence. Japan and India,
major economies and military powers in
their own right, are also playing stronger
roles in Indo–Pacific security and political
affairs and are seeking to influence the
balance of the regional order.

In this dynamic environment, competition
is intensifying, over both power and
the principles and values on which
the regional order should be based.
Maritime and land border disputes will
continue to create friction. The region’s
seas and airspace are becoming more
contested. Freedom of navigation is
under challenge in parts of the region.

Economic power is also being used for
strategic ends. We are already seeing
increased competition over regional
economic integration, including in the
financing of infrastructure projects.


-----

There is a risk that trade and investment,
which in the past have acted to restrain
strategic rivalry, could fuel it instead.

Military modernisation in our region is not
directed at Australia but nonetheless will
significantly diminish the capability edge
we have enjoyed. Over the next 20 years,
a larger number of regional armed forces
will be able to operate at greater range
and precision. The quality and quantity
of missile forces in the Indo–Pacific is
rising, including ballistic missiles. We will
see more submarines and advanced
combat aircraft. Stronger surveillance
and reconnaissance systems will reduce
the effectiveness of stealth capabilities.

In response, the Government is
delivering a more capable, agile and
potent Australian Defence Force (ADF).
Our particular focus is modernising
our maritime capabilities and further
integrating the ADF so it can apply
force more rapidly and effectively.

In the decade ahead, Australia will
seek security and prosperity in a
region changing in profound ways.
We are likely to face higher degrees
of uncertainty and risk. We will need
to be more active and determined in
our efforts to help shape a regional
balance favourable to our interests.

###### Terrorism will remain a critical global threat

The threat from terrorism will remain
high and could worsen over the decade.
There are now more Islamist extremists
from more countries active in more places
than ever before. Extremists will continue
to exploit fragile and violence-prone
states, including in Southeast Asia, for
safe havens and to build skills. Globally,


terrorism will add to instability and
drive international security interventions,
especially in the Middle East and Africa.

Communications technology allows
extremists to inspire or direct attacks
remotely, often through encrypted
means, underlining the complexity
and unpredictability of the risks we
face. New technologies could make it
easier for terrorists to make advanced
biological or chemical warfare agents.

Recent attacks and disruptions in Australia
highlight the dynamic nature of the
extremism challenge. With the conflicts in
Syria and Iraq having energised Islamist
extremists at a level not seen before, these
threats will have a generational impact.

Extremist narratives will continue to inspire
violence globally, even as the so-called
Islamic State (ISIL) loses ground in Iraq
and Syria. Al Qa’ida retains the intent to
conduct attacks against western interests.
Other groups are likely to emerge. The
security and stability of Afghanistan will
continue to be vital in containing the
threat from international terrorism.

The terrorism threat in Southeast Asia
is increasing because of links between
local extremists and terrorist groups
such as ISIL, with the situation in the
southern Philippines of pressing concern.
We must plan on the basis that a mass
casualty attack against western targets
in Southeast Asia will take place.

###### Constraints on global growth

Advanced economies have taken longer
than expected to recover from the global
financial crisis. More recently, the short-term
outlook for global growth has brightened.
Trade volumes have grown and business


-----

and market sentiment have improved.
Looking further ahead, however, several
factors will weigh on the world’s economy.

In the developed world, productivity gains
associated with technology advances
in the 1980s and 1990s have largely
been exhausted and new advances
in information and communications
technologies have not yet translated into
higher productivity across economies.
Real wage growth is not expected to
improve unless productivity increases,
particularly in developed economies.

Ageing populations will impede the
productive capacity of economies such
as Japan, China and the European Union.
In response to cyclical crises, major
economies have little room for stimulus
because of high public debt and low
official interest rates. China’s economy
is also slowing as it matures and this
will affect global growth rates.

Despite changes to financial regulation
and supervision since the global financial
crisis, risks remain in the global monetary
system. These include high debt in major
economies and potentially destabilising
increases in borrowing costs as developed
economies normalise monetary policy.

###### The Indo–Pacifc will create opportunity

Even with declining momentum, Asia overall
stands to deliver nearly two thirds of global
growth to 2030. Its continuing growth will
provide numerous opportunities for
Australia while our economy remains
competitive and agile. Within the next
15 years, four of the world’s five biggest
economies in purchasing power parity
terms are likely to be in Asia: China, India,
Japan and Indonesia. China and India


together make up more than 60 per cent
of Asia’s economic activity. By implementing
policies to support reform and inclusive
growth, developing economies with large
and youthful populations, such as India
and Indonesia, could reap a demographic
dividend (see Figure 2.5).

Some forecasts suggest that by 2030, Asia
could be home to a middle class of almost
3.5 billion (Figure 2.6). Australia’s economy
will continue to strongly complement
those of a growing Asia. Demand from
Asia for minerals and energy—-including
LNG, coal, iron ore, gold, alumina, copper,
nickel and zinc—-will continue. Australia
will also have significant opportunities to
supply regional economies with services
and premium agricultural products.

Recognising that it can no longer rely
on traditional growth drivers, such as
investment in infrastructure and the
movement of rural workers to urban
areas, China is seeking to shift its
economy to a more sustainable model
driven by domestic consumption.
This economic transition is on a scale
without precedent. If the reforms
succeed, they will lead to a more
mature, diverse and stable economy.

China faces risks however in the form of
significant debt in the private and public
sectors. While it has the resources and
controls to respond to a crisis in its financial
sector, a sharp correction could have a
significant impact on Australia’s exports
and on the global economy more broadly.

India is the world’s fastest growing major
economy and is expected to remain so
for the next few years. India’s growth has
been supported by increased openness
to foreign investment and other economic
reforms, as well as by a young and growing
population.


-----

###### Figure 2.5  Changing demographics globally (2015–2030)


g dem


t, titled Changin

ograp


hics glo


bally

This bar char


(2015-20


30) illus

trates t


he pe

rcentage ch

, Central and South America, the Middle East and North Africa and sub-Saharan Africa. Indicated in pink on comparative columns for the years 2015, 2020, 2025 and 2030, the figure for Asia grows from 1.38 billion in 2015 to 3.49 billion in 2030, compared to .72 billion for Europe in 2015 and .73 billion in 2030.


ng ang e i n t he w or ki

age population for the Philippines, India, Malaysia, Indoneisa, Australia, US, China, Thailand, EU28, Republic of Korea and Japan. The Philippines is indicated as having the biggest percentage growth over the period, with 26%, while Japan figures lowest at -10%. Australia comes in around the middle wth 12% change.


Source: United Nations

###### Figure 2.6  Growing middle class in Asia


a

c


i

r


e

m


This gra ph, titl

num ber (i n billions) o f people in the middle cl

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||


ass in Asia, comparing it wi th Europe, North A


Source: Brookings Institution

Note: Middle class is defined as households with a per capita income between

US$11–US$110 per person per day in 2011 PPP terms


-----

-----

Within the next 10 years, India will have
the largest working age population in the
world.

Behind China and India, Southeast Asian
economies have the third-largest combined
workforce and population in Asia. Despite
collectively tripling in economic size over
the past two decades, most economies in
the region have the potential to lift their
productivity and growth.

Ultimately, as is the case with China, the
pace and sustainability of growth in India
and in Southeast Asia will depend on
further difficult-to-implement structural
reforms. Some economies might also find
it harder than in the past to follow the
traditional path to economic development
as increased automation lowers the
importance of cheap labour to industry.
Australia’s development assistance can
help to support economic reforms in the
Indo–Pacific.

###### Technological change

The virtual world, ‘internet of things’ and
big data are changing the way we work,
socialise, communicate and consume
goods and services. The combination
of more advanced ICT tools—-including
artificial intelligence—-with other disciplines
such as materials technology, robotics,
genomics and biotechnology will also
drive further innovation, from medical
treatments to smarter cities to low emissions
energy. New industries and new jobs will
be created.

For Australia, there will be significant
opportunities to improve productivity and
harness new sources of growth to deliver
the next stage of economic prosperity.
At the same time, as discussed earlier
in this chapter, domestic policy settings


will need to respond to the changing
nature of work.

Technological change also has significant
security implications. Access to technology
makes it easier and cheaper for terrorists
to construct, conceal and detonate lethal
devices. Advances in military technology
change the way military forces prepare
for and engage in conflict. Technologies
such as hypersonics and innovative
computing will also lead to new types of
weapons, challenging global arms control,
disarmament and international law.

Globally networked information systems
also make it easier for states and non-state
actors to compromise national security
and to target individuals and businesses.
Cyber threats can range from unacceptable
interference in democratic processes, such
as the activities of Russian cyber actors
during the 2016 US presidential election,
to the theft and manipulation of information
or disruption of government or commercial
activity. At the extreme, cyber actors could
attack critical national infrastructure such
as power grids and financial systems.

###### People, cities and migration

Australia’s external environment will
be influenced by demographic shifts,
continuing urbanisation and high rates of
people movements. The world’s population
is estimated to reach 8.6 billion by 2030,
up from 7.6 billion this year.

As developed countries and China age
rapidly, populations in Africa and South
Asia will soar. This could assist or constrain
economic growth depending on how well
governments handle education and training,
health, employment and infrastructure. It


-----

could also drive further irregular migration
and other transnational security challenges.

The strong trend towards urbanisation
will continue, including in the Indo–Pacific
(Figure 2.7), bringing export opportunities
for Australian minerals and energy, and
other goods and services. According to
United Nations estimates, globally there
could be 41 mega-cities (cities with more
than 10 million inhabitants) by 2030.

Increased flows of displaced people and
irregular migration will continue to present
challenges. Unprecedented numbers of
people displaced by conflict and natural
disasters are moving within countries and
across borders. Currently, there are an
estimated 65 million displaced people
in the world, the highest number since
the Second World War. The scale of this
challenge is overwhelming traditional
responses, requiring new approaches
to supporting displaced people as well
as countries of first refuge.


Irregular migration will continue, with
implications for the management of our
borders. These movements are often
enabled by digital communication,
cheap transport and people smuggling
syndicates.

Societies that protect human rights and
gender equality are much more likely to
be productive and stable. In this respect,
global trends are uneven. Severe gender
inequality persists in parts of the
Middle East, South Asia and the Pacific,
undercutting social stability and economic
development in these regions.

###### Fragile states

Conflicts within states and the problems
posed by fragile states will continue to
undermine international security and lead
to interventions by other powers. Non-state
actors, such as terrorists, continue to find


###### Figure 2.7  Forecast increase in urban population (2010–2030)

an po

pulat

ions of J

apan, Repub

lic of

Korea, T

This bar graph il

haila

n d, Vi etn am, Ph ili ppines, Indonesia, India and China for the period 2010-2020, by the million of additional people. China comes in highest at 329.5 million, and Japan lowest, at 1.6 million.

lustrates forecasted increases in urb

Source: United Nations


-----

space in fragile states to pursue their
objectives. Challenges such as transnational
crime, mass migration and the spread of
communicable diseases are magnified
or enabled by weak or lawless states.

The number of major civil wars taking
place around the world tripled between
2007 and 2014. Over 1.6 billion people
live in countries affected by fragility,
conflict and violence, and by 2030 more
than 60 per cent of the world’s poor will
live in fragile societies. Violent conflicts
cause 80 per cent of humanitarian needs
and are straining international responses.

The challenge of state fragility, conflict and
violence will remain acute in parts of the
Middle East and Africa, affecting Australia’s
security interests through terrorism and
irregular migration. Instability in these
regions could potentially disrupt energy
supplies and other trade. Geopolitical
tensions between Iran and some Gulf
countries are likely to continue, fuelling
conflicts within some states in the
Middle East.

In Southeast Asia, challenges stem from
subnational conflicts, usually in isolated
or remote border regions, such as in
Myanmar and the southern Philippines.
In the Pacific, the challenges are weak
governance, corruption and vulnerability
to economic and environmental shocks.

###### An environment under strain

A bigger population, increased numbers
of middle class consumers and further
economic development will strain the
world’s resources. Climate change,
environmental degradation and the
demand for sustainable sources of food,


water and energy will be political, economic
and security disrupters over the longer
term. These challenges could undermine
stability in some countries, especially
fragile states, and contribute to conflict
and irregular migration. They also affect
our economic interests.

The economic and security effects of
climate change will sharpen and increase
global stresses on the supply of food and
water. Climate impacts could add to social,
economic and political tensions. Many
countries in Australia’s immediate region,
especially small island states, will be
severely affected in the long term. The
coming decade will likely see an increased
need for international disaster relief.

Responses to climate change will be an
important influence on international affairs
and Australia’s economy. Australia has
the renewable resources and products,
capabilities and services in low-emissions
technologies to benefit from the transition
of the global economy to a low-emissions
growth model. At the same time, buoyant
demand in the Indo–Pacific will support
our exports of high-quality coal and LNG,
and potentially uranium. Figure 2.8 shows
forecast global demand for energy.

Global food demand will rise. The
Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD) estimates that
60 per cent more food will be needed to
feed the world by 2050. Growing middle
classes will also demand more resource
intensive food like meat.

Water requirements for drinking and food
and energy production will increase as will
demand for the energy needed to grow,
store and transport food, underscoring the
nexus between food, energy and water.
If no changes are made to the way water
is used, the United Nations estimates that


-----

###### Figure 2.8  Global energy demand


ergies

ble en


renewa

r and


nuclea

gas,


oil,

oal,


c
dem and for

ene rgy de mand, i llustrates

|Col1|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|


Source: International Energy Agency (baseline scenario, 2016)


demand will outstrip supply by over
40 per cent by 2030. Preventing hunger
and malnutrition will remain an acute
challenge.

The world’s oceans will be under greater
pressure. Demand for seafood, especially
from Asia, will further strain global fisheries,
31 per cent of which are fished at
unsustainable levels. The continuing
effective management of our own fisheries
will depend on the health and sustainability
of ecosystems in the wider region.

The world’s forests will continue to face
intense pressure from land-use conversion,
unsustainable harvesting (including illegal
logging) and climate change. Demand for
timber is expected to quadruple by 2050.


agriculture, forestry, water management
and environmental sciences, Australia will
make an important contribution to efforts
to respond to these shared challenges.


As a major exporter of food and energy,
and with our world-leading expertise in


-----

-----

-----

CHAPTER THREE
#### A stable and prosperous Indo–Pacifc

###### The Indo–Pacific’s rising prosperity has been built on the region’s stability. Today, the Indo–Pacific is undergoing a strategic transition as profound as the economic transformation that preceded it.

 No long-term foreign policy objective is more important to Australia than ensuring our region evolves peacefully and without an erosion of the fundamental principles on which the Indo–Pacific’s prosperity and cooperative relations are based.


Australia will be active in advancing and
protecting our interests at this critical time.
Our interests lie both in stability and in the
character of the enduring peace we seek.
In particular, our security and prosperity
will be enhanced in a region characterised
by respect for international law and other
norms, and by open markets. This will help
ensure Australia can prosecute our national
interests unconstrained by the exercise of
coercive power. Our policies to support
a stable and prosperous Indo–Pacific
complement our trade, investment and
economic engagement with the region,
which is detailed in the next chapter.

The Government’s approach to better
protecting and advancing our interests
in a changing Indo–Pacific begins with
substantial investments in the foundations
of our national strength. In particular, we
are building a more capable, agile and
potent Australian Defence Force. We will
also pursue active diplomacy and use our
development cooperation to promote
economic reform and social stability.
The Government will strengthen our


law and justice, border protection and
intelligence capabilities.

Our alliance with the United States is central
to Australia’s security and sits at the core
of our strategic and defence planning.
The Government will broaden and deepen
our alliance cooperation and encourage
the strongest possible economic and
security engagement by the United States
in the region.

Strengthening our Comprehensive
Strategic Partnership with China is also
vital for Australia both to pursue extensive
bilateral interests and because of China’s
growing influence on the regional and
global issues of greatest consequence
to our security and prosperity.

The Government will lift the ambition of
our engagement with major Indo–Pacific
democracies. We will do more bilaterally
and work across these partnerships,
including in small groups, to promote
and protect a shared vision for the region
and to support a balance in the region
favourable to our interests. Our partnership


-----

with Japan, one of our most important
regionally and globally, will remain
essential to Australia’s interests. In
addition to the United States, we will
strengthen economic ties and other
shared interests with Indonesia, India
and the Republic of Korea.

As competition for influence in Southeast
Asia sharpens, the Government will ensure
Australia remains a leading economic,
development and strategic partner for
ASEAN and its members.

The Government will also continue to
invest in regional institutions because they
promote economic cooperation and help
build norms that support the peaceful
resolution of disputes.

As set out in the 2016 Defence White Paper,
Australia will boost defence engagement
with countries in the Indo–Pacific, including
through increased training, exercises and
capacity building.

Australia will also pursue regional trade
and investment arrangements that
increase growth and promote openness,
competition and transparency, helping
to defuse strategic rivalry.

Through these policy approaches the
Government will act to support an
Indo–Pacific region in which:

R countries foster habits of dialogue
and cooperation, and resolve disputes
peacefully in accordance with
international law and without the
threat or use of force or coercion

R open markets facilitate flows of goods,
services, capital and ideas

R economic integration is inclusive of and
open to all the region’s economies

R rights of freedom of navigation and
overflight are upheld and the rights
of small states are protected


R the United States remains strongly
engaged in the economic and security
affairs of the region and continues to
help shape its institutions and norms,
and

R China plays a leading role in a way that
strengthens a regional order based on
these principles.

Australia will also work resolutely with
our partners to counter the serious threat
posed by North Korea, including by greater
efforts to exert economic pressure.

The policies in this chapter reflect an active
approach by Australia to shaping the
character of our region. The Government
recognises the difficulty of this task in an
era of shifting power balances and greater
rivalry. In particular, the objectives set out
above can only be secured if the region’s
major powers—-notably the United States
and China—-believe that their interests are
also served by them.

This is not assured. In the decade ahead
we expect further contestation over ideas
and influence, directly affecting Australia.
It is imperative that Australia prepare for
the long term. Australia and our regional
partners have a shared interest in seeking
to build a regional economic and strategic
culture that supports stability, cooperation,
the rule of law and openness.

###### The United States and China

The Indo–Pacific’s stability depends more
than ever on the actions of, and relations
between, two of Australia’s most important
partners—-the United States and China.
Australia tangibly supports the deep
engagement of the United States in the
economic and security affairs of the region,


-----

which has been and continues to be
essential to the stability and prosperity
of the Indo–Pacific. Many of Australia’s
partners similarly encourage deep regional
engagement by the United States.

The web of US alliances in the Indo–Pacific,
especially US alliances with Japan, the
Republic of Korea and Australia, makes an
essential contribution to regional security.
Australia will continue to ensure the strength
and vitality of our alliance. A comprehensive
US economic strategy for Asia will be as
important as the United States’ extensive
security engagement.

China’s capacity to take on responsibility
for supporting regional and global security
is growing. We encourage China to exercise
its power in a way that enhances stability,
reinforces international law and respects
the interests of smaller countries and their
right to pursue them peacefully.

The United States and China are
economically interdependent and have
a sophisticated and multi-faceted
relationship. They have a mutual interest
in managing strategic tensions but this
by itself is not a guarantee of stability.

Compounding divergent strategic interests
as China’s power grows, tensions could also
flare between them over trade and other
economic issues.

Australia will encourage the United States
and China to ensure economic tension
between them does not fuel strategic rivalry
or damage the multilateral trading system.

Over time, bringing China and the
United States together in a region-wide
free trade agreement would reduce
economic tension and help maximise
regional economic growth prospects.
A Chinese economy that further liberalises
as it matures would also lower the risk
of destabilising economic competition.


Australia and the United States are not only
strong allies. Our partnership encompasses
engagement across the full suite of
Australia’s international interests and works
strongly to the benefit of both countries.

The economic significance of the
United States, combined with its dynamism,
innovation and central role in the
international financial system, makes it
critical to our interests. The United States
has a systemic importance to the global
economy that is unlikely to be eclipsed
even beyond the 10 year horizon of this
White Paper.

Our economic relationship is deep and
broad, with extensive two-way investment
supporting production, growth and jobs
in both countries. The United States is the
largest foreign direct investor in Australia,
accounting for nearly 25 per cent of foreign
investment—-more than the next two
countries combined.

For over 60 years, our security has been
supported by the extended deterrence
provided by the United States and our
privileged access to technology and
information. The United States Force
Posture Initiatives in northern Australia are
providing new opportunities for combined
training, regional engagement and further
interoperability between our armed forces,
including for humanitarian operations.

We source high-end military equipment
from the United States, including next
generation platforms such as the Joint
Strike Fighter. Deep intelligence sharing
with the United States is vital to our capacity
to respond to security challenges and
humanitarian emergencies and to protect
Australian lives.

The alliance is a choice we make about
how best to pursue our security interests.
It is central to our shared objective of


-----

shaping the regional order. It delivers a
capability edge to our armed forces and
intelligence agencies, giving Australia
added weight and regional influence.

At the same time, Australia will strengthen
relations with China, now a major
geopolitical player with the capacity
to influence virtually all of Australia’s
international interests. China is rapidly
becoming a significant global investor
and a burgeoning centre for science,
research and innovation. It is by far our
largest trading partner, accounting for
32 per cent of our goods exports in 2016,
and will remain so for the foreseeable
future.

Australia is committed to advancing our
Comprehensive Strategic Partnership
with China. Our broad and sophisticated
relationship is underpinned by a bilateral
free trade agreement, growing investment,
close cooperation to combat transnational
crime, important research linkages and
extensive and growing flows of students,
tourists and migrants. Our societies are
increasingly connected. Our economic
and people-to-people links—-enhanced by
initiatives such as the New Colombo Plan
—-provide ballast for our relationship.

Australia will continue to place priority
on positive and active engagement with
China, including through annual meetings
between leaders, foreign ministers and
economic ministers. We will pursue
cooperation on issues ranging from energy
to law enforcement and security through
a growing web of ministerial and other
senior-level dialogues. We are looking
to build on our free trade agreement by
expanding market access and opportunities
for our businesses.

We have a long-standing and productive
program of defence cooperation with
China, which we are committed to


expanding. We promote stronger
connections at the sub-national level,
working closely with our states and
territories. We are expanding our
diplomatic footprint in China by opening
a new consulate-general in Shenyang.
We welcome and will continue to contribute
to important Chinese initiatives, such as the
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB),
of which Australia is a founding member.

At times, closer engagement will be
accompanied by friction arising from
our different interests, values and political
and legal systems. Regular and substantive
engagement at senior levels will be
essential to achieve our ambitions for the
relationship.

###### Indo–Pacifc partnerships

The Indo–Pacific democracies of Japan,
Indonesia, India and the Republic of Korea
are of first order importance to Australia,
both as major bilateral partners in their own
right and as countries that will influence the
shape of the regional order.

We are pursuing new economic and
security cooperation and people-to-people
links to strengthen these relationships.
Australia will also work within smaller
groupings of these countries, reflecting
our shared interests in a region based on
the principles described in this chapter.

For example, Australia remains strongly
committed to our trilateral dialogues with
the United States and Japan and, separately,
with India and Japan. Australia is open to
working with our Indo–Pacific partners in
other plurilateral arrangements.

###### Japan

A ‘Special Strategic Partner’ of Australia,
Japan is a democratic, trade-oriented


-----

nation with which we share values and
interests, including through our alliances
with the United States. Together we are
working to achieve a stable region
underpinned by open economies and the
rule of law. As close partners, each country
is invested in the success of the other.

Japan is the world’s fourth-largest economy
and a major player in international and
global economic forums. It remains
a cornerstone of global value chains,
the largest source of foreign direct
investment in Southeast Asia and the
catalyst for much of our region’s—-and
Australia's—-economic development.

We have an extensive and mature
partnership in trade and investment,
which both countries seek to deepen.
Australia is committed to the tempo of
annual prime ministerial visits and will
strengthen economic dialogue with
Japan to complement our FTA and
already extensive economic contacts.

We expect Japan, which possesses
advanced military forces and significant
technological capabilities, steadily
to pursue reforms to its defence and
strategic policies over the decade.
Australia supports these reforms and
Japan’s efforts to improve its security
capabilities and to play a more active
role in the security of the region. In
recent years our defence relationship has
grown rapidly. Australia will continue to
boost defence engagement with Japan,
including in maritime security and in
research and development.

###### Indonesia

Indonesia is a dynamic, democratic,
diverse and growing G20 member with
the world’s largest Muslim population.
Indonesia’s success is of fundamental
importance to Australia.


Indonesia has a growing middle class and,
by some estimates, will be the world's
fifth-largest economy by 2030. The size,
weight and location of Indonesia at the
intersection of the Indian and Pacific
oceans makes it a leader in our region,
including in ASEAN. We work closely
with Indonesia in regional and international
forums to support and protect a rulesbased regional order, including in the EAS
and ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting
Plus (ADMM Plus).

As close neighbours, with an extensive
maritime border, we will be stronger as we
continue to promote our interests together.
The 2006 Lombok Treaty reaffirms our
respect for each other’s territorial integrity.

We have already built a mature and mutually
beneficial partnership, one that will be
reinforced by growing economic ties,
including the Comprehensive Economic
Partnership Agreement currently under
negotiation, and more diverse links through
business, study and travel. To this end,
the Government has opened new posts in
Makassar and Surabaya to better engage
with Indonesia’s dynamic regions.

We support Indonesia’s economic
growth and stability including through
development cooperation. Australia
works in partnership with Indonesian
agencies to further the development
of infrastructure, skills and institutions.

We will deepen cooperation on shared
maritime interests including by working
to counter illegal fishing, improve
coordination and communications
on search and rescue, and upgrade
navy-to-navy links. Through our
development program, we support
Indonesia’s efforts to tackle inequality
and maintain social stability, promote
tolerance and pluralism, and counter
violent extremism. Our long-standing


-----

defence, counter-terrorism, law
enforcement and intelligence cooperation
will continue to help both countries
respond to shared security challenges.

###### India

India now sits in the front rank of Australia’s
international partnerships. We are seeking
much closer economic ties, as detailed in
the next chapter. Beyond an increasingly
important economic relationship, our
security interests are congruent,
particularly in relation to the stability
and openness of the Indian Ocean. We
have common interests in upholding
international law, especially in relation
to freedom of navigation and maritime
security. We are both pluralist democracies.
Our education links and Australia’s large
and rapidly growing Indian diaspora add
depth to these common interests.

India will remain the pre-eminent maritime
power among Indian Ocean countries.
Australia wants to work with India as
both countries invest in enhanced naval
capabilities. We already conduct joint
naval exercises and we are deepening
our broader defence cooperation and
expanding our information sharing.

With India and others, we seek to strengthen
regional architecture in the Indian Ocean—including the Indian Ocean Rim Association
(IORA)—-and encourage more coordinated
responses to developments affecting
security in the Indian Ocean region.

We strongly encourage India’s strategic
engagement with East Asia and the
United States. We will work with India
in the East Asia Summit (EAS) and build
on the growing strategic collaboration
between Australia, India and Japan.


###### Republic of Korea

We seek to build on our mature economic
relationship with the Republic of Korea—Australia's fourth-largest trading partner
—-by enhancing cooperation on political,
defence and security issues. We share
values such as democracy and free speech
and are both trade-oriented economies.

Australia and the Republic of Korea share
an interest in working with the United States
and Japan to protect regional security
and respond to North Korea’s nuclear and
ballistic missile programs. We strongly
support the Republic of Korea’s efforts to
strengthen its defences against North Korea.

###### Grave and growing threat posed by North Korea

North Korea’s long-range missile and
nuclear programs represent the region’s
most immediate security challenge.
Any major instability or conflict on the
Korean Peninsula would have severe
strategic, economic and humanitarian
repercussions. A North Korean attack
on the United States would also trigger
Australia’s commitments under our
ANZUS alliance.

Australia will continue to work resolutely
with our partners to bring increasing
pressure to bear on North Korea to end its
dangerous behaviour. China has unique
economic leverage over North Korea.
We welcome China’s support for
strengthened United Nations measures.

We implement United Nations Security
Council resolutions and sanctions fully
and have adopted our own autonomous
measures. We act with partners to counter
North Korea’s proliferation activities.


-----

North Korea’s purported withdrawal from
the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty and
defiance of United Nations Security Council
resolutions weaken the global restraints
on the spread of nuclear weapons and
weapons technology, including ballistic
missiles. These restraints have greatly
protected Australia’s security interests.

Australia is focused on protecting our
deployed forces from a range of air
and missile threats, including cruise and
ballistic missile threats. At the same time,
the Government keeps the possible threat
of an inter-continental ballistic missile
attack on Australia under constant and
careful review.


###### Working with Southeast Asia

Southeast Asia frames Australia’s northern
approaches and is of profound significance
for our future. ASEAN’s success has helped
support regional security and prosperity
for 50 years. In 2016, Australia’s trade with
ASEAN countries was greater than with our
second-largest bilateral trading partner, the
United States.

Southeast Asia sits at a nexus of strategic
competition in the Indo–Pacific. This both
tests the region’s cohesion and underlines
ASEAN’s central role in convening the
region’s strategic forums such as the EAS.


-----

Australia places high priority on our
bilateral relationships in Southeast Asia
and on our support for ASEAN. The
Government is enhancing engagement
with the region to support an increasingly
prosperous, outwardly-focused, stable and
resilient Southeast Asia. As an example, we
have agreed a new Strategic Partnership
with Vietnam.

In 2018, Australia will host ASEAN leaders
in Sydney for an historic ASEAN – Australia
Special Summit. This will reinforce our
Strategic Partnership with ASEAN as we
advance shared interests. The Summit will
demonstrate our elevated commitment to
ASEAN and our enduring ties with the
countries of Southeast Asia.

As a key element of our Comprehensive
Strategic Partnership, we will strengthen
security cooperation with Singapore,
including by jointly developing military
training areas in Australia. The Government
will also boost defence engagement
with Southeast Asia more broadly,
including multilaterally through the
ADMM Plus meeting of defence ministers.
Close cooperation with Singapore and
Malaysia through the Five Power Defence
Arrangements is an essential part of our
security engagement with Southeast Asia.

We will cooperate more closely with our
Southeast Asian partners on transnational
challenges such as crime and people
smuggling. The continuing threat to the
region of terrorism and violent extremism
will require concerted and determined
cooperation between us.

We will continue to boost trade and
investment links, including through
a comprehensive review of the
ASEAN – Australia – New Zealand Free
Trade Agreement (AANZFTA) and
upgrades to our FTAs with Singapore,
Thailand and Malaysia. We will elevate


our development, trade and investment
cooperation with Vietnam. We will also
continue to build on extensive political,
defence, educational and people-to-people
links between Australia and the region.

Through our development partnerships,
we will work with Southeast Asian countries
to deliver effective programs to promote
economic reform and inclusive growth,
reduce poverty and address inequality.
In this way we strengthen bilateral
relationships and contribute to regional
stability and prosperity.

###### Geo-economic competition

Even as growth binds the economies
of the Indo–Pacific, trade and investment
and infrastructure development are being
used as instruments to build strategic
influence, as well as to bring commercial
advantage. In the past, the pursuit of
closer economic relations between
countries often diluted strategic rivalries.
This geo-economic competition could
instead accentuate tension.

Australia’s economic and security interests
are closely intertwined here. These are best
served by deepening regional economic
integration in a way that maximises growth
through open trade and investment on
market-based principles.

This objective will be achieved through
regional trade and investment and through
infrastructure financing arrangements that
reinforce an open global economy and that:

R are based on strong, transparent rules

R promote fair and open competition, and

R are transparent and non-discriminatory,
with predictable regulatory systems.


-----

Australia’s long-term objective is to work
towards a region-wide trade and investment
arrangement defined by comprehensive
rules to promote liberalisation, reform and
a more seamless trading environment. It is
likely a generational endeavour. Further
integrating the major economies of the
Indo–Pacific serves both our economic
and security interests.

Australia’s approach to regional trade
negotiations, such as the Trans–Pacific
Partnership (TPP) and the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership
(RCEP), seeks to ensure that the core
features of these arrangements are
consistent with our goal of an open,
region-wide arrangement.

Much of the new competition for
influence is also being played out
through infrastructure development.


There are several regional infrastructure
and economic engagement initiatives,
including ones advanced by China, India
and Japan.

The region’s infrastructure needs are
massive and wide-ranging (Figure 3.1).
It is in our interests for this infrastructure
to be developed in a way that conforms
to the principles set out above. We also
favour infrastructure that has robust
social and environmental safeguards
and avoids unsustainable debt burdens
on the economies of the region. It is
on this basis that Australia engages
with regional infrastructure initiatives,
including China’s Belt and Road.

We seek to ensure that Australian firms
are well placed to prosper from the
region’s pipeline of future investment.
Our firms have more than 30 years


###### Figure 3.1   Infrastructure investment needs in Asia (2016–2030, US$ trillion)This infographic, titled, Infrastructure investment needs in Asia (2016-2030, USD trilliion), shows total investment needs at $26.2 tonne; power at $14.7 tonne; telecommunications at $2.3 tonne; transport at $8.4 tonne; water and sanitation at $.8 tonne.

Source: Asian Development Bank


-----

experience working with Australian
governments to build roads, airports,
hospitals and other infrastructure.
Many are leaders in the design and
integration of large-scale infrastructure
projects. Australian financial institutions
have been at the forefront of innovative
financing for infrastructure, including
through public private partnerships,
and are able to tap into deep pools of
funds for multi-billion dollar projects.

Australia helps regional countries prepare
high-quality, investment-ready projects
and improve policy frameworks to attract
private capital. We have played a key role
in negotiating rules and practices that match
our and the region’s interests, as we did in
the establishment of the AIIB. With our
partners, we also support the development
of infrastructure plans and the preparation,
financing and implementation of projects
that best meet the region’s needs, including
through our work with the World Bank
Group and the Asian Development Bank
and through our support for ASEAN’s
Masterplan on Connectivity.

###### Building collaboration

Australia continues to support the EAS as
the region’s premier political and security
forum. It has the right membership
(including China, India, Japan, the Republic
of Korea, Russia, the United States and
ASEAN countries), and it has the right
mandate. Leaders drive its agenda.

In recent years, EAS leaders have paid
increased attention to security issues
such as counter-proliferation, counterterrorism and maritime security, a trend
Australia will seek to reinforce. We aim
to bolster the strategic role of the EAS
so that it can positively influence the
region’s rules and norms.


Through the EAS and other forums such
as APEC, ADMM Plus and the ASEAN
Regional Forum, Australia pursues a
regional agenda that:

R promotes cooperation on strategic,
political and economic issues,
including extensive engagement
between leaders

R reinforces international law

R encourages full and active
engagement by the United States
in regional affairs, and


R


ensures that all regional countries,
large and small, have a voice on
regional issues.


###### Fault lines

Maritime and land border disputes are a
growing source of potential instability in
a more contested Indo–Pacific. They draw in
the region’s three big Asian powers—-China,
Japan and India—-as well as Southeast Asian
nations and Pakistan. They also strongly
engage the interests of countries, such
as the United States and Australia, which
seek to build a region where disputes are
solved peacefully and in accordance with
international law.

The South China Sea is a major fault line
in the regional order. Australia is not a
claimant state and does not take sides in
the competing claims. Like other
non-claimant states, however, we have a
substantial interest in the stability of this
crucial international waterway, and in the
norms and laws that govern it.

We have urged all claimants to refrain
from actions that could increase tension
and have called for a halt to land
reclamation and construction activities.
Australia is particularly concerned by the


-----

unprecedented pace and scale of China’s
activities. Australia opposes the use of
disputed features and artificial structures
in the South China Sea for military
purposes. We support the resolution of
differences through negotiation based
on international law.

All claimants should clarify the full nature
and extent of their claims according to the
United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea (UNCLOS). The Government
reaffirms its position that the Permanent
Court of Arbitration’s ruling on the
Philippines South China Sea Arbitration
is final and binding on both parties.

Elsewhere in the region, Australia is
concerned about the potential for the
use of force or coercion in the East China
Sea and Taiwan Strait. We also remain
concerned about the potential for tension
between India and Pakistan to escalate
into confrontation. How India and China
manage their relationship, including
competing border claims, will also have
important implications for regional
stability. In all of these matters, it is vital
that those concerned act with restraint
and avoid actions that add to tensions.

###### Safeguarding maritime security

Open sea lanes link the Pacific and Indian
oceans, enabling trade in goods and energy
that fuels the region’s growth. The major
economies of North Asia—-China, Japan
and the Republic of Korea—-in particular
rely on energy transported through the
Indian Ocean. Australia’s own connections
with the world will continue to rely on our
sea lines of communication.

The region’s seas are becoming more
congested and contested. Many regional


countries continue to invest in advanced
naval and civil maritime capabilities.
Terrorists and other criminals use the
relatively porous maritime boundaries
of the Indo–Pacific as transit routes.

Australia will increase its investments
in maritime security capacity building
in Southeast Asia. We will also work to
strengthen the focus on maritime issues
within regional forums, including the EAS
and IORA, and enhance regional training
on maritime domain awareness,
protection of the marine environment
and international law. We will deepen
joint exercises and build maritime domain
awareness with India and collaborate on
maritime safety and security with other
Indian Ocean partners, like Sri Lanka.

We will promote confidence-building
measures and cooperation among regional
coast guards and maritime enforcement
bodies, assist in efforts to counter terrorism
and offer to support regional littoral states
to develop comprehensive national
maritime strategies.

Through our diplomatic and operational
engagement, we will strive to ensure
international law, especially UNCLOS,
is respected and implemented to protect
freedom of navigation and uphold the
sovereign rights of coastal states in their
exclusive economic zones.

Australia will continue to exercise our rights
to freedom of navigation and overflight,
consistent with long-standing policy, and
conduct cooperative activities with other
countries consistent with international law.


-----

-----

CHAPTER FOUR
#### Our agenda for opportunity

###### Australia’s prosperity will continue to rely on the competitiveness of our economy and our ability to seize opportunities globally.


The economic transformation of our region
will continue (Chapter 2). More people
moving to Asia’s cities will help sustain
demand for our minerals and energy. Asia’s
middle classes will expand and demand
premium agricultural products and a wide
range of services, such as education,
tourism, health care and finance. Hundreds
of millions of Asian consumers are already
shopping online for goods and services
from around the world.

Established markets, such as those
in North America, Europe and Japan,
also remain important to Australia’s
economy, particularly as investment
partners, as export markets and as
a gateway to global value chains.
Economic reforms in Latin America
offer new possibilities for trade and
investment, as do growing populations
and natural resource endowments in
Africa and the Middle East.

At the same time, our policies will need
to reflect the changing nature of trade
driven by technology and shifts in the
relative competitiveness of economies.

Lower communication and transport
costs have enabled today’s global value
chains, in which components of goods
are produced in different countries
before being assembled for sale. Value
chains blur the distinction between
exports and imports. Goods often cross
borders many times before they find their
way into final products.


Technological advances will drive further
change. E-commerce provides new
ways to access markets and consumers.
The digital economy, and the rules that
govern it, is increasingly essential to
Australian companies. The tasks that go
into providing some services are being
broken up and performed by firms in
different countries in much the same
way goods are produced in value chains.

Lower-cost robotics and technologies such
as additive manufacturing are increasing
opportunities for companies based
in higher-wage economies, including
our own.

How global manufacturing and global
value chains evolve will have major
implications for trade and investment.
Given its central role in manufacturing,
changes in China’s economy will be
influential. As its economy becomes
more advanced, production of many
goods could be centralised in China.
Conversely, higher costs in China might
see companies shift production to other
countries to seek competitive advantages.

Global developments in energy technology
and consumption will influence demand
for major Australian exports like iron
ore, coal and LNG. The increasing use
of high efficiency, low-emission coal
technologies, cleaner gas plants and
advances in renewable energy and carbon
capture and storage technologies will
create export and investment


-----

opportunities for Australia. Even so,
global energy markets are becoming
more competitive, including because of
the exploitation of unconventional energy
reserves in the United States, and more
responsive to changing demand.

The task for Australia is to maximise
opportunity in this dynamic environment.
While we have many advantages, including
the complementary nature of our economy
with that of many Asian countries, there
will also be challenges to navigate.


Australia will more than ever need a
competitive economy with efficient
businesses and industries and a skilled
workforce. Our companies will need to
be agile and adaptable to benefit from
changes in the way goods and services
are produced and traded. Australian
direct investment into Asia is relatively
low, potentially affecting the ability of
some firms to tap into growth markets
and value chains. Efforts to facilitate our
companies’ access to regional value


###### Figure 4.1   Australia’s trade in goods and services (2016)This infographic, titled, Australia's trade in goods and services (2016), illustrates Australia's top 5 imports and countries of origin, and Australia's top 5 exports and destinations. The top import, at $3.7 billion, is personal travel (excluding education) and China is the top source of imports, at $62 billion. The top export is iron ore, at $54 billion, with China the top export destination, totalling $94 billion. The number five import is freight, at $9 billion and Germany is the fifth largest import source, at $16 billion. The number five export is natural gas, at $18 billion, while the number five export destination is the United Kingdom at $15 billion.

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics

*Excludes education


-----

or

, f


ype

y t


s b

ort


exp

s


'


###### Figure 4.2 Australia’s exports by type

This gra ph i llus trat es A ustr alia


Rural goods Minerals, fuels, non-monetary gold Manufactures Other goods Total services

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics


chains will be necessary to maximise the
benefits of our region’s economic growth.

The continuing openness of the world
economy will be vital to our interests.
Any serious turn towards protectionism
would weaken rules that enable stable
and predictable international trade,
which in turn supports economic growth,
job creation and improvements in living
standards. Even narrow protectionist
measures could limit or disadvantage our
exports and harm Australia’s economy.

In responding to this changing
environment, the Government will:


shape rules that promote economic
growth, trade liberalisation and free
markets

R ensure the lowest possible barriers to
our trade and investment, including
through modern free trade agreements,
and


R work with Australian businesses to
advance our commercial interests
in overseas markets.

This international agenda will be built
on domestic policies that increase the
competitiveness and resilience of our
economy and that ensure Australia
maximises the gains from economic
openness (Chapter 1).

The Government will maintain a strongly
consultative approach before, during and


R resist protectionism and advocate for
an open global economy

R work determinedly with partners and
in global institutions to protect and


-----

s mine
rals

and energy exports
by major market (2016), illustrates that exports of minerals and energy to the EU were $4 billion; India $8 billion; Republic of Korea $13 billion; Japan $30 billion and China $61 billion.

a

Source: Department of Industry, Innovation and Science


titl
ed,


after trade negotiations. We will continue to
seek stakeholder input to our negotiations
and policy development. We will make it
easier for business and individuals to
access information on trade negotiations,
including by upgrading our FTA portal for
business enquiries.

###### Defending and supporting an open global economy

Globalisation has lifted hundreds of
millions of people out of poverty, helped
drive global economic growth and
delivered affordable goods and services
worldwide. By having the policy settings to
benefit from trade, investment and skilled
migration, Australia’s economy is stronger
and our standard of living higher.

At the same time, some countries are
dealing with a backlash against
globalisation as citizens express concern


Austra
lia'


about the impact of technological change,
overseas competition and migration on
their societies (Chapter 2). Technological
shifts and competitive trade pressures
will sustain concerns in many countries
about job security.

As a result, some governments are under
pressure to protect particular industries
from international competition. Publics and
governments globally are debating whether
policies to keep economies open and break
down barriers to trade and investment
work in their interest. The United States,
in particular, is seeking to renegotiate some
trade agreements and take other steps to
address measures it regards as unfair and
to reduce its trade deficit.

We cannot be certain to what extent these
pressures might lead to a significant retreat
from the long-term trend of a liberalising
world economy. We do know however that
protectionism represents a serious risk to
Australia’s interests, particularly if major


###### Australia’s minerals and energy exports by major market (2016)

This c
hart,

s mine
rals

s

Source: Department of Industry, Innovation and Science

about the impact of technological change,
overseas competition and migration on


-----

economies take actions that substantially
impede trade and investment and weaken
trade rules. Even under this scenario,
economic openness would remain in
Australia’s interests. Any protectionist
response on our part to events


elsewhere would risk hurting Australian
workers, drive up prices and weaken
incentives to innovate. It would mean
lower living standards and less choice
for Australian consumers.


###### Australia as an export nation

Australia exported more than $337 billion in goods and services in 2016,
amounting to one fifth of our economic activity. Our exporters are often
world leaders.

Australia is a minerals and energy superpower. In 2016, we exported
more than $140 billion in minerals and energy—-more than half of total
merchandise exports. Figure 4.3 shows minerals and energy exports to our
major markets.

We are the world’s largest exporter of coal and iron ore, and one of the
world’s largest exporters of LNG. We have the world’s largest reserves of a
range of metals and minerals including gold, iron ore, lead, nickel, zinc and
uranium. For 60 years, we have helped power Asia’s economic growth and
industrialisation (Figure 4.4).

Australia is among the top 10 agricultural exporters in the world. In 2016,
we exported more than $47 billion in agricultural and fisheries products,
accounting for more than two-thirds of our agricultural production. We are
the world’s largest exporter of beef and wool. Our reputation for producing
safe and high-quality food is second to none.

Services make up a growing share of our exports, more than $75 billion or
one fifth of exports in 2016. Australia is the third-largest provider of education
to international students, attracting more than 550,000 students from more
than 180 countries in 2016. More than 8.5 million tourists visited Australia
in 2016–17. In the previous financial year, international tourists contributed
$34 billion to our economy and supported the employment of over
580,000 people (Figure 4.5).

Manufacturing makes up $44 billion or 13 per cent of our exports. Australia’s
manufacturers are linking into global value chains and developing high
value-added products and services including research and development,
design and engineering. More than four out of five Australian manufacturing
businesses are small or medium in size. They rank fifth among advanced
economies for business innovation.


-----

###### Figure 4.4  Australia’s iron ore and coal driving Asia’s growth

Australia’s share of select countries’ metallurgical coal imports


ica

rg


lu

al


et

m
ia's share of s elect countries'


l coa l imp orts, illustrates the percentage of China, India, Japan and the Republic of Korea's imports of metallurgical coal that are from Australia for the years 2005, 2010 and 2015. In all cases the share exceeds 50 per cent.


Source: International Energy Agency

Australia’s share of select countries’ iron ore imports


im

re


o

on


ir


lia's shar e of select countries'

ports, ill ustrates the percentage of China, India, Japan and the Republic of Korea's imports of iron ore that are from Australia for the years 2005, 2010 and 2015. With the exception of India, which ranges from nil in 2005 to 30.5 per cent in 2010, in all cases Australia's share exceeds 40 per cent.


Source: World Steel Association; Australian Bureau of Statistics


-----

###### Making globalisation work for Australia

Most Australians recognise that globalisation
has significantly benefitted Australia.[3 ]
Our economic record of 26 years of
uninterrupted growth is based on policies
adopted by successive governments to
ensure Australia benefits from economic
openness. This has enabled Australia
to prosper while maintaining social
cohesion and fairness.

Nonetheless, the Government understands
that maintaining public support for trade,
investment and skilled migration is vitally
important to our continuing prosperity.
We will continue to work with the business
community and other partners to explain
the importance of an open Australian
economy to our future prosperity. The
Government will strengthen advocacy
in support of our trade and investment
agenda.

We seek to ensure Australians find
opportunity in a growing economy and
implement policies that help businesses
and workers adapt to change and share
in the benefits of trade and investment.

We recognise that technological change is
an opportunity for business and the wider
community. The Government’s approach
to innovation and science fosters globally
competitive businesses and institutions
that provide better paying jobs. We
continue to look for ways to stimulate
innovation, including by enabling the
commercialisation of research, supporting
start-ups, and helping existing businesses
to build capability and skills.

Our flexible vocational and higher
education pathways help Australians to
develop skills to find jobs and opportunity

3 2017 Lowy Institute Poll


in changing workplaces. At the same time,
our social safety nets, skills retraining and
labour market programs for Australians
affected by technology and competition,
including in regional centres, will also help
communities adapt to change.

###### Protecting rules to support trade and investment

Internationally, Australia will continue
to take a determined stand alongside
like-minded partners to resist
protectionism. The Government will
make vigorous efforts bilaterally to
minimise the impact of protectionist and
trade restrictive measures on Australian
businesses. At the same time, we will
remain a strong advocate for an open
global economy supported by enforceable
rules.

The rules embodied in the WTO limit
arbitrary and unfair trade restrictions
and are of fundamental importance to
Australia’s interests. We will demonstrate
leadership, creativity and perseverance in
seeking to advance liberalisation within
the WTO.

Australia has played an instrumental
role in achieving recent WTO outcomes,
such as the Trade Facilitation Agreement.
This agreement will reduce red tape and
compliance costs for exporters (such as
customs procedures), potentially boosting
global trade by up to $1 trillion a year.

Similarly, we contributed substantially to
the WTO agreement reached in 2015 to
eliminate agricultural export subsidies.
This was a goal long pursued by Australia
because of the damage to our farmers
from these subsidies. Addressing the
remaining substantial distortions and


-----

###### Figure 4.5 Inbound international tourism to Australia (select markets, 2016–17)

**tional touri** **sm to Australia (sea** **arkets,,** **of travellers** **), il[lustra]** **e countryl** **n, number**
**lect m 2016-17** **tes th of origi**

**pend, fo** **, visig** **tor s** **flight** **s pered**
**week ph** **and i t**
nd se nbou ats for C anan
da, Unite

**tes, U** **d Star** **nited** **Kingdo** **m, Ge,**
**rmany,ic** **Chinait**
, Re publ Japa ic o f Kor n, ea,

**Ind** **inga** **sia,** **New**

**, M** **nes**

**ia, S** **pore** **Indo** **Zea**

**alay** **ia,**

**land and Ho** **ng Kong. Colour** **ed circles rep** **resent the rela** **tive size of spen** **ding by visitor**

**s, witI** **est atb** **ease ou** **ndonesd** **billii** **from er**
h Chi $9. f 10% ia th on ( 2015**na bein** **8 billo** **from n** **e smal** **an incnt** **16). na**
ng th ion 2015- lest rea

**e** **(an** **16)** **, at** **se o**

**larg** **incr** **and I** **$.7** **f 2%**

T
i s i n
h

Source: Tourism Australia

Note: Percentage figures are year on year change from 2015–16

|landa nd Ho ngn gK.o Colour edr cciles rep ret setnhe rela tsiivze e of spen dibnyg visitor s, witI est atb ease ou ndonesd billii from er h Chi $9. f 10% ia th on ( 2015- na bein 8 billo from n e smal an incnt 16). na ng th ion 2015- lest rea e (an 16) , at se o larg incr and I $.7 f 2%|Col2|
|---|---|
|landa nd Ho s, witI h Chi na bein ng th e larg|ngn gK.o Colour est atb $9. 8 billo ion (an incr|


-----

reducing barriers to trade in agricultural
products will remain a priority for Australia
in the WTO.

Reflecting the importance of services
exports, we will pursue multilateral
outcomes to strengthen global rules
governing trade in services. We will
also support the extension of WTO
rules into new areas such as investment,
competition policy and e-commerce.

Progress at the multilateral level, however,
is likely to be slow and uneven. Australia
will therefore pursue agreements among
a sub-set of WTO members—-known as
plurilateral agreements—-that have the
potential to boost trade. Plurilateral
agreements can also act as building
blocks to wider multilateral agreements.

Australia will continue to press for the
resumption of negotiations on two
plurilateral agreements—-the Trade in
Services Agreement and the Environmental
Goods Agreement—-because of their
potential to generate major benefits.
If agreement by all WTO members on a
new e-commerce deal proves to be out
of reach, Australia is ready to work with
others to pursue a plurilateral agreement.

In addition to the WTO’s importance to
Australia as a forum for negotiating new
and enhanced rules, an effective WTO
dispute settlement system will remain
vital to limiting unilateral or retaliatory
trade actions that damage trade and
global growth. To date, countries have
been largely prepared to accept the
judgment of an independent umpire.
In the period ahead, we will urge the
United States, China and other major
economies to settle trade disputes within
the framework of WTO rules and processes.

Australia will continue to press all members
to comply with WTO rules and obligations.
We will work with others to strengthen the


WTO’s monitoring and enforcement of
rules. To ensure our credibility and avoid
retaliation against our interests, our
domestic policies will need to remain
consistent with our WTO obligations.

###### International cooperation to promote an open and stable global economy

Australia benefits from international
cooperation to support an open global
economy and to protect the stability of
the global financial system. In particular,
our interests are advanced by having a
voice at the G20, the world’s premier forum
for international affairs. The G20 brings
together leaders and ministers from major
developed and developing countries
to discuss economic issues that have a
bearing on their citizens and the wider
global economy.

With G20 members often holding
divergent views, consensus is hard to
reach at times. Australia supports a strong
and effective G20 wherever possible.
Our interests are also served by the
G20’s continuing high-level support for
institutions and policies that contribute
to global prosperity and the integrity of
the international financial and tax systems.
G20 support for the WTO is particularly
important at a time when trade tensions
are rising.

Australia has an important stake in global
financial stability. That is why we strongly
support a well-capitalised IMF. This provides
a vital safety net for countries in economic
difficulty. Similarly, we continue to support
the Financial Stability Board, which seeks
to reduce vulnerabilities in the global
financial system. US leadership will remain
vital in promoting financial stability and
responding to crises given the pre-eminent
role of the United States in global financial
markets.


-----

Australia’s interests are served by
global efforts to encourage sustainable
development and reduce poverty
(Chapter 6). The work of the World Bank
—-the world’s largest multilateral source
of official development finance—-helps
achieve these aims and supports economic
growth and an open global economy.
Over the past four years, Australia has
contributed approximately $220 million
a year to the International Development
Association, the World Bank’s fund for the
poorest nations. In addition, we provide
about $250 million a year through our
development program to co-finance
initiatives with the World Bank Group that
align with our priorities in the Indo–Pacific.

Australia also works in the OECD, the
World Customs Organization, the World
Intellectual Property Organization and
numerous other bodies to support policies,


cooperation and dialogue that enable
economic growth and help to facilitate
trade and investment.

Australia encourages reform to
international institutions to make them
more effective and responsive, and to
better reflect the economic weight of
emerging economies. This will help
protect the legitimacy of institutions such
as the World Bank and the IMF. Australia
will also be open to new groupings and
approaches to support open trade and
investment based on market principles.

###### Securing opportunity globally

The outlook for international trade and
investment demands a flexible approach.


lia'

s sh

are


###### Figure 4.6  Share of Australia’s goods and services exports by region

**egi**

**cen** **6. T** **002** **ears** **or t**

**s b**

**y r**

**he** **and** **198** **he y**

**ort**

**exp**

**per** **201** **7, 2** **on f**

o f go od s an d se rv ic es

This bar graph shows Austra

tage of to tal expo rts has been most signifcant in Asia, showing growth from 48% in 1987 to 73% in 2016.

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics


-----

Multilateral liberalisation will deliver the
biggest gains for Australia, but since the
mid-1990s, comprehensive deals agreed
in the WTO have not been possible.
With 164 members, many with divergent
interests and levels of development,
getting consensus in the WTO is now
very difficult.


The Government’s trade agenda is
pragmatic given the obstacles to progress
at the multilateral level. The best current
prospects to protect and improve Australia’s
competitive position, open new commercial
opportunities and help grow our economy
through trade, lie in bilateral and regional
FTAs. This will remain the case for the


-----

foreseeable future. We cannot afford to
stand still while our trading partners are
cutting their own bilateral and regional
deals. The Government will act to ensure
Australian businesses have the competitive
edge to succeed in global markets.

###### Modern trade agreements

FTAs are now a major feature of the global
trading system, growing in number from
around 50 in 1990 to about 280 today.
While built on the rules and disciplines of
WTO agreements, modern FTAs go well
beyond tariff elimination and advance
rules in areas and ways not possible in
the multilateral system. This network of
agreements can generate a competitive
liberalisation dynamic, which can open
up new opportunities.

These new rules include competition policy,
investment and intellectual property rights.
FTAs provide mechanisms to address
non-tariff and other behind the border
measures that could block imports
such as biosecurity and environmental
standards (both legitimate objectives
but sometimes applied by countries in
ways that unduly restrict trade).

Australia has been at the forefront of
developing modern, comprehensive FTAs.
These aim to maximise tariff reductions
for Australian exporters, open up services
markets, and set rules to enhance trade
and investment and reduce regulatory risk.
Through these agreements we encourage
approaches that support economic growth
and trade and investment liberalisation
more broadly.

By setting rules to promote a seamless
business environment, these agreements
improve the prospects of our companies
to link to global value chains. They


support services exports by eliminating
discriminatory treatment, promoting
greater regulatory coherence, opening the
digital economy, and establishing rules on
the temporary entry of business people.

Our FTAs provide a competitive edge
to our agricultural producers and
complement the Government’s efforts
to secure and maintain access for many
of our agricultural products under other
countries’ technical and biosecurity
regulations.

By reducing import costs, these
agreements benefit Australian consumers
and producers by improving access to
intellectual property, technology and
know-how from around the world.

To complement our robust diplomacy that
assists companies overcome non-tariff
barriers, our trade agreements provide a
framework to deal with barriers stemming
from differences in labelling, standards
and other regulations.

Australia’s FTAs promote and facilitate
two-way flows of investment, for example
by codifying and improving policy
settings and seeking improved access for
Australian investors in overseas markets.
They ensure non-discriminatory access to
government procurement markets, and
equal treatment under local competition
laws. Our FTAs complement Australia’s
advocacy for reform of international
investment law in forums such as the G20,
WTO and OECD.

Finally, we make our FTAs ‘living
agreements’ with substantial built-in
forward negotiating agendas and work
programs. This enables the agreements
to evolve in light of emerging trends in
trade and investment, and to ensure
Australia continues to receive the best
available treatment from our FTA partners.


-----

###### Creating new opportunities through bilateral FTAs

Australia has FTAs with ASEAN and nine
individual countries (Chile, China, Japan,
Republic of Korea, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Singapore, Thailand and the United States),
which together account for 64 per cent of
our total trade. To open new opportunities
for Australia, the Government will expand
our network of agreements to ensure that
by 2020 we have FTAs with countries that
account for over 80 per cent of our trade.

Our immediate priority is concluding the
Indonesia – Australia Comprehensive
Economic Partnership. This agreement
will strengthen commercial links and help
stimulate increased two-way investment.
Both governments want this agreement


to unlock future growth opportunities for
Australia and Indonesia.

The Government will negotiate an
ambitious FTA with the European Union,
the world’s second-largest economy
as a bloc. Australia will also negotiate
a comprehensive FTA with the
United Kingdom once it has left the
European Union. These prospective FTAs
will advance our commercial interests,
especially in investment, services and
agriculture. They will also signal the
commitment of Australia, the European
Union and the United Kingdom to a
strong global trading system.

India has striking economic potential with
scope for sustained catch-up growth from
improving productivity and harnessing


-----

the talent and dynamism of its young and
growing population. To cement India as a
priority economic partner, the Government
is developing an India Economic Strategy
to take advantage of India’s strengths in
services, technology and innovation, and to
identify new ways to do business together.
The Strategy will also position us for
opportunities that should come from
India’s domestic reform agenda. We
will keep working towards freer trade
with India through our bilateral FTA
negotiations, as well as regionally and
multilaterally.

The Government’s FTA negotiation with
Hong Kong aims to enhance access for
our services exports to a major financial
centre and a gateway to the larger market
in mainland China.

In Latin America, the Government
has concluded FTA negotiations with
Peru, with ratification of the agreement
expected in 2018. We are also advancing
negotiations with the Pacific Alliance,
which comprises Chile, Colombia, Mexico
and Peru. We aim to deepen our trade and
investment dialogue with the Mercosur
countries: Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and
Uruguay.

The Government continues to advocate
with Gulf Cooperation Council countries
for the resumption of FTA negotiations.
A high-quality FTA covering goods, services
and investment would enable Australian
business to compete on a level playing
field in a region important to our trade
and investment interests.

The Government is also working to expand
and diversify commercial links with Africa.
Africa’s population of 1.2 billion will double
by 2050 and its growing urban middle
class is creating new demand for goods
and services. Africa is already a major
overseas market for our mining services.


###### Advancing regional trade and investment integration

As discussed in Chapter 3, Australia
supports an inclusive and open approach
to economic integration. FTAs that link
multiple economies enable Australian
business to reduce transaction costs and
better access supply chains.

There are a number of possible paths to
our long-term goal of an agreement that
brings the major Indo–Pacific economies
under one set of trade and investment rules
(Figure 4.7). This would have important
strategic benefits as outlined in the
previous chapter.

While the TPP will not proceed in its original
form as a result of the United States’
decision to withdraw, the scale and
ambition of the deal and the benefits to
Australia mean bringing the agreement
into force is strongly in our interests.

Australia is working with remaining TPP
members to achieve this aim. Even without
the United States, the agreement would
support economic growth, create new
export opportunities, set high-standard
rules and contribute to global trade
liberalisation.

Australia is also committed to a successful
outcome to the RCEP negotiations. RCEP
involves ASEAN and Australia, China, India,
Japan, the Republic of Korea and
New Zealand. This group includes seven of
our top 10 trading partners and almost
half of the world’s population. Alongside
the TPP, RCEP has the potential to
contribute to the development of a
region-wide trade and investment zone.

APEC leaders have also agreed to work
towards free and open trade and investment
in the Asia–Pacific. Ultimately, Australia
believes the region’s economies should


-----

###### Figure 4.7   Current and prospective free trade agreement groupings

Source: Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade

Note: APEC members are discussing a Free Trade Area of the Asia–PacificThis Venn diagram shows membership of current and prospective free-trade agreement groupings, including overlapping memberships for the regional comprehensive economic partnership, the TPP 11 and APEC. Australia is a member of each.


agree on practical steps to achieve
region-wide integration, with the support
of the region’s three largest players, the
United States, China and Japan, being vital.

Australia will contribute to this long-term
goal in a range of ways, including by
ensuring our bilateral and regional FTAs
are broadly compatible with each other,
are linked to as many economies in the
region as possible, and are as liberalising
and comprehensive as possible. A free
trade zone in our region would be an
effective way to guard against the risk of


discriminatory trading blocs that would
disrupt value chains, undermine regional
economic growth and damage Australia’s
trade and investment interests.

###### Standards

Influencing international standards and
regulations strongly supports Australia’s
economic interests. Where these
standards are aligned with our own,
this facilitates trade and helps make
our businesses globally competitive.
By exercising leadership in setting


-----

international standards in emerging
technologies such as Blockchain,
Australian industry can develop an
early mover advantage and open up
new opportunities for export.

Initiatives that reduce the regulatory
burden for our services firms will assist
this sector’s export competitiveness,
including through equivalence or
harmonisation. This is vital for our
agenda to grow services exports
beyond education and tourism. It
will enable Australian providers to
operate in foreign markets in sectors
such as health and aged care, financial
services, communications, marketing,
and engineering and design.

The Government is also shaping
international rule-making and
standard-setting to provide the certainty
and stability needed to help Australian
businesses realise opportunities through
digital trade. Australia’s FTAs incorporate
rules facilitating digital trade—-such as on
electronic signatures and data flows—-as
well as protecting consumer rights online.
Australia also promotes international
standards on digital trade that are
industry-led and technology neutral.

Australia works in APEC to facilitate trade
through improved data standards, and
by promoting standards and regulations
based on science for agriculture and food
safety. We have also strengthened
economic and technical cooperation
between regulators and agencies that set
standards to promote regional economic
integration.

Australia has a sophisticated financial
services sector, and a $2.3 trillion
superannuation sector, positioning our
firms to tap into rising demand in Asia
for funds management products. To
facilitate opportunities for Australian


financial service providers, we pioneered
the Asia Region Funds Passport,
agreed with Japan, the Republic of
Korea, New Zealand and Thailand.
Once implemented, the passport
will allow Australian fund managers
to sell investment funds in the other
participating jurisdictions (and vice-versa).

###### Supporting our commercial interests

Beyond getting the frameworks and rules
right for business, we will revamp our
economic diplomacy to ensure it is better
geared to support Australia’s commercial
interests. Drawing on the commercial
expertise and informed by the priorities
of Australian companies, our overseas
network will advance our commercial
interests in foreign markets, reinforcing
high-level advocacy by Australian political
and business leaders.

Our overseas posts exchange insights
with business on foreign markets and
global economic conditions. They help
Australian companies to navigate political
and other risks and to identify commercial
opportunities in unfamiliar business and
regulatory environments. In partnership
with business, we work to influence the
policies of foreign governments to
support our economic interests.

We also assist Australian businesses
to tackle non-tariff measures that often
impede our exports. These can include
regulatory barriers, standards-related
measures, or labelling and customs
measures. This work builds on and
complements our efforts in the WTO
and through our FTAs to open markets
and facilitate trade. We will continue to
work closely with business using the


-----

expertise and networks of all relevant
government agencies to prosecute this
agenda. The Government will implement
a new non-tariff measures strategy to
respond to business concerns.

Our commercial diplomacy will focus
strongly on promoting Australia as an
attractive place to visit, study and invest.
The Government emphasises five priority
sectors for inbound investment as agreed
with state and territory governments:
agribusiness and food; major infrastructure;
tourism infrastructure; resources and
energy; and advanced manufacturing,
services and technology. We will also
focus on reducing or removing barriers
that affect Australia’s export interests.

More broadly, the Government will
continue to assist Australian businesses,
including our more than 45,000 small
to medium sized enterprises, to access
international markets. Austrade provides
a range of support, from business
introductions to market information.
The Australian Government’s export
credit agency, EFIC, assists firms to secure
finance for export and to invest overseas.

The Government is also partnering with
the private sector to build the capability
of Australian business to successfully
engage in Asian markets, including
through the Asialink Business and Asialink
Leaders programs.

The Government helps Australian
companies export in other ways. For
example, we are modernising rules for
exporting agricultural produce to make
compliance easier, including to meet
requirements for overseas markets.
We recently expanded the number of
agricultural counsellors overseas who
provide in-market support and help
solve regulatory issues affecting
Australian exports.


###### Competitiveness

Chapter 1 underlined the importance
of a flexible and competitive economy
to Australia’s prosperity and our
national strength. Our openness to
trade, investment, skilled migration
and new technologies supports high
living standards, creates jobs, and helps
push down prices. In turn, policies that
strengthen our competitiveness enable
Australia to make the most of trade and
investment opportunities.

The Government is strengthening our
competitiveness over the next decade
by substantially increasing infrastructure
funding, investing in science and
innovation, cutting the company tax
rate to 25 per cent and returning the
budget to balance. The Government is
also strengthening national competition
and consumer legislation to enhance the
competitiveness of Australian businesses
and give consumers more choice through
well-functioning markets.

We are improving Australia’s infrastructure
to boost our productive capacity and
better connect us to international markets.
We are investing $75 billion in transport
infrastructure projects and over $50 billion
for additional infrastructure, including the
National Broadband Network, the National
Water Infrastructure Development Fund
and regional grants programs. The
Government has also established a
$5 billion infrastructure facility to support
the development of major projects like
ports, railways and electricity generation
in Northern Australia.

The Government’s National Innovation
and Science Agenda (NISA) is encouraging
the development of new technologies,
including by supporting collaboration
between businesses and universities,


-----

as well as tax breaks for venture capital
investments and early-stage investors.
It is also equipping Australians with the
digital literacy and the science, technology,
engineering and maths skills needed for
the jobs of the future.


Under our Global Innovation Strategy,
the Government is supporting businesses,
researchers and start-ups to boost their
international links, including through the
opening of five ‘Landing Pads’ in innovation
hubs in Berlin, San Francisco, Shanghai,
Singapore and Tel Aviv.


-----

tape, supporting new infrastructure, developing northern Australia and helping
businesses to innovate and create jobs. The Government is funding more
training places and ensuring educational institutions respond more flexibly
to the needs of industry. We support government and industry cooperation
on agricultural research.

###### Education and training

The Government’s National Strategy for International Education 2025 sets
out a 10 year plan to entrench Australia as a leader in education, training
and research. We are strengthening the fundamentals of our education
system to ensure Australia has a highly educated population. We will
continue to deliver our distinctive model of education that connects early
learning, schools, vocational education and training, and higher education
to ensure that domestic and international students obtain a world class
education and student experience. The Government is examining ways to
increase recognition of Australian qualifications and licensing, creating new
opportunities to export professional services and increasing the value of
Australian qualifications to international students.

###### Tourism

Our Tourism 2020 strategy is a joint government–industry plan to improve the
competitiveness of the sector. The strategy is on track to meet its overnight visitor
expenditure target of $115–$140 billion by 2020, up from $70 billion in 2009.

###### Services

We aim to further boost services exports beyond education and tourism.
The Government has commissioned a major study to identify emerging
opportunities in the region and issues beyond cost that influence the ability
of Australian services providers to compete internationally.

###### Manufacturing

The Government has integrated initiatives and policies to help the manufacturing
sector transition to advanced manufacturing. We are working with Australian
manufacturing businesses to improve their competitiveness, including through
the $100 million Advanced Manufacturing Fund and the Prime Minister’s
Industry 4.0 Taskforce.

###### Australia’s defence industry

We are also making a $200 billion investment in Australia’s defence
capability. Increasing Australia’s defence exports will build the international
competitiveness, resilience and sustainability of our defence industry and
contribute to employment and economic growth. The Government’s Naval
Shipbuilding Plan will improve and sustain our naval capabilities and support
thousands of jobs.


-----

-----

CHAPTER FIVE
#### Keeping Australia and Australians safe, secure and free

###### While Australia will remain one of the safest countries in the world, we nonetheless face a diverse range of risks that will threaten our security, our freedom and our values.


Technological change, the reach and
vulnerabilities of the internet, state fragility,
military modernisation and environmental
stresses are all factors likely to amplify
threats to our people, borders, economy
and physical assets in the decade ahead.

The threat to Australia from Islamist
terrorism and violent extremism will
remain high and could worsen. We face
a range of sophisticated cyber threats.
Some ‘push factors’ could revitalise
attempts at people smuggling to Australia
on a large scale. We face challenges in
dealing with attempts to interfere in the
independence and sovereignty of
Australian decision-making. Crime will
continue to emanate from beyond our
borders and will grow in complexity.

The Government is resolutely committed
to meeting these challenges. Ensuring the
safety and security of Australians is our
most fundamental responsibility and
highest priority. National security is the
foundation on which our freedoms have
been built and maintained.

The Government’s reforms to Australia’s
domestic security and national intelligence
arrangements reflect this commitment.
In the decade ahead, Australia will need
to continue building strong defences and
resilient communities at home. We will


take determined action internationally,
in partnership with others and on our own
as necessary, to disrupt and defeat these
threats.

###### Countering terrorism and violent extremism

The Government will do everything
possible to keep Australians safe from the
threat of terrorism and violent extremism.
Since the national threat level was raised in
September 2014, there have been several
terrorist attacks in Australia and many
disrupted plots. With the threat continuing
to evolve we should be prepared for
more attacks. At home and abroad,
the Government will continue to deploy
its full range of capabilities to reduce the
lure of violent extremist ideologies and
the likelihood of future attacks.

The Government is constantly reviewing
and strengthening its counter-terrorism
responses because the threat we face is
both enduring and dynamic. Islamist
extremists globally, but crucially also in
Australia and in Southeast Asia, have been
energised by the fighting in Iraq and Syria.
New and emerging technologies are being
used to conduct attacks, enable extremist
activity and spread propaganda.


-----

The Government has already invested an
additional $1.5 billion since August 2014
to combat terrorism. We have strengthened
counter-terrorism legislation, more than
tripled our investments to counter violent
extremism at home and established the
Centre for Counter-Terrorism Coordination
to improve coordination across government.

Australia’s Counter-Terrorism Strategy is
based on partnerships between all levels
of government, communities and the
private sector. It focuses on:

R disrupting terrorist activity within
Australia

R ensuring an effective response to and
recovery from any terrorist incidents

R reducing the lure of violent
extremist ideologies

R stopping Australians from using
violence to express their views, and

R contributing to global
counter-terrorism efforts.

At home, the Government has
strengthened our control order regime,
allowing us to monitor and limit where
terrorist suspects can go and with whom
they can associate. We have legislated
to enable the continued detention of
high-risk terrorist offenders. With the
states and territories, local government,
police and the private sector, we are
implementing a strategy to protect crowded
places, such as sporting stadiums.

The Government is taking steps to provide
our law enforcement and security agencies
with the capabilities to monitor the digital
communication of terrorists. While
Australia supports strong encryption
to protect personal, commercial and
government information, we will work with
other countries and companies to ensure


terrorists cannot operate with impunity
in ungoverned digital spaces.

We work domestically and with our
international partners to counter the
drivers of violent extremism through
early intervention and community
engagement, and by challenging terrorist
propaganda and recruitment techniques.

We continue to play an important role in
defeating ISIL in Iraq and Syria within an
international coalition. Beyond training Iraqi
troops and conducting air operations, we
are working with partners to destroy ISIL’s
financing and economic infrastructure,
counter its propaganda, provide
immediate humanitarian assistance, and
support stabilisation and the restoration of
essential public services in Iraq and Syria.

The return of foreign terrorist fighters
and their families from Iraq and Syria
will continue to challenge the security of
Australia, our region and the world. Some
will be motivated to conduct or inspire
terrorist attacks in their home countries.
More than 200 Australians have travelled
to these conflict zones and about 40
have returned. Some of these individuals
remain a significant security concern.

The Government is responding decisively.
We have cancelled or refused more than
200 Australian passports to prevent further
travel to and from conflict zones. We will
continue to work with international partners
to bring foreign fighters to justice, prevent
their movement across borders and
manage the risks of their return to their
countries of origin.

While ISIL and ISIL-inspired groups
present the highest threat to Australians,
the Government remains concerned
about al Qa’ida, its affiliates and other
terrorist groups, including in Afghanistan,
Syria and North Africa. Other extremist


-----

networks are likely to emerge and draw
on the same narratives that inspire ISIL
and al Qa’ida. Australia will continue
to contribute to international efforts
to minimise safe havens for terrorists,
including through our commitment to
the train, advise and assist mission in
Afghanistan.

The spillover of fighters, money,
propaganda and ideology from extremist
groups in the Middle East is increasing
the threat of terrorism in and to Southeast
Asia. Fighters from our region may seek
to return to their countries as ISIL loses
territory in Iraq and Syria, and some
will be battle-hardened and primed
to conduct attacks. There have already
been a number of ISIL-inspired terrorist
attacks in Indonesia and elsewhere in
the region. Concerted international
support will be required for Philippine
efforts to counter the terrorist threat in
the southern Philippines, an area which
regional and local extremists will continue
to exploit to plan and train for attacks.

Terrorism will therefore threaten the
lives of Southeast Asians and Australians
living in and travelling to the region.
It will undermine the security, and may
threaten the stability, of our partners.
Australia is determined to work with
regional partners to respond. We will host
the ASEAN – Australia Counter-Terrorism
Conference in Australia in 2018 to put in
place a plan for collective regional action.

Australia will continue to support regional
efforts to disrupt attacks and degrade
terrorist networks, build the capacity of
partner countries to counter terrorism
and violent extremism, and strengthen
counter-terrorism laws.

We strongly support efforts led by
regional and international organisations


to counter terrorism and violent extremism.
We are a strong voice in developing and
implementing global rules and norms to
counter terrorist financing, arms smuggling
and illicit trade in chemicals and precursors
used to make improvised explosive devices.

###### Securing our borders

Australia’s security and prosperity
depend on robust border policies. The
Government’s policies are designed to
make globalisation work for Australians.
A well-managed border connects us to
the world and enables us to manage risks
while benefitting from flows of goods and
people, including through the skilled
migration essential to our economy.
We are investing in new technologies
to improve the speed and integrity of
movement across our borders and to
maximise the opportunities that come
from our global linkages.

At the same time, the Government is
vigilant about security risks and efforts
to circumvent our border controls. Strong
and well-protected borders help defend
us against transnational crime. Equally,
they enable the movement of goods and
people but control restricted and regulated
goods to prevent the entry of exotic pests
and diseases. This safeguards human
health, protects our environment, and
ensures the sustainability and productivity
of Australia’s primary industries.

The Government remains determined to
combat people smuggling and irregular
migration. This is essential to save lives,
ensure the integrity of our border and
maintain public confidence in Australia’s
migration program. Without a wellmanaged migration program, the
cohesion of our society could be


-----

damaged and community support
for our humanitarian program would
be unsustainable.

Worldwide, borders are being
challenged by unprecedented global
mobility. Conflict, climate change and
natural disasters are major drivers, but
millions of people are now on the move
each year seeking opportunity and
better lives elsewhere. This massive
growth in irregular migration is being
enabled by digital communication,
cheap transport and, in some cases,
people smuggling syndicates. In an
era of smart phones and social media,
people smugglers find it easier to
market their services than ever before.

Australia’s response has four elements.
We will:

R continue to protect our borders to
prevent irregular people movement
to Australia

R maintain our permanent refugee
resettlement program

R help regional partners improve their
border management capacity and
strengthen our cooperation, including
to disrupt people smuggling, and

R support people displaced by conflict
or natural disasters through our aid
program by providing assistance as
close to their homes as possible.

Illegal maritime arrivals will not be settled
in Australia. The Government’s Operation
Sovereign Borders has effectively broken
the business model of smuggling networks,
although they continue periodically to test
our resolve. The primary deterrent to any
resumption remains robust border policies.
Boat turn-backs, regional processing of
protection claims and settlement in third
countries will remain integral to our
response.


Australia is committed to being a regional
leader in combatting people smuggling,
human trafficking, modern slavery and
related crimes. Together with Indonesia,
Australia co-chairs the Bali Process
on People Smuggling, Trafficking in
Persons and Related Transnational Crime.
Supported by our aid program, the Bali
Process is the only mechanism in the
Indo–Pacific addressing irregular migration.

We also engage the private sector
through the Bali Process Government
and Business Forum to combat modern
slavery, human trafficking and related
exploitation in global supply chains. The
Government will make it a requirement
for large businesses to report annually on
their actions to address modern slavery.

We also continue to deliver significant
technical assistance to deepen
cooperation in law enforcement and to
combat human trafficking such as sexual
servitude, forced labour and debt
bondage. We are working to protect
and support victims of these crimes,
and enable the safe and orderly return
of irregular migrants to whom protection
is not owed.

Our response to the challenge of displaced
people is further detailed in Chapter 6.

###### Tackling transnational organised crime

Transnational organised crime threatens
Australia’s interests and the regional
stability on which we depend. Crime
is becoming increasingly complex and
increasingly global. About 70 per cent
of Australia’s serious criminal threats have
an international dimension. Increased
cooperation with our partners will ensure
Australia has access to the information,


-----

intelligence and capabilities needed to
respond.

Transnational crime has a severe impact
on the safety and security of Australians.
Illegal drugs harm our community. Human
trafficking, sexual servitude, and child
sexual abuse and exploitation blight lives.
Counterfeit goods pose safety risks and
undercut our businesses. Illicit trade in
wildlife products and illegal fishing in
Australian waters deplete our resources
and damage the environment.

Across our region, transnational crime
undermines political processes, weakens
security, harms communities, fuels
corruption, inhibits economic development
and impedes good governance.

The threat we face will continue to
evolve, often in ways that will be difficult
to counteract. The distinction between
traditional forms of crime and cybercrime
is becoming increasingly blurred. In
the next decade, the sourcing of drugs,
weapons and other illicit goods from
‘darknets’ will increase, as will the use
of crypto currencies to pay for them.
Increased trade flows to Australia will
provide more opportunities for criminals
to conceal illicit goods.

Our ability to combat transnational
crime rests on the collaboration
between government agencies and
the effectiveness of our international
engagement. Measures to detect and
disrupt criminal activity are equally
important—-for example, the sophisticated
intelligence and surveillance systems
we deploy to help interdict harmful
illicit goods like drugs and firearms.

Crime flourishes in environments where
the rule of law is weak. We need to build
on our work with international partners,
including through engagement with the


region’s police and law enforcement
agencies, to address vulnerabilities in
our region that enable criminal networks
and corrupt individuals to operate.

Our development assistance supports
governance, the rule of law, leadership
training and capacity building to assist
countries to respond to these challenges.
Australia will also increase our bilateral
and regional law and justice, border
protection and diplomatic engagement to
help prevent, investigate and prosecute
transnational organised crime.

Our bilateral law and justice cooperation
with regional states, including China,
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines,
Thailand and Vietnam, will be vital to
combatting serious criminal threats
to Australia. We will boost capacity to
prevent, investigate, prosecute and deter
criminal networks from operating in the
region, including through the Pacific Police
Development Program and the Jakarta
Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation.

Australia will continue to play a leading
role in promoting international standards
to combat transnational crime, including
money laundering, terrorism financing and
corruption. Our work in and with regional
and international organisations helps
advance this agenda. We will continue
to build regional capacity to combat
corruption through the framework of
the United Nations Convention
against Corruption.

International forums will need to focus
increasingly on non-traditional security
threats like transnational crime. Australia
will continue to work through bodies
such as the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, where we are already
a major donor, and through regional
forums, both to fight transnational
organised crime and corruption,


-----

and to promote wider international
understanding of the illicit flows and
trends that undermine our security.

###### Open, free and secure cyberspace

Over the coming decade, the digital
economy will further transform how we
do business and connect with the world.
By 2020, Australia’s digital economy
is projected to be worth as much as
$139 billion, or 7.3 per cent of GDP.
Digital technology will increasingly
underpin wide-ranging aspects of the
broader economy.

Whether the internet continues to create
opportunities for growth and development
will depend on it remaining open, free and
secure. The Government believes that
the maintenance of our security online
and the protection of freedom online
reinforce each other.

An increasing dependence on global
ICT networks means that the potential
costs of disruption are large and growing.
Cyber incidents in Australia and overseas
disrupt infrastructure and services, cause
billions of dollars in damage to companies,
and threaten the integrity of government
and private networks. At the extreme, a
cyber attack could seriously compromise
national security.

The Government is doing everything in
its power to protect the nation from cyber
attack and to defend our interests in
cyberspace. We are implementing the
five priorities of our $230 million Cyber
Security Strategy: a national cyber
partnership between government and
business; strong cyber defences; the
pursuit of global responsibility and


influence; ensuring growth and innovation;
and delivering a cyber-smart nation.

A focus of the Strategy is to make Australia’s
networks and systems hard to compromise
and resilient to cyber attacks. We will work
closely with the private sector to safeguard
the country against criminality, espionage,
sabotage and foreign interference
online. The 2016 Defence White Paper
also outlines a $400 million investment
in Defence cyber security capabilities.

The Government’s International Cyber
Engagement Strategy sets out Australia’s
international agenda to ensure cyberspace
continues to evolve in a manner consistent
with our interests and values. A key driver
is to maximise economic opportunity for
Australia through digital trade.

Australia aims to preserve the multistakeholder model of internet governance
involving the community as equal partners
with governments. Australia will also
protect freedom of speech, freedom
of association and privacy online.

Strong cyber defences and law
enforcement measures will sit at the
forefront of our response to cybercrime.
The Government has authorised the
Australian Signals Directorate to use its
offensive cyber capabilities to disrupt,
degrade, deny and deter offshore cyber
criminals. This capability is subject to
stringent oversight and will be used
consistent with our obligations under
domestic and international law.

We are committed to peace in cyberspace.
Australia affirms that existing international
law applies in cyberspace. We will continue
to advocate that states adhere to agreed
norms of responsible behaviour in
cyberspace, including that they refrain
from using cyber means to intentionally
damage critical infrastructure (as agreed


-----

by the UN Group of Governmental
Experts on cyber), and that no state
should conduct or support ICT-enabled
theft of intellectual property—-including
state secrets or other confidential
business information—-with the intent
of providing competitive advantages to
companies or the commercial sector.

Australia will work with our partners to
respond to and deter malicious cyber
activity, particularly that involving state
actors and their proxies. Australia’s
response will be proportionate, comply
with domestic law, and be consistent
with our support for the rules-based
international order and our obligations
under international law. Australia will
also promote cyber confidence-building
measures to reduce the risk of miscommunication, miscalculation and
escalation to conflict.


###### Guarding against foreign interference

The Government is concerned about
growing attempts by foreign governments
or their proxies to exert inappropriate
influence on and to undermine Australia’s
sovereign institutions and decision-making.
Such attempts at foreign interference
are part of a wider global trend that has
affected other democracies. Foreign
interference aims to shape the actions
of decision-makers and public opinion to
achieve an outcome favourable to foreign
interests.

Likewise, ensuring Australia’s business
interests and intellectual property are
not subject to theft through espionage
is important to our national interests.
The Government endeavours to prevent
state-sponsored actions that harm our
economic and commercial interests.


-----

All states seek to advance their interests
by persuading others to their point of
view. This is a central and legitimate task
of diplomacy. Foreign interference goes
further by using clandestine or deceptive
means to affect political, governmental
or even commercial processes to cause
harm to Australian interests.

Technology has broadened the tools
available to states engaging in foreign
interference. New media platforms, for
example, provide opportunities to sow
misinformation.


The Government will act to protect the
sovereignty, integrity and transparency of
our institutions. We will ensure that national
decision-making and institutions remain
free from foreign interference. This is one
of our most important national interests.


###### Assisting Australians overseas

The Government is committed to providing
a modern, efficient and cost-effective
consular service to Australians in distress
overseas. This is an important and complex
task at a time when Australians are travelling
overseas in unprecedented numbers.
(Figure 5.1 shows record levels of demand
for Australian passports.) We provide
information and advice, including a
comprehensive range of travel advisories,
to empower Australians to help themselves
while travelling and living overseas.


The Government is providing increasingly
tailored advice to respond to new travel
trends, such as the growth in young
Australians travelling independently,


###### Figure 5.1 Growing demand for Australian passports

ustr alia n pa

Source: Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade


Note: Calculation is at 30 June for each year


-----

a rise in Australians retiring overseas
and the growth in international cruises.

The Department of Foreign Affairs and
Trade (DFAT) will build partnerships with
social media and telecommunications
companies to develop alternative tools to
establish the welfare and whereabouts of
Australians during emergencies overseas.

In the face of rising demand, we will
ensure consular resources are directed
to those most in need. The Government
no longer provides consular assistance to
Australian permanent residents (except
during crises) or to dual nationals in their
country of other nationality in cases where
they are clearly self-sufficient. DFAT is
improving its capacity to manage complex
cases such as those involving mental health
issues and victims of violent crime.

The Government’s crisis management
systems are world-class and we are
committed to their further improvement.
We are building stronger cooperation
arrangements with key international
partners to broaden our reach and
extend our global capability. DFAT’s
new Global Watch Office delivers a
24/7 government capability to monitor
and respond to international events
that affect Australian interests.


-----

-----

CHAPTER SIX
#### Global cooperation

###### One of the most significant features of the post-Second World War era was the development, underpinned by US power and global leadership, of international institutions and rules designed to help support economic growth, global security and human development.

 This is a system now under significant challenge. Shifts in power between states, geopolitical competition and the political and economic effects of globalisation are testing its effectiveness and cohesion.


Australia’s interests are strongly served by
acting with others to support a rules-based
international order. Australia will encourage
and tangibly support the leadership of the
United States to this end.

Australia will also work with new and
emerging powers to increase their stake in
the international system. We will support,
for example, well-designed proposals for
new forms of global cooperation and reform
of multilateral institutions.

Even in a period of uncertainty and
challenge, global partnerships and international cooperation will remain important
to Australia for three fundamental reasons.

First, the world’s interconnectedness
makes global cooperation even more
important. Many problems that directly
affect our interests can only be tackled
through cooperation with other states.

Second, we must help shape responses
to global challenges because if we do not
then others will, potentially in ways that
diverge from our interests and our values.


Third, in many circumstances multilateral
engagement magnifies our influence. By
working with partners in coalitions and
leveraging the resources and expertise
of international organisations we can get
more done.

The Government’s global agenda
concentrates on issues where Australia
has vital security, economic and other
interests, and where we are most likely
to achieve results.

Beyond our strong interest in open and
rules-based international trade and
investment (Chapter 4), Australia’s
priorities in the international system
include:

R shaping and protecting rules and norms

R guarding against threats to international
peace and security

R protecting the international environment
in a way that also allows for sustainable
growth of the Australian economy

R reducing global poverty and
responding to humanitarian crises


-----

R

R


strengthening human rights and other
norms of acceptable behaviour, and

reducing the potential for pandemics
and other international health risks to
harm Australians.


It is not possible to know how the pressures
on the current international system will play
out. Many countries are strongly invested in
making institutions and global cooperation
work. Not all rules are contested. It is
possible to imagine, nonetheless, futures
in which competition over power, influence
and ideas dominate international relations.

Australia would face a difficult economic
and security environment in those
circumstances. Our policy choices would
be harder. Our engagement with the
world might become narrower and more
transactional. We might have to spend
more on defence and national security
capabilities. These risks underline the
importance of Australia’s investment in
strong rules and global cooperation.

###### Our global partnerships

Unique among global powers, the
United States has built, contributed to
and led the post-Second World War
international order. It has done this
not only in its own interest, but also to
create public goods and a global system
in which other countries can prosper.

The scope of US interests and the
interconnectedness of a globalised world
will keep the United States strongly
engaged internationally. At the same time,
concerns in the United States about the
costs of its global leadership, and some
of the effects of globalisation, have been
growing in recent years. There is greater
debate about whether and how the
United States should act to sustain parts


of the international system.

Australia believes that international
challenges can only be tackled effectively
when the world’s wealthiest, most
innovative and most powerful country
is engaged in solving them. Strong
and sustained US engagement in the
international system, including the
United Nations, remains fundamental
to international stability and prosperity.
Without such engagement, the
effectiveness and liberal character of
the international order would erode.

Supporting US global leadership,
therefore, serves Australia’s national
interests. The United States reasonably
expects its partners to help bear some
of the costs of maintaining the current
order. Australia will continue to do so,
including through our alliance, broader
contributions to regional and global
security and the ideas we bring to our
multilateral engagement.

At the same time, cooperation with other
like-minded partners who support strong
rules and institutions is becoming more
important. Among these are the
United Kingdom, the European Union,
Japan, Canada and New Zealand.

The United Kingdom is one of Australia’s
most important partners. Its exit from the
European Union will change the framework
for our engagement but will not alter its
foundation. We see this transition as an
opportunity to re-invigorate cooperation
as the United Kingdom maintains a global
role on security and economic issues.

A strong European Union remains vital
to Australia’s interests and will be an
increasingly important partner in protecting
and promoting a rules-based international
order. We will continue to cooperate
closely with the European Union and its
member states on our shared interest in


-----

limiting the exercise of coercive power
and on challenges such as terrorism,
the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD), sustainable
development and human rights. Europe
will also continue to be an important
partner for Australia in global economic
governance. We will further strengthen
bilateral relationships with key EU member
states, especially France and Germany.

We will continue to engage the North
Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) on
global security issues, including terrorism.
In the face of Russia’s destabilising activities,
NATO—-and strong transatlantic ties more
broadly—-is now more important to security
in Europe than at any time since the end
of the Cold War.

Given its international role and reach,
Russia’s policies affect Australia both directly
and indirectly. We will deal carefully with
Russia to advance our interests where we
see scope. Equally, Australia will work with
partners to resist Russia’s conduct when it is
inimical to global security. Australia remains
particularly concerned by the downing of
flight MH17 and Russia’s annexation of
Crimea and intervention in eastern Ukraine.

Australia will intensify our work on global
issues with the countries of the Indo–Pacific,
including to ensure multilateral institutions
are focusing on our region. We already
cooperate closely with Japan on issues
such as WMD proliferation and UN reform.
Recognising that China’s influence in the
multilateral system continues to grow,
Australia will seek to work more closely
with China in response to global
challenges. We are also committed
to ensuring multilateral processes and
institutions factor the interests of Pacific
island countries into decision-making.

The 54 countries of Africa, as well as
the countries of the Middle East and


Latin America, will remain important
to achieving our objectives in the
multilateral system, including in relation
to peacekeeping, conflict prevention
and responding to humanitarian crises.

Israel is also an important partner for
Australia, with our bilateral ties underpinned
by people-to-people links. The security of
Israel will remain an abiding concern for
Australia. Given major differences between
the parties, resolving the Israeli–Palestinian
conflict will remain very difficult. Australia
will continue to advocate a two-state
solution as the only viable path to peace.

We will look for opportunities to work
in partnership with emerging powers,
including in cross-regional coalitions.
Our work in MIKTA (Mexico, Indonesia,
Korea, Turkey and Australia) underlines
the potential of plurilateral cooperation.

Australia will also work in smaller, issuesbased groups and coalitions where
necessary to protect our interests. For
example, we work to harmonise export
controls to prevent the development of
chemical and biological weapons through
our leadership of the Australia Group.

###### The United Nations

Australia is a principled and pragmatic
member of the United Nations, contributing
to its vital security, environmental and
humanitarian endeavours.

The United Nations and its specialised
agencies deliver a wide range of essential
services around the world, often in remote
and dangerous locations. These include
peacekeeping in 14 different locations
across three continents, mediating disputes,
vaccinating children, fighting pandemics,
promoting nuclear safeguards, supporting
education systems and providing food and


-----

other assistance in humanitarian crises.

As the world’s peak body for responding to
threats to international peace and security,
the United Nations Security Council helps
support Australian interests. We are seeking
election to the Council as a non-permanent
member in 2029–2030 because we believe
elected members can enhance its
effectiveness, as Australia did when we
were on the Council in 2013–2014. This
complements the other contributions
Australia makes to the vital work of the
United Nations, including through our
assessed contributions, financial support
for peacekeeping and our development
assistance program.

The Government recognises that many
multilateral institutions have clear
limitations. The United Nations system is
frequently cumbersome and sometimes
responds too slowly to urgent challenges.
Our approach seeks to reinforce the
strength, accountability and effectiveness
of international institutions.

We will encourage the United Nations and
its agencies to better coordinate activities,
reform their corporate governance and
work more closely with the private
sector, including by tapping into private
funding. We will continue to support the
current Secretary-General's efforts to
reform and strengthen UN peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development systems.
We particularly encourage a more
coordinated focus on conflict prevention,
rather than waiting for crises to develop.

###### Shaping rules and institutions

Threats to international rules come from
countries directly challenging, ignoring or
undermining international law, including


in the global commons. Another risk is that
countries do not defend rules when they
are challenged, leading to the potential
erosion of global governance. Finally, new
rules and norms could emerge that are not
consistent with Australia’s interests and values.

Accordingly, the Government will place a
high priority on protecting and strengthening
the international rules that guide the
conduct of relations between states.

Strong rules that help constrain the exercise
of coercive power contribute to global
security. They are becoming more
important to Australia as the distribution
of power changes in the international
system. They help reinforce other ways
in which we ensure our security, notably
our alliance with the United States and
our own defence capabilities.

International law and other norms provide
a basis for the peaceful resolution of
disputes, including in relation to maritime
or land border disputes. International
rules, such as those embodied in binding
resolutions of the United Nations Security
Council, also underpin collective
responses to challenges such as terrorism
and North Korea’s proliferation of WMD.

More broadly, a range of legal, regulatory
and other measures support commerce,
travel, investment and other exchanges.
International accords such as the Paris
Agreement guide global cooperation
on climate change. A rules-based
trading system centred on the WTO
is fundamental to Australia’s interests.
International aviation, shipping,
telecommunications, postal services and
many other aspects of our world are
inconceivable without the certainty and
predictability inherent in a system based
on rules.

Australia has a long record of helping to
develop the rules-based component of


-----

the global order, beginning with the
establishment of the United Nations
in 1945. We have played a leading role
in setting new rules and norms in areas
as diverse as the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the Arms Trade Treaty, digital
trade, internet governance, global health
standards and regional approaches to
irregular migration and human trafficking.
This gives us standing in the system that
we can leverage in pursuit of our interests.

To help protect and strengthen international
rules and norms, Australia will:

R act in partnership with other states and
organisations to uphold international law

R encourage others to adopt or ratify
international conventions and
instruments to broaden adherence
to international law

R support international accountability
and adjudicatory mechanisms, such
as the International Criminal Court
and the International Court of Justice

R continue to make a significant
contribution to the development
of new rules and norms, and

R use our development assistance to help
partner countries join and comply with
international rules-based processes.

The Government is also committed
to working with the United States and
like-minded partners to maintain a
rules-based order by making practical
and meaningful military commitments
where it is in our interests and capacity
to do so.

While the current international system
supports Australia’s national interests,
the Government recognises that the way
states interact has never been and never
will be static. Institutions, rules and forms
of cooperation can and do evolve. Australia


believes the institutions that support global
cooperation must accommodate the
greater weight of emerging powers.
Without such flexibility, new multilateral
bodies might proliferate, undercutting
the effectiveness of the current system
and potentially challenging Australia’s
interests and values.

Australia will therefore contribute
constructively to the reform of
international institutions. We will
remain open to proposals that
might address gaps in the current
institutional architecture. In doing so,
our approach will remain anchored in
international law, universal standards
of human rights, good governance,
transparency and accountability.

###### Countering the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Australia has an abiding interest in working
towards the ultimate goal of a world
without WMD.

Over the next 10 years the world will face
new proliferation challenges because of
emerging technologies with WMD and
conventional weapons applications.
Terrorists continue to seek WMD to cause
mass casualties. Technological advances
make developing bio-weapons easier
and cheaper. Chemical weapons are
again being used, as seen recently in Syria.
Proliferation networks, including for missile
technology and small arms, threaten the
security of the Indo–Pacific.

We will remain vigilant in countering
proliferation and ensuring effective export
controls on goods and technologies used
in the manufacture of WMD. We will stay


-----

focused on nuclear safety and security,
which will grow in importance as more
countries invest in nuclear power.

Australia remains committed to preventing
the use of chemical and biological weapons,
including through our chairing of the
Australia Group. We will encourage efforts
to disrupt and prevent the financing of
proliferation. We will continue to strengthen
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which is the
cornerstone of the nuclear non-proliferation
regime, especially through the 2020 and
2025 NPT review cycles.

We will take action, including implementing
sanctions, in response to specific nuclear
and WMD proliferation concerns, especially
in relation to North Korea. We support the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action with
Iran, which is important to efforts to
stabilise the Middle East.

We advocate a patient and pragmatic
approach in a complex security
environment in which it is difficult to
achieve significant nuclear disarmament.
We must ensure the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty enters into force
and achieves universal coverage. We will
encourage progress on a Fissile Material
Cut-Off Treaty to prevent the production
of fissile material for nuclear weapons
and will work with partners to improve
how disarmament is verified.

In an uncertain security environment,
including North Korea’s development
of a nuclear and missile capability, the
Government recognises that only the
nuclear and conventional military
capabilities of the United States offer
effective deterrence against the possibility
of nuclear threats against Australia and
other allies of the United States such as
the Republic of Korea and Japan. Without


extended deterrence, more countries in
the Indo–Pacific would need to re-assess
their security and defence capabilities.

###### Climate change

The challenge posed by climate change
will deepen over the next 10 years.
Countries will need to factor climate change
in to long-term planning and investment,
including its implications for national and
regional security.

Already, changing environmental conditions
are evident, including rising temperatures
and sea levels and increasingly frequent
and severe weather events and natural
disasters. This is leading, in turn, to
economic, environmental and security
risks. In Australia, those risks extend
to our coasts and beaches, and to our
agriculture, water resources and fisheries.

Climate change will sometimes impede
economic development, drive additional
displacement of people and, if left
unchecked, add to global stresses on the
supply of food and water. Many countries
in Australia’s immediate region, especially
small island states and those with large
delta cities, will be increasingly affected.

Australia has comprehensive policies
to reduce domestic emissions while
maintaining our economic competitiveness.
The Government is reviewing its climate
change policies to ensure they remain
effective in achieving Australia’s 2030
emissions reduction target and Paris
Agreement commitments. The review
will monitor and be informed by
developments in international climate
policy, and include a focus on electricity
prices. The Government also recently
announced a national energy guarantee,
under which retailers of electricity will


-----

need to meet a guarantee for reliability
and emissions reductions in line with
Australia's commitments under the
Paris Agreement. Our commitment to
reduce emissions by 26 to 28 per cent
below 2005 levels by 2030 is among
the highest per capita reduction
targets for an advanced economy.

Australia will work in partnership with
developed and developing countries
to take effective action on climate
change. The United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, and in
particular the Paris Agreement, requires


action by both developed and developing
parties. The framework also allows
countries to determine the nature and
extent of their contributions. To date,
more than 160 countries have ratified the
Agreement. While disappointed by the
decision of the United States to withdraw,
Australia remains committed to the
Paris Agreement.

Responding to climate change will
continue to be a priority for Australia’s
development assistance. We are investing
more than $1 billion over five years to
support developing countries to reduce


-----

###### Figure 6.1  Australia and Australian Antarctic Territory This map shows Australia and Antarctica, indicating in taupe the areas which are the Australian Antartctic Territory. It also indicates with red dots the year-round Australian stations of Casey, Davis, Mawson, Macquarie Island and Heard Island and their distances from Hobart.

Source: Australian Antarctic Data Centre, Map Catalogue No. 14508


-----

their emissions and build resilience to
climate change.

Australia is also boosting our response
capability to natural disasters as well as
improving disaster preparedness. When
disasters strike, within 48 hours Australia
can deploy relief supplies, humanitarian
specialists and health and urban search
and rescue teams. We also invest in
regional disaster preparedness to help
save lives, minimise economic loss and
enable communities to recover more
quickly. Our new deployment capability,
Australia Assists, will bolster our ability
to send Australians overseas to support
these efforts.

Australia has a strong interest in an effective
global transition to a low-emissions
economy while supporting growth and
affordable energy. Although emissions
are still rising globally, there is momentum
towards a low-emissions economy, driven
by technological advances and lower costs.
Many of our major economic partners,
including China and India, are investing
in green growth.

Australia stands to benefit from these
trends because of our abundant
renewable resources and expertise
in low emissions, clean energy and
renewable technology. We will have
the opportunity to boost exports of
climate services and technologies and
to attract investment. Australia also has
expertise in sustainable agriculture and
cities, climate smart infrastructure, water
management and climate finance.

To take advantage of these opportunities
and capture the benefits of the global
energy transition, the Government is
investing in clean energy technologies.
For example, the Clean Energy Finance
Corporation and the Australian Renewable
Energy Agency have already invested


over $4.5 billion in projects worth over
$11 billion. The Government has also
joined the global Mission Innovation
initiative to double government
investment in clean energy research
and development by 2020.

###### Promoting sustainable development

Global levels of poverty have been
steadily declining since the early 1980s,
driven by rapid economic development
in Asia. However, in 2013 (the most
recent year for which comprehensive
poverty data from the World Bank is
available) more than 10 per cent of the
world’s population, or over 750 million
people, still lived in extreme poverty
(defined by the World Bank as living on
less than US$1.90 a day). The challenge
remains acute in the Pacific (Figure 6.2).

The United Nations estimates that globally
18,000 children die every day from
poverty-related causes. Climate change,
conflict, natural disasters and increasing
pressure on resources threaten to slow
the progress of poverty reduction over
the next decade.

As a prosperous country, Australia has
a responsibility to contribute to global
efforts to reduce poverty, alleviate
suffering and promote sustainable
development. This also serves our
interests because the more that countries
can provide economic opportunity
for their citizens the more stable they
will be. They will be less vulnerable to
challenges such as irregular migration
and extremism. In an interconnected
world, investing in the development of
other countries helps to limit negative
impacts on our own security.


-----

###### Figure 6.2  Extreme poverty in the Indo–Pacifc


Pacific, South Asia, East Asia and Southeast Asia for the years 2002 and 2013. The Pacific has the highest levels, of 46% in 2002 and 26.6% in 2013, whereas the other regions show a decrease, markedly in East Asia which was 31.9% in 2002 and 1.8% in 2013.

e


th

n


i

y
of pop ulations l iving in extreme povert


cent age


Source: Asian Development Bank

Note: Extreme poverty is defined as living on less than US$1.90 per day (2011 PPP)


To respond to the challenge of global
poverty, Australia has joined all other
United Nations member states in
committing to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the
17 Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). These include goals to reduce
poverty and hunger, improve health and
education, advance gender equality and
strengthen economic growth (Figure 6.3).

The 2030 Agenda is not just for and
about government—-it also engages the
private sector, civil society, academia
and international organisations.


Australia is committed to advancing human
rights globally. Men, women and children
have the right to fundamental freedoms
and to live their lives with dignity. Human
rights underpin peace and prosperity.

Australia will promote human rights
through constructive bilateral dialogue.
Where appropriate, we will work with
countries to advance and protect human
rights through development assistance
and humanitarian support. At times, and
especially in the case of gross human


growth to help reduce poverty. The
2030 Agenda provides an opportunity
for Australia to share its experience at
home with partners around the world.

###### Advancing human rights


In working with partners to achieve the
SDGs, Australia will use its overseas
development assistance, including
through aid for trade, to catalyse
sustained and inclusive economic


-----

rights violations, we will apply sanctions.

Australia is committed to a strong
multilateral human rights system. We
continue to support the independent
mandate of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
We promote efforts to strengthen the
Human Rights Council and the wider
human rights system. As a member of the
United Nations Human Rights Council
for the 2018–2020 term, Australia will:

R advance the rights of women and girls

R promote good governance,
democratic institutions and freedoms
of expression, association, religion
and belief

R promote the rights of people with
disabilities

R advance human rights for indigenous
peoples around the globe


R promote national human rights
institutions and capacity building, and

R advocate the global abolition of the
death penalty.

Our development program supports
these objectives, especially by tackling
gender inequality, promoting disability
inclusive development and funding
multilateral human rights bodies.

In addition, Australia is committed to
protecting and strengthening civil society
internationally. We will work to increase
the formal participation of civil society in
UN processes.

Australia also supports democratic
principles, the rule of law, human
rights and gender equality through the
Commonwealth, which links 52 countries.


###### Figure 6.3  Sustainable Development Goals This infographic displays the 17 UN Sustainable Development Goals. Number 1 is No Poverty and number 17 is Partnering for the Goals.

Source: United Nations


-----

-----

###### Figure 6.4   Australian official development assistance (ODA)

Source: Australian Aid Budget Summary 2017–18, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade

- Total Australian ODA, from all agencies and programs, attributable to regions; including flows from DFAT
regional and global programs and expenditure by other government departments

**The percentage calculation of Indo–Pacific excludes: United Nations; Commonwealth and Other
International Organisations; Cash Payments to Multilaterals; and Humanitarian and other ODA not attributed
to particular regions


-----

###### Figure 6.5  Global trends of displaced persons


each year across the period 2006-2016. This figure has mostly risen over the period, excepting a dip in 2011, with the figure for 2006 39million and 66million in 2016.

r


fo

,


on

li


il

m

|chyeaacosshepeod20062016Thsguehasmosysenovehepeodexcepngadpn2011whhegueo200639monand66monn2016|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|Col11|Col12|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||||||||
|||||||||||||
|||||||||||||
|||||||||||||
|||||||||||||
|||||||||||||
|||||||||||||


of forc ibly dis plac ed p erso ns g loba lly, by

Source: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees


###### Responding to the challenge of displaced people

Australia is committed to responding to the
long-term challenge posed by the world’s
displaced people, including 22.5 million
refugees and more than 40 million internally
displaced people (Figure 6.5).


Recognising the pressing need for stronger
global support for displaced populations
and to respond to natural disasters, Australia
will increase its global humanitarian funding
to more than $500 million a year. We will
provide additional assistance to support
displaced people as close to their homes
as possible so they can return home when
conditions allow. This is essential because


permanent resettlement is available to
only a fraction of the world’s displaced.
Australia will continue to maintain one
of the world’s most generous refugee
resettlement programs.

Australia’s $220 million and $100 million
three year commitments to the Syrian
and Iraqi crises, for example, focus on
providing humanitarian assistance,
delivering employment opportunities
and improving education. Australia also
supports the Comprehensive Refugee
Response Framework trials in Uganda
and Ethiopia, which are helping to
equip refugees with skills and training.


At a time when traditional approaches
are being overwhelmed, Australia is
contributing to development of the
Global Compact on Refugees and the


-----

Global Compact on Safe, Regular and
Orderly Migration, which are scheduled
to be concluded in 2018.

The Refugee Compact seeks to
enhance protections for refugees and
displaced people, develop a better
framework to deal with the protracted
nature of displacement, and ease the
burden of countries hosting large
refugee populations. The Migration


Compact seeks to improve the global
governance of migration and reduce
the vulnerabilities of migrants.

Australia works closely with a range of
international organisations to protect and
support refugees and displaced people,
including the UN High Commissioner for
Refugees and the International Committee
of the Red Cross. Australia focuses strongly
on protection efforts for women and girls


-----

and people with disabilities because they
are particularly vulnerable during conflicts
and natural disasters.

Australia also supports regional and
international peacekeeping efforts to
protect people affected by conflict.
We have pledged to provide strategic
airlift support for UN peacekeeping
operations in crises and to build the
capacity of troop contributing countries
in our region. Beyond peacekeeping,
Australia also contributes to the United
Nations Peacebuilding Fund, which
aims to prevent a return to conflict in
countries at risk.

###### Strains on food, energy and water

As the world’s population grows, demand
for food, energy and water will continue
to rise. These pressures, compounded
by climate change, will strain the world’s
resources in a way that could limit future
prosperity and contribute to conflict and
population displacement.

In addition to supplying agricultural products
to global markets, Australia also supports
basic food security and efficient water
management internationally. In 2017–18,
nine per cent of Australia’s development
assistance, or $339.5 million, was invested
in the agriculture, fisheries and water sectors.
The Australian Centre for International
Agricultural Research has extensive
research partnerships and implements
practical applied projects and training
to improve food security in our region.

Australia, as a major global producer and
exporter of energy commodities, will work
collaboratively to support the availability
of energy throughout the Indo–Pacific
region and beyond. Access to reliable


and affordable energy is crucial to trade,
economic growth and development.
Australia will continue to provide
development assistance to help partner
countries maximise benefits from their
natural resources and energy sectors.

Australia is a leader in water management.
We will share our water management
expertise to help enhance agricultural
productivity, improve health outcomes,
strengthen economies and reduce poverty,
including through the Prime Minister’s
membership of the United Nations/World
Bank High Level Panel on Water. Australia
has also committed US$6 million to launch
the Water Innovation Engine with the
Rockefeller Foundation and the World
Bank to trial and develop new approaches
to help improve affordable access to
clean water and sanitation. We also
share information and experience in
water policy dialogues with China, India,
Indonesia and the United States.

Australia will deliver a $100 million
‘Water for Women’ program over seven
years (2017–2024) to improve water
access, sanitation and hygiene practices
across the Indo–Pacific. We have also
established a $20 million Australian Water
Partnership to share Australia’s water sector
expertise internationally.

###### Protecting the oceans

As a continent surrounded by three oceans,
Australia has a fundamental interest in the
legal regimes and norms that govern the
oceans. Our maritime Exclusive Economic
Zone, including waters surrounding our
offshore territories, is the world’s third
largest. Our marine resources are vital
for our economy.

The world’s oceans face multiple stresses,
including climate-driven changes, pollution,


-----

over-exploitation and habitat destruction.
Australia is advocating a new international
agreement, under the UN Convention on
the Law of the Sea, on the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biodiversity in the
high seas.

We will also continue to work to enhance
fisheries governance. As demand for fish
products grows, current stocks will come
under greater pressure, affecting food
security, livelihoods and economic
development across many regions.
Depleted fish stocks in neighbouring


regions degrade our own stocks and can
motivate illegal fishing in Australian waters.

We will continue to work with our partners
in regional fisheries management
organisations to ensure the long-term
sustainability of fisheries resources. We
will also tackle illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing, and monitor the
status of fish stocks to provide industry
with certainty over catch limits. We will
continue to assist communities in our region,
including through our development
assistance, to sustainably manage fish


-----

stocks and marine ecosystems, and improve
aquaculture production.

###### Guarding against global health risks

The Government recognises the importance
of good health and strong and resilient
health systems to support productive
societies and economic growth. Our health
system is recognised as among the best
in the world, and we will continue to help
shape global health norms and standards.


The Government is committed to
preventing and responding to the introduction and spread of infectious diseases.
Health crises threaten economic and
human development. International travel,
urbanisation and weak health systems in
some countries contribute to the rapid
spread of pathogens around the globe.

Antimicrobial resistance is a major global
health threat. If not tackled decisively,
it could cause an additional 10 million
deaths a year by 2050. Already, drug
resistant tuberculosis is a challenge in
Papua New Guinea, while drug resistant


-----

malaria elsewhere threatens a resurgence
of what was once the world’s biggest killer.
Australia supports the Asia Pacific Leaders
Malaria Alliance to galvanise action in
response. We will continue to support
research and development to bring new
drugs and diagnostics for these diseases
to market and build institutional capacity
in regional countries.

Australia’s development funding
strengthens health systems and combats
health risks that cross national borders.
We have established an Indo–Pacific
Centre for Health Security to invest in
research, strengthen partnerships, and
improve the capacity of health systems.
Our development program will build upon
outcomes from domestic initiatives such
as the $1.4 billion Medical Research
Future Fund.

In addition to our substantial domestic
investments in health and medical
research, Australia will continue to work
with international institutions such as
the World Health Organization to help
prevent, detect and respond to health
emergencies and to combat antimicrobial
resistance. Australia will invest a further
$220 million in the Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, which has
saved more than 20 million lives since 2002.

###### Security in space

Australia’s economic and security
interests in space will grow with the
expansion of space-based and spaceenabled capabilities. We need robust
rules and norms to maximise the
benefits of greater access to space while
tackling challenges such as debris.

At the same time, the expansion of
space-based technologies creates
risks. States are continuing to develop


capabilities to disrupt satellites and
degrade space-dependent military
systems, threatening our defence
networks and those of our alliance
partner the United States. Potential
state adversaries may also exploit
space to obtain sensitive information
about our security. In response,
the Australian Defence Force is
strengthening its space surveillance
and situational awareness capabilities.

Australia is committed to strengthening
international rules and laws that apply
to space, including military uses of space.
We will work with partners, particularly
through the United Nations Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,
to strengthen norms of responsible
behaviour.

The Government will also establish
a space agency to represent Australia
internationally, partner with other
countries, coordinate a national space
strategy and support industry growth.


-----

-----

CHAPTER SEVEN
#### A shared agenda for security and prosperity

###### The stability and economic progress of Papua New Guinea, other Pacific island countries and Timor–Leste is of fundamental importance to Australia. Our ties with these neighbours are long-standing and will be enduring. We are bound by migration, education and, in many cases, historical ties.


Australia is a major economic partner
and an enabler of opportunity for our
neighbours. Some countries in the region
have the natural resources and many have
the tourism potential to benefit from
increased trade and investment with
Australia, New Zealand and Asian
economies.

Our engagement is anchored in common
interests. Stability in Papua New Guinea,
the wider Pacific and Timor–Leste, for
example, is vital to our ability to defend
Australia’s northern approaches, secure
our borders and protect our exclusive
economic zone.

Most countries of the region are, however,
facing acute development challenges. Small
formal economies, distance from major
markets, high costs, and rapidly growing
populations hamper economic growth.

Governance and capacity constraints in
some countries also limit their ability to
deliver services. These challenges make
it difficult to respond to transnational
crime, natural disasters, climate change
or outbreaks of infectious diseases. This in
turn exposes Australia to increased threats,
which our cooperation helps to mitigate.

To identify and implement practical
responses to these economic, security


and development challenges,
Australia will enhance engagement
with Papua New Guinea, other Pacific
countries and Timor–Leste, as well
as with regional organisations such
as the Pacific Islands Forum.

In the Pacific, Australia recognises that
new approaches will be necessary. Our
support will focus on three priorities:

R promoting economic cooperation
and greater integration within the
Pacific and also with the Australian
and New Zealand economies,
including through labour mobility

R tackling security challenges, with
a focus on maritime issues, and

R strengthening people-to-people links,
skills and leadership.

These priorities build on our commitment
to work with governments in the Pacific
to respond to climate change, bolster
resilience, strengthen emergency
responses and improve governance,
education, health and gender outcomes.

No single country or organisation can
tackle the challenges in the Pacific on
its own. Stronger bilateral and regional
partnerships are necessary to achieve
shared goals.


-----

New Zealand will remain an essential
partner in support of the economic
growth, stability and security of the
region. Australia and New Zealand
will align our approaches to the Pacific.

Our cooperation has wider regional
and global dimensions. Australia’s
relationship with New Zealand is our
most comprehensive and we are
committed to deepening it further.
We have high levels of police and
military interoperability and collaborate
on strategic planning, capability
development and intelligence. This will
continue to be essential to prosecuting
shared interests, including in the Pacific.

Australia recognises that increasing
competition for influence and economic
opportunities in Papua New Guinea, other
Pacific countries and Timor–Leste, as well
as growing aid and loans from other
sources, means they can turn elsewhere
for advice and assistance. This brings
opportunity in many cases, but also
has the potential to strain the capacity
of countries to absorb assistance and
manage their debt levels. It could also
undermine regional coordination.

In particular, Australia will engage the
Pacific’s outside partners to encourage
them to work in a manner that
strengthens cooperation, builds more
sustainable and resilient economies
and maintains stability. We will
encourage responsible lending to the
region and adherence to the priorities
identified by regional governments
and the Pacific Islands Forum.

Australia will support efforts to attract
public and private investment in the
Pacific and Timor–Leste. We continue
to work to increase the provision of
multilateral bank finance and expertise,
especially by the World Bank and Asian


Development Bank. This will be essential
to redress the infrastructure shortfall in
the Pacific and Timor–Leste, estimated
to be US$46 billion out to 2030.

###### An enduring partnership with Papua New Guinea

Supporting a stable and prosperous
Papua New Guinea is one of our most
important foreign policy objectives.
The Torres Strait is the closest thing
Australia has to a land border—-it is
less than four kilometres from the
Papua New Guinea mainland to the
nearest populated Australian island.
Developments in Papua New Guinea
have substantial implications for
Australia, including our defence, border
security, health security and economy.

It is in our shared interest that Australia
remains Papua New Guinea’s principal
security partner. We will continue to
pursue close defence cooperation and
build capacity in policing and law and
justice. We will work with Papua New
Guinea to tackle illegal fishing, transnational crime and people smuggling.
Ensuring the integrity of the Torres Strait
Treaty, the foundation of our border
arrangements, will remain a priority.

Notwithstanding its current fiscal challenges,
Papua New Guinea has considerable
economic potential and a growing number
of trade and investment partners.

In this changing economic landscape,
Australia will have to compete harder for
business. Australian companies have
already invested $18 billion in Papua
New Guinea. Some 4,600 Australian
firms do business there.

A significant part of Papua New Guinea’s
economy relies on foreign investment


-----

in resource projects. While this offers
potential for growth, a more diverse
economy also focused on agriculture,
fisheries, services and tourism, as well
as better governance, will be essential
for Papua New Guinea to convert its
natural endowments into sustained,
broad-based economic growth.

Papua New Guinea continues to face
serious development challenges. Its
population of about 8 million—-40 per
cent under the age of 15—-is projected
to reach 18 million by 2050. The delivery
of services is suffering because of a
shortage of capacity and a constrained
budget. Many development indicators
—-such as maternal, child and infant
mortality, the rate of communicable
diseases, and access to clean water and
sanitation—-are poor.

Reflecting its challenges and the closeness
of our relationship, Papua New Guinea
is our largest development partner, with
Australia investing around $550 million
a year in assistance. We work together
to encourage economic growth, improve
governance, and support health and
education. Australia is also helping
Papua New Guinea to empower women
and foster a new generation of leaders.

Australia will continue to support the
Papua New Guinea and autonomous
Bougainville governments to implement the
2001 Peace Agreement, which underpins
peace and stability in Bougainville.

###### Stepping up our engagement in the Pacifc

To pursue common interests and respond
to the region’s fundamental challenges,
Australia will engage with the Pacific with
greater intensity and ambition, deliver


more integrated and innovative policy
and make further, substantial long-term
investments in the region’s development.

We will look to test new ideas and adopt
the most practical means to strengthen
regional cooperation and integration.
Some initiatives will commence bilaterally,
allowing new measures to be trialled.

###### Promoting economic cooperation and integration

Economic integration within the region
and with Australia and New Zealand is vital
to the economic prospects of the Pacific.
Growth is constrained for most countries
because of a combination of remoteness
from markets, limited land and resource
bases, the dispersal of people over many
islands and environmental fragility.

When in force, the Pacific Agreement on
Closer Economic Relations (PACER) Plus
will lay the ground for stronger trade and
investment, increasing business confidence
through transparent and enforceable rules.

Australia will work to improve opportunities
for growth and jobs and to strengthen
the economic resilience of the region by
increasing opportunities for labour mobility
to satisfy unmet demand in our labour
market, investing in skills, and helping
countries to capture growth potential
in sectors such as tourism.

Australia and the Pacific can also share
institutions and systems to help bring
efficiencies and economies of scale.
As a first step, we will facilitate access
for Nauru, Tonga and Tuvalu to use
Australian testing services to improve the
quality and reliability of pharmaceuticals.

Our new Pacific Labour Scheme will
allow workers from the region to take up
non-seasonal low and semi-skilled work


-----

in rural and regional Australia in growth
sectors such as health care, social
assistance and hospitality. In parallel,
our Seasonal Worker Program will be
streamlined to give more Australian
employers access to a reliable seasonal
workforce drawn from the Pacific and
Timor–Leste. Participation in these
programs benefits seasonal workers and
their communities and supports economic
growth in the Pacific and Timor–Leste.

These programs are labour-market tested
and will enable Australian employers
to address labour shortages in towns
and farms. They represent a partnership
between Australian businesses and our
neighbours that will help the Pacific


through remittances as well as boost the
economy in parts of regional Australia.

We are establishing a Pacific Labour
Facility to connect workers, employers
and training institutions, provide financial
education for workers, and monitor the
impact of labour mobility programs both
in Australia and in Pacific economies.

We will continue to work with the
Australia – Pacific Technical College to
ensure that it and other Pacific training
institutions provide the skills and
qualifications needed by workers.

We share an interest with our Pacific
partners in maximising gains from the
skills and remittances delivered through


-----

our labour mobility schemes. We are
working with financial institutions to
reduce further the cost of remittances
to the Pacific.

###### Tackling security challenges

Many countries in the Pacific have limited
capacity to respond individually to security
challenges such as transnational crime,
natural disasters, climate change or
outbreaks of infectious diseases. Our
experience of working together—-through
the Regional Assistance Mission to
Solomon Islands (RAMSI), cyclone
responses and fisheries surveillance—shows the advantages of close bilateral
and regional cooperation.

Following the conclusion of RAMSI, we have
signed a bilateral security agreement with
the Solomon Islands Government to allow
for future Australian support should it be
required. We have concluded bilateral
security memoranda with Nauru and Tuvalu
to help protect them and the region against
transnational organised crime, build their
border security capacity and protect against
health threats. We will work with other
partners on cooperative arrangements.
We will assist some countries to develop
national security strategies.

Australia will continue to support and better
coordinate defence, police, intelligence,
border and law and justice training. We
will help improve information sharing
between national and regional law
enforcement agencies, including through
the Pacific Transnational Crime Coordination
Centre. This will help deliver more effective
approaches to transnational organised
crime.

Australia will work with Pacific partners to
establish an Australian Pacific Security College
to deliver security and law enforcement
training at the leadership level.


Australia’s maritime cooperation
contributes to protecting our region’s
vast maritime resources and enhances
regional security. Through our Pacific
Maritime Security Program, Australia
will provide 19 replacement patrol
vessels to our partners and we will fund
aerial surveillance. We are boosting
civil maritime cooperation to enhance
information sharing and to improve
responses to threats such as illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing and
smuggling of people, wildlife and drugs.

In support of these efforts, Australia will
continue to cooperate closely in the Pacific
with New Zealand, the United States and
France on maritime surveillance and
disaster preparedness and response.

###### Strengthening people-to-people links, skills and leadership

An increased focus on skills and education
will be vital if the Pacific is to realise its
economic potential. Again, the relatively
small populations and economies of most
countries mean that vocational training
and higher education are often best dealt
with by pooling resources and expertise.

Our support for vocational education and
training, including the Australia – Pacific
Technical College and universities in
the region, and scholarships for study
in Australia, will have a sharper focus
on preparing graduates for employment
and community engagement.

This investment in human capital supports
economic growth and the better delivery
of government services. It complements
Australia’s work with partners—-including
in think tanks, civil society and institutions,
such as the Pacific Leadership and
Governance Precinct in Port Moresby—-to
train emerging leaders and prepare them
for the challenges of modern governance.


-----

Australia will continue to invest in links
between communities and people in
the region. Australians studying in the
Pacific under the New Colombo Plan
and Australian volunteers are increasing
our understanding of the region.

###### Climate change, resilience and a strengthened response to disasters

Australia will continue to strengthen the
capacity of the Pacific, particularly lowlying atoll states, to respond to climate
change. We are providing $300 million
over four years to provide climate science
and data and other support to help our
partners plan for and adapt to climate
change and mitigate its impacts.

We use our own investment to leverage
funding by multilateral banks in critical
infrastructure. Similarly, we are working
to help countries in the region access
resources from the Green Climate Fund,
to which Australia has contributed
$200 million.

We will increase investments in local
and national capacity to better manage
disasters in the Pacific. This will include
funding experts to work with Pacific
National Disaster Management Offices
and support for a new partnership with
Australian non-government organisations
(NGOs) and the Australian Red Cross
to bolster disaster preparedness and
strengthen Pacific civil society.

We will work with Pacific governments,
the World Food Programme and United
Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to improve early
warning systems and access to prepositioned humanitarian supplies. We
will boost joint training with emergency
services, police and defence forces
to improve disaster preparedness.


###### Bilateral and regional partnerships in the Pacifc

Australia will continue to strongly support
the Pacific Islands Forum, the pre-eminent
regional organisation, through which
leaders set regional priorities. We will
support organisations in the region
that coordinate management of natural
resources such as fisheries, or provide
essential scientific and technical services.

Australia is committed to strong and
productive relations with Fiji. We recognise
Fiji’s economic potential and its capacity to
serve as a regional hub for business, tourism,
security cooperation, and humanitarian
and disaster response coordination.

We will work with Solomon Islands to help
ensure that the transition from RAMSI
protects stability in the country. Our joint
work to support economic growth and to
improve governance will remain important.

We will also continue to support Vanuatu’s
recovery from Tropical Cyclone Pam and
to build resilience and growth. Australia
will assist with economic and social
development in Polynesia by supporting
reform programs and assisting the export
sector. We will work with Tonga and Samoa,
including through joint security operations
and exercises, and by cooperating in
regional organisations.

We will strengthen cooperation with the
smaller island states in the region with a
focus on economic growth, security, fisheries
and building more resilient communities.

###### Supporting Timor–Leste

The recent agreement on the maritime
boundary between Timor–Leste and
Australia marks a new chapter in the


-----

bilateral relationship. It will revitalise our
friendship and cooperation in the years
ahead. It will also provide a new foundation
for the development of the Greater Sunrise
gas field in the Timor Sea, and the sharing
of any resulting revenue. This will support
the national interests of both nations.

The agreement is a testament to the way
in which international law, in particular
the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea,
reinforces stability and allows countries
to resolve disputes peacefully without
resorting to force or coercion. It is an
example of the rules-based order in action.

Timor–Leste has made significant progress
since independence in 2002. However,
it still faces development challenges and
high rates of poverty and malnutrition.
We are Timor–Leste’s leading economic
partner, and will continue to support its
objective of economic diversification
and private sector growth through our
development cooperation and labour
mobility schemes.

We will continue to support Timor–Leste’s
armed forces and national police. We
cooperate on regional security issues,
including maritime challenges, border
security and transnational crime.

We both have important relationships with
Indonesia. This provides an opportunity
to deepen trilateral cooperation to
advance shared interests. Australia
supports Timor–Leste’s ambition to join
ASEAN, to facilitate its closer economic
engagement with Southeast Asia.


-----

-----

CHAPTER EIGHT
#### Partnerships and soft power

###### The strength and diversity of Australia’s connections to the world mean that partnerships between all levels of government, and between the Australian Government and business and civil society, are essential to effective foreign policy. Such partnerships amplify Australia’s international influence. The Government will continue to work closely with a broad range of partners to advance our security and prosperity.


State governments, cities and even
regional centres increasingly have strong
international linkages. Our migrant
communities in Australia have grown
and so too has the number of Australians
working overseas. Our companies trade
and invest globally. Education and tourism
strongly connect us to our region. Our
NGOs support sustainable development
and respond to humanitarian crises
around the world.

Globalisation also means that soft power
—-our ability to influence the behaviour or
thinking of others through the power of
attraction and ideas—-is becoming more
important to Australia. By using soft power
to help shape our external environment,
Australia can better pursue its interests
internationally. The rapid rise of social
media and other digital communication
platforms creates new opportunities—-and
some challenges—-for countries seeking to
develop their soft power.

In a globalised and contested world, a
systematic and sophisticated approach
to soft power is in our national interest.
To maintain our strengths in this area,
and to ensure our capabilities and areas


of focus keep pace with changes in
technology, the Government will conduct
a review to ensure we continue to build
soft power and exercise influence
effectively.

At the same time, the Government will
also develop a stronger nation brand that
better positions Australia in the eyes of
the global community. In competitive and
fast-changing global markets, we want to
be recognised as uniquely Australian.

###### Foreign policy partners

 States and territories

The Commonwealth Government is
committed to a close partnership with
its state and territory counterparts on
international issues. Together, we promote
and facilitate trade, investment, tourism
and education. We cooperate to counter
security threats, such as terrorism and
transnational organised crime.

Many large, globally connected Asian
cities and regions are international actors
in their own right. Tokyo, Seoul, Beijing,
Shanghai, Guangdong, Jiangsu,


-----

Shandong and Zhejiang have economies
that are larger than some G20 members.
These provinces or cities have formal
linkages, and extensive commercial and
other connections, with Australian states
and cities. The Commonwealth
Government encourages and supports
the states and territories with their own
sub-national international relationships.
The Australia – China State – Provincial
Leaders Forum is one example.

Domestic and foreign policies interact
extensively in a globalised world. Close
cooperation with state and territory
governments is therefore vital to our trade
and investment links and to meeting our
international obligations. The policies of
the states and territories can impinge
on our obligations under treaty-level
agreements, including in areas such
as trade and climate change. Ensuring
Commonwealth and state and territory
policies align to meet our international
obligations is vital to protecting our
economic interests and our reputation.

###### Business

On global issues such as climate change
and sustainable development, many
businesses are major players, linking
corporate objectives to social,
environmental and economic goals.
Businesses influence policy, help to set
international standards and connect
Australia to world markets, technology
and ideas. Private enterprise is not only
the engine of our domestic prosperity,
it is fundamental to Australia’s place in
the world and the exercise of influence
internationally.

The Government will continue to engage
extensively with business leaders, industry
groups and small to medium sized
enterprises, including in regional and


rural Australia, on Australia’s international
agenda. The business community is an
essential advocate for economic reform
at home and an important partner for
government in maintaining public support
for open trade and foreign investment.

The work of Australian business leaders in
regional and multilateral business groups,
such as the APEC Business Advisory Council
and the Business 20 sub-group of the G20,
helps to expand Australia’s influence and
ensure our policy approaches in these
forums work to maximise economic
benefit for Australia.

The Prime Minister and senior ministers
lead CEO delegations to major markets
to promote our commercial interests.
Austrade organises regular business
missions to and from Australia to increase
commercial opportunities, with an
emphasis on small to medium sized
enterprises. Australian officials also work
closely with chambers of commerce in
Australia and overseas to increase trade
and investment opportunities.

###### Development partners

Our work with a wide range of partners,
including NGOs, the private sector and
multilateral organisations, helps to magnify
the impact of Australia’s development
assistance program.

NGOs in particular are vital partners in our
effort to encourage greater prosperity and
stability in our region through the delivery
of development assistance. They bring
strong connections to local communities,
a comprehensive understanding of poverty
in local contexts, and deep development
expertise. NGOs can often reach vulnerable
groups that are otherwise difficult to access,
such as those in areas hit by natural disasters.
They also make significant contributions to


-----

multilateral processes on issues like climate
change and sustainable development,
often participating in official Australian
delegations.

Partnerships with the private sector boost
the impact of Australia’s development
assistance. The private sector is the primary
source of economic growth, incomes and
jobs in developing countries. We work with
businesses through programs like the
Business Partnerships Platform to effect
positive change in many sectors,
including agricultural development, water
management and health care. By sharing
assets, networks and expertise with
business we can get better results from
our assistance.

Our work with multilateral institutions, like
UN agencies and multilateral development
banks, allows the Government to leverage
their influence, technical expertise and
convening power. Our multilateral partners
help us achieve outcomes on a scale
that would not otherwise be possible.
For example, Australia and the Asian
Development Bank have co-financed the
design and construction of the Cao Lanh
Bridge across the Mekong River. Once
finished, the bridge will carry 170,000
road users a day and link people and
markets in the Mekong Delta to the rest
of Southeast Asia.

Partnerships with other governments can
also achieve better development results. In
Bangladesh, we have formed a partnership
with the United Kingdom and one of the
largest NGOs in the world, BRAC (Building
Resources Across Communities), to help
vulnerable communities become more
self-reliant by providing education, skills
training and livelihood assistance.


###### Diasporas

Australia is a migrant nation. The
Government considers our diversity
a national strength and ensures that all
diaspora communities[4] in Australia,

regardless of origin, enjoy full rights
and protections under Australian law.

These communities often have the
connections, language skills and cultural
understanding to assist Australia to
deepen ties with other countries. They
help to facilitate trade and investment,
including by sharing information on
overseas markets and customs. Diaspora
communities can also influence how
Australia is perceived internationally.

Our diaspora communities often contribute
to developing countries through remittances. They also have the knowledge
and networks to help improve our
understanding of development and
humanitarian issues in other countries.

The Government is committed to working
with diaspora communities to promote
Australia’s image and reputation, to
encourage trade and investment and,
where appropriate, to support our
development assistance program.

###### Soft power

Having the ability to influence the behaviour
or thinking of others through the power
of attraction and ideas is also vital to our
foreign policy. This is known as soft power.

Australia’s ability to persuade and influence
others is underpinned by some enduring
strengths. Among these are our democracy,
multicultural society, strong economy,


4 We define diaspora communities as those composed of people, including migrants and their descendants,
who live outside but maintain active connections to their shared country of origin or ancestry.


-----

attractive lifestyle and world-class
institutions. At the same time, globalisation
and technological advances, particularly
the reach of the internet and social media,
continue to change the way influence is
exercised.

The Government recognises the greater
ability in a globalised world of individuals
and non-state actors to shape outcomes
on issues of importance to Australia.
Digital communication also allows nongovernment actors and nation states
alike to influence public attitudes at a
pace and scale not witnessed before,
for good and ill.

###### Strengths

We start from a position close to the top
of global surveys of soft power. Australia’s
democracy, rule of law, strong economy,
quality education, cutting-edge science,
multiculturalism and environmental
protections are all sources of influence.
These facets of modern Australia underpin
our ability to attract capital and talent from
around the world. They enable Australians
and Australian institutions to speak with
confidence and with credibility on the
world stage.

Australia’s commitment to solving regional
and global challenges underpins our
standing as an influential and successful
nation. Our development partnerships
also expand our points of engagement
and international influence.

Our widely envied lifestyle reflects the high
standard of living we have forged and the
excellence of our cities and government
services, as well as world-leading levels
of environmental protection. We have
strengths in innovation and the creative
industries. Our attractiveness as a tourism
destination brings substantial economic


benefits and builds influence by
encouraging visitors to our shores and
showcasing Australia’s natural beauty,
world-class produce, dynamic economy
and the openness of our society.

###### A stronger nation brand

The Government is committed to marketing
our commercial, educational and cultural
credentials. We will develop a stronger
nation brand that reinforces our reputation
as an internationally competitive investment
destination, a great place to visit, a quality
provider of education and a trusted exporter
of premium quality goods and services.
This will complement our broader trade
and investment policies and add impetus
to our major economic partnerships.

###### Digital engagement

Digital engagement is increasingly
important to attract, build and mobilise
support for our foreign policy goals. More
broadly, digital engagement supports a
more open and consultative form of
government, one in which governments
both communicate their own messages
and listen to diverse views.

Digital communication platforms also help
us to monitor international developments
and track sentiment towards Australian
policy. Through digital media, we can also
help to shape debate and understanding
of Australia’s interests, and improve crisis
management and consular services, for
example through immediate warning
messaging.

The Government will continue to invest in
its people to ensure the Australian Public
Service has the right digital skills. This
includes recruiting employees with technical
expertise and investing in staff to develop


-----

the skills they need to engage in digital
diplomacy. We will also increase the use
of languages other than English through
our digital media. We will continue to
encourage active use of social media
platforms by Australia’s overseas posts.

At the same time, we need to be ready to
dispel misconceptions and ensure our
voice is heard when new and traditional
media are used to sow misinformation
or misrepresent Australian policies.

###### Institutions, systems and standards

Australia’s systems, institutions and expertise
are themselves crucial tools of influence.
By sharing our experience with economic
reform, sustainable development and
regulation, we help other governments
with their own challenges.

This enables us to collaborate with partners
to tackle common problems, and promote
standard setting and regulatory approaches
that facilitate commercial engagement by
Australian companies. Our institutions
and standards in the financial sector, aged
and health care, and water efficiency are
among several such areas of strength for
Australia. The changing world economy
gives further scope for Australia to lead
in the setting of global standards.

Our delivery of effective development
programs also adds to our reputation
and helps to showcase Australia’s
expertise in areas such as education,
health and science.

###### Education

Our commitment to education, training
and research exchanges will remain
central to Australia’s soft power. These
exchanges build influence, and strengthen
people-to-people links and mutual


understanding. Australia will continue
to welcome hundreds of thousands of
international students to our shores
(Figure 8.1).

For more than 60 years, the Government
has supported the education of emerging
leaders from developing countries. From
the Colombo Plan in the 1950s to today’s
Australia Awards, more than 80,000 men
and women have received an Australian
Government scholarship to study in
Australia. Each year, the Government
invests approximately $320 million in the
Australia Awards program, funding around
3,500 scholarships, fellowships and short
courses.

The challenge for Australia is to ensure
we capitalise on the opportunity afforded
to us in hosting—-often for several years—some of the best and brightest from the
Indo–Pacific and beyond. To that end, the
Government will deliver a new Australia
Awards Linkages Framework to connect
awardees to leaders in the private sector
and government.

Endeavour Scholarships and Fellowships
and Endeavour Mobility Grants also build
Australia’s reputation for excellence in the
provision of education and research. Since
2004, tens of thousands of Australian and
overseas students have benefitted from
study, research or professional development
under the program.

###### New Colombo Plan

The Government is committed to ensuring
one of its signature initiatives, the New
Colombo Plan (NCP), becomes a
transformative program for Australia. Under
the NCP, thousands of young Australians
study and undertake internships in the
Indo–Pacific. This builds institutional and
people-to-people links with the region.


-----

###### Figure 8.1  International students in Australia (2016)

**This pie chart**

**1 students; India with 60,013; Malaysia with 23,539.**


**China with 156,96**

**s of origin are:**

**hree countrie**


**shows the nu**

**mbers of interna**

**tional students**


**, for the year** **in Australia, by country**

Source: Department of Education and Training


The NCP is a practical manifestation of
Australia’s commitment to learn from our
neighbours, just as we know students from
our region benefit from their experiences
in Australia. The Government wants it to
become a rite of passage for young
Australians to live and work in our region.
The NCP must be an investment that
endures for the long term.

Each year, the Government provides
$50 million to fund about 10,000 students
under the NCP. By 2018, we will have
supported more than 30,000 Australian
undergraduates to study and undertake
internships in the Indo–Pacific (Figure 8.2).
We will nurture the NCP’s alumni network
by linking NCP alumni to international
students in Australia.

Countries across the Indo–Pacific have
embraced the NCP at the highest levels.
The Australian business community and


many foreign companies are also essential
partners, including by providing internships.

###### Alumni and expatriates

More than 2.5 million international students
have studied in Australia in the past 50
years. Many foreign government and
business leaders, including heads of state,
ministers and CEOs, have studied in
Australia and understand our institutions,
values and perspective on the world. This
is a significant asset for Australia. These
former international students, together
with Australians who have studied
overseas, make up Australia’s global
alumni community.

Our strategy to build a global alumni
community promotes Australia and
advances our national interests. The
Government is working in partnership
with Australian universities to keep alumni


-----

connected to Australia and to each other
through online communities and learning
opportunities.

We also have an estimated one million
Australians living overseas. We will continue
to leverage the knowledge, networks and
expertise of our expatriates through
chambers of commerce and organisations
such as Advance.

The Government will maintain its 60 year
commitment to funding Australian
volunteers to share their expertise in our
region. This year we will support more than


1,000 Australian volunteers to work with
local organisations and governments in
partner countries to promote social and
economic development.

###### Science and research

Australia has a global reputation for
excellence in science and research. Our
scientific community showcases Australia’s
scientific excellence at home and abroad.
Many Australian researchers are experts in
their field and hold influential positions in
international organisations. Our science


###### Figure 8.2   New Colombo Plan students by destination (2014–2018)This interactive map uses purple circles to show the destinations new Colombo Plan scholars are travelling to and in what numbers, for the period 2014-2018. ASEAN (excluding Indonesia) accounts for 8,267 students; Indonesia 5,336; and China 4,708.

Source: Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade

Note: Data includes both the New Colombo Plan Mobility Program and Scholarship Program; Scholarship
Program figures for 2018 were not available at the time of publication


-----

diplomacy, such as our joint research
initiatives with China and India, strengthens
bilateral relationships.

Our international science collaboration
generates new ideas to respond to
emerging research opportunities and
challenges. It provides our scientists and
researchers with networks at home and
overseas. We also encourage some of
the world’s best and brightest to pursue
opportunities in Australia to deepen our
talent pool. The talent we attract drives
the development of new products and
knowledge, linking Australia to
technological developments needed
for the industries of the future.

Australia is also a leader on a range of
health issues, including emergency
preparedness and response, health
technology and assessments, regulatory
processes for medicines, medical devices
and cell and tissue products, tobacco
control, and ageing and health care. By
sharing our expertise in health we add to
our influence in a sector fundamental to
the wellbeing and prosperity of all nations.

###### Creative excellence

The arts are more than a cultural export.
Collaboration on cultural projects helps
build influence and partnerships
internationally and creates shared
understanding. The Government's
promotion of Australian excellence
in culture and the arts works to establish
networks and encourage collaboration
and exchanges between Australian
artists and arts organisations and their
international partners. It helps to expand
audiences and markets for Australian
artistic work and creative products. We
also promote Australian expertise in arts
production and management, and build


our reputation as a culturally rich and
diverse society.

We will continue, for example, to invest in
exporting Australia’s software development
and interactive content expertise to take
advantage of growth in digital games
development. The Government will
continue to partner with the private sector
and state governments to ensure Australia
is recognised as a world-class filming
destination. We also showcase Australia’s
creative industries in dedicated international
programs, such as G’day USA, which
promotes Australia every year in the world’s
largest consumer market.

###### Sports diplomacy

Australia is recognised globally as a highperforming and passionate sporting
nation. Our sports diplomacy showcases
Australia’s expertise in areas such as
event management, elite sports and
sports medicine. Sport enables us to
connect and engage with people and
institutions around the world, including
by hosting major events such as the 2018
Commonwealth Games and the men’s
and women’s T20 Cricket World Cups
in 2020.

###### Visits and exchanges

One of the most effective ways to promote
Australia is through sponsored visits and
exchanges. The International Media Visits
program, for example, exposes influential
foreign journalists to contemporary
Australia and aims to generate accurate
and informed overseas media reporting.

Other programs, such as the Special Visits
Program, showcase Australian expertise,
institutions, governance, culture and
lifestyle, and explore opportunities for


-----

collaboration. The leaders of China and
India and the Secretary-General of the
Arab League are some of the many
distinguished alumni from the Special
Visits Program.

Government agencies regularly conduct
exchanges and training programs with
emerging leaders and senior officials
from counterpart agencies. Defence
and police-led diplomacy and personnel
exchanges are an example. These activities
and institutional relationships facilitate
the development of networks, and build
long–standing partnerships and strong
personal connections, often at the highest
levels. More broadly, these programs
help to promote Australia’s interests,
priorities and policies internationally.


-----

-----

#### Glossary of terms


2030 Agenda
for Sustainable
Development


Globally agreed, long-term roadmap for development. It comprises the
17 Sustainable Development Goals and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
on Financing for Development.


AANZFTA ASEAN – Australia – New Zealand Free Trade Agreement, which entered
into force in 2010.

Additive Manufacturing Use of technologies that add layers of material to build an object. 3D printing
controlled by a computer is an example.


Asian Development
Bank (ADB)

ASEAN Defence
Ministers’ Meeting
Plus (ADMM Plus)


Multilateral bank established in 1966 to promote sustainable economic
growth and poverty reduction in Asia through loans, equity investments,
technical assistance and other support.

Meeting established in 2010 to strengthen security and defence cooperation
in the Indo–Pacific. Members are the 10 ASEAN countries, as well as
Australia, China, India, Japan, Republic of Korea, New Zealand, Russia and
the United States.


Aid for trade Assistance to address constraints to trade, such as cumbersome regulations
and poor infrastructure.


Asian Infrastructure
Investment Bank (AIIB)


Multilateral bank established in 2016 to focus on infrastructure investment
in Asia.


ANZUS Alliance Military and strategic alliance agreement between Australia, New Zealand
and the United States signed in 1951.


Asia–Pacific Economic
Cooperation (APEC)

Association of
Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN)

ASEAN Economic
Community

ASEAN Regional
Forum (ARF)


Economic cooperation forum established in 1989 to link 21 economies in
the Asia–Pacific, including Australia.

Political and economic association of Southeast Asian countries established
in 1967. Members are Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos,
Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam.

Plan adopted by ASEAN leaders in 2015 to move towards a single market
and production base, with a free flow of goods, services, skilled labour and
capital across the ten member states of ASEAN.

Forum for security dialogue in Asia established in 1994. Members are the
10 ASEAN countries, as well as Australia, Bangladesh, Canada, China,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, European Union, India, Japan,
Republic of Korea, Mongolia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Sri Lanka, Russia, Timor–Leste and the United States.


-----

Australia Awards Australian scholarships and fellowships that fund study, research and
professional development in Australia, and support the study of Australian
students overseas.

Australia Group Informal forum of countries that seeks to ensure that exports do not
contribute to the development of chemical or biological weapons.


Bali Process on People
Smuggling, Trafficking
in Persons and Related
Transnational Crime


Regional forum of 48 members that helps to address the challenges of
people smuggling, trafficking in persons and related transnational crime.


Belt and Road Initiative Chinese economic and strategic initiative to invest in major infrastructure
projects along land and sea routes. Also referred to as One Belt One Road.

East Asia Summit (EAS) Regional leaders forum established in 2005 for strategic dialogue and
cooperation in the Indo–Pacific. Members are the 10 ASEAN countries,
as well as Australia, China, India, Japan, Republic of Korea, New Zealand,
Russia and the United States.


Exclusive Economic
Zone (EEZ)

Export Finance and
Insurance Corporation
(EFIC)

Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI)

Five Power Defence
Arrangements (FPDA)

Financial Stability
Board (FSB)

Free Trade
Agreement (FTA)


Area claimed by a coastal state that can extend up to 200 nautical miles from
baselines along its coast. Within the zone, a state has jurisdictional rights,
including to explore and exploit natural resources. Other states retain certain
rights in the zone, including freedom of navigation and overflight.

Australian Government’s export credit agency. It facilitates and encourages
export trade on a commercial basis by providing financial support to
Australian-based companies that are exporting, integral to a global supply
chain or seeking to grow internationally.

When an individual or entity from outside Australia establishes a new
business or acquires 10 per cent or more of an Australian enterprise.

Series of regional security agreements signed in 1971 committing Australia,
Malaysia, New Zealand, Singapore and the United Kingdom to consult in the
event of an attack on Malaysia or Singapore.

Forum of international financial officials and central bank representatives
from G20 countries established in 2009 that aims to coordinate policies to
promote financial stability.

International treaty to reduce barriers to trade and investment between two
or more countries by eliminating or lowering tariffs and other restrictions.


Group of Twenty (G20) Premier international forum for cooperation on global economic issues.
Members are Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, European Union,
France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Mexico,
Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Turkey, United Kingdom and the United States.


Gross Domestic
Product (GDP)


Total value of goods and services produced in an economy, including net exports.


-----

Global Value Chain Production process across jurisdictions to bring a product from conception
to end use. This includes research and development, manufacturing, design,
management, marketing, distribution and/or post-sale services.


International Energy
Agency (IEA)

International Monetary
Fund (IMF)


International organisation established in 1973 to ensure reliable, affordable
and clean energy for its 29 member countries, including Australia.

International organisation established in 1945 to ensure the stability of the
international monetary system.


Indo–Pacific Region ranging from the eastern Indian Ocean to the Pacific Ocean connected
by Southeast Asia, including India, North Asia and the United States.


Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA)


Accord between Iran, the United States, United Kingdom, France, Russia, China,
Germany and the European Union to ensure Iran’s nuclear program is used for
exclusively peaceful purposes.


Landing Pads Austrade program that provides Australian start-ups with access to facilities
and advice in five of the world's global innovation centres to help them find
new customers, investors, mentors and partners.

Lombok Treaty Informal name for the Agreement between the Republic of Indonesia and
Australia on the Framework for Security Cooperation (2006).

Mercosur Economic and political bloc established in 1991 comprising Argentina,
Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay.

MIKTA Plurilateral partnership between Mexico, Indonesia, Republic of Korea,
Turkey and Australia.


North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO)

Treaty on the
Non‑Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT)

Organisation for
Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD)

Pacific Agreement
on Closer Economic
Relations (PACER) Plus


Political and military alliance established in 1949 between the United States
and 28 other countries.

Multilateral treaty designed to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons, to
further the goal of nuclear disarmament and to promote cooperation in the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy.

Economic forum established in 1961 to promote policies that improve
economic and social wellbeing. It comprises 35 member countries,
including Australia.

Comprehensive trade agreement between Australia, New Zealand and Pacific
island countries expected to enter into force in 2019.


Paris Agreement Global agreement to address climate change and support a transition
to a lower-emissions, climate-resilient global economy.


Permanent Court
of Arbitration (PCA)


International court based in the Netherlands to facilitate arbitration and other
forms of dispute resolution between states.


-----

Pacific Islands
Forum (PIF)

Purchasing power parity
(PPP)

Regional Assistance
Mission to Solomon
Islands (RAMSI)

Regional Comprehensive
Economic Partnership
(RCEP)


The Pacific’s premier political grouping, founded in 1971 as the South Pacific
Forum. The Forum comprises 18 members, including Australia.

Alternative to using market exchange rates to compare economic measures,
such as GDP and income. PPP accounts for the difference in prices of goods
and services between countries.

Regional stabilisation and state-building intervention led by Australia at the
request of the Solomon Islands Government. The intervention ran from June
2003 to June 2017.

Proposed regional FTA that would include the 10 ASEAN member states,
as well as Australia, China, India, Japan, Republic of Korea and New Zealand.


Regulatory equivalence Recognises that another country’s legal, regulatory and/or supervisory
regime is equivalent to a corresponding framework in your own country.


Regulatory
harmonisation

Trans–Pacific Partnership
(TPP) Agreement

United Nations
Convention on the Law
of the Sea (UNCLOS)

United Nations Security
Council (UNSC)

United States Force
Posture Initiatives


Creates common laws, regulations or standards across jurisdictions or countries.

Regional free trade agreement between Australia, Brunei Darussalam,
Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore,
the United States and Vietnam. The United States has since withdrawn.
The eleven remaining participants are sometimes known as the TPP11.

Comprehensive treaty governing the oceans and their resources. It includes
mechanisms for the settlement of disputes.

The 15 member UN body with primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security.

An extension of Australia’s existing defence relationship with the United
States. Signed in 2014, the initiatives support our common interest in
promoting regional security and stability. Through combined training and
improved interoperability, the initiatives enhance the capabilities of both
forces to respond to emergencies and natural disasters.


World Bank Group 189 member multilateral bank with a mission to end extreme poverty and
promote shared prosperity by providing finance, policy reform analysis and
advice, and technical assistance.


World Health
Organization (WHO)

World Trade
Organization (WTO)


International organisation established in 1948 to work with governments
and NGOs to improve health outcomes.

Global body established in 1995 to regulate trade between nations,
including by settling disputes.


-----

#### List of fgures

Figure 1.1 Percentage of population born overseas (select countries) 12

Figure 1.2 Benefits of imports to Australian households and businesses since 2000 15

Figure 1.3 Benefits of trade for Australians 16

Figure 1.4 Level of foreign direct investment in Australia (2016) 17

Figure 2.1 Value of global trade and investment 22

Figure 2.2 Asia’s share of world manufacturing output 23

Figure 2.3 Asia’s share of world merchandise trade 23

Figure 2.4 GDP forecasts to 2030 26

Figure 2.5 Changing demographics globally (2015–2030) 29

Figure 2.6 Growing middle class in Asia 29

Figure 2.7 Forecast increase in urban population (2010–2030) 32

Figure 2.8 Global energy demand 34

Figure 3.1 Infrastructure investment needs in Asia (2016–2030, US$ trillion) 45

Figure 4.1 Australia’s trade in goods and services (2016) 50

Figure 4.2 Australia’s exports by type 51

Figure 4.3 Australia’s minerals and energy exports by major market (2016) 52

Figure 4.4 Australia’s iron ore and coal driving Asia’s growth 54

Figure 4.5 Inbound international tourism to Australia (select markets, 2016–17) 56

Figure 4.6 Share of Australia’s goods and services exports by region 58

Figure 4.7 Current and prospective free trade agreement groupings 63

Figure 5.1 Growing demand for Australian passports 76

Figure 6.1 Australia and Australian Antarctic Territory 86

Figure 6.2 Extreme poverty in the Indo–Pacific 88

Figure 6.3 Sustainable Development Goals 89

Figure 6.4 Australian official development assistance 91

Figure 6.5 Global trends of displaced persons 92

Figure 8.1 International students in Australia (2016) 112

Figure 8.2 New Colombo Plan students by destination (2014–2018) 113


-----

#### List of boxes

Dynamic Asia 30

Supporting growth in our region 43

Australia as an export nation 53

Benefitting from Asian growth 59

Helping Australian businesses take advantage of our FTAs 61

Sectoral initiatives 66

Protecting critical infrastructure 75

Antarctica 85

Australian aid: investing in prosperity and stability 90

Gender equality 93

Great Barrier Reef 95

innovationXchange 96

Labour mobility for the Pacific and Timor–Leste 102


-----

-----

ISBN: 978-1-74322-410-6 (Online)

###### Creative Commons Creative Commons License

The Commonwealth of Australia’s 2017 Foreign Policy White Paper (this publication) is
protected by copyright. The material in this publication is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/), with the exception of:

R the Commonwealth Coat of Arms;

R the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade logo;

R any material protected by a trademark; and

R all images (images are licensed individually as set out below in the image credits).

Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence is a standard form license
agreement that allows you to copy, distribute, transmit and adapt this publication provided
that you attribute the work. The full legal code for the licence (which includes any relevant
licence conditions) is available on the Creative Commons website accessible by using this
link: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode.

The Commonwealth’s preference is that you attribute this publication (and any material
sourced from it) using the following wording:
_Source: Licensed from the Commonwealth of Australia under a Creative Commons_
_Attribution 4.0 International Licence. The Commonwealth of Australia does not necessarily_
_endorse the content of this publication._

**Image credits**
Overview image- Peter Parks, AFP collection, Getty Images
Chapter 1 image- Kokkai, Signature collection, iStock.com
Chapter 2 image- Holgs, E+ collection, Getty Images
Chapter 3 image- Imaginima, E+ collection, Getty Images
Chapter 4 image- John Kirk, Signature collection, iStock.com
Chapter 5 image- Commonwealth of Australia, Department of Immigration and Border

Protection (Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 Generic Licence https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/)

Chapter 6 image- SGT Ray Vance, Commonwealth of Australia, Department of Defence
(Licensed from the Commonwealth of Australia in accordance with the
licence at: http://www.defence.gov.au/Copyright.asp)

Chapter 7 image- Commonwealth of Australia, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade

(Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 Generic Licence https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/)

Chapter 8 image- Ted Sealey, International Sponsorships, The University of Sydney

**Use of the** The terms under which the Commonwealth Coat of Arms can be used are

**Coat of Arms** detailed on the ‘It’s an Honour’ website: https://www.pmc.gov.au/
resource-centre/government/
commonwealth-coat-arms-information-and-guidelines

**Website** www.fpwhitepaper.gov.au

###### Contact

Enquiries about this document should be directed to:

Executive Branch
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
R G Casey Building, John McEwen Crescent
Barton ACT 0221
Australia

**Phone +61 2 6261 2518**

**Email whitepaper@dfat.gov.au**

Published in November 2017

Editing by Morris Walker Pty Ltd
Cover design by Swell Design Group Pty Ltd


-----

**FPWhitePaper.gov.au**


-----

