-----

## Foreword

Predicting the future is fraught with risk, but the
greater risk is in failing to plan for our destiny. As a
nation, we face a choice: to drift into our future or
to actively shape it.

That is why I commissioned the Australia in the Asian
Century White Paper. I took a clear decision that our
nation should actively plan for and shape our national
future. Only by doing so can we realise our vision of
being a land of increased opportunity, prosperity and
fairness.

Whatever else this century brings, it will bring
Asia’s rise.

The transformation of the Asian region into the economic powerhouse of the world is
not only unstoppable, it is gathering pace.

In this century, the region in which we live will become home to most of the world’s
middle class. Our region will be the world’s largest producer of goods and services
and the largest consumer of them.

History teaches us that as economic weight shifts, so does strategic weight.

Thriving in the Asian century therefore requires our nation to have a clear plan to
seize the economic opportunities that will flow and manage the strategic challenges
that will arise.

There are also great social and cultural benefits to be had from broadening and
deepening our people-to-people links across the region.

Our nation has benefited from Asia’s appetite for raw materials and energy. The
challenge we must now address is how Australia can benefit from what Asia will
need next.

Australians do not come to these tasks empty-handed.

Our economy is strong because over the past 30 years we have been prepared to do
the things that are necessary to build for tomorrow. This approach has given us
21 years of continuous economic growth.

As a nation we pulled together during the Global Financial Crisis to successfully avoid
recession and the loss of hundreds of thousands of jobs.

As a result of our courage to shape the future and our decisive action during the
Global Financial Crisis we come to this century of change with economic strength.

ii


-----

Government has shown the fortitude to identify the right changes and get them done,
in order to give us a more prosperous tomorrow.

We also have the benefits that come from a track record of engagement with the
nations of our region. Our principal relationships with China, India, Indonesia, Japan
and the Republic of Korea have strengthened in recent years. Our alliance with the
United States remains as strong as ever.

Our institutional regional engagement combines the ongoing strength of the
Asia–Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum with the now-developing East
Asia Summit. Our people-to-people links are also expanding as business, travel,
communications and study relationships in our region continue to grow.

But we must build on all of these strengths combined if we are to seize the
opportunities of the Asian century.

I want our nation to be a winner as our region changes and I want every Australian
to be a winner too.

Put simply, as a Labor Prime Minister I want the new opportunities that will come in
this century to be seized and shared. I want us to take an approach to the looming
change that is farsighted and focused on fairness.

This White Paper is a plan to build on our strengths and shape our future.

It details how, by 2025, Australia can be a winner in this Asian century by becoming
more prosperous, more resilient, and sharing the new opportunities.

It calls on all of us to play our part in becoming a more Asia-literate and Asia-capable
nation.

The Australian Government will play its part in leading our nation to this vision of
the future during a time of enormous change. Like past Labor governments, we will
manage and shape change with the aim of providing better opportunities for all.

I commend this White Paper to you and ask you to play your part in shaping our
future.

Julia Gillard

_Prime Minister of Australia_

iii


-----

-----

## Contents

##### Foreword ii

 Executive summary 1

 Chapter 1: The rise of Asia 28

 Chapter 2: The future of Asia to 2025 48

 Chapter 3: Australia in Asia 76

 Chapter 4: Outlook for Australia to 2025 104

 Chapter 5: A productive and resilient Australian economy 132

 Chapter 6: Building capabilities 160

 Chapter 7: Operating in and connecting to growing Asian markets 186

 Case study: Australia’s agriculture and food sector 213

 Chapter 8: Building sustainable security in the region 222

 Chapter 9: Deeper and broader relationships 250

 Appendix A: Asia’s resurgence 273

 Appendix B: Australia’s bilateral relationships with Asia 278

 Abbreviations 287

 Glossary 289

 References 297

 List of figures, charts and tables 311

v


-----

-----

## Executive summary

Asia’s rise is changing the world. This is a defining feature of the 21st century—the
Asian century. These developments have profound implications for people
everywhere.

Asia’s extraordinary ascent has already changed the Australian economy, society and
strategic environment. The scale and pace of the change still to come mean Australia
is entering a truly transformative period in our history.

Within only a few years, Asia will not only be the world’s largest producer of goods
and services, it will also be the world’s largest consumer of them. It is already the
most populous region in the world. In the future, it will also be home to the majority
of the world’s middle class.

The Asian century is an Australian opportunity. As the global centre of gravity shifts to
our region, the tyranny of distance is being replaced by the prospects of proximity.
Australia is located in the right place at the right time—in the Asian region in the
Asian century.

For several decades, Australian businesses, exporters and the community have grown
their footprint across the region. Today, for Australia, the minerals and energy boom
is the most visible, but not the only, aspect of Asia’s rise. As the century unfolds, the
growth in our region will impact on almost all of our economy and society.

An increasingly wealthy and mobile middle class is emerging in the region, creating
new opportunities. They are demanding a diverse range of goods and services, from
health and aged care to education to household goods, and tourism, banking and
financial services, as well as high-quality food products.

Beyond economic gains, there are many valuable opportunities for building stronger
relationships across the region, including through closer educational, cultural and
people-to-people links.

Our nation also has the strength that comes from a long history of engagement with
countries in Asia. Australia’s relationships in our region are strong and robust,
including with Asian nations like China, Japan, India, Indonesia and the Republic of
Korea (South Korea). But in this Asian century we must enter a new phase of deeper
and broader engagement.

This White Paper provides a roadmap for the whole of Australia—governments,
business, unions, and the broader community—in this next phase. Our goal is to
secure Australia as a more prosperous and resilient nation that is fully part of our
region and open to the world.

Australia starts from a position of strength. Just as our region has a lot to offer us,
we have a lot to offer our region. We have strong, world-leading institutions, a
multicultural and highly skilled workforce, and a productive, open and resilient

1


-----

economy, which is one of the strongest in the world. These assets have been
reinforced by a series of economic reforms and good decisions made over past
decades, including Australia’s world-beating actions to avoid the worst impacts of the
Global Financial Crisis.

Our strengths have long been reflected in Australia’s interaction with countries in
Asia. Over the past 50 years, Australia’s trade with Asia as a share of our total trade
has risen dramatically. Our financial, political and cultural links have deepened. We
have strong relationships and close friendships with countries across the region.

But Australia’s success will be based on choice, not chance. In order to succeed, we
must sustain the policy settings and pathways that have served us well. We need to
reinforce our strong social foundations, including our national institutions, our
cultural diversity and our outward-looking society.

We will need to do more than this—we all need to respond to the rapid changes
occurring in our region.

Australians need to act in five key areas in order to succeed in the Asian century.

First, irrespective of how the Asian century evolves, Australia’s prosperity will come
from building on our strengths. We need to reinforce the foundations of our fair
society and our prosperous, open and resilient economy at home. We need to build
on areas where we already perform well, in order to extend our comparative
advantage. Critical to this will be ongoing reform and investment across the five
pillars of productivity—skills and education, innovation, infrastructure, tax reform and
regulatory reform.

Second, as a nation we must do even more to develop the capabilities that will help
Australia succeed. Our greatest responsibility is to invest in our people through skills
and education to drive Australia’s productivity performance and ensure that all
Australians can participate and contribute. Capabilities that are particularly important
for the Asian century include job-specific skills, scientific and technical excellence,
adaptability and resilience. Using creativity and design-based thinking to solve
complex problems is a distinctive Australian strength that can help to meet the
emerging challenges of this century. As a nation we also need to broaden and deepen
our understanding of Asian cultures and languages, to become more Asia literate.
These capabilities are needed to build stronger connections and partnerships across
the region.

Third, Australia’s commercial success in the region requires that highly innovative,
competitive Australian firms and institutions develop collaborative relationships with
others in the region. Australian firms need new business models and new mindsets to
operate and connect with Asian markets. We will work to make the region more open
and integrated, encouraging trade, investment and partnerships. Firms will adapt
their business models to seize the opportunities created in our region.

2


-----

Fourth, Australia’s future is irrevocably tied to the stability and sustainable security of
our diverse region. Australia has much to offer through cooperation with other
nations to support sustainable security in the region. We will work to build trust and
cooperation, bilaterally and through existing regional mechanisms. We will continue
to support a greater role for Asian countries in a rules-based regional and global
order. Australia’s alliance with the United States and a strong US presence in Asia will
support regional stability, as will China’s full participation in regional developments.

Fifth, we need to strengthen Australia’s deep and broad relationships across the
region at every level. These links are social and cultural as much as they are political
and economic. Improving people-to-people links can unlock large economic and social
gains. While the Australian Government plays a leading role in strengthening and
building relationships with partners in the region—with more intensive diplomacy
across Asia—others across a broad spectrum spanning business, unions, community
groups and educational and cultural institutions also play an important role. Stronger
relationships will lead to more Australians having a deeper understanding of what is
happening in Asia and being able to access the benefits of growth in our region. In
turn, more of our neighbours in the region will know us better than they do today.

Success in the Asian century requires a whole-of-Australia effort, with businesses,
unions, communities and governments being partners in a transformation as
profound as any that have defined Australia throughout our history.

It is in the interests of all Australians—and therefore in the national interest—to
develop the capabilities and connections that Australia will need, so that we can
contribute to, and learn from, the region, and take full advantage of these
opportunities.

The challenges ahead require sustained effort; Australians cannot build stronger
relationships or learn new skills overnight, or even over five years, especially given the
diversity of the countries in our region. Some actions can be taken immediately, but
others require further conversation among communities across the nation, detailed
planning and careful implementation over a generation.

Chapters 1 to 4 of the White Paper explain the extraordinary rise of Asia over recent
decades and its likely future to 2025 (Figure 1). They examine Australia’s place in Asia
and our outlook to 2025. This sets the scene for a roadmap for Australia in the Asian
century.

Chapters 5 to 9 set out an ambitious set of national objectives and pathways to guide
Australia to 2025 (Figure 2). Advancing and implementing these national objectives
sets the agenda for taking full advantage of the Asian century, but achieving these
objectives will require a concerted and coordinated effort from the entire community.

3


-----

##### Figure 1: Setting the context for the Asian century

- staggering scale and pace of rise ahead

- investment in people and - shifting trade and
capital

- market and institutional - competition for
reform resources

- open global trading - prosperity through
systems and stability stability

- Asia has changed the world


**provides great**
**opportunities**

**Chapter 3:**
Australia in Asia


**Chapter 2:**
The future of
Asia to 2025

**The**
**rise of Asia**



- Australia’s comparative
advantages

- demographic and
environmental challenges

- opportunities arising
from Asia’s development


**provides great**
**opportunities**
**for Australia**

**Chapter 4:**
Outlook for Australia
to 2025



- developing institutional
connections

- opening up the Australian
economy

- cultural contributions to
Australian society


**Chapter 1:**
The rise of Asia

**The**
**rise of Asia**


4


-----

##### Figure 2: Roadmap to navigate the Asian century

skills and education - schools

                                  - universities

                                  - vocational training

                                  - participation

                                  institutions

                                  - adaptability

macroeconomic and - fair, multicultural and
financial frameworks cohesive society

**Chapter 5** **Chapter 6**
A productive Building
and resilient capabilities
Australian
economy

**By 2025,**
**Australia will be**
**a more**
**prosperous and** **Chapter 7**

**Chapter 9** **resilient nation,** Operating in
Deeper and **fully part of the** and connecting
broader **region and open** to growing
relationships **to the world** Asian

markets

**Chapter 8**
Building sustainable
security in the region

                                    
stronger and more

opportunities

                                    
              - security has underpinned

chains

Asia’s development

                                    
              - changing security

                                    
environment

              - building trust

              - comprehensive national,
collective and human
security

5


**resilient nation,**
**fully part of the**
**region and open**
**to the world**

**Chapter 8**
Building sustainable
security in the region


**Chapter 5**
A productive
and resilient
Australian
economy


-----

### The rise of Asia

The pace and scale of change in the region have been staggering (Chart 1).[1] In the
past 20 years, China and India have almost tripled their share of the global economy
and increased their absolute economic size almost six times over. By 2025, the region
as a whole will account for almost half the world’s output. Many millions of people
will have been lifted out of poverty. They will live longer and be better connected to
the world.

##### Chart 1: Asia’s economic resurgence is set to continue


20,000 Income per person US$ Income per person US$

2025

15,000

10,000

2010

5,000 1990

1970

1820 1870 1913 1950

0


20,000

15,000

10,000

5,000

0


Asia’s ability to capitalise on open global markets for goods and services has been
crucial to its economic transformation. Central to this has been a widespread
commitment to investing in people and physical capital.

Asia continues to develop against a backdrop of persistent global challenges. First
among these is the present weakness in major advanced economies, where more
moderate economic growth is expected. Second, there are global challenges such as
climate change and other emerging challenges in the areas of food, water and energy
security. Third, Asia has policy challenges of its own, including the continuation of
market-based reforms to promote economically and environmentally sustainable
growth, dealing with urbanisation, ageing populations in some countries and
developing social safety nets.

1 The bubble area in Chart 1 reflects the size of GDP for Asia’s economies, adjusted for purchasing
power parity in 2011 prices (Maddison 2010, IMF 2012c, Conference Board 2012 and Treasury
projections). See glossary for definition of Asia and description of projections.

6


-----

Asia’s economic rise is shifting other dynamics in the region and across the globe. The
United States will remain the most powerful strategic actor in Asia for the foreseeable
future. But the economic growth and broader international interests of Asia’s large
powers, especially China and India, are changing the established strategic order.
Rising national wealth is allowing states to modernise their defence forces, to acquire
more advanced capabilities and to project power. At the same time, economic growth
will put more pressure on energy, water and food resources. Existing regional
strategic tensions remain, such as North Korea’s nuclear program and unresolved
territorial disputes. Australia’s strategic landscape is becoming more crowded and
complex.

The stability and prosperity of our region will depend on how major-power relations
evolve, particularly between China, India, Japan and the United States. A degree of
competition is inevitable as Asia’s strategic order changes. But all countries in the
region have a deep investment in stability and economic growth: the complex
interdependencies and growing bilateral engagement are strong stabilising forces.

Still, while the likelihood of miscalculation may be low, the potential consequences
would be high. These risks are driving bilateral and regional efforts to build trust,
dialogue and habits of cooperation in the region, and those efforts are explored in
this White Paper.

### Australia in Asia

Australia is in a good position to make the most of the opportunities that will flow
from the Asian century. Despite uneven conditions across sectors, Australia has one
of the strongest economies in the world and a bright outlook. Unemployment is low.
Inflation is contained. The terms of trade are high. While commodity prices appear to
have passed their record peak, considerable minerals and energy investment is still to
come and large-scale production and exports are yet to flow.

Australia’s public finances are among the strongest in the world. Government debt is
low. Our financial institutions are sound and we have the highest possible sovereign
credit rating. We have a multicultural, highly skilled and creative population that has
demonstrated capabilities in innovation and complex problem solving. We have vast
natural resources and the know-how and technologies to develop them.

Australia’s foreign policy and strategic frameworks have built strong relationships in
the region, enabling us to influence regional and, at times, global outcomes.

While Australia has many strengths, we will need to take action to ensure we
continually adapt to the rapid changes in our region and transitions in our own
economy.

Over the past decade, Asia’s demand for Australia’s natural resources has created a
once-in-a-lifetime surge in our terms of trade and an extraordinary boom in minerals
and energy investment. This delivered a substantial increase in national income, even
though productivity growth has been modest over the past decade.

7


-----

While Australia’s terms of trade are expected to remain high for some time yet,
productivity growth remains critical to lifting living standards in Australia. This
requires growth that is broadly based and sustainable.

Our goal is to ensure that Australians have higher incomes in a more diverse economy
that is resilient in the face of ongoing change.

The Asian century offers a wealth of opportunities and career choices in a variety of
businesses (including small and medium-sized enterprises), especially for Australia’s
young people:

- in mining and resource related sectors—continued economic development in the
region will drive demand for energy and mineral resources

- in tourism, sport, education, the arts and creative industries, professional, banking
and financial services, and science and technology—thanks to growing affluence in
Asia

- in agriculture—rising food demand, connected to rising populations and an
expanding middle class in Asia, offers an opportunity for Australia to be an
important supplier of high-value food, requiring greater investment by
agribusinesses to boost output and research, adapt to regulatory change and build
capacity

- in manufacturing and services—as Australian businesses join regional and global
value chains and over time become increasingly integrated and specialised, they
will offer high-value and innovative products and services

- in environmentally sustainable growth, natural resource management,
infrastructure development, urban design and health and aged care—as
Australians leverage their expertise to do business with their neighbours.

To seize these opportunities, Australia must create deeper connections with Asia to
broaden the flow of ideas and acquire new knowledge and capabilities. Asia is an
important source of new ideas, arts and culture, technologies and leading-edge
science. Australia stands to benefit greatly from Asia’s advance. Increasingly, we look
to measure our performance against standards of excellence in the region.

The arts, culture and creativity can broaden and strengthen Australia’s relationships
in Asia, both formally and informally. Australia’s cultural strengths—as home to the
world’s oldest living culture, and as a country that welcomes diversity—underpin
values of respect, understanding and inclusion that help to connect people, business,
institutions and governments.

Two-way people movements between Australia and the rest of the region will further
strengthen the fabric of Australian society and our way of life. Australia is well
positioned to continue attracting highly skilled and talented people from the region to
live, study and work in Australia—just as Australians have much to offer the region in
return.

8


-----

Not all parts of the Australian economy are facing the same opportunities at the
present time; some industries and regions are working through difficult transitions.
The Government, in partnership with business, unions and the wider community, is
committed to targeted support for sectors and regions in transition, including by
improving skills and education and helping with access to domestic and international
markets.

As some business models are challenged, new development opportunities are
opening up in other areas. Australia’s regions make an important contribution to the
economic, social and environmental fabric of our nation. Regional Australia is home to
around one-third of our population. Primary industries, which are concentrated in
regional Australia, make up close to two-thirds of our exports. Strong demand from
Asia will support development across northern Australia from Western Australia to
Queensland, including in Darwin, and in other regions including Tasmania and the
Upper Spencer Gulf.

Australia has a track record of managing immense structural adjustments more
effectively than many other countries. But the scale of change and opportunity
presented by the Asian century is large and enduring; it requires a whole-of-Australia
effort across the whole federation. Businesses, communities and institutions all need
to lead their own responses to the changing global economy.

All of us will need to work smarter to maximise prosperity and manage challenges
well. For the Government, that means continuing what we have done in recent years,
by making the right decisions and continuing the proud tradition of reform that has
spanned decades.

### Twenty-five national objectives for 2025: a roadmap to navigate the Asian century

The rise of Asia provides great opportunities for Australia. To achieve the vision of a
more prosperous and resilient Australia, fully part of the Asian region and open to the
world, the Government has identified 25 objectives for the nation for 2025. These
national objectives are set out in detail below, along with policy pathways to guide
their achievement.

#### A productive and resilient Australian economy (Chapter 5)

Together, the objectives and pathways in the roadmap provide mechanisms to
strengthen Australia’s economy and society.

- By 2025, Australia’s GDP per person will be in the world’s top 10,
up from 13th in 2011, requiring a lift in our productivity.

- This will mean Australia’s average real national income will be about
$73,000 per person in 2025 compared with about $62,000 in 2012.

9


-----

**_Skills and education_**

1. All Australians will have the opportunity to acquire the skills and education they
need to participate fully in a strong economy and a fairer society.

   - Australia’s school systems will be in the top five schooling systems in the world
and our universities and training systems will be among the world’s best.

**Pathways**

  - Improve Australia’s early childhood education, schools, universities and training
systems as strong foundations for building capability to improve productivity
and connections with Asian nations (the full set of pathways is in national
objectives 9–13 below).

  - Increase participation among groups currently under-represented in the
workforce, including through education and training, child care, paid parental
leave, employment services and assistance for older Australians, so that more
Australians can benefit from the Asian century.

  - Continue to develop, through the Fair Work Act 2009, and ongoing partnership,
a workforce culture in which employees, employers and unions collaborate for
continuous improvement and productivity growth.

**_Innovation_**

2. Australia will have an innovation system, in the top 10 globally, that supports
excellence and dynamism in business with a creative problem-solving culture that
enhances our evolving areas of strength and attracts top researchers, companies
and global partnerships.

**Pathways**

  - Through the Industry and Innovation Statement, articulate an ambitious
industry and innovation policy agenda for Australian business to create new
jobs and seize new market opportunities.

  - Through the National Research Investment Plan, provide a framework for
investment in Australia’s scientific capabilities—including our research
infrastructure, Australia’s workforce and fostering globalisation—to sustain our
ability to help address the global challenges we and the region face.

  - Improve financing options for Australia’s innovation system to make it easier to
attract private investment, encourage entrepreneurship, build on government
investment in science and technology and commercialise our ideas.

  - Support collaboration across business, the research sector and governments to
build scale and capability that encourages innovation, allowing Australia to
make the most of emerging opportunities in the Asian region.

  - Support Australian researchers to broaden and strengthen their partnerships
with the region as Asia grows as a global science and innovation hub.

10


-----

**_Infrastructure_**

3. Australia will implement a systematic national framework for developing,
financing and maintaining nationally significant infrastructure that will assist
governments and the private sector to plan and prioritise infrastructure needs at
least 20 years ahead.

   - Infrastructure investment will support Australia’s growing trade and
investment with the region, improve productivity and will reduce future
congestion costs by billions of dollars a year.

**Pathways**

  - Work, including through Infrastructure Australia, with States and Territories,
the private sector and academic institutions, to expand existing infrastructure
plans by creating a long-term national infrastructure strategy that focuses on
corridor planning, cross-jurisdictional networks and projects of national
significance.

  - Work with States and Territories to increase private sector involvement in new
infrastructure projects, including removing barriers to investors (including
superannuation funds) participating in infrastructure financing, and consider
alternative ways to speed up project delivery.

  - Improve the productivity, amenity and liveability of Australia’s cities by helping
provide transparent and forward-looking analysis to support the States and
Territories to deliver on their responsibilities, through forums such as the
Standing Council on Transport and Infrastructure.

  - Sharpen rules governing infrastructure provision and use, including by
promoting greater competition in retail energy markets, ensuring energy
network investment is efficient and avoiding unnecessary costs, as outlined in
our forthcoming Energy White Paper, and reviewing third-party access
regulation.

4. Australia’s communications infrastructure and markets will be world leading and
support the rapid exchange and spread of ideas and commerce in the Asian
region.

   - The National Broadband Network (NBN) will have bridged geographical
barriers to Asian markets, allowing all Australian businesses and households to
conduct more of their activities online.

   - All Australians will have access to high-speed broadband through a nationwide
fibre network and wireless satellite services.

   - Australia will have high-speed broadband fibre to 93 per cent of premises,
rolled out progressively to 2021 and capable of supporting speeds of
one gigabit per second.

11


-----

**Pathways**

  - Complete the rollout of the NBN to enhance digital commerce and productivity
and boost trade and wider economic ties with Asia.

  - Review and examine regulatory and other barriers to expanding into new
technological markets, including through increased use of the NBN.

**_Tax system_**

5. Australia’s tax and transfer system will be efficient and fair, encouraging
continued investment in the capital base and greater participation in the
workforce, while delivering sustainable revenues to support economic growth by
meeting public and social needs.

**Pathways**

  - Ensure the tax system continues to support businesses to invest and adapt to
take advantage of the Asian century, including through measures like the loss
carry-back for companies and simpler tax arrangements for small business such
as the immediate deduction for assets costing less than $6,500.

  - Ensure that the tax, transfer and superannuation system encourages
Australians, particularly older Australians, to participate in the workforce and
provides access to a minimum standard of living in retirement.

  - Lift the tax-free threshold to at least $21,000, freeing more Australians from
having to lodge a tax return and raising participation in the labour market.

  - Facilitate State and Territory-led tax reform, to phase out their inefficient taxes
and make better use of their efficient tax bases, including through processes
like the State tax plan being developed by the New South Wales and South
Australian Treasurers.

  - Establish the Tax Studies Institute to provide policy-relevant research that will
inform debate about tax reform goals and transitional pathways and provide
opportunities for regional collaboration and exchange.

  - Continue the national conversation about tax reform with business and
community groups, including through processes such as working groups and
roundtables.

**_Regulatory reform_**

6. Australia will be among the most efficiently regulated places in the world, in the
top five globally, reducing business costs by billions of dollars a year.

**Pathways**

  - Progress the six priority areas for major reform to lower costs for business and
improve competition and productivity as agreed by the Council of Australian
Governments (COAG) in April 2012.

12


-----

  - Enter into a National Productivity Compact with the States and Territories and
business to pursue regulatory and competition reform.

  - Progress high-value reforms already identified by the Business Regulation and
Competition Working Group and the Standing Council on Federal Financial
Relations.

  - Reduce reporting burdens on business by removing overlaps and expanding the
use of online business reporting.

  - Through COAG and processes such as the Business Advisory Forum, pursue
continuous improvements to lift regulatory performance across all areas of
regulatory practice, with a particular focus on the application of risk-based
approaches and giving greater attention to reform implementation and
enforcement.

**_Environmental sustainability_**

7. The Australian economy and our environmental assets will be managed
sustainably to ensure the wellbeing of future generations of Australians.

   - Australia will have reduced emissions by at least 5 per cent below 2000 levels
and we will be well on our way to securing a clean energy future in which
emissions are 80 per cent below 2000 levels by 2050.

   - Australia will be a world leader in implementing sustainable food production
methods, in sustainable energy and water use, and in biodiversity
conservation.

**Pathways**

  - Fully implement our Clean Energy Future policies, alongside international
action, to reduce Australia’s emissions intensity and absolute greenhouse gas
emissions, through changes to the land sector, developing cleaner energy
sources and linking with international carbon trading systems.

  - Maintain our commitment to ensuring that 20 per cent of Australia’s electricity
is generated by renewable energy sources by 2020.

  - Continue to support Australia being a world leader in the research and
development of solar energy technologies, and becoming a world leader in the
commercialisation and deployment of renewable energy technologies and
energy efficiency.

  - Achieve healthy rivers, strong communities and sustainable food production,
including through finalising the Murray–Darling Basin Plan.

  - Assess biodiversity impacts of growing demand for Australia’s non-renewable
resources as part of the review of Australia’s Biodiversity Conservation Strategy
2010–2030 scheduled for 2015.

13


-----

  - Implement the world’s largest marine reserve network and continue to protect
Australia’s biodiversity on the land.

  - Support the ongoing development and use of environmental accounting in
Australia.

**_Macroeconomic and financial frameworks_**

8. Australia’s macroeconomic and financial frameworks will remain among the
world’s best through this period of change.

   - Australia will have a strong and sustainable fiscal position and will continue to
have a triple-A sovereign credit rating.

   - Australia will have a deep and liquid corporate bond market to harness our
national savings so that more investment is domestically funded and we have
less reliance on offshore wholesale funding markets.

**Pathways**

  - Maintain the macroeconomic policy settings that have supported Australia’s
long-term economic growth, including a floating exchange rate, independent
monetary policy and a medium-term fiscal framework.

  - Meet our fiscal targets of achieving budget surpluses, on average, over the
medium term (including through maintaining a 2 per cent annual cap on real
spending growth, on average, until surpluses are at least 1 per cent of GDP and
while the economy is growing at or above trend) and improving the
Government’s net worth over the medium term.

  - Build further on the strength, stability and competitiveness of Australia’s
financial system by implementing the Basel ΙΙΙ capital and liquidity standards,
boosting superannuation balances, and ensuring reasonably priced credit for
productive investment and more choice for households.

  - Ensure that Australia has an efficient and well-regulated funds management
industry, to support strong growth in funds under management.

  - Support the development of a deep and liquid domestic corporate bond market
by streamlining market disclosure obligations in the retail corporate bond
market and reducing transaction costs, while maintaining a high level of
protection for retail investors.

  - Provide a more visible benchmark price for Australian corporate bonds by
allowing Commonwealth Government Securities to be traded on a securities
exchange.

14


-----

#### Building capabilities (Chapter 6)

**_Through schools_**

9. Australia’s school system will be in the top five schooling systems in the world,
delivering excellent outcomes for all students of all backgrounds, and
systematically improving performance over time.

   - By 2025, Australia will be ranked as a top five country in the world for the
performance of our students in reading, science and mathematics literacy and
for providing our children with a high-quality and high-equity education
system.

   - By 2015, 90 per cent of young Australians aged 20 to 24 years will have a
Year 12 or equivalent qualification, up from 86 per cent in 2010.

**Pathways**

  - Legislate and deliver the National Plan for School Improvement, in partnership
with States and Territories and non-government school authorities. The plan
will ensure that school funding meets student needs and additional funding is
used to improve students’ results, so that all schools get the funding they need
to give students a great education. The plan will improve teacher quality,
empower school principals and provide more information to parents and the
community.

  - Implement, through the National Plan for School Improvement, the Australian
Curriculum in partnership with States and Territories and non-government
school authorities to upgrade student skills for the Asian century.

10. Every Australian student will have significant exposure to studies of Asia across
the curriculum to increase their cultural knowledge and skills and enable them to
be active in the region.

   - All schools will engage with at least one school in Asia to support the teaching
of a priority Asian language, including through increased use of the National
Broadband Network.

**Pathways**

  - Fully implement the Australian Curriculum, which includes the cross-curriculum
priority of ‘Asia and Australia’s engagement in Asia’. Develop measures to track
how Australian students are increasing their knowledge of Asia, in consultation
with States and Territories and non-government education authorities.

  - Work collaboratively with States, Territories, non-government education
authorities and higher education institutions to develop detailed strategies for
studies of Asia to become a core part of school education.

15


-----

11. All Australian students will have the opportunity, and be encouraged, to
undertake a continuous course of study in an Asian language throughout their
years of schooling.

   - All students will have access to at least one priority Asian language; these will
be Chinese (Mandarin), Hindi, Indonesian and Japanese.

**Pathways**

  - Ensure that every Australian student has continuous access to high-quality
Asian language curriculums, assessment and reporting in priority Asian
languages as a core requirement in the new school funding arrangements to be
negotiated between the Commonwealth, the States and Territories, and
non-government education authorities.

  - Lead a collaborative process with States and Territories, non-government
education authorities and tertiary education institutions to develop detailed
strategies for studies of Asia and Asian language take-up in schools, including
through increased use of the National Broadband Network.

  - Work with business and the community to increase understanding of the
benefits of learning a foreign language and boost demand for language studies.

**_Through universities_**

12. Australia will remain among the world’s best for research and teaching in
universities, delivering excellent outcomes for a larger number of Australian
students, attracting the best academics and students from around the world and
strengthening links between Australia and the region.

   - By 2020, 20 per cent of undergraduate higher education enrolments will be
people from low socioeconomic backgrounds, up from 17 per cent in 2011.

   - By 2025, 40 per cent of all 25 to 34-year-olds will hold a qualification at
bachelor level or above, up from 35 per cent in 2011.

   - By 2025, 10 of Australia’s universities will be in the world’s top 100.

   - A larger number of Australian university students will be studying overseas and
a greater proportion will be undertaking part of their degree in Asia.

**Pathways**

  - Progress higher education reform to continue improving the reach, quality,
performance and flexibility of Australia’s higher education system, including a
strengthening of our international education sector informed by the
International Education Advisory Council.

  - Work with universities to substantially boost the number of Australian students
studying in Asia through closer links with regional institutions, and improve
financial support and information for students who study in Asia.

16


-----

  - Support universities to increase the number of students who undertake Asian
studies and Asian languages as part of their university education, including
through increased use of the National Broadband Network and digital
technology.

  - Encourage every Australian university to have a presence in Asia and establish
an exchange arrangement involving transferable credits with at least one major
Asian university.

  - Support, through the Australian Research Council and other mechanisms,
high-quality research by Australian publicly funded research organisations and
strengthen research and teaching links between Australian institutions and
those in the region.

**_Through the vocational education and training system_**

13. Australia will have vocational education and training systems that are among the
world’s best, building capability in the region and supporting a highly skilled
Australian workforce able to continuously develop its capabilities.

   - By 2020, more than three-quarters of working-age Australians will have an
entry-level qualification (at the Certificate III level or higher), up from just
under half in 2009.

   - Australia’s vocational education and training institutions will have substantially
expanded services in more nations in the region, building the productive
capacity of the workforce of these nations and supporting Australian
businesses and workers to have a greater presence in Asian markets.

**Pathways**

  - Work with States and Territories to implement the new National
Partnership Agreement on Skills Reform to ensure that more Australians
receive higher-quality vocational education and training that responds to
industry and student demand.

  - Address Australia’s changing skills needs through improved planning,
investment and delivery, guided by the new Australian Workforce and
Productivity Agency, educators and Industry Skills Councils.

  - Work with business and Australian industry partners, through regional forums
and bilaterally, to build in-country partnerships and to develop complementary
skills and qualification assessment and recognition.

  - Strengthen networks between Industry Skills Councils, Australian industry and
unions, and their counterparts in the region.

17


-----

**_Asia-capable leaders, workplaces and institutions_**

14. Decision makers in Australian businesses, parliaments, national institutions
(including the Australian Public Service and national cultural institutions) and
advisory forums across the community will have deeper knowledge and expertise
of countries in our region and have a greater capacity to integrate domestic and
international issues.

   - One-third of board members of Australia’s top 200 publicly listed companies
and Commonwealth bodies (including companies, authorities, agencies and
commissions) will have deep experience in and knowledge of Asia.

   - One-third of the senior leadership of the Australian Public Service (APS 200)
will have deep experience in and knowledge of Asia.

**Pathways**

  - Encourage boards to include more businesspeople with direct expertise from
within the region.

  - Encourage the Australian Institute of Company Directors to integrate Asian
cultural competency training into its company directors course.

  - Encourage leading peak business organisations to report annually on progress,
including through cooperation with the ASX Corporate Governance Council to
incorporate into its principles and recommendations reporting on business
practices and processes to promote relevant Asian expertise and knowledge.

  - Encourage the Australian Council of Trade Unions and the broader union
movement to develop greater regional expertise and build stronger
partnerships in the region.

  - Strengthen the Australian Public Service by improving capabilities for
integrated policy analysis, problem solving and implementation across
domestic and international matters. A strategy will be developed by the
Secretary of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and the
Australian Public Service Commissioner to develop these capabilities.

  - Build stronger ministerial relationships through more regular bilateral and
regional engagement with counterparts in Asia to pursue policy outcomes.

  - Build stronger relationships through interactive programs and regular
exchanges of senior officials at mid-career points, including through the
university sector.

18


-----

**_Adaptability_**

15. Australian communities and regions will benefit from structural changes in the
economy and seize the new opportunities emerging in the Asian century.

**Pathways**

  - Work cooperatively with industries and businesses to develop strategies to
ensure sustainable growth and jobs.

  - Work with communities and regions right across Australia to help them manage
structural transition, diversify their economies and take advantage of new
opportunities that promote sustainable growth.

  - Work together with business and the Northern Territory Government to
accelerate Darwin’s evolution as a sophisticated, liveable city built around a
gateway to Asia, and a regional hub for a large number of goods and services,
through coordinated infrastructure, planning and international engagement
activities. Explore options to extend this strategy to other well-positioned,
high-growth centres in northern Australia as well as other regions across
Australia with growing links to Asia.

**_Social foundations_**

16. Australia will be a higher skill, higher wage economy with a fair, multicultural and
cohesive society and a growing population, and all Australians will be able to
benefit from, and participate in, Australia’s growing prosperity and engagement
in Asia.

**Pathways**

  - Maintain and support Australia’s stable, liberal democratic institutions and
laws.

  - Maintain world-leading social systems, including pensions and family support,
and pursue long-term social reforms and investments such as the National
Disability Insurance Scheme and health and aged care reform.

  - Work with all levels of government, together with businesses and communities,
to promote a cohesive and multicultural society through continued
commitments to anti-racism policies and Closing the Gap with Indigenous
Australians.

  - Draw on Australia’s diverse population by supporting a wide range of
partnerships and networks—with migrant communities, Australians living
abroad, people who have previously lived and worked in Australia, and others
who have a special connection with Australia and Australians.

  - Maintain a flexible, responsive and well-planned migration framework,
including Australia’s skilled migration programs, that meets our changing
needs, maintains opportunities for Australians and supports our engagement in
the region.

19


-----

#### Operating in and connecting with growing Asian markets (Chapter 7)

17. Australia’s businesses will be recognised globally for their excellence and ability to
operate successfully in Asian markets.

   - Australian businesses will offer high-value goods and services as they link into
regional and global value chains.

   - Small and medium-sized enterprises will be integrated into Asian markets.

**Pathways**

  - Develop strong dialogues between government and business here and in the
region, including through our Asian Century Business Engagement Plan, to
make the most of our opportunities in the region.

  - Ensure that the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Austrade, Enterprise
Connect, Tourism Australia, the Export Finance and Insurance Corporation
(EFIC) and other government bodies work with peak industry bodies and small
and medium-sized enterprises to build capabilities and identify and secure
opportunities to compete and succeed in regional value chains.

  - Revise EFIC’s mandate to ensure more of its resources are devoted to
addressing the market failures that impede Australia’s small and medium-sized
exporters, especially in emerging and frontier markets.

18. The Australian economy will be more open and integrated with Asia, the flow of
goods, services, capital, ideas and people will be easier, and Australian businesses
and investors will have greater access to opportunities in Asia.

   - Australia’s trade links with Asia will be at least one-third of GDP by 2025, up
from one-quarter in 2011.

   - Australia will be part of comprehensive region-wide agreements that
substantially reduce the cost of doing business in Asian markets by lowering
trade and investment barriers, better aligning economic regulations and
corporate governance arrangements, and enhancing connectivity of
infrastructure.

   - Businesses in Australia and the region will have well-developed working
relationships based on a good understanding of each other’s legal institutions,
commercial practices and corporate governance standards.

**Pathways in Australia**

  - Continue to reduce Australian tariffs through scheduled reductions and
negotiated commitments as part of World Trade Organization and other trade
agreements.

  - Work to reduce unnecessary impediments in Australia’s domestic regulations
to cross-border business activity, investment and skilled-labour mobility, having
regard to the arrangements in place in other countries in the region.

20


-----

- Work with business, and with partner governments in the region, to improve
Australia’s border management framework, adopting an intelligence-led
risk-based approach that manages threats effectively while reducing
impediments to legitimate trade and travel.

- Make it easier for low-risk visitors to come to Australia, through longer period
and multiple entry visas and greater use of online visas. To encourage more
tourists from emerging markets, from China in particular, the Government will
build on the trial of streamlined visa processes for independent Chinese tourists
and continue to promote Australia as a preferred destination across the region.

- Continue to welcome foreign investment in Australia and promote Australia as
an investment destination, including by engaging major investors and investing
nations.

- Continue to enhance the transparency of Australia’s foreign investment
screening processes.

**Pathways abroad**

- Work persistently to reduce barriers to trade and investment through existing
multilateral and regional forums such as the World Trade Organization, the
Group of Twenty (G20), the Asia–Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum,
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and its free trade
agreement partners, and also through bilateral engagement.

- Work towards a free trade agreement of the Asia–Pacific region by encouraging
competitive liberalisation in regional agreements, through our ongoing
participation in negotiations for the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement, and
participating in negotiations for the Regional Comprehensive Economic
Partnership.

- Promote rules of origin in trade agreements that lower business compliance
costs and facilitate trade.

- Assess the benefits of joining with the Pacific Alliance of Chile, Colombia,
Mexico and Peru, as part of our efforts to position Australia as a connecting rod
between Latin America and Asia.

- Work to increase access for Australian investment in Asian markets.

- Continue to advocate market-based reforms in Asia that promote stable,
efficient and open financial markets; for example, through further work
towards the establishment of direct trading between the Australian dollar and
the Chinese renminbi in mainland China.

- Support efforts towards complementarity of financial market regulations within
the region to open up market opportunities; for example, through APEC’s
financial market integration efforts, including the Asia Region Funds Passport
initiative.

21


-----

  - Work with partners in the region on ‘behind the border’ initiatives to build an
integrated and resilient regional economy and open up market opportunities
for Australia, especially in our areas of expertise such as infrastructure,
agriculture and food, education, health and aged care, finance and regulation
of services.

#### Australia’s agriculture and food sector (Case study)

19. Australia’s agriculture and food production system will be globally competitive,
with productive and sustainable agriculture and food businesses.

   - Australian food producers and processors will be recognised globally as
innovative and reliable producers of more and higher-quality food and
agricultural products, services and technology to Asia.

**Pathways**

  - Implement the National Food Plan to foster an integrated food system where
policies along the supply chain benefit food businesses and consumers and
ensure Australia is a sustainable and productive supplier of nutritious and
affordable food for its people and the world.

  - Maintain the rural research and development corporation model to boost
productivity through advances in collaboration, science and innovation.

  - Increase Australia’s participation in Asia’s markets through providing services to
assist food and agricultural exporters, and support two-way investment with
the Asian region in food and food processing, related transport infrastructure,
natural resource management and water conservation to drive the
development of Australia’s regional and remote areas, particularly across
northern Australia and Tasmania.

  - Use trade negotiations, existing intergovernmental agreements,
government-to-government relationships and our overseas network to
promote freer trade in agricultural and food products, support food security in
the region and improve market access for Australian producers.

  - Implement world-class biosecurity reforms that provide for the efficient
movement of people and imported and exported goods while protecting
Australia’s unique environment, the health of our people and our agriculture
and food industries.

  - Ensure Australian food producers and processors make efficient use of our
natural resources, including soil, water and energy, to support productivity
growth and maintain the sustainability of those natural resources.

22


-----

#### Building sustainable security in the region (Chapter 8)

20. Australian policies will contribute to Asia’s development as a region of sustainable
security in which habits of cooperation are the norm.

**Pathways**

  - Promote cooperative arrangements among major powers in the region—China,
Japan, Indonesia, India and the United States—as the economic and strategic
landscape shifts.

  - Continue to promote fair representation of Asian nations in key international
organisations, reflecting their increased economic weight, and encourage these
nations to be part of, and help shape, these rules-based institutions.

  - Support China’s participation in the region’s strategic, political and economic
development.

  - Work with the United States to ensure that it continues to have a strong and
consistent presence in the region, with our alliance contributing to regional
stability, security and peace.

  - Maintain a comprehensive approach to security, including the release of a
National Security Statement and a Defence White Paper, informed by this
White Paper.

  - Maintain Australia’s strong support for global, regional and bilateral security
frameworks and norms based on the United Nations Charter.

  - Work for global economic stability and cooperative major-power relations
through the G20, which Australia will host in 2014, with a clear focus on
economic growth and jobs, strengthening the global economy and making
global rules and institutions effective and relevant in a period of economic
change.

  - Use global forums such as the United Nations and the G20, including through
our hosting of the G20 in 2014 and our membership of the UN Security Council,
to strengthen regional relationships and in turn use these relationships to
address global and regional issues and strengthen these institutions.

  - Work in the region to develop the East Asia Summit as a crucial regional
institution in East Asia so that it can help manage regional challenges, foster
strategic dialogue and promote cooperation on political, economic and security
issues.

  - Pursue practical cooperation and build local capability with regional partners
across a range of issues such as terrorism, people smuggling, transnational
crime, non-proliferation and disarmament, human rights, and disaster
mitigation and management.

23


-----

21. The region will be more sustainable and human security will be strengthened with
the development of resilient markets for basic needs such as energy, food and
water.

**Pathways**

  - Work within the region to support growing international carbon markets,
energy, food and water, including by improving regulations that recognise the
links across these markets.

  - Support the ongoing development and use of environmental accounting in the
region through cooperation between national statistical agencies.

  - Working within the region, build the capability of the food supply system,
including through research and development, to ensure a competitive industry
and stronger trade and investment partnerships.

  - Build a well-functioning and comprehensive international carbon market by
sharing experience and expertise with partner nations, including China,
Indonesia, Japan and South Korea.

  - Foster a constructive debate and cooperative solutions in global and regional
forums on energy markets; and support regional partners to improve energy
efficiency and enhance cooperation on research and development, and the
deployment and commercialisation of new technology.

  - Continue to be a reliable and high-quality development partner through
collaborative relationships aimed at reducing poverty and improving
sustainability.

#### Deeper and broader relationships (Chapter 9)

22. Australia will have the necessary capabilities to promote Australian interests and
maintain Australia’s influence.

   - Australia’s diplomatic network will have a larger footprint across Asia.

**Pathways**

  - Work with and through all levels of government, business, institutions and the
community to promote Australian interests in the region.

  - When circumstances allow, open a full embassy in Ulaanbaatar (Mongolia) and
consulates in Shenyang (China), Phuket (Thailand) and in eastern Indonesia.

  - Appoint a Jakarta-based Ambassador to ASEAN to support engagement with
the ASEAN Secretariat, ASEAN members and ASEAN-related forums.

  - Ensure that all government departments and agencies embed international
considerations into their domestic policy analysis and implementation and
prioritise working relationships with their regional counterparts.

24


-----

  - Support stronger relationships between State and Territory and local
governments and their counterparts in the region, including by broadening and
promoting sub-national relationships as well as the value of sister-city and
sister-state relationships.

23. Australia will have stronger and more comprehensive relationships with countries
across the region, especially with key regional nations—China, India, Indonesia,
Japan and South Korea.

**Pathways**

  - Extend our comprehensive bilateral architecture, with China and India being
immediate priorities.

  - Develop bilateral architecture that includes: regular high-level meetings
between leaders, senior ministers and senior business leaders; dialogue
between young leaders; and substantial flows of people and ideas between
institutions, including parliaments, educational and cultural institutions,
business and public services.

  - Work with the Australian community to develop comprehensive country
strategies, with China, India, Indonesia, Japan and South Korea as the initial
priorities. These strategies will set out the objectives and priorities for
relationships across the whole community with each country. They will be
tabled in Parliament and regularly evaluated and updated.

  - Strengthen Australia’s economic and business diplomacy through deeper and
more comprehensive bilateral ties between Australian and regional economic
agencies, greater Australian involvement in regional economic forums and
stronger links between Australian and regional business and Australian-based
think-tank and university networks (Track 2 diplomacy).

  - Ensure that the newly reconfigured Australia Network service, combining the
resources and experience of Australia Network and Radio Australia, provides an
effective public diplomacy tool with a large online component to build
knowledge about Australia in the region.

24. Australia will have deeper and broader people-to-people links with Asian nations,
across the entire community.

**Pathways**

  - Commit to 12,000 Australia Awards (Asian Century) over five years to nations in
Asia to encourage people-to-people links with the region.

  - Expand work and holiday program agreements with countries in Asia over time,
starting with an increase to 1,000 places in the Work and Holiday Visa program
we have with Indonesia.

  - Extend Australia Awards (Asian Century) offered to recipients in Asia to include
work placements and support mid-career sabbaticals in Australia.

25


-----

  - Strengthen the extensive alumni networks of Australian-educated leaders in
Asia by providing a focal point for coordinating the networks through an
Australia Awards Office.

  - Support high-quality private-sector scholarships that bring future Asian leaders
to Australia.

  - Use the National Broadband Network and digital technology to boost online
collaboration between researchers, community groups, students, schools and
universities in Australia with their counterparts throughout the region.

  - Nurture programs that promote cooperation between Australian and regional
faith communities and community organisations.

  - Encourage sports, academic, professional and scientific communities in
Australia to become fully part of the region through collaboration and
partnership arrangements.

25. Australia will have stronger, deeper and broader cultural links with Asian nations.

**Pathways**

  - Recognise and highlight Australia’s unique cultural advantage as home to the
world’s oldest living culture and one that welcomes great diversity.

  - Encourage cultural and arts communities in Australia to become fully part of
the region through two-way collaboration and partnership arrangements,
including through training and capacity building.

  - Re-examine government activities that support artists to achieve success in Asia
and promote Australia as a culturally vibrant and open country, including
through the Government’s consideration of the Review of the Australia Council.

  - Revamp the Australian International Cultural Council to better coordinate our
support for cultural and artistic organisations to enhance promotion of
Australia as a culturally vibrant and open country.

  - Work with the media industry, through its representative bodies, to improve its
content and coverage of the region to ensure that Australians receive more
day-to-day news about major events and issues from across the region. In
addition, encourage media exchange programs with the region to build
knowledge.

  - Request that the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and the Special
Broadcasting Service examine how to promote more extensive coverage of the
region in all aspects of their content and programming, with special attention
to news and information coverage, to ensure that their content reflects the
depth and diversity of our connections with the region, including SBS’s
developing role as a news provider to Asian Australian communities in their
languages.

  - Strengthen cultural diplomacy and exchange to build trust, understanding and
confidence in our cultural, political, security and economic relationships.

26


-----

-----

## Chapter 1: The rise of Asia

 - staggering scale and pace of rise

 - investment in people and capital

 - market and institutional reform

 - open global trading systems and
stability

 - Asia has changed the world


**Chapter 1:**
The rise of Asia

**The rise of Asia**
**provides great**


-----

**Key points**


The pace and scale of Asia’s rise have been nothing short of staggering.


In a region rich in cultural, social, political and economic diversity, peoples’ lives
have been transformed just as the globe has been transformed.

Hundreds of millions of people have been lifted out of poverty, parts of the region
have experienced a halving in their infant mortality rates and decades have been
added to life expectancy.

Nearly all the high-performing economies in Asia deliberately set out to support
prosperity by reforming their policy and institutional settings.

Many economies within the region have invested heavily in their people and
created a climate that has supported capital investments.

With the benefit of a good education, growing shares of young people have found
jobs as they have reached prime working age.

Open global trading systems and infrastructure to reduce transport costs have
driven regional and global integration.

More broadly, a global system of rules has allowed for greater stability and spurred
increasing levels of interdependence.

29


-----

### 1.1 Introduction

Just over two decades ago, the Australian Government commissioned a study of
Australia and the Northeast Asian ascendancy (Garnaut 1989). Since then, Asia has
continued to change at an unprecedented pace and scale. This White Paper looks at
the group of nations that stretch from India through Southeast Asia to Northeast Asia,
including Indonesia, other Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) members,
China and Japan.

Asia is a region of great diversity—across ethnic groups, languages, history,
institutions and natural endowments. Its transformation into the world’s most
dynamic economic region has been a defining development of our time.

Over the past 20 years, one-third of the world’s population has re-engaged with the
global economy and more are set to do so (Chart 1.1). Living standards for billions of
people in Asia have improved at a rate not previously experienced in human history.

##### Chart 1.1: Asia’s rising 

Share of world output


100

75

50

25

0


Per cent Per cent

1950 1970 1990 2010

Asia North America and Europe Rest of the world


100

75

50

25

0


Note: GDP is adjusted for purchasing power parity (2011 prices). See glossary for the definition of country
groupings in this chart.
Source: Conference Board (2012).

Between 2000 and 2006, around a million people were lifted out of poverty every
week in East Asia alone (Gill & Kharas 2007). Japan, the Republic of Korea (South
Korea), Singapore and, more recently, China and India doubled their income per
person within a decade. Some went on to repeat this achievement two or three
times. To put this into perspective, it took the United Kingdom over 50 years to
double its income per person during the epoch-defining Industrial Revolution
(Maddison 2010).

This chapter looks at Asia’s success to date and how it has shaped the world.

30


-----

### 1.2 The makings of success

Asia’s economic rise has been staggering, starting with Japan, whose emergence
gathered pace from the 1950s. The region’s success has not followed a single ‘recipe’.
Even where economies have drawn on the lessons of others, they have adapted
approaches to suit their own circumstances and have implemented them alongside
home-grown initiatives.

The region’s economies are diverse. Some started their growth surge earlier; some
have enjoyed greater success. Incomes in Singapore, for example, are currently
12 times higher than in neighbouring Indonesia (Conference Board 2012). Economic
progress has been uneven within countries too, including in the region’s large
economies.

But amidst this diversity some common patterns have emerged in recent decades.
Nearly all the high-performing Asian economies deliberately set out to support
prosperity by investing in people, building capital and undertaking institutional
change, including expanding the role of markets.

With the benefits of a good education and employment-creating reforms, large
numbers of young people have become productively employed as they reached prime
working age, while a global system of rules has promoted stability and
interdependence.

Open global trading systems and the construction of vital infrastructure to reduce
transport costs have been drivers of integration. Intricate regional production
networks have emerged, along with increased flows of intermediate goods between
regional partners. Specialisation and scale have given the region a powerful
advantage, particularly in manufactures.

Asia’s most successful economies have evolved continually in response to new
developments. As incomes have risen in population-dense economies such as
Hong Kong, Japan, South Korea and Taiwan, and as their labour-intensive activities
have become less competitive, Asia’s high performers have refocused their
production on new areas of consumer demand—developing domestic markets and
specialising in high-skill activities.

Notwithstanding its diversity, the region is bound by a shared ambition for economic
advancement. The means may have varied, but the effort has been determined and
the results staggering.

31


-----

#### Asia’s demographic dividend

In the early stages of their take-off, many economies in Asia faced a favourable set of
circumstances as large numbers of young people approached working age, boosting
the productive capacity of economies.

The region’s ability to capitalise on its favourable demographics has been a key factor
underpinning Asia’s stellar income growth over the past four decades.

An East Asian baby boom, which started in Japan in the late 1940s, sparked a series of
demographic and social changes that helped shape the region’s economic growth
trajectory.

As the large ‘boom’ cohorts reached prime working and saving age (Chart 1.2), the
productive capacity of economies such as Japan and South Korea expanded. During
this phase—from 1965 to 1990—East Asia’s working-age population grew nearly four
times faster than its dependent population (Bloom & Williamson 1997).

##### Chart 1.2: Asia’s demographic dividend

Share of working-age population


Per cent Per cent

80 80

70 70

60 60

50 50

40 40

1950 1975 2000 2025

Australia China

Japan Malaysia

Thailand

Source: UN (2011b).


Per cent Per cent

80 80

70 70

60 60

50 50

40 40

1950 1975 2000 2025

India Indonesia

Philippines South Korea


Demography is not destiny. Indeed, despite having experienced similar demographic
transitions, Latin America as a whole was unable to achieve a demographic dividend
in the 1960s to the 1990s (Bloom & Canning 2004, cited in Wei & Hao 2012). To take
advantage of the favourable window provided by a youthful workforce, East Asian
economies invested in physical capital, job training and technological progress. With
the benefits of a good education, East Asia’s large numbers of working-age people
became a huge productive workforce.

32


-----

A virtuous spiral was created: population change increased income growth, and
income growth pushed down population growth. The consequent declines in fertility
reduced youth dependency rates and further boosted women’s participation in the
workforce.

East Asia’s ‘demographic dividend’ is estimated to have accounted for between
one-quarter and two-fifths of its growth in GDP per person in the late 20th century.[1]

Favourable demographic changes were not confined to East Asia’s developed
economies—other economies have also enjoyed a demographic dividend (Chart 1.2
and Box 1.1). Between 1981 and 2010, the large share of working-age people is
estimated to have boosted the growth rate of output per person by more than
1 per cent a year in Indonesia, South Korea, China, Thailand and Vietnam
(ADB 2011b).


**Box 1.1: Life has changed in Indonesia**


The experience of a child living in Indonesia tells the story of what has happened
across large parts of Asia.

While there is room for improvement, access to immunisation, sanitation and
nutrition means an Indonesian child can now expect to have a life expectancy into
their late 60s, compared to just 45 if they’d been born in 1960 (World Bank 2012d).

Around 18 per cent of Indonesians are living in poverty today, compared to
68 per cent in the late 1980s (World Bank 2012d). The size of the Indonesian
economy is now larger than Australia’s (when adjusted for purchasing power
parity) (IMF 2012c).

Young children today will have had at least nine years of compulsory schooling,
with plans for 12 years of compulsory education from 2014 (Yudhoyono 2012).
Nearly a quarter of students who recently completed their secondary school
education are enrolled in tertiary study (World Bank 2012d).

With economic growth and education, job choices have been transformed. As
recently as 1990, a young Indonesian was most likely to have a job in agriculture.
Now, the prospect of a city-based career in a professional service industry is a
reality—and lifestyles are changing rapidly as a result.

#### Investing in people

Asia’s young people enjoyed marked improvements in their access to education and
its quality as governments invested in their youthful populations and dramatically
transformed their education and training systems.

1 See, for example, Bloom & Sachs (1998), Bloom & Williamson (1998), Bloom, Canning & Malaney
(2000), Mason (2001) and World Bank (2012c and 2012d).

33


-----

Many countries started investing in their people, building on a strong base. Primary
education was compulsory in many East Asian economies and by 1960 was prevalent
in China, Hong Kong, Japan, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan (Tilak 2002). Some
who did not start from as strong a base also improved access to primary education
sharply—primary school net enrolment rates are currently nearly 90 per cent in the
Philippines and are close to universal in Cambodia and Indonesia (World Bank 2012d).

But the most profound changes occurred in secondary and higher education. Average
years of formal education were extended across the region, as more people stayed in
education for longer (Chart 1.3).

##### Chart 1.3: Average years of formal schooling

Population aged 15 and above


Years


Years


Years


Years Years

15 15

10 10

5 5

0 0

1950 1970 1990 2010

Australia China

Japan Malaysia

Taiwan United States

Source: Barro & Lee (2010).


Years

15 15

10 10

5 5

0 0

1950 1970 1990 2010

India Indonesia


Years


Singapore South Korea


Between 1970 and 2001, secondary school enrolment rates in some of the region’s
largest developing countries—Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and China—more than
doubled (World Bank 2007). Higher education enrolment rates in the region have
increased considerably since the 1970s, in countries such as Hong Kong (increased by
a factor of 8), Malaysia (increased by a factor of 10) and Thailand (increased by a
factor of 16). South Korea is a standout performer, with almost universal
post-secondary education (World Bank 2012d).

As participation improved, the focus in many countries shifted to quality. Today, four
of the world’s five highest performing education systems are in Hong Kong, Shanghai,
Singapore and South Korea (OECD 2010c).

In the more populous developing countries, such as India and Indonesia, efforts to
increase access to, and the quality of, education continue. In both these countries,
the task is complicated by the diversity and size of their education systems.

India, which has the second-largest education system in the world, has made large
strides in improving school enrolment rates and reducing socioeconomic, caste and
gender gaps in enrolments at the primary level, but significant challenges remain.

34


-----

They include very low rates of schooling achievement as measured by test scores, and
a lack of qualified teachers (Kochar 2012).

Indonesia’s education system, the fourth-largest in the world, has more than 50 million
students and 2.6 million teachers in more than 250,000 schools. While average primary
school enrolment rates are reasonably high, they vary across the country. Net primary
school enrolment rates are about 60 per cent in poor districts compared to almost
universal enrolment in more well-off districts (World Bank 2012c).

The region’s investment in its people has gone well beyond education. Governments
have also invested heavily in improving access to sanitation, housing and clean water.
A virtuous circle has been created in which social development has accompanied and
supported higher rates of economic growth, and these in turn have contributed to
further improvements in broader indicators of wellbeing (Box 1.2).


**Box 1.2: Vietnam—big improvements in health and wellbeing**


Vietnam’s health expenditure per person has quadrupled since the mid-1990s and
water supply and sanitation services have improved sharply. Seventy-five per cent
of the rural population had access to clean water in 2010.


Better health outcomes have supported economic growth.


Average life expectancy is now 75 years, up from 49 in 1970. And the health of
Vietnam’s women and children has improved substantially. The share of women
dying as a result of childbirth has fallen to around a third of the 1990 rate, with a
similar drop in infant mortality, while the mortality rate for children under five has
halved.

More than 90 per cent of children in Vietnam are now vaccinated against six
common diseases. Polio was eradicated in 2000, and neonatal tetanus was
eliminated in 2005.

Tuberculosis and dengue fever persist, however, and Vietnam’s rapid development
has brought new health challenges. More than 15,000 people die in traffic
accidents each year, and non-communicable diseases associated with higher
standards of living now account for half of all deaths.

#### Jump-starting growth through investment

As Asia’s economies emerged, they created a climate that supported investment—
accelerating growth in the early stages of their development by rapidly investing in
physical capital (Chart 1.4).

Higher levels of private and public investment enabled Asian countries to exploit their
favourable demographics. With access to better machinery and infrastructure,
workers became more productive. Technology and management systems, imported
and adapted from overseas, further boosted productivity. And as firms invested and

35


-----

expanded their operations, competitive pressures on enterprises, including
state-owned monopolies, lifted productivity.

The paths taken by Asian economies to stimulate investment have varied, but those
that succeeded generally followed a two-pronged approach. First, many built a
favourable investment climate through a succession of—typically gradual and
rudimentary—institution-building and market-enabling reforms. Second,
governments in successful Asian economies actively enabled and complemented
markets in different ways that supported investment. Different approaches ranged
from putting in place export processing zones to various approaches to exchange rate
management, and from industry-incentive arrangements to industry arm twisting.

##### Chart 1.4: Increasing investment in physical capital

Gross fixed capital formation


45

35

25


Per cent of GDP Per cent of GDP

0 2 4 6 8 10

Years after take-off

China Singapore South Korea Thailand


45

35

25


Note: The take-off years are 1990 for China, 1969 for Singapore, 1984 for South Korea and 1986 for
Thailand (Hausmann et al 2005).
Sources: World Bank (2012d) and Conference Board (2012).

#### Institution-building and creating markets

In the early phases of Asian countries’ rapid economic growth, institutional
improvements helped create a favourable climate for human and physical capital
accumulation.

Governments put in place more predictable property rights, opened up markets and
invested in public goods such as basic knowledge, education and health.
Macroeconomic frameworks and governance more generally were improved. Price
controls were liberalised and production quotas were gradually removed. Parts of
previously closed economies were integrated into global markets, creating access to
markets and finance, and boosting productivity.

36


-----

It was not just economic institutions that underwent change. So did the formal and
informal institutions that shape nations more broadly—governments and the military,
the nature of political institutions and societal values and customs.

Countries across the region infused broad approaches to institutional improvement
with their own unique practices. Although its development followed that of many
other economies in Asia, China in many ways epitomised the gradual and pragmatic
approach to reform. Its process is often described, in Chen Yun’s phrase, as ‘crossing
the river by feeling stones’ (Li 1995 and Box 1.3).


**Box 1.3: China—feeling the stones**


Reforms in China started in 1978 with the partial liberalisation of agriculture. Those
reforms allowed local farmers, rather than the state, to take responsibility for the
profitability of their enterprises and gave them incentives by allowing them to sell
produce above state-determined quotas. In the 1980s, reforms also allowed largely
communally owned enterprises to take advantage of new market opportunities—
providing the engine of Chinese growth for two decades.[2] This was accompanied by
the introduction and expansion of ‘special economic zones’, which provided
concessions for private enterprise and foreign investment while the rest of the
economy remained under controls and restrictions.

Over the next two decades, China continued its dual-track approach to reform as it
encouraged private sector development while supporting state-owned enterprises
in strategic industries. It gradually liberalised price controls and sought to reform
state-owned enterprises, financial markets and the housing sector.

China’s accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001 was a further
major step in integrating its economy with the global system. Reforms that
supported China’s commitment to the global trading system before its WTO
accession should not be overlooked—no other member joining the WTO made so
many concessions on the way to accession (Drysdale 2000; Brandt, Rawski & Zhu
2007). For example, in the decade before its accession to the WTO, China’s
effective tariff rate halved to 15 per cent in 2000, and has since continued to fall
(World Bank 2012d).

Combined with a governance structure that gave local and provincial governments
incentives to experiment with different approaches to growing local economies,
China was able to adapt institutions and settings to fit each stage of its
development (World Bank & DRC 2012).

2 Known as ‘township and village enterprises’. Placing ownership in the hands of communities and
local governments arguably struck a trade-off between lifting economic efficiency (by improving market
incentives and property rights security) and ensuring that reform momentum was maintained by building
constituencies and providing a ‘win–win’ for further reform (Qian 2003).

37


-----

Similar patterns of gradual reform are clear in the four small newly industrialised
economies that have successfully made the transition to high-income economies.

Hong Kong, for example, took a liberal approach to economic development, setting
itself up as a regional and global financial centre. Singapore’s path was much more
state-led. Its distinctive brand of forward-looking public leadership, governance
structures and investment in a high-performing public service allowed the country to
take full advantage of its favourable geographical location. South Korea and Taiwan
used aggressive strategies to foster entrepreneurship and innovation and established
themselves as technological powerhouses.

But as conditions change, so does the usefulness of existing institutions. Over time,
the region’s more successful economies have managed to adapt many institutions in
response to changing conditions and challenges. The benefits of investing in the
formal institutions that support exchange increased as the Asian economies became
richer, deeper and more complex. It is this ability to maintain the pace of institutional
reform that largely explains why some economies—including the highly developed
Asian economies—have sustained their initial growth success to reach high-income
status.[3]

The reform path has not always been smooth. For example, while the structure and
practices of Japan’s financial sector were useful in initially driving rapid economic
growth, they also contributed to the late-1980s asset bubble. In response, Japan
underwent a reform period focusing on corporate governance and the financial sector
in the 1990s. Similarly, the policy models that fuelled unprecedented economic
growth in other countries and regions in Northeast and Southeast Asia contributed to
asset price bubbles that later collapsed during the Asian financial crisis in 1997, which
in turn required policy reform (Box 1.4).

3 For a discussion on the role of institutions in economic growth and development, see, for example,
Zhuang, de Dios & Lagman-Martin (2010), Rodrik (2005), Aron (2000), Easterly (2005), Acemoglu &
Robinson (2008) and North (1990).

38


-----

**Box 1.4: The Asian financial crisis**


Several decades of unprecedented economic growth in many East and Southeast
Asian economies came to an abrupt end in mid-1997 with the onset of the Asian
financial crisis. Their growth models, particularly the focus on large-scale
mobilisation of investments, contributed to asset price bubbles that later burst,
leading to capital flight, sharp currency movements and the abandonment of
pegged exchange rates (Gill & Kharas 2007).

Many factors lay behind the crisis and accounted for its severity: an inconsistent
mix of macroeconomic and exchange rate policy settings, poor prudential
supervision against a background of liberalisation of capital markets and
underdeveloped domestic financial markets, lack of quick and coherent
government action, and an overconfident international financial sector that had
underestimated risks in the good years and panicked when economic conditions
deteriorated.

The crisis had a devastating impact in several East Asian economies. For instance, in
1998, Thailand’s real GDP fell by 8 per cent and Indonesia’s by 14 per cent. Gross
private financing to Asian emerging market economies collapsed from $128 billion
in 1997 to $7 billion in 1998. Between 1996 and the second half of 1997, capital
movements to Asia swung from annual inflows of almost $100 billion to outflows of
the same size, while international bank loans to non-banks in Asia (excluding Japan)
fell by more than $9 billion in the final quarter of 1997, the largest drop ever.

After the crisis, financial cooperation between ASEAN and East Asian economies
became a regional priority, particularly through bodies such as ASEAN+3. This was
also a reaction to concerns that the International Monetary Fund (IMF) was
dictating policy settings to the crisis-affected countries—Indonesia, South Korea
and Thailand—in a manner the region thought to be both intrusive and
inappropriate.

In the immediate aftermath of the crisis, Japan offered to underwrite an Asian
monetary fund, triggering opposition from the United States and the IMF. The
proposal also lacked the support of China. But it eventually led to what has become
the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralisation, which started as a complex network of
bilateral swap agreements and has since become a single, uniform facility to help
with managing regional financial crises.

Reforms put in place since the Asian financial crisis have improved the resilience of
Asian economies.

39


-----

#### Openness, reliability and stability

Asia’s rising economies were major beneficiaries of the open global trading system
established under United States leadership after World War II. In the early stages of
their take-off, open global markets allowed them to take advantage of their large
endowments of relatively unskilled, cheap labour.

In the most successful economies, early jobs in low-end manufactures, combined with
hefty investments in education and training, enabled workers to learn the skills—and
absorb and adapt advanced technology from abroad—that later permitted movement
up the value-add chain (Krueger 2005).

Regional efforts also supported greater levels of openness. The Asia–Pacific Economic
Cooperation (APEC) forum, for example, helped sustain market-driven integration in
the region.[4]

More broadly, an open global trading regime enabled Asia’s rising economies to
secure energy and resources vital to their growth, including from Australia. This was
particularly important for economies such as Japan and South Korea, which lacked
large resource endowments.

At the same time, the security guarantees provided by the United States to its key
allies in the region, especially Japan and South Korea, and the development of an
effective working relationship between Washington and Beijing after 1972, provided
strategic (and business) confidence that helped frame and support the region’s
economic development. The post–Cold War consolidation of ASEAN to incorporate
the countries of Indochina helped establish the foundations for Southeast Asia’s
development.

### 1.3 Asia has changed the world

As Asia has grown over the past two decades, it has changed the world.

Asia’s impact on global markets has been profound. More regional and global firms
have emerged from Asia to shape the way businesses operate across the globe. The
region’s industrialisation and urbanisation have sparked demand for raw materials,
creating a resources boom. And Asia’s burgeoning middle class has reshaped global
markets, including for high-value consumer goods and services—spanning everything
from electronics to tourism.

4 Average tariffs of APEC members have declined from 16 per cent in 1989 to around 6 per cent in
2010.

40


-----

#### Asia has shifted global production, trade and investment

With the emergence of ‘Factory Asia’, Asia has become the production engine for the
world (Chart 1.5). As it has done so, it has also transformed the way the world
produces goods and services.

##### Chart 1.5: Asia’s manufacturing output

Share of world production


50 Per cent Per cent 50

40 40

30 30

20 20

10 10

0 0

1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

China India Japan Indonesia South Korea Rest of Asia

Note: See glossary for the definition of Asia in this chart.
Source: UN (2011a).

Integrated parts of the production process have spread across several different
countries. These cross-border value chains first developed for cars and electronics
and had their genesis in Japan’s economic rise. As Japan developed, its production
costs rose and the yen appreciated. Japanese companies began specialising in higher
skill goods and services in Japan, while moving parts of their labour-intensive
assembly operations to South Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan and Singapore. As
production costs rose in these economies, businesses relocated assembly processes
to ASEAN countries and then to China; China quickly became the main assembly plant
for Factory Asia. India, however, has so far followed a different economic
development path from that of East Asia (Box 1.5).

Successive relocations and regional infrastructure projects that have increased
connectivity have led to intricate regional production networks and greater flows of
intermediate goods among Asian partners, and given the region a powerful advantage
in many industrial sectors, especially manufacturing.

41


-----

**Box 1.5: India’s manufacturing and services sectors**


As India’s agricultural share of output has fallen, its services share has risen, with
the industry and manufacturing shares remaining broadly unchanged. Other
economies at a similar stage of development have shown a greater bias towards
labour-intensive manufacturing.

India’s information technology, business services and financial services industries—
the modern services sector—have recently been powering services exports. Their
share in India’s services export earnings has more than doubled over the past
decade, to around 19 per cent in 2011. Software exports now rival India’s other
major services export—income from international ‘guest’ labour.

Some of the challenges facing India’s industry and manufacturing sectors include its
land acquisition and land-use policies, complex and time-consuming regulatory
approvals, the quality of supporting infrastructure (including electricity systems)
and skills shortages (Government of India Planning Commission 2011).

There are signs of improvement and elements of manufacturing are already
globally competitive. For example, India’s automotive and automotive components
sector has thrived on the back of foreign investment, strong growth in domestic
incomes and vibrant export opportunities. In 2010–11, more than 17 million
vehicles were produced, most of which were ‘two-wheelers’. India’s automotive
sector now accounts for more than 5 per cent of GDP and directly employs more
than 5 million workers.

India has recognised the need to make substantial investments in skills and
infrastructure to better equip India’s future workforce and improve its
competitiveness. Boosting industrial activity and employment is the driving impetus
behind its 2011 National Manufacturing Policy.

East Asia now accounts for almost one-third of world trade in manufacturing, and the
intermediate goods trade accounts for more than half of all interregional trade in
East Asia. China’s size, and the growing interconnectedness of production networks
across Asia, means that China has become the main trading nation for almost all
regional nations (WTO & IDE-JETRO 2011). Now the world’s largest exporter, China’s
share of global value-add manufacturing has doubled over the past decade.

Not all parts of Asia have formed deep economic ties with their immediate
neighbours. Links within South Asia have been growing, but they are still relatively
modest. These links have been constrained by political tension (despite some promise
of change), poor physical connectivity and impediments to cross-border trade and
investment.

More recently, Asia’s emergence has also reshaped global financial markets.

Over the past decade, regional investment has expanded rapidly and regional
financial markets have become closer and more efficient as economies have become
more interdependent. And in the decade before the Global Financial Crisis in 2008,

42


-----

Asia also financed high rates of investment in developed economies—supporting
growth in the United States and Europe.

While portfolio flows have oscillated, Asia has become a major net exporter of capital
to the rest of the world through both growing foreign exchange reserves and private
investment flows. Asia’s foreign exchange reserves over the past decade have soared,
with about two-thirds of the world’s accumulated reserves in 2012 (Bloomberg 2012).
China and Japan were the main contributors, at about one-third and one-tenth of
global reserves respectively, but the pattern of accumulation has been common
across countries in the region (Gill & Kharas 2007).

But, despite the region’s impressive progress to strengthen financial systems and
build regional connections, Asian financial markets remain relatively underdeveloped
and are more closely linked to global markets than to each other.

#### Asia’s rapid growth and urbanisation have transformed global commodity markets

Urbanisation has transformed Asian societies. Urbanisation in Asia involves around
44 million people—around twice the size of Australia’s current population—leaving
rural areas and being added to the population of cities every year in search of
opportunities. The impacts have been staggering. Between 1990 and 2009, energy
consumption in Asia more than doubled and the region’s share of global energy
consumption increased from 25 to 38 per cent (IEA 2011). Demand has not been
limited to energy. Between 2001 and 2011, iron ore prices increased by a factor of
13, zinc prices more than doubled, and copper, lead and tin prices all increased at
least fivefold (IMF 2012c).

This process—along with the region’s rapid growth, massive infrastructure investment
and ongoing industrialisation—has boosted demand for a broad range of mineral and
energy resources (Chart 1.6), affecting all resource-supplying nations, including
Australia.

With its rapid growth, intensive resource use and sheer scale, China has led the pack.
It is now the world’s largest energy consumer, having gone from consuming less than
half as much energy as the United States in 2000, to consuming slightly more today
(IEA 2011). Now the world’s largest producer and consumer of coal, China accounts
for almost half of the world’s coal consumption. Having been largely self-sufficient in
coal until recently, China has quickly emerged as the world’s largest importer of coal
(IEA 2012).

China’s commodities-intensive growth has also seen it become the world’s largest
consumer of steel, aluminium and copper, accounting for around 40 per cent of global
consumption for each—a share two to three times larger than those of Japan or
South Korea at the peak of their respective metals demand cycles (Coates &
Luu 2012). China’s growth and technological change have also demanded
lesser-known materials. Demand has increased for manganese (used in the
production of stainless steel), antimony (electronics), scandium (aluminium alloys)
and zircon (ceramic glazes).

43


-----

##### Chart 1.6: Energy and metals consumption per person, selected
 countries 

Energy Metals


20

15

10

5

0


Tonne oil

equivalent


Tonne oil

equivalent


10 10

8 8

6 6

4 4

2 2

0 0

0 20,000 40,000 60,000

GDP per person (US$)

China India Indonesia

Japan Malaysia South Korea

United States


Kg Kg

20

15

10

5

0

0 20,000 40,000 60,000

GDP per person (US$)

China Japan

South Korea United States


Note: Bubble area represents the nation’s total energy consumption in 2009. GDP adjusted for purchasing
power parity (2011 prices). Metals consumption data are for 1972–2010 for China, 1960–2010 for Japan,
1975–2010 for South Korea and 1960–2010 for the United States.
Sources: World Bank (2012d), IMF (2012c) and Conference Board (2012).

China is a significant, and in some cases a dominant, producer of most energy and
mineral resources. While it leads world production in black coal, iron ore, gold, zinc,
manganese, rock phosphate, rare earths, tungsten, and lead (Geoscience
Australia 2012), China is sourcing an increasing share of its commodity needs on
global markets. As China becomes increasingly aware of, and sensitive to, the
environmental and social costs of mineral extraction, domestic production is also
becoming more expensive, reinforcing the shift toward imports. Both state-owned
enterprises and the private sector are investing overseas to diversify supply, partly in
response to government encouragement.

India, too, has significant resource endowments and has sought to remain primarily
self-sufficient in mineral production, taxing exports in an effort to retain critical
commodities like iron ore and metallurgical coal for domestic use. Some argue that
domestic production has been hampered by inefficient regulation in areas such as
land access and use.

The mature industrial economies of Japan, South Korea and Taiwan have long
demanded raw materials for their manufacturing sectors. Primarily import
dependent, these economies have established trade and investment relationships
with nations rich in raw materials. Japan, for example, has relied on imports for over
80 per cent of its sizeable energy needs. Japan is the world’s third-largest net
importer of crude oil, second-largest importer of coal and largest importer of
liquefied natural gas (EIA 2012).

The region’s economic growth has also contributed to fundamental changes in global
food demand. Income growth has boosted demand for better quality, higher protein

44


-----

and more diverse diets, including for more dairy, fish, vegetables, fruits, edible oils
and meat. For example, the amount of meat consumed a year in Asia increased by a
factor of 14 between 1961 and 2009 (FAO 2012). Asia’s urbanisation has further
accentuated changes in lifestyle and consumption patterns, bolstering demand for
semi-processed and ready-to-eat foods.

#### As production has become more sophisticated, Asia has emerged as a global innovation hub

While the United States and Europe continue to be world leaders in science and
research, Asia is emerging as a world centre of innovation and technological
development.

China has overtaken South Korea as a science and research producer and has recently
overtaken Japan on a number of measures, such as research and development
expenditure and national output of scientific publications. However, in 2010, Japan
overtook the United States to become the highest producer of triadic patent families
(a set of patents taken at the European Patent Office, the Japanese Patent Office and
the US Patent and Trademark Office), while South Korea was fifth (OECD 2012c;
Thomson Reuters 2012).

Other emerging economies in Asia are also becoming knowledge creators. India’s
large and youthful population and growing expenditure on research and development
have lifted its publications of scientific papers from 2.1 per cent of the world total in
2000 to 3.5 per cent in 2010 (Thomson Reuters 2012). And it has also had success
opening up new markets for high technology through ‘frugal innovation’. An example
is TATA’s Swach, a $25 water filter that exploits the properties of nanoparticles of
silver and runs without electricity or moving parts.

Indonesia more than doubled, and Vietnam more than tripled, their volumes of
scientific publications between 2000 and 2010, albeit from modest bases (Thomson
Reuters 2012).

The scale and networks provided by Asia’s cities have helped spur innovation. With
activity increasingly concentrated in cities, businesses have been able to tap into
innovative practices and deep and growing pools of talent. In 1993, China had less
than half the number of researchers of the United States. By 2007, it had 1 per cent
more, employing more researchers than any other country—around two researchers
per thousand people in the labour force. This is still significantly lower than advanced
Asian economies such as Taiwan and Singapore (both around 10 per thousand)
(OECD 2012c).

Not only have Asia’s cities become centres of innovation, they have also become
engines of growth (Pellegrini 2011). In Malaysia and Thailand, cities contribute more
than 90 per cent of GDP. Even in countries such as Sri Lanka and Bangladesh, where
urbanisation is still low, more than 65 per cent of GDP is produced in urban areas.

45


-----

#### A burgeoning middle class has emerged, poised to transform consumer markets

As incomes in the region have grown, an increasingly wealthy and mobile middle class
has emerged, with a resulting shift in the balance of consumer markets towards Asia.
With less income being taken up by necessities, demand for a diverse range of goods
and services, from health care to household goods, has grown.

Between 2000 and 2011, the number of automobiles per 100 urban households in
China is estimated to have risen from less than one to more than 18; the number of
computers from eight to 80; the number of mobile phones from 16 to over 200; and
microwave ovens from 16 to 60 (CEIC Data 2012). While rates of growth in different
consumer durables vary, similar patterns are evident across a whole range of goods.

Intraregional tourism has boomed and popular culture is now shared across Asia as
more people throughout the region and the world discovered Japan’s pop music and
manga, Hong Kong cinema, South Korea’s television soaps and India’s Bollywood
films.

Technology—which is spreading particularly quickly in the region—is changing the
way people interact. India now broadcasts more than 800 television channels,
compared with only two in 1990 (Indian MIB 2012). More than three in four people in
Asia and the Pacific now use a mobile phone, compared with less than one in four in
2005; and 2.3 million more people in Asia and the Pacific are connecting to the
internet every week (ITU 2011).

The rise of Asia’s middle class has a long way to play out (Chapter 2).

#### Asia’s growing weight is altering the focus of global governance

Finally, Asia is not a self-contained strategic or economic system. The rising influence
of emerging economies in Asia is shifting the focus of global governance.

The formation of the Group of Twenty (G20) following the Asian financial crisis—
particularly its elevation to a leader level forum in 2008—is an example. Changes to
the governance and membership of rules-setting bodies such as the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) have also begun. An important sign of the shift in financial
relativities was the substantial commitment that emerging economies made to the
IMF’s crisis reserves at the G20 summit in Mexico in 2012.

ASEAN has consolidated its role in the evolving regional architecture. It provides the
framework for the East Asia Summit, which brings together leaders from all major
powers involved in the region, with an agenda that covers economic, political,
security and environmental issues.

46


-----

-----

## Chapter 2: The future of Asia to 2025


**Chapter 2:**
The future of
Asia to 2025

**The rise of Asia**
**provides great**


-----

**Key points**


Asia’s past cannot be explained by a single model; nor will its future be a single
destiny, but there are good reasons to be optimistic.

While the shape of the Asian century is not set in stone, the scale and pace of Asia’s
rise in the coming decades is expected to be staggering.

Many nations in the region have only just begun to catch up to the productivity
levels enjoyed in advanced economies, promising strong income growth for
decades to come.

Asia will not just be the most populous region in the world. Asia will be the biggest
economic zone, the biggest consumption zone and the home to the majority of the
world’s middle class.

Economic cycles affecting the region are expected to occur around a rising
long-term income trend.

The economies and societies of Asia will transform as they become more
prosperous.

Over the coming decades, the nations of Asia will face new pressures, including
likely moderate economic growth among advanced-economy trading partners,
greater competition for natural resources and further environmental constraints.

Despite substantial declines in poverty levels, rising income disparities will
challenge social stability.

And Asia’s continued growth won’t occur in a strategic vacuum. Stable relations
among the major powers in Asia and the Pacific—China, India, Indonesia, Japan and
the United States—will remain fundamental to prosperity and security in the region
and will require sustained effort.

Each nation’s choices about its own institutions and policies will guide its future
growth and prosperity, as will global economic and other developments.

49


-----

### 2.1 Introduction

Embracing more than half of the globe’s population, the transformation now
underway in Asia is happening within compressed time frames (Chart 2.1).

##### Chart 2.1: Asia’s economic resurgence is set to continue

20,000 Income per person US$ Income per person US$

2025

15,000

10,000

2010

5,000 1990

1970

1820 1870 1913 1950

0


20,000

15,000

10,000

5,000

0


Note: Bubble area reflects the size of GDP. GDP adjusted for purchasing power parity (2011 prices). See
glossary for definition of Asia and description of Treasury projections. See Appendix A for a description of
Asia’s resurgence to date.
Sources: Maddison (2010), Conference Board (2012), IMF (2012c) and Treasury projections.

Average living standards are set to improve dramatically and transform the way
people live and work. Asia’s economies are projected to expand at a strong rate. The
region’s expansion and development will change the contours of Asia and the globe—
opening up exciting new opportunities, while also posing some challenges.

### 2.2 Asia’s rise has further to go

Building on settings that support prosperity, the region is set to continue its rapid
growth into the next decade. Asia will change the shape of the global economy.
Fast-growing Asian economies will be the engines of world economic growth as their
share of global output rises (Chart 2.2).

50


-----

##### Chart 2.2: Share of world output growth

World Asia


100

80

60

40

20

0


Share of world growth

2005 2015 2025
Asia Euro area

Latin America and Caribbean North America

Rest of world


Share of world growth

China India

Rest of Asia


100

80

60

40

20

0


Note: GDP adjusted for purchasing power parity (2011 prices). See glossary for the definition of country
groupings.
Sources: Conference Board (2012), IMF (2012c), Maddison (2010) and Treasury projections.

Asia’s contribution to world output growth will largely be the result of sustained
growth by China and India as their productivity growth continues (Table 2.1).

China and India are expected to grow rapidly, albeit at a slightly slower pace
compared to the past decade. The combination of their robust outlook and the sheer
size of their economies mean that China and India will make the largest contribution
to global and regional economic growth to 2025.

Despite their smaller size, Indonesia, Malaysia and other countries in Southeast Asia
are expected to grow rapidly and make solid contributions to regional growth.
Southeast Asia’s cumulative economic, political and demographic weight is growing.
With a combined population of 600 million, these countries have embarked on a
drive, through the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), towards regional
integration and connectivity by 2015.

As high-income nations that already count among the world’s most advanced
economies, Japan and South Korea are expected to grow at more moderate rates,
especially as their populations’ age.

**Table 2.1: Projected average annual economic growth rates in Asia, 2012–25**

**China** **India** **Indonesia** **Vietnam** **Malaysia** **Thailand** **South Korea** **Japan**

Per cent 7 6¾ 6 6¼ 5 4½ 2¾ 1½

Sources: IMF (2012c) and Treasury projections.

51


-----

By 2025, four of the 10 largest economies in the world will be in the region—China
(first), India (third), Japan (fourth) and Indonesia (tenth). Asia is likely to account for
almost half of the world’s economic output, with China accounting for about half of
that (Chart 2.3 and Box 2.1).

##### Chart 2.3: World output shares

World Asia


100

80

60

40

20

0


Share of output


100

80

60

40

20

0


Share of output

2005 2015 2025


Asia Euro area ASEAN China

Latin America and Caribbean North America India Japan

Rest of world Rest of Asia

Notes: GDP adjusted for purchasing power parity (2011 prices). See glossary for the definition of country
groupings.
Sources: Conference Board (2012), IMF (2012c), Maddison (2010) and Treasury projections.

In 1980, income per person in developing countries in Asia was about one-thirtieth of
that in the United States. By 2025, the gap will have closed at a rapid pace—income
per person in the United States will be only four times the income per person in Asia’s
developing countries. Higher living standards, improved health care, greater life
expectancy and access to goods and services will transform the lives of millions in the
region. The transformation will be amplified by widening access to education and by
the global reach of communications and digital technology.

52


-----

#### Demographics will matter, but they are not destiny

Asia’s growth story has been closely connected with its demographic dividend
(Chapter 1). But the demographic tide is turning. In Japan, South Korea and Singapore,
the proportion of the population that is of working age has peaked or is peaking, as
the number of young people entering the workforce no longer keeps pace with the
number of older people leaving it. In China, too, retirees account for a high and
growing share of the total population.

Across the region as a whole, the working-age share of the population is plateauing
and will begin to decline from around 2025. Asia’s working-age population is expected
to grow at 0.8 per cent a year in the next two decades, around half the rate of the
past two decades (Chart 2.5). Growth in the share of Asia’s working-age population
will be a particularly important factor in future output growth—both as population
growth slows and even reverses in some cases, and as the proportion of elderly
people increases.

53


-----

Ultimately, the extent to which Asia’s workforce becomes a demographic ‘drag’ will
depend on domestic policy initiatives. These initiatives need to encompass workplace
flexibility, investment in human capital and the incentive effects of social safety nets.
Many of those factors will also determine whether Asia’s more ‘youthful’ countries—
India, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines—are able to replicate the East Asian
experience and capitalise on the opportunities of favourable demographics. Even if
they do, for the region as whole, demographic factors will be a less significant source
of economic growth than in the past.

##### Chart 2.5: Asia’s population and productivity 

Percentage point contribution

1980to economic growthto economic growth1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025Per cent2030

8 2.0

6 1.5

4 1.0

2 0.5

0 0.0

1985 1995 2005 2015 2025

Productivity (Left axis) Working-age population (Left axis) Population growth (Right axis)

Note: See glossary for the definition of Asia.
Sources: UN (2011b), Conference Board (2012), IMF (2012c), Maddison (2010) and Treasury projections.

#### Productivity remains the driver of economic growth

Improvements in productivity will drive the bulk of economic growth in Asia to 2025
(Chart 2.5). The acquisition and proliferation of established technologies, a more
highly skilled workforce, an increased stock of productive capital, and sound policy
and institutional arrangements are all needed to lift labour productivity levels.

Given the starting output levels per person in many emerging Asian economies, the
potential for continued labour productivity growth is large. Output per person in
China is currently only 20 per cent of that in the United States, while India and
Indonesia have barely reached 10 per cent (Chart 2.6).

54


-----

##### Chart 2.6: Output per person

Per cent of United States output per person

Per cent Per cent

100 100

80 80

60 60

40 40

20 20

0 0

1950 1965 1980 1995 2010 2025

China India Indonesia Japan South Korea

Note: GDP adjusted for purchasing power parity (2011 prices).
Sources: UN (2011b), Conference Board (2012), IMF (2012c), Maddison (2010) and Treasury projections.

With few exceptions, economies in Asia have been rapidly catching up with the
productivity levels of more advanced economies. They have introduced markets to
allocate resources efficiently, harnessed domestic savings for capital investment, and
adopted existing technologies and foreign investment to create productivity growth.
A few, of course, have already reached, or are close to, the global technological
frontier.

But the fruits of adopting new technology and adapting it will become harder to
harvest. A point will come, though it’s still some way off, where the growth of labour
productivity in developing Asian economies will slow—opportunities for gains from
importing foreign technology and for shifting workers from agriculture to industry will
diminish.

High levels of capital investment have been a considerable support for labour
productivity growth in the region, but the next phase of such growth will likely draw
from a wider set of sources—including investment in skills and education, further
urbanisation, capitalising on further opportunities for deeper integration into the
global economy and the rapid growth of other emerging economies.

#### The outlook for Asia is optimistic and it is shifting the global economy

While the shape of the Asian century is not set in stone, there are good reasons to be
optimistic. Many nations in the region have only just begun to catch up to the
productivity levels enjoyed in advanced economies, promising strong income growth
for decades to come. Even if there are economic cycles, as is likely, they will occur
around a trend of rising income.

55


-----

Over the coming decades, Asian economies will face new pressures. These include
expectations of more moderate economic growth among advanced economies, the
need to build upon policy and institutional settings that support prosperity, greater
competition for natural resources and further environmental constraints. Asia’s
economies will have cycles and, with greater integration, they will not be immune to
shocks from elsewhere.

Yet there are potential upside risks. It is possible that productivity gains might exceed
expectations, as was the case after China’s entry into the World Trade Organization in
the early 2000s (Armstrong & Tranh 2010). Also, consensus forecasts have
consistently underestimated China’s economic performance over the past decade or
so (Connolly & Orsmond 2011).

The economies of Asia will each need to define their own economic, institutional and
political paths forward. But effective reforms, allowing for the development of more
flexible, transparent institutions that can respond to unexpected ‘bumps in the road’,
will be a necessary platform for Asia’s ongoing growth. Maintaining the direction of
reform across Asia is important for achieving future economic outcomes at the upper
bound of the region’s potential.

In particular, as Asian economies become wealthier and more technologically
sophisticated, they gradually lose the advantages of ‘starting from behind’. They may
not be so easily able to adopt and adapt technology from elsewhere as they operate
closer to the technological frontier and compete further up the value chain. Without
the necessary reforms and human capital development, Asia’s emerging economies
risk falling into the ‘middle-income trap’, finding it difficult to progress to becoming a
high-income economy (Kharas & Kohli 2011; Eichengreen, Park & Shin 2011).

Some parts of Asia, including some ASEAN economies, already have the
middle-income trap as a serious challenge to manage. Globally, a recent report
showed that only 13 of the 101 countries deemed to be middle-income countries in
1960 had broken through to high income levels (World Bank & DRC 2012).

Much of Asia’s future will be determined by how China and India manage their
growth strategy so as to avoid this potential pitfall.

The shift of economic weight to Asia will continue, even if growth is slower than
expected, given the low productivity base from which the large emerging economies
are starting. If convergence is only 50 per cent of what is anticipated, three out of the
world’s top five economies will still be in Asia by 2025 and the region will still be the
world’s fastest growing. Even under a low growth scenario, China and India will
continue to grow robustly (Box 2.2).

56


-----

57


-----

So while precise projections of Asia’s economic growth trajectory are uncertain, the
overwhelming consensus among forecasters and commentators is that Asia’s
economic rise will continue (Box 2.3). As one recent report shows, the centre of the
world’s economic gravity will be moving closer towards Asia based on these
projections of global economic growth (Figure 2.1 and McKinsey & Company 2012).

**Box 2.3: Long-term economic growth projections**

Many long-term growth projections exist for the global economy, including those
from large global investment banks such as Goldman Sachs, Citigroup and HSBC,
think tanks such as the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, international
financial institutions such as the Asian Development Bank and the World Bank, and
from Australian Government agencies such as the Bureau of Resources and Energy
Economics (BREE) within the Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism
(Chart 2.8).

All these projections show a similar picture of strongly rising output in China and
India over the period to 2025. There is more variance around India’s possible
development path, in large part reflecting the earlier stage of its development.

**Chart 2.8: Long-term GDP growth projections for China and India**

China India

Index Index Index Index

400 400 400 400

350 350 350 350

300 300 300 300

250 250 250 250

200 200 200 200

150 150 150 150

100 100 100 100

2010 2015 2020 2025 2010 2015 2020 2025

BREE Citigroup Goldman Sachs HSBC

OECD Treasury World Bank-DRC

Sources: BREE (2012a), Buiter & Rahbari (2011), HSBC (2012), OECD (2012b), Wilson et al. (2011),
World Bank & DRC (2012) and Treasury projections.

58


-----

##### Figure 2.1: Asia to become the centre of global economic activity 

**1990**
**1960** **1970** **1980** **2000**

**2010**

**1950** **1940**

**1913**

**2025**

**1820**

**1500**

**1000**

Note: At each point in time, the centre of world economic gravity was calculated by weighting the GDP for
each civilisation or country and measuring its relative importance against the known world economic capacity
at that point. The centre of economic gravity slowly shifted from East Asia to Europe, then more quickly to
the Atlantic and in more recent decades it has shifted quickly back towards Asia.
Source: McKinsey & Company (2012).

#### But Asia’s development has not been evenly distributed

Although the conditions of Asia’s poor have improved markedly, the incomes of the
rich have been growing at a faster rate. Gaps have widened along rural-urban, gender
and ethnic lines.

Cities and coastal areas were the first to benefit from Asia’s integration and
development, while interior regions have lagged. Wide disparities now exist between
the coastal and inland provinces in China, the eastern, southern and western states in
India, and western and eastern Indonesia. These disparities are evident in rural-urban
wage differentials. In Indonesia, incomes of urban workers are some 20 per cent
higher than those of rural workers. In India, the wage premium is more than
30 per cent. Urban incomes in China are two and a half times those in rural areas.

Gender inequality has also become pronounced, particularly in South Asia: in
Afghanistan, India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka, women are half as likely as men to have a
job or be looking for work. While education levels have improved in aggregate, gaps
remain in education opportunities between young people in high and low-income
households and between men and women (Menon, Mitra & Arnold 2011).
Three-quarters of women in the lowest income quintile in India have no education
(World Bank 2012a).

Caste and ethnicity-based discrimination makes this regional and gender inequality
worse. In many countries, the incomes of minority groups lag behind those of the
ethnic majority. For example, despite impressive achievements in reducing poverty

59


**1990**
**1960** **1970** **1980** **2000**

**2010**

**1950** **1940**

**1913**

**2025**

**1820**

**1500**

**1000**


-----

and inequality, Vietnam ethnic minorities now constitute 45 per cent of the poor
though accounting for only 15 per cent of the population (World Bank 2012b).

There are deep inequalities of opportunity between countries in the region. Many
have found it difficult to stimulate and sustain rapid growth. In Bangladesh, Laos and
Timor-Leste, more than a third of people still live in absolute poverty.

Unless these growing disparities in incomes and living conditions, both within and
between countries, are addressed, social stability could be threatened and could have
an adverse impact on long-term economic growth (Kharas & Kohli 2011).

### 2.3 Asia will continue transforming the region and globe

Asia’s economic rise will continue to transform the region and the globe in the period
to 2025 and beyond. Economies in Asia will become even more important participants
in world trade and Asian consumer markets will grow as the region’s living standards
rise. Asia’s strong rates of urbanisation will continue, and the region will increasingly
become an exporter of capital and a world financial centre.

#### Asia’s rise will shift trade and production patterns

Asia has transformed the way the world produces goods and services and it will
continue to be the production engine for the world (Chapter 1). Asia as a whole will
become more important in the system of global trade to 2025 (Chart 2.9), retaining its
many advantages as a mass producer of manufactured goods.

##### Chart 2.9: Asia’s share of world merchandise trade


Per cent Per cent

100 100

80 80

60 60

40 40

20 20

0 0

1975 1985 1995 2005 2015 2025

Asia with rest of world Intra-Asia

Note: See glossary for definition of Asia.
Source: Treasury projections based on IMF (2012b).

60


-----

As the more advanced economies in Asia turn to producing higher value-added
products and face rising labour costs, the competitive dynamics of industries will
change globally. The trend of firms moving to regions in Asia with lower labour costs
is likely to continue, driving more integrated and interdependent cross-border
production networks. However, as more labour gets drawn into the traded sectors in
the developing economies, real wages are expected to rise. Higher living standards
and wages will narrow the labour cost difference between developing and developed
economies, including with Australia.

More sophisticated and affordable information and communications technology,
enhanced cross-border transport and logistics solutions, and a further reduction of
barriers to cross-border trade, investment and people movement will all support
further cross-border production integration.

In addition to increasing exports, economies in Asia will turn more to domestic
end-market opportunities. Internal demand within Asia is expected to become the
major source of new opportunity for firms in and outside Asia.

And as incomes rise in Asia, the expanding middle class’s spending on services will
become more significant, following the path of almost all advanced economies
(Chart 2.10).

##### Chart 2.10: Services shares of output increases with income


80

60

40

20


Per cent of GDP Per cent of GDP

80

60

40

20

0 10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000


GDP per person US$

China India Indonesia

Japan South Korea United Kingdom

United States

Note: Data from 1980 to 2011. GDP per person adjusted for purchasing power parity (2011 prices)
Sources: Conference Board (2012) and World Bank (2012b).

India, for example, has developed a larger services sector than other economies at
the same stage of development. By the early 2020s, information technology and
business process outsourcing are projected to employ around 7.5 million workers.

Whether that sector will provide sufficient productivity gains and opportunity for the
large number of relatively unskilled workers in India remains to be seen. But with the

61


-----

development of new information and communications technology, and the capacity
for these services to be integrated into global value chains, it may be possible for
parts of India to ‘leapfrog’ the more heavy industrialisation of East Asia. The Indian
Government has recognised that, for India to achieve its potential, there are many
challenges ahead such as the burden of ‘red tape’ and the need to improve its human
capital and infrastructure (Government of India Planning Commission 2011).

As producers in Asia ‘move up the value chain’, they will focus their efforts on
increasingly skills and innovation-intensive goods and services.

The more advanced economies in the region—particularly Japan and South Korea—
will remain important drivers of economic activity, especially as suppliers of critical,
high-value elements of the region’s production networks and as consumers of final
goods.

Asia’s growing science and research capability is boosting global scientific output and
accelerating the pace of technological progress worldwide. It is also intensifying
innovation competition as traditional technology powerhouses—such as Germany,
the United Kingdom and the United States—strive to maintain, or at least mitigate the
pressure on, their innovation roles.

Although competition from countries in Asia will increase, so too will opportunities
for collaboration. These opportunities are likely to arise in the provision of
international education, basic research (for example, particle physics and bioscience),
research on common problems (such as climate change and disease prevention), and
applied or commercial research with effective intellectual property arrangements.
The benefits of international research collaboration include improvements in the
influence, cost effectiveness and applicability of research, access to new ideas and
data, and sharing of facilities.

#### Consumer markets will grow

As the living standards of people in Asia improve, they will contribute to a shift in
their economies towards greater domestic consumption.

In China, for example, consumption as a share of the economy has been squeezed by
the export-intensive nature of China’s rapid industrialisation. Although consumption
per person has grown, the private consumption share of output is still below
40 per cent, much lower than in other major economies at comparable stages of
development. China’s 12th five-year plan is focused on restructuring its economic
model towards internal sources of growth.

The Asian region is expected to be home to the world’s fastest-growing middle class,
whose pursuit of an improved quality of life will see Asian economies emerge as the
world’s dominant consumer markets. This trend will change spending patterns, social
and cultural preferences, use of technology and occupations throughout the region
and the world.

62


-----

While recent studies differ on how to define and measure the global middle class, all
point to the sheer magnitude of the shifts in Asia. One prominent study estimates
that middle-class consumers in the Asia–Pacific region will increase by more than
2.5 billion people and account for around 60 per cent of global middle-class
consumption by 2030 (Kharas & Gertz 2010 and Figure 2.2).[1]

##### Figure 2.2: Growing consumer markets of Asia

**Europe**
2009: 664 m

**North America** 2030: 680 m **Asia Pacific**
2009: 338 m 2009: 525 m
2030: 322 m 2030: 3228 m

**Central and** **Middle East and**
**South America** **Africa**
2009: 181 m 2009: 137 m
2030: 313 m 2030: 341 m

Note: ‘Middle class’ is defined as those households with daily expenditures of between US$10 and US$100
per person. The black border circles and orange border circles depict the size of the middle-class population
in 2009 and 2030 respectively.
Source: Kharas & Gertz (2010).

The large and dynamic consumer markets emerging in Asia are already attracting the
attention of businesses—and governments—globally. And although this growing
group of consumers will still be considerably poorer than consumers in advanced
economies, their sheer number will open up huge new markets as they spend a
higher proportion of their income on discretionary items. In urban China in 2025,
discretionary spending is expected to constitute 45 per cent of a household’s total
expenditure, up from 34 per cent in 2000 (McKinsey & Company 2010).

Consumers across Asia are becoming more aspirational and more discerning. As
incomes of the middle class increase, consumption choices will become more
diversified—including a desire for higher quality, and potentially tailored, goods and
services (Box 2.4).

1 Specifically, daily expenditures of between US$10 and US$100 per person in purchasing power parity
terms. The lower limit was chosen by the authors with reference to the average poverty line in Portugal
and Italy, the two advanced European countries with the strictest definition of poverty. The upper limit
was chosen as twice the median income of Luxembourg, the richest advanced country. Defined in this
way, the middle class excludes those who are considered poor in the poorest advanced countries and
excludes those who are considered rich in the richest advanced country.

63


**Europe**
2009: 664 m

**North America** 2030: 680 m **Asia Pacific**
2009: 338 m 2009: 525 m
2030: 322 m 2030: 3228 m

**Central and** **Middle East and**
**South America** **Africa**
2009: 181 m 2009: 137 m
2030: 313 m 2030: 341 m


-----

**Box 2.4: Middle-class consumers in Ahmedabad, India**


Ten years ago, Hitesh moved from a village in the Indian state of Gujarat to
Ahmedabad, a city of 4.5 million, where he now lives with his mother, wife and two
daughters in a three-storey house in the old part of town.

Hitesh, 31, is a stockbroker in a firm that he opened with his friend several years
ago. He brings in an annual income of US$5,280, placing his family squarely in the
middle of Ahmedabad’s middle class. Almost half their income goes to food and
housing, although they also spend a lot on transportation and entertainment. In the
past few years, his wife, Komal, has begun buying groceries at a new supermarket
instead of from local kiranas (traditional convenience stores), and the family buys
electronics from a local showroom or from a friend’s shop. They now have US$700
in household assets, including a washing machine, a refrigerator, a television, a
DVD player and two mobile phones—all of which, with the exception of the
refrigerator, are international brands. Hitesh owns a motorcycle, which he bought
for US$850.

The family has seen a dramatic upgrade in the quality of their lives in the last few
years, and they have high hopes for continued improvement. Hitesh expects his
income to double within the next five years, and he and Komal are already planning
how their lives will change. Their first focus is housing. The family currently lives in
an old neighbourhood with narrow streets and older, worn buildings, and they
would prefer a more developed area. They have been looking at a house with
greater investment value and more living and outdoor space, including a garden
and a parking spot. They have decided that they will buy an air-conditioning unit for
their new home, are aiming to set up an internet connection and are budgeting
US$4,000 to US$5,000 for new furniture. They then plan to invest in a small car
and, eventually, new office space for Hitesh’s firm, ideally in one of the commercial
developments that have recently sprouted up in Ahmedabad. The family also
expect to spend more on health care and, as their daughters grow up, education.


Stories like this will play out across the region in years to come.


Note: Expenditure figures quoted are 2010 US dollars.
Source: BCG (2010).

The Asian middle class will become more mobile. Outbound tourist numbers have
already grown substantially; China’s increased from 4.5 million to 57 million between
1995 and 2010 and India’s from 3 million to 11 million over the same period
(UNWTO 2012).

Asia’s expanding middle class will seek greater access to educational opportunities as
a driver for more highly skilled and better paid jobs. Studying abroad is considered
important to obtain these jobs and in 2012 one survey found that 85 per cent of
Chinese high net worth individuals intended to send their children overseas to study
(Hurun 2012). This preference has led the number of students from China studying

64


-----

overseas to almost treble: in 2003, 117,300 Chinese students studied abroad, but by
2011, this had grown to 339,700 students (China MOE 2012; AEI 2012a).

Alongside growing middle-class consumption in Asia, large consumer groups in the
region already have much higher income levels, as evidenced by the size of the luxury
goods market in Asia: China, for example, is now the world’s largest market for Rolls
Royce automobiles.

With billions of people set to enjoy considerably higher living standards, a surge in
global creativity and productivity should be expected, accompanied by widening
access to education—especially among women—and by the global reach of
communications and digital technology.

Access to a greater range of financial services to meet the demands of the middle
class will also change consumption patterns. New investment products will further
increase household wealth and provide alternative sources of funds for business
investment.

#### Urbanisation is set to continue

Urbanisation in Asia has been an important driver, as well as a consequence, of the
region’s economic development and industrialisation.

Although Asia’s rate of increase in urbanisation is soon to peak, the scale of
urbanisation to come is unprecedented (Chart 2.11).

##### Chart 2.11: Asia’s continuing urbanisation

Number of people living in urban areas


People (billion) People (billion)

3 3

2 2

1 1

0 0

1985 1995 2005 2015 2025

Note: See glossary for the definition of Asia.
Source: UN (2012b).

65


-----

By 2025, more than 2 billion people in Asia—half the world’s urban population—are
expected to live in cities. By 2050, this number will rise to some 3 billion people,
around double the current level (ADB 2011a).

By way of comparison, China’s pace of urbanisation is 100 times the scale, and
10 times the speed, of Britain’s urbanisation during the Industrial Revolution
(Maddison 2010). Building on their relatively low urbanisation levels, India and China
are expected to account for around 40 per cent of the world’s urban population
growth to 2025 (UN 2012b).

Urban areas are productive, attracting skilled workers, generating economies of scale
and efficiencies, and providing more cost-effective essential services. Globally, large
cities have 38 per cent of the world’s population but generate 72 per cent of global
output; China’s metropolitan areas accounted for 78 per cent of its output in 2010.
While urban India’s share of the country’s output is currently low—less than
40 per cent—urban areas there should generate half of India’s growth in GDP to 2025
(McKinsey & Company 2012). In China, average consumption per person in urban
areas was more than double that of their rural counterparts in 2008. In India, average
consumption per person was one-third higher in urban areas in 2009 (World
Bank 2012b). The presence of a significant gap in incomes between urban areas and
the rest of an economy is practically universal.

Strong rates of urbanisation in Asia will continue to shift investment activity from the
building of heavy industry to the building of infrastructure: residential construction,
roads and other transport networks, container port capacity, and urban amenities
(such as water and electricity distribution).

In response to concerns about the degradation of arable land, urban densities are
likely to increase. China is forecast to have more than 200 cities with a population in
excess of 1 million by 2025. Europe, in contrast, has 35.

Urban areas will be the primary location for Asia’s emerging middle class, whose
demands will relate to the needs of an urban lifestyle—transportation, infrastructure,
housing and utilities, food and other consumables, health care, recreation and
education.

Countries such as Bangladesh, Cambodia, Laos, Pakistan and Vietnam, which are at an
earlier stage in the urbanisation process, will see a doubling in their urban
populations over the next 25 years. They, too, face significant decisions about
urbanisation, which could put pressure on institutional and political systems if not
carefully managed.

#### Asia as a capital exporter

Asia is growing as a capital exporter and financial centre. The region holds more than
half the world’s foreign exchange reserves and accounts for nearly a quarter of global
financial assets. By 2050, this could rise to as much as 45 per cent (Kohli, Sharma &
Sood 2011). Whatever the overall share turns out to be, Asia will host some of the

66


-----

largest global equity, debt and banking markets, and be at the centre of global
financial intermediation.

The share of total savings in China, India and other emerging economies is likely to
increase over coming decades, while the United States’ share, and those of other
advanced economies, will decline (Chart 2.12).

Savings from Asian countries have largely been invested in foreign markets, such as
the United States and Europe, due to the historic stability that these markets have
offered compared to the Asian financial market. Foreign exchange reserves have also
been built up, partly in response to macro-prudential concerns raised in the
aftermath of the Asian financial crisis (Chapter 1). The strengthening and rigorous
application of regulatory and supervisory frameworks will enhance confidence in
Asian capital markets and these markets are likely to deepen as a result. As the
financial system in Asia grows and matures, more direct investment within the region
is likely, as is a gradual decline in the investment of funds in advanced economies
(Sheng 2011). Deeper and larger capital markets in the region will likely lead to
greater market opportunities for services such as risk management tools and financial
market products, including the provision of such services from Australia.

And with financial systems in advanced economies unwinding the high debt levels
built up before the Global Financial Crisis, financial institutions in stronger economic
positions, such as those in Australia and elsewhere in the Asian region, will have
opportunities to expand into new markets.

##### Chart 2.12: Share of total saving in the Group of Twenty


Per cent Per cent

80 80

60 60

40 40

20 20

0 0

1985 1995 2005 2015 2025

China India Other advanced

Other emerging United States

Note: See glossary for definition of country groupings.
Source: Speller, Thwaites & Wright (2011).

67


-----

### 2.4 Success is giving rise to interconnected challenges

As Asia’s economies, populations and middle class grow and its rates of urbanisation
and consumption increase, so too do its challenges in the areas of food, water,
infrastructure and energy and minerals security. Climate change is likely to amplify
these challenges over time.

#### Energy and minerals security concerns

As it has grown, Asia has made growing claims on global energy. Increasingly, the
region has relied on imports to meet its energy needs, with Australia playing an
important role.

These concerns are likely to heighten in coming decades. Asia is expected to become
90 per cent dependent on imported oil by 2050, with the source of that oil being
concentrated in the Middle East (ADB 2011a). For those countries within the region
with large endowments of carbon-intensive fuel, climate change is adding a new
dimension to Asia’s energy challenges—creating pressures to restrict and alter
patterns of energy use.

China is passing through the most energy-intensive part of its economic development
(Song 2010). At the same time, its largest oilfields are maturing and production has
peaked. So with backing from the government, Chinese national oil companies are
investing overseas to expand production and diversify sources of supply.

To further address its energy security concerns, China’s 12th five-year plan contains
ambitious targets to reduce energy intensity and increase the share of renewable
energy in national energy consumption. Action against these targets has been
successful: China has emerged as a significant actor in the global renewable energy
market and is now the world leader in renewable energy investment (UNEP 2012).

India, too, is focused on assuring ongoing access to reliable, affordable and secure
energy. It recently became the world’s third-largest energy consumer, and its energy
demand is expected to more than double between 2009 and 2035 (IEA 2011). But
India holds less than 1 per cent of the world’s proven oil reserves, and while the
country has the world’s fifth-largest coal reserves, domestic production has been
unable to keep pace with demand (BP 2012). Against this backdrop, India seeks to
expand the population’s access to modern energy sources, such as natural gas, liquid
petroleum gas, diesel and biofuels.

The energy security landscape of ASEAN countries is being transformed as well. Once
major exporters of oil and gas, ASEAN countries are now collectively net oil importers,
and within three decades they are expected to also become net importers of gas
(ADB 2011a).

Concerns about energy security are not confined to the region’s fast-growing
developing economies: Japan and South Korea have limited domestic energy supplies
and so both have come to rely heavily on imports. Japan and South Korea are the

68


-----

world’s third and fifth-largest net importers of crude oil respectively and the world’s
first and second-largest importers of natural gas. Both confront a more crowded field
of competitors for future energy requirements.

Asia’s rapid growth, infrastructure investment, and ongoing industrialisation and
urbanisation will boost demand for a broad range of minerals—spanning aluminium
to zircon. China’s iron ore imports, for example, are projected to grow strongly to
reach over 1,000 million tonnes in 2025 (BREE 2012a). The demands of Asia’s growing
middle class for jewellery, as a means to display and store wealth, will drive demand
for commodities such as gold.

The mature industrial economies of Japan, South Korea and Taiwan will also continue
to demand raw materials to maintain their manufacturing sectors. And as their
manufacturing industries respond to demands for ‘greener’, innovative technologies,
there is likely to be a corresponding increase in demand for materials such as rare
earths and lithium. Increasing global demand for consumer electronics is heightening
this demand, all of which would be supplied by imports.

#### Climate change

As the region’s energy use has increased markedly, so too have its greenhouse gas
emissions. The link between energy and emissions arises from the use of fossil fuels,
which dominate Asia’s existing energy mix due to their low cost, availability and ease
of use relative to low-carbon alternatives. In 2009, fossil fuels accounted for about
82 per cent of Asia’s energy mix, with coal alone accounting for around 47 per cent.

It is in the region’s interests to work to address climate change and many countries
are taking steps to do so (Chapter 8). Projected sea-level rise, more intense tropical
storms and higher wind speeds could inundate low-lying port cities, threaten coastal
areas, exacerbate flooding and increase the salinity of rivers and bays across the
region. With rapid and sometimes poorly planned urbanisation, these impacts could
devastate Asia’s coastal cities and major ports. Even under a conservative scenario of
sea-level rise, by the end of the century the number of people affected by flooding in
low-lying parts of the region, such as parts of Bangladesh, China, India and Vietnam,
could increase from 13 million to 94 million (Cruz et al. 2007). In South Asia alone, the
average costs of adapting to a 2°C temperature rise could be up to $15 billion every
year between 2010 and 2050 (CSIRO 2006).

Not only is action on climate change in the region’s interests—given its large
population and huge latent demand for emissions-intensive goods and services—it is
critical to a global climate change solution. Asia is already a major contributor to
global emissions. The region currently accounts for around 40 per cent of global
emissions—up from 31 per cent in 2001. China, which recently overtook the
United States as the world’s largest emitter, is responsible for more than 60 per cent
of the region’s total emissions. And without a shift to low-carbon development,
growth in emissions is projected to rise significantly (Garnaut 2011; Australian
Government 2011c).

69


-----

If the region is to reach its potential, it must address its growing food, energy, water
and climate constraints. Significant efforts to do so are already underway. But for
them to succeed, the region must avoid past approaches, where attempts to fix one
area without regard for effects elsewhere led to unintended consequences. The links
between food, water, energy and climate change are multiple and fundamental, and
so a whole-of-system approach to these challenges is critical.

#### Growing demand for food

Asia’s demand for food commodities is set to grow. In order to feed a larger, more
urban and richer population, food production in 2050 needs to be around 70 per cent
higher than today. Most of the projected increase in food demand will come from
Asia (Linehan et al. 2012). The shift towards more protein-rich food and a wider
variety of vegetables and fruit, combined with growth in biofuels, will also be more
resource intensive.

The world is expected to be able to achieve the required increase in food production
(FAO 2009; World Bank 2009), mostly from higher yields and cropping intensity.

But meeting the required increase in food production will not come easily. While the
increase needed in agricultural yields is comparable to those achieved in the past,
crop productivity growth is slowing and producers face much greater environmental
constraints and challenges than before. And in many areas, climate change is
multiplying these challenges. By 2030, rising sea levels could expose large parts of the
Mekong Delta to extreme salinisation and crop damage.

The focus on lifting agricultural productivity will need to extend beyond the farm gate.
Investments in water and transport infrastructure, particularly roads, irrigation
systems and dams, will also be required. Such investments would help farmers better
integrate into value chains and markets as well as help reduce food loss and waste. A
lack of hard infrastructure, such as storage and cooling facilities and transportation,
means that food does not always make it to market.

The combination of resource and environmental constraints, along with higher input
costs, will constrain the supply response in most regions, so coming decades will be
characterised by high food prices. Stronger links between agricultural and energy
markets, as well as more frequent extreme weather shocks, will also add to food price
volatility.

#### Water scarcity is set to increase

Meeting the region’s growing food demands will be complicated by water scarcity.

Asia is a relatively water-scarce region, and the complexity and scale of its water
problems are set to grow. Growing populations and cities, changing diets and
expanding energy and industrial production will demand greater shares of the
region’s limited water resources. Industrial water use alone is projected to increase by
65 per cent by 2030, crowding out growth in agricultural water use (ADB 2011d).

70


-----

If improvements in water efficiency remain at recent levels—a modest 1 per cent a
year between 1990 and 2008—demand in India and China could exceed supply by
50 per cent and 25 per cent respectively by 2030 (Water Resources Group 2009). In
developing Asia, aggregate water shortfalls could reach 40 per cent, with implications
for the region’s food and energy production, its ecological needs and the health and
livelihoods of its population.

Large expanses of land are already becoming vulnerable to desertification, with
deserts expanding in India, China and Pakistan. In China alone, just over one-quarter
of the country’s landmass is desertified and an average of almost 2,500 square
kilometres of land being lost to advancing deserts each year.

Climate change, as it takes effect in the annual variability of rainfall, will make things
worse. While there is uncertainty about the extent and rates of melting of the Hindu
Kush glaciers, climate change could reduce downstream water availability, affecting
1.3 billion people who indirectly benefit from the water in eight countries
(Papademetriou 2000; Singh et al. 2011).

Water quality is also likely to remain a problem. Within the region, surface-water
sources are being rapidly polluted, often irreparably. More than half of the water in
China’s Hai River basin is classified as ‘non-usable’. Of the Philippines’ 412 rivers,
50 are classified as ‘dead’. In Indonesia’s West Java, all seven main rivers—the source
of water for the nation’s capital, Jakarta—are categorised as heavily polluted. And the
waters of the Ganges and Yellow rivers are unusable for agriculture along more than
half their lengths (ADB 2011d).

As water scarcity grows and as water quality deteriorates, competition among users
and jurisdictions will increase. Already, in countries such as India, frequent water
shortages have contributed to conflicts among households, communities and states
(Mukhopadhyay & Shyamsundar 2012). Without effective management of water
resources, tensions within and among countries will rise, with implications for
regional growth and stability.

#### Infrastructure needs are set to increase

As the nations in Asia continue their process of rapid urbanisation and economic
development, substantial investments in quality infrastructure will be required. Asia
could require up to US$8 trillion of new infrastructure investment out to 2020 to
support the current levels of economic growth (ADB 2011c). And almost US$1 trillion
trans-regional infrastructure projects have been identified (ERIA 2010). This
investment will influence the amenity, sustainability and productivity of societies—
providing for the timely movement of people, goods and services.

Infrastructure demands vary across the region. Some countries are already investing
heavily in infrastructure. For example, China spends $116 per person, while India
spends about $17 per person (Kohli and Sood 2010).

71


-----

Infrastructure needs are not contained to dynamic urban areas. In a survey of over
5,000 rural households in India’s southern states of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and
Tamil Nadu, about 90 per cent of respondents listed water and infrastructure as
among their top three priorities (Besley et al 2004).

Given the size of the challenge, many in the region are looking to harness private
sector involvement. Policy settings which address impediments to investment and
encourage private sector participation in infrastructural development will be needed
to meet the region’s infrastructure needs (Sheng 2011). At the same time, planning
practices will need to develop further to make the most of increasing scarce urban
space. Solutions for these policy challenges can be found by working together—
through multilateral development and other institutions, international forums, such
as APEC forum and the G20, and bilaterally (Chapter 7).

### 2.5 International systems are evolving

The international system established after World War II brought about the longest
and most prosperous period of peaceful expansion ever witnessed. This rules-based
system, global and comprehensive in reach, and underpinned by institutions like the
United Nations, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (now the World Trade Organization), created the
conditions in which many nations, including a large number in Asia, could confidently
pursue their own development.

The question, looking forward to 2025, is how relationships between regional powers
will change as the balance of influence among them shifts, and how regional and
global institutions and rules will evolve.

Strategic power is difficult to define, but most attempts to measure it include a
nation’s income, or output, defence spending, population and technical
advancement. Other measures include military capability, the determination and
ambition of the political leadership and a country’s ‘soft power’, which denotes a
country’s attractiveness and its consequent ability to persuade, rather than coerce,
others to help in achieving its goals.

Whatever the definition, most measures point to the rapid rise in strategic power of
emerging Asian economies in recent decades (Figure 2.3).

Positive and stable relations among all nations, and particularly the larger nations—
China, India, Indonesia, Japan and the United States—will be fundamental to the
prosperity and security in the region over the period to 2025. Indonesia and the other
members of ASEAN are of special relevance to Australian interests.

72


-----

##### Figure 2.3: Major economic powers in the Asia–Pacific region

Share of global economic power

19%

**United States**

11% 11%

**China** **Japan**

5% 7% 14%

3%

**India**

2%

**2010 %**

**2000**
%

Note: This index of global economic power is a weighted average of the share of a nation in world GDP, their
share of global trade and their share of financial strength as measured by share of net exports of capital.
Weights are from Subramanian (2012)—0.6 for GDP, 0.35 for trade and 0.05 for net exports of capital.
Sources: Subramanian (2012) and World Bank (2012d).

Nothing is inevitable in the global strategic transition underway. At the same time,
throughout the region, old frictions, including territorial disputes and debate over
historical issues, persist and can easily escalate. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea (North Korea), with its nuclear ambitions, repressive government and
impoverished population, remains one of the region’s flashpoints. As can be seen in
the South China Sea, territorial disputes, especially in the maritime domain, will
continue to be points of regional friction and pose serious risks of conflict. Despite
recent constructive developments in cross-straits relations, uncertainties remain
about how Beijing and Taipei will resolve their differences. And relations between
India and Pakistan, currently relatively stable, could yet deteriorate quickly and
dangerously.

But there are reasons for optimism. The economic rise of Asia has been a win-win on
an unprecedented scale. Risks of miscalculation and policy error will always be
present, but the growing strength, breadth and sophistication of bilateral and regional
engagement provide grounds for believing that shifting regional and global power can
be managed constructively. These security dimensions of the region’s growth are
further examined in Chapter 8.

The relationship between the United States and China, the two largest economies in
the world, will be of central importance. Many alternative strategic futures, both
positive and negative, are possible. But Washington and Beijing are conscious of their
complex interdependency and have been building mechanisms across their bilateral
relationship to help manage the tensions that will inevitably arise from time to time.

73


19%

**United States**

11% 11%

**China** **Japan**

5% 7% 14%

3%

**India**

2%

**2010 %**

**2000**
%


-----

The United States will almost certainly remain the single most powerful global and
regional power for some time to come, drawing upon its economic, military and soft
power and, within Asia, its network of security alliances and mutually beneficial
political and economic relationships.

The two most populous regional powers, China and India, can be expected to seek
greater strategic influence as their economic weight grows. But their determination to
lift their large populations out of poverty suggests that they will continue to focus
primarily on domestic policy issues, including environmental sustainability, and have a
primary interest in stability.

The significance of their emerging relationship and the growing importance of the
lines of energy supply to East Asia from the Middle East reinforce the value of thinking
about the Indian Ocean and the Pacific Ocean as a single strategic arc (Box 2.5).


**Box 2.5: Indo-Pacific and trans-Asian concepts**


Driven by Asia’s economic rise, the Indian Ocean is surpassing the Atlantic and
Pacific oceans as the world’s busiest and most strategically significant trade
corridor. One-third of the world’s bulk cargo and around two-thirds of world oil
shipments now pass through the Indian Ocean (IOR-ARC 2012). Regional
cooperation to ensure the safety and security of these vital trade routes will
become more important over coming decades.

Some observers have raised a new ‘Indo–Pacific’ conception of the Asian region.
Under such a conception, the western Pacific Ocean and the Indian Ocean would
come to be considered as one strategic arc. This conception is being driven by the
increased economic interaction between South, Northeast and Southeast Asia and
the importance of the lines of energy supply to Asia from the Middle East.

Another conception of increasing importance is the trans-Asian region. With its
growing economic ties and historical, community and cultural links to East and
Southeast Asia, India’s foreign policy has increasingly tended to ‘look east’. In
return, Northeast and Southeast Asian countries are looking west, not least
because of the importance of energy links. Trade between China and India is
expanding. In 2011, China was India’s largest export market, although their
two-way merchandise trade was one-tenth of India’s total trade.

China is giving priority to developing road and rail infrastructure southwards from
its borders as part of its wider efforts to improve production and distribution
networks through enhanced regional connectivity (Bubalo & Cook 2010). India is
building transport infrastructure that connects to East Asia. ASEAN’s Economic
Community is giving priority to developing trans-regional transport and other
infrastructure. Japan is heavily involved in the development of these trans-Asian
infrastructural projects. These developments represent significant trans-Asian
infrastructure projects, lessen focus on ocean security and heighten focus on
managing land border issues.

For Australia, either the Indo–Pacific or trans-Asian conceptions could shape, in
different ways, our economic, political, security and environmental interests.

74


-----

Northeast Asia’s evolution is likely to be marked by both growing economic
integration and continuing competition. China and Japan enjoy the third-largest
economic relationship in the world. China is Japan’s largest export market and its
largest source of imports. Japan is China’s second-largest export market after the
United States, and its largest source of imports.

While a commercial competitor in some fields, South Korea has a deep economic
partnership with China in fields such as information and communications technology
and green energy. It is China’s third-biggest trading partner in merchandisable goods
and third-largest source of foreign investment, while China is South Korea’s biggest
trading partner and investment destination.

The strong links between the economies of China, Japan and South Korea are likely to
increase. Japan and China are now close partners in value chains that underpin
regional growth and prosperity. Discussions on a new trilateral free trade agreement
have begun, and intensive bilateral and trilateral exchanges are taking place.

In Southeast Asia, Indonesia has re-emerged as a regional leader, is emerging as a
global influence and is expected to play a growing role in the G20 and other forums. It
has a large population, a strongly growing economy and a pivotal geostrategic
location. It is the world’s largest predominantly Muslim country and a lively
democracy. It will increasingly influence outcomes within global and regional
institutions. Indonesia will become even more important for Australia. Other ASEAN
nations, such as Vietnam, Singapore, Thailand and Malaysia, will play a significant role
in regional trade and investment. Vietnam has carved out a distinctive diplomatic and
wider regional profile. Singapore’s geographic location, world-class infrastructure and
the ease of doing business there have made it an important commercial hub. For
example, around 70 per cent of all intra-ASEAN trade is now with, or through,
Singapore.

75


-----

## Chapter 3: Australia in Asia

|Chapter 1: The rise of Asia The rise provide|Chapter 2: The future of Asia to 2025 of Asia s great|
|---|---|
|opportunities for Australia Chapter 4: Outlook for Australia to 2025 Chapter 3: Australia in Asia • developing institutional connections • opening up the Australian economy • cultural contributions to Australian society||


**opportunities for**

**Chapter 3:**
Australia in Asia


-----

**Key points**


Australian interactions with the Asian region have a long history and have evolved
over time in response to developments at home and abroad.

In the post-war period, Asia’s commitment to internationally oriented development
opened unprecedented new opportunities for the resource-abundant Australian
economy.

Australia’s economic integration into Asia has accelerated over the past four
decades. Steps to open up the Australian economy began in the 1970s with
landmark tariff cuts in 1973. Comprehensive reforms to Australia’s economic
institutions and frameworks then gathered pace from the mid-1980s.

These reforms and Australia’s more recent successful response to the Global
Financial Crisis have laid the foundation for Australians to benefit from the
opportunities stemming from the region—such as the surge in resource demand
and the rising middle class in Asia—with the gains of success spread across the
nation.

More recent policy reforms—including in tax, regulation, skills, school funding,
managing the resources boom, increasing connectivity and investing in
infrastructure—are important components of our agenda to further strengthen the
economy’s resilience and diversity and enhance our ability to engage with Asia.

Cultural diversity is at the centre of Australia’s identity. The face of Australia has
changed dramatically in recent decades and Asia is now an important part of our
identity.

The Australian Government is engaging more with regional partners through
multilateral institutions, regional forums and bilateral exchanges. Australia has built
deep and broad relationships within the region, across educational, cultural and
social dimensions. Our people-to-people connections with Asia have deepened and
have transformed our society.

77


-----

### 3.1 Introduction

Australia’s interactions with nations in Asia have shaped our strategic focus and the
structure of our economy and society.

In the early decades after Federation in 1901, Australia’s mindset was oriented mainly
towards the British Empire and Europe. Following World War II, Australia shifted its
strategic focus to the United States and countries closer to home. And over time
Australia’s economic focus also has shifted into the region.

Over the past four decades, Australia has transformed its economy, society and
institutions as it has become closer to Asia. Asia’s commitment to modernisation and
internationally oriented development opened unprecedented new opportunities for
Australia to become a highly productive and reliable supplier of resources and related
goods and services to the region and the world. Our economic integration with Asia
gathered pace as our economic settings were liberalised.

Our people-to-people connections with Asia have transformed our society through
migration, business, travel, study and popular culture.

### 3.2 Developing institutional connections

Successive generations have transformed Australia from a nation that once built
defensive walls to shield itself from the region and the globe into an open, outward
looking, prosperous society, securing its future in the region.

Australian interactions with the Asian region have a long history, dating back to
contact between Indonesian fishermen from Makassar and Indigenous communities
in northern Australia before European settlement, and early migration from a number
of Asian regions during the colonial period. But all the elements of what has been
described as the ‘Australian Settlement’ that underpinned Federation—’White
Australia, industry protection, wage arbitration, state paternalism and imperial
benevolence’ (Kelly 1992)—had the effect of stunting the relationship with Asia.[1]

In the early decades after Federation, Australia’s economic, political and strategic
mindsets were oriented mainly towards the British Empire and Europe. While there
was an awareness of Asia, and cultural, economic and diplomatic exchanges with
countries in the region took place, their development was constrained by Australian
institutions. This reflected the values and attitudes of a time when many Australians
defined themselves as distant and separate from Asia.

World War II was a major strategic shock for Australia. The fall of Singapore in 1942
marked a new chapter. Australia shifted its attention squarely to Asia and developed
a security partnership with the United States.

1 See Stokes (2004) for a critique of that summary and an alternative formulation.

78


-----

In the immediate post-war period, Australian policy towards Asia was driven mainly
by political, defence and security considerations, particularly decolonisation and its
implications for Asian security, and the regional manifestations of the Cold War.

After World War II, the Chifley government was engaged in laying the foundations for
a new international order, in which the United Nations was envisaged as playing a
central role. Australia lent strong diplomatic support for independence for Indonesia,
Myanmar, India, Pakistan, the Philippines and Sri Lanka. Successive Australian
governments took the view that Australia should contribute to the region through
development assistance. Conceived under the Chifley Government, and established
under the Menzies Government in 1951, Australia led in the development of the
Colombo Plan, offering scholarships whose recipients included a significant number of
emerging Asian leaders.

The rapprochement with Japan in the 1950s, driven by the signing of the Agreement
of Commerce in 1957, was a catalyst for Australia establishing itself as Asia’s premier
resources supplier and accelerated the shift of Australian diplomatic focus to the
region.

Meanwhile, the Cold War reinforced Australia’s preoccupation with sustaining major
power (notably United States) military and wider engagement in the region. The
conclusion of the ANZUS Treaty in 1951, which cemented our US alliance, was a
landmark. Australia also encouraged the United Kingdom to retain its military and
wider influence in the region into the 1970s.

These strategic considerations lay behind Australian policy in relation to Vietnam,
including the decision to deploy Australian armed forces there. They were also
prominent in Australia’s decision to support Malaysia diplomatically and militarily
when it was facing threats from the Sukarno government in Indonesia during the
confrontation (Konfrontasi) period.

A distinctive feature of the 1950s was the expansion of Australian diplomatic
representation in the region. Richard Casey, as External Affairs Minister, led this effort
to build relations with the region. By 1960, when he retired from this role, Australia
had established diplomatic missions in 14 Asian countries (Gifford 2001).

One of Australia’s distinctive contributions to the region has been to encourage more
effective mechanisms for political, strategic and economic consultation and
cooperation.

Australia, under the Whitlam Government, became the first external dialogue partner
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in 1974 and has participated
regularly in the ASEAN Post Ministerial Conference, which brings together ASEAN and
its dialogue partners, including Australia, once a year.

Economic ties with the region deepened and broadened under the Hawke and
Keating governments, with Australia playing a central role, alongside Japan and South
Korea, in the development of the Asia–Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum in
the late 1980s and early 1990s. Although APEC’s agenda is largely economic, it helped

79


-----

foster positive habits of cooperation and consultation and a stronger sense of shared
regional interests. Until the recent formation of the East Asia Summit, annual APEC
leaders’ meetings were the only forum to bring together the heads of government of
most regional economies.

Working closely with regional partners, notably Indonesia, Australia has encouraged
the development of broadly inclusive regional security mechanisms like the ASEAN
Regional Forum in 1994 and the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting-Plus in 2010. We
have supported informal networks and processes such as the Pacific Economic
Cooperation Council and the Council for Security Cooperation in the Asia–Pacific
network of think tanks and academics.

In addition to their functional importance, these processes have helped develop
extensive personal networks of ministers, officials, businesspeople, academics and
other experts around the region.

Regional and global institutions, like these, continue to evolve partly in response to
Asia’s rise. Australia has a growing engagement with regional partners in multilateral
organisations. It has been at the forefront of support for reforms to international
institutions to reflect the increasing importance of emerging economies. For example,
our constituency at the International Monetary Fund has agreed that Australia and
South Korea share the constituency’s seat on the IMF’s Executive Board. We have
supported the bids of two regional partners, Japan and India, to secure permanent
membership of the UN Security Council. The Group of Twenty (G20) gives us close
engagement with China, Japan, India, Indonesia and South Korea.

Australia and our regional partners have established strong frameworks for practical
cooperation to address shared regional security and related challenges. Australian
experts in law enforcement, customs, migration, public health, intelligence and other
fields are well regarded and connected in the region.

Central to our approach to engagement in the region has been developing coalitions
of like-minded countries that can attract broader support for action. Our major
contributions to the United Nations’ efforts in Cambodia and Timor-Leste were
examples.

In the security domain, Australia has developed defence cooperation programs with
partners in Southeast Asia, including training, joint exercises, specialised exchanges
and shared perspectives on defence doctrine.

The Australian Defence Force has a long record of contributing to regional security
through peacekeeping and stabilisation operations and responding to regional needs
for humanitarian assistance and disaster relief.

A further, longstanding strand in Australia’s engagement with Asia has been our
development cooperation program. In 2010, Australia was the sixth-largest OECD
Development Assistance Committee donor to Asian countries, which accounted for
58 per cent of our aid program, the second-highest proportion among all donors,
after South Korea (OECD 2012a).

80


-----

Australian development assistance focuses on poverty alleviation and assisting the
most vulnerable. It helps countries connect with the economic dynamism in Asia in a
self-sustaining way by building skills and capacity, strengthening institutions and
governance, and supporting sustainability.

Economic links are another major feature of Australian engagement with the region.
Our economic ties became more important in the late 1950s. The 1957 Commerce
Agreement between Australia and Japan started a boom in our economic ties and
growing recognition that Australia’s future lay in the region (Drysdale 1987). Australia
was a reliable supplier to other Asian nations as well (for example, Australia exported
wheat to China during the Cold War).

Australia has long been committed to economic integration with the region. The
Whitlam Government’s recognition of the People’s Republic of China in 1972 and the
establishment of diplomatic ties was a milestone. The 1976 Basic Treaty of Friendship
and Co-operation with Japan was another landmark.[2] The loss of British markets,
especially when the United Kingdom joined the European Common Market in the
early 1970s, also spurred a search for new markets in Asia.

The 1997 Asian financial crisis reinforced Australia’s growing economic
interdependence with Asia. Australia was active in responding to the crisis, joining
Japan and other countries to support arrangements to assist Indonesia, South Korea
and Thailand. Following the crisis, efforts to improve governance, build capacity and
develop stronger regional policy cooperation and institutions were intensified.

A final strand in our links with Asian countries—the people-to-people dimension—
deepened in the 1970s. This development was given particular impetus by substantial
Asian migration to Australia, but has since been complemented by others, such as the
boom in international education in Australia and growth in tourism to and from Asia.
More recently, other connections, such as social media, have become prominent.

### 3.3 How our economy transformed alongside Asia’s

Australia’s economic institutions inherited at Federation stood unchallenged, and
indeed were extended, in the decades immediately after World War II. The growth
strategy in the seven decades after Federation resulted in an economy that was
overregulated and underproductive. On a number of occasions, Australia’s inflexible
macroeconomic settings buckled under the strain of global economic forces.
Households and businesses that were not sheltered by our version of mercantilism
were being short changed by a succession of failures in Australia’s winner-picking
policies. As Australian policymaker JB Brigden put it, people of all classes not only

2 In 1990, only 14 years after the Basic Treaty was signed, Japan became one of the biggest investors in
Australia. Japan held one-fifth of all foreign investments in Australia—a similar proportion to the United
States and the United Kingdom.

81


-----

expected the government to spend for them, but also to think for them—to help
them find markets and to hold their hand in settling disputes (Coleman, Cornish &
Hagger 2006).

At times during this period, Australians thought that the country was undergoing an
economic revival, and many felt a sense of economic and national security, as
occurred in the 1920s and 1960s. However, while living standards rose in absolute
terms, Australia underperformed relative to comparable economies, especially
between the 1950s and 1980s (Chart 3.1).

##### Chart 3.1: Australia’s slide in comparative income has been reversed

Australia’s average annual growth in output per person compared with the OECD–20


1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5


Percentage points Percentage points

Liberalisation

gathered pace

1900-50 1950-60 1960-70 1970-80 1980-90 1990-2000 2000-10


1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5


Note: GDP per person adjusted for purchasing power parity at 1990 prices. OECD–20 is the original
20 members in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development in 1961. Before 1950, Iceland
and Luxembourg have been excluded due to data limitations.
Sources: Maddison (2010) and Conference Board (2012).

In 1870, Australia enjoyed the highest average incomes in the world. By 1970, average
incomes had fallen to three-quarters of those in the United States.

Seeing the opportunities emanating from within Asia against the backdrop of
declining productivity growth and falling agricultural export prices, from the
mid-1980s successive Australian governments managed a hard-fought transformation
of our economic institutions. This reversed the comparative slide in living standards
and set Australia up as a high-productivity economy (Box 3.1). The reform strategy
taken can be characterised in three steps.

First, Australia opened up its economy over time, which allowed us to develop
partnerships with Asian economies in an open global economic system. Moves to
open up the Australian economy began in the 1970s with landmark tariff cuts in 1973.

82


-----

Second, Australia adopted a liberal but prudent approach to macroeconomic policy
frameworks and capital market regulation, commencing in the 1980s, to make the
domestic economy more resilient. Among a long list of institutional changes, Australia
floated the dollar, liberalised financial markets under systemic oversight, introduced
inflation targeting through an independent Reserve Bank, and introduced a
medium-term fiscal policy framework focused on keeping a strong public sector
balance sheet. Australia’s high-quality macroeconomic institutions created a stable
environment that gave individuals, businesses and governments the ability to plan for
the longer term and respond to external events and long-term trends.

Third, Australia then implemented broad microeconomic reforms from the mid-1980s
onwards to lift the productivity and flexibility of the domestic economy. Exposure to
international competition, especially as Australia integrated into Asian markets,
placed pressure on Australian firms to adapt in order to succeed. Microeconomic
reforms ultimately embraced goods and services markets, factor markets (including
the labour market), the tax system, human services and publicly owned monopolies.
In a landmark act of collaboration, the strands of the structural reform process were
consolidated and extended in the National Competition Policy agreed by the
Australian and State and Territory governments in 1995.[3]

Since coming to office in 2007, we have continued the reform process, putting into
place the essential policy settings that will ensure Australia has an economy that is
positioned to address the emergence of Asia. Tax reform, returning the budget to
surplus, managing the resources boom, regulatory reform, ensuring that industries
under pressure become a successful part of Australia’s future, skills reform, school
funding reform, and increasing connectivity through the NBN, are all part of this
broad reform agenda.

Building the Australian economy also means investing in critical infrastructure—such
as ports, roads and rail—to increase productivity, improve competitiveness, attract
investment and drive growth. Infrastructure investments will also better connect
Australian regions, helping them to harness their unique strengths.

These reforms of Australia’s economy are essential and will assist in spreading the
gains of success to ensure that all parts of society benefit. A resilient and diverse
Australian economy, with many sources of strength and growth in different sectors,
will able to respond to the opportunities and challenges of the Asian century.

3 The National Competition Policy extended prohibitions on anti-competitive activities to all businesses
(previously most government-owned and some private businesses were exempt), introduced
competitive neutrality, established reviews of all legislation that restricts competition, established an
access regime for nationally significant infrastructure, created a new regulator (the Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission, merging the Prices Surveillance Authority and the Trade
Practices Commission), as well as advanced reforms in the electricity, gas, water and land transport
markets.

83


-----

84


-----

85


-----

#### Opening up our economy: accelerated economic integration

Australia’s economic integration with Asia gathered pace as our economic settings
were liberalised. The opening up of our economy was begun by incremental, typically
unilateral, decisions to liberalise restrictions on trade. Australia’s sequence of
reductions in tariff assistance began with a 25 per cent cut in the tariff rate at the
beginning of the Tokyo Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in 1973.

After a decade’s hiatus, during which policymakers vacillated, liberalisation
accelerated with the abolition of quantitative restrictions on imports from the
mid-1980s. Controls were lifted from a range of consumer goods that Australian
households wanted and needed, including clothing, textiles, whitegoods and,
particularly, cars. The rate of assistance to industry fell significantly (Chart 3.4). While
the transition was difficult for some firms, greater openness ultimately reaped
economic dividends and made Australians better off (Box 3.2).

##### Chart 3.4: Fall in average effective rates of industry assistance


Per cent Per cent

40 40

30 30

20 20

10 10

0 0

1970-71 1980-81 1990-91 2000-01 2010-11

Manufacturing Agriculture

Note: Breaks in the series are represented by gaps, and overlaps are included to show the effects of the
methodological and data changes made in moving between series.
Source: Productivity Commission (2012b).

As tariff barriers fell, and a succession of Asian economies emerged to become major
players in global markets, our trade ties with Asia burgeoned—supported by our
geographical proximity and complementarities with industrialising Asian economies.

Asia’s rapidly expanding industrial sectors and abundant labour supplied Australians
with the finished industrial goods that they wanted, such as electronics and cars. The
source of those goods moved around the region as Asian economies successively
industrialised and moved up the value-adding chain—starting with Japan, then to
Taiwan, South Korea, the ASEAN economies and China.

86


-----

**Box 3.2: Quantifying the benefits of openness and integration**


The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has
undertaken extensive research quantifying the benefits of openness. It estimates
that for a 10 percentage point increase in trade exposure there is a corresponding
4 per cent increase in income per working-age person in the long run (OECD 2003).

Separately, the OECD has confirmed that greater market openness is a necessary
condition for a sustained improvement in economic performance (OECD 2009).
Lower regulatory barriers to competition (including between domestic and foreign
suppliers) could result in a 2–3 per cent increase in GDP per person in
OECD countries. Opening up an economy creates more opportunities and, over time,
new jobs, while protectionism has a significant negative impact on employment.

Research in Australia has reached similar conclusions. The Centre for International
Economics suggested that trade liberalisation since 1988 may have added
2.5 per cent to Australia’s GDP in the long run, representing an increase in real
income of around $3,000 to $4,000 a year for the average working family (CIE 2009).
The importance of an open economy for employment is also evident in the research,
with more than one in five Australian jobs now trade-related.

Other studies show a similar positive relationship between market openness and
working conditions. For example, one study shows that open economies outperform
closed economies in terms of pay (Flanagan & Khor 2011). Based on 2008 figures,
the study concluded that workers in the manufacturing sectors of non-Asian
economies have pay rates three times greater in open economies than in closed
systems. In Asia, manufacturing workers in open economies have pay rates nine
times greater than those of workers in closed economies.

An Australian Bureau of Statistics study of small to medium-sized Australian
exporters using 2006–07 data for 14 different industries showed that those
businesses paid more than 40 per cent higher average wages than non-exporters
(ABS 2009).

Recent studies by the International Collaborative Initiative on Trade and
Employment, led by the OECD, confirmed previous findings that economic opening
must be complemented by other policies in order to ensure inclusive growth. Such
policies include investment in education, active labour market policies, promotion of
labour market flexibility and the development of social safety nets (Campos-Vázquez
& Rodríguez-López 2011; Iapadre 2011).

87


-----

In turn, the large industrial sectors of densely populated Asian countries boosted
global demand for Australia’s raw materials. Increasing affluence in emerging Asian
economies lifted demand for high-value goods and services—such as education,
business services and niche manufactures—that Australia supplies as an advanced
economy.

In 1960, Asia accounted for only one-fifth of Australia’s goods trade, with Japan being
our biggest regional trading partner. By 1980, that fraction had risen to over one-third
(Japan took up one-quarter of Australia’s goods trade) while by 2010, Asia accounted
for two-thirds of Australia’s goods trade. China, Japan, India, the four ‘tigers’ and our
ASEAN neighbours absorbed around three-quarters of our merchandise exports and
supplied half of our imports (RBA 1997; ABS 2012d). While Australia’s services trade
has not grown as fast, a number of Asian markets have become more important. The
Chinese and Indian markets for Australia’s services exports have increased fivefold
over the past decade.

In contrast to the trade story, Australia’s direct financial market ties with Asia have
been slower to develop. Like other countries and regions in Asia, Australia has been
more financially integrated with other parts of the globe than with the region
(Pongsaparn & Unteroberdoerster 2011). The United States and Europe continue to
be the main sources of Asia’s portfolio finance, although intra-Asian foreign direct
investment has been rising, especially investments to integrate value chains over the
past three decades.

Nevertheless, the more open financial markets in Australia and in parts of Asia led to
rises in foreign investment from Asian economies as they emerged as economic
powers. Hong Kong, Japan and Singapore continue to be the most important sources
of finance from Asia; together, they hold one-tenth of all foreign investments in
Australia. Starting from a low base, other rapidly emerging Asian economies have
gained greater prominence, particularly in the resources sector. While investment
from China has accelerated in recent years, it remains small in absolute terms. China
was only Australia’s 13th largest investor by the end of 2011 and it still has less than
1 per cent of the total stock of inward investment.

Our economic performance has become more synchronised with that of the region,
and less with that of the United States (Box 3.3). And since 1998, Australian equity
markets have become more synchronised with equity markets in Asia—particularly
markets in Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Singapore and South Korea (Boao Forum for
Asia 2012).

88


-----

|7 6 5 4 3 2 1|Col2|
|---|---|


#### Integration with Asia unleashed transformative economic forces

Australia’s integration with a resurgent Asia unleashed forces that continue to
transform our economy and the economic activities of Australians. The globalisation
of economies in Asia has made Australian consumers better off. Demand from Asia
for Australia’s natural resources has changed the shape of our economy and the rising
affluence in Asia has created broad new opportunities for Australian firms.

Because of Asia’s abundant labour and integrated transnational production chains, it
has a powerful advantage in producing many goods, especially manufactured goods.
The expansion of Asia’s industrial producers into global markets, together with
improvements in business practices and technology, has constrained growth in the
prices of the goods and services they produce.

89


-----

At first, these benefits came in the form of cheaper, labour-intensive, simply
transformed consumer goods. As Asian producers have moved up the value-adding
chain, their impact has since been felt more strongly in the markets for
high-technology goods (Spence 2011; Riad et al. 2011; WTO & IDE-JETRO 2011).

As Asian imports penetrated Australian domestic markets, their prices fell (Chart 3.6).
In 2011, household electrical imports were on average half the price they were
25 years ago. By comparison, the price of a representative basket of goods and
services has doubled over the same period.

Capital goods import prices have fallen rapidly since the 1980s, driven down by
cheaper information and communications technology. The prices of consumer
goods—clothing, household electrical goods and cars—have grown slower than
wages and general prices.

While the transition was difficult for some firms and workers, lower prices have
meant that the purchasing power of Australians has improved—we have been able to
buy more for less and dedicate more of our income to other things.

##### Chart 3.6: Globalisation of Asia has been good for consumers
Exports by country or region (as a Australians’ import prices

percentage of world trade)


ASEAN-4

China

Germany

Hong Kong

Japan

Singapore

South Asia

South Korea

United Kingdom

United States


0 5 10 15 20

Per cent of world trade

1970 1990 2010


Index Index

300 300

200 200

100 100

0 0

1986 1999 2012

Consumer good imports
Capital good imports
IT equipment imports
Consumer Price Index


Notes: Prices are in Australian dollars and have been influenced by exchange rate movements. See glossary
for country groupings.
Sources: World Bank (2012d), RBA (1997) and ABS (2012c).

As Asian producers became bigger players in global markets, heightened competition
placed pressure on many businesses around the globe, including in Australia. Firms
that competed head-on, such as in textiles, clothing, machinery and equipment, felt
the pressure most.

90


-----

In response to these challenges, Australian industry innovated and evolved in ways
that were ultimately responsible for boosting Australia’s productivity.[4] Many firms
improved their processes and ‘did the same things better’. And rather than trying to
compete head-on with producers in developing Asian economies, many Australian
businesses changed their business models and took advantage of complementary
capabilities. Instead of trying to defy Australia’s comparative advantages, they
created their own niche in domestic and overseas markets. And rather than producing
more generic ‘commoditised’ goods, many sought to differentiate their products
through design and value-adding. To complement this, they changed their marketing
to target changing consumer tastes and export markets. While it was difficult times
for some, many were successful.

Some businesses also moved away from labour-intensive, lower-skilled mass
assembly operations and developed partnerships with complementary industries
overseas (including firms in textiles and machinery industries with marked import
penetration), developing production and value chains within the region. They moved
parts of their production to lower-cost overseas locations, including in Asia. At the
same time, the production of premium and specialised goods—as well as design
services, marketing services, intellectual property and management acumen—was
retained domestically (Box 3.4).

The surge in Asia’s demand for resources, and our comparative advantage in these
resources, has complemented Asia’s development and driven both our labour market
and industrial structures.

Since World War II, Australia has emerged as an important and reliable supplier of
mineral and energy resources, which have helped fuel economic growth in Asia.
Australia currently provides Japan with well over three-quarters of its domestic
consumption of coking coal (for steel production) and half of its consumption of
thermal coal (for power generation) and iron ore (Chart 3.7).

4 For case studies showing how some firms adapted to competitive pressures during this period of
liberalisation in Australia, see Clark et al. (1996).

91


-----

**Box 3.4: Blundstone**


In the past few decades there have been significant changes in the Australian
business environment for labour-intensive manufactures such as footwear. These
changes led Blundstone to move the remaining 50 per cent of its value-adding in
leather manufacturing offshore to a number of facilities located throughout Asia.

If the company had not taken this decision, its 142-year presence would have
vanished. Instead, Blundstone was able to retain the manufacturing of gumboots at
its base in Hobart. Blundstone now defines itself as a proud Tasmanian company,
competing on a global basis. It designs and sells highly innovative work boots and
leisure footwear in more than 30 countries around the world.

Asia is a key enabler of Blundstone’s strategy to compete globally—more than
90 per cent of the world’s footwear is now manufactured in Asia. The company has
entered partner business relationships with three footwear manufacturing facilities
in Vietnam, China and India. It has some of its own employees working within these
factories and has invested heavily in training personnel in its manufacturing
techniques. It sees these suppliers as long-term business partners, with whom it
shares intellectual property and a mutual interest in growing the Blundstone
business. To this end, it has regular audits of its combined business practices,
covering employee and industrial relations, environmental management practices
and quality management systems.

From Blundstone’s headquarters in Hobart, the company is able to successfully
manage product design and development, production and logistics, sales and
marketing, and administrative support of its global operation. Having transformed
its business, Blundstone is now in a position to compete well beyond the next
decade and sees its Asian partners as an important enabler in that future.


Source: Blundstone.


Australia also supplies one-sixth of Japan’s natural gas imports and is the largest
supplier of industrially important minerals such as zinc and bauxite. The Japan-driven
minerals boom began long ago, during Japan’s period of rapid growth in the 1960s
and 1970s. Like what is happening now, it revived or created towns in Australia’s
mining regions.

Since 2003, however, the pace of the economic emergence of China and India has
lifted the demand for Australian commodities to a new scale. Australia now supplies
around 40 per cent of Chinese demand for iron ore, accounting for two-thirds of
Australia’s total iron ore production. China is a relatively small but growing market for
Australian coal and natural gas. India, on the other hand, is the second-biggest
importer of Australian coking coal (behind Japan).

92


-----

##### Chart 3.7: Australia’s penetration into Asia’s resource markets

Imports of Australian iron ore

Per cent of domestic consumption Weight


300

200

100

0

60

40

20

0


Megatonnes Megatonnes

1995 2000 2005 2010


100

75

50

25

0

100

75

50

25

0


Per cent Per cent

1995 2000 2005 2010


Per cent Per cent

1988 1995 2005 2010

China India


100

75

50

25

0


100

75

50

25

0


300

200

100

0


Imports of Australian coking coal

Per cent of domestic consumption


Weight


60

40

20

0


Megatonnes Megatonnes

1988 1995 2005 2010

Japan South Korea


Source: Bureau of Resources and Energy Economics.

A surge in resources demand since 2003 has led to the biggest and most sustained
boom in Australia’s export prices in our history. Our terms of trade are around
three-quarters higher than our 20th-century average.

More moderate export price booms in the past have ended in high inflation and rising
unemployment, due to weaknesses in our macroeconomic settings. Australia’s more
robust and transparent settings this time around have played an important role in
sustaining our strong economic performance (Box 3.5).

93


-----

**Box 3.5: Australia’s macroeconomic frameworks have served us well over**
**the past decade**

Australia’s macroeconomic frameworks and settings have worked well over the
past two decades, with Australia having recorded 21 years of continuous economic
growth, a record unmatched by any other advanced economy over this period.
Sound macroeconomic frameworks and decisive policy responses have allowed
Australia to successfully weather significant economic shocks, including the Global
Financial Crisis. The Australian economy has also sustained the longest mining
boom in our history, managing to convert high commodity prices into more
enduring export capacity. This has been achieved at the same time as contained
inflation and low unemployment.

The Government’s commitment to fiscal discipline, and the return to surplus in
2012–13, will ensure Australia’s balance sheet remains one of the strongest in the
developed world. The strength of Australia’s public finances is a key reason behind
Australia’s AAA/stable credit rating from all three major rating agencies.

In the absence of sound macroeconomic policy frameworks, past booms, such as
the Korean War wool boom of the 1950s and the commodity boom of the early
1970s, ended badly. Annual inflation spiked at more than 20 per cent in 1951–52,
while in the mid-1970s inflation rates hit 15 per cent and unemployment rose to
around 6 per cent by the end of the decade.

In these cases, the shock from the rise in the terms-of-trade fed directly into the
economy through a fixed exchange rate. The shock was spread throughout the
economy through the centralised wage fixing system, leading to inflation and
considerable erosion of competitiveness in those sectors not linked to the booming
sectors.

In contrast, while the terms-of-trade rise during the first phase of the recent mining
boom was larger than in either the 1950s or 1970s, the economy was buffered by
the floating exchange rate and more flexible labour markets. With prudent fiscal
policy, a floating exchange rate and an independent, inflation targeting central
bank, Australia’s more robust and transparent settings have helped spread the
gains.

The strength of our macroeconomic frameworks was shown during the Global
Financial Crisis. In response to the global downturn, the Reserve Bank of Australia
eased monetary policy significantly and swiftly. The cash rate was reduced by
3.75 percentage points over four board meetings from October 2008 (after Lehman
Brothers collapsed) to February 2009. At the same time, the Reserve Bank provided
significant liquidity support to money markets.

94


-----

**Box 3.5 (continued)**


In addition, fiscal policy provided critical support. The Government implemented a
significant and rapid fiscal stimulus package to support growth and jobs, consistent
with the Government’s medium-term fiscal strategy. Without the support of fiscal
stimulus, the Australian economy would have experienced a technical recession.

At the same time as enacting fiscal stimulus, the Government introduced a clear
and credible plan to return the budget to surplus through the introduction of strict
fiscal rules which included allowing the level of tax receipts to recover naturally as
the economy improves and holding real growth in spending to 2 per cent a year, on
average, until the budget returns to surplus (Chapter 5).

The impact of the crisis on Australia’s financial system was further reduced as a
result of our decisive action to support the financial sector, for example, through
guarantees for deposits and wholesale debt securities. The strong
whole-of-financial-system oversight of the Council of Financial Regulators
(comprising the Australian Treasury, Reserve Bank of Australia, Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority and Australian Securities and Investments
Commission) also supported the safety and stability of the financial sector through
the crisis.

Strong demand for Australia’s mineral commodities has led to strong growth in
mining investment over the past decade. In 2010–11, mining investment was above
4 per cent of GDP—around eight times its share 50 years ago—and it is expected to
remain high over the medium term (Australian Government 2012a).

In recent years, there has been strong employment growth in the mining and related
construction sectors. While sectors like health and social services, professional
services and education have recorded more moderate rates of employment growth,
they continue to be the largest source of jobs growth given their greater share of
Australian employment (Chart 3.8). In contrast, some industries have faced more
difficult conditions, with some finding it harder to attract workers and compete. The
purchasing power of average earnings has risen across the board, even though it has
grown more quickly in the mining and mining-related sectors.

Although many people are moving into mining-related industries and enjoying higher
returns for their work, large numbers of jobs continue to be created in the services
industries, particularly health services, professional services and education and
training.

Across both mining and non-mining communities, unemployment has declined.
Despite the structural change occurring within the economy, unemployment has
become less widespread as the aggregate level of unemployment has declined with
the overall strengthening economy (Gruen, Li & Wong 2012).

95


-----

##### Chart 3.8: Services have been the major source of employment growth

Employment change by industry, 2003–04 to 2011–12

Health care and social assistance (4.5)

Professional, scientific and technical (4.4)

Construction (3.5)

Mining (12.6)

Education and training (2.3)

Public admin and safety (2.8)

Retail trade (1.2)

Accommodation and food services (2.0)

Transport (2.1)

Financial and insurance services (2.6)

Utilities (6.7)

Arts and recreation services (4.0)
Admin support and services (1.9)

Other services (1.0)

Wholesale trade (1.1)

Rental, hiring and real estate (2.0)

Information and telecommunications (-0.1)

Agriculture, forestry and fishing (-1.1)

Manufacturing (-1.0)

-100 0 100 200 300 400

change of employed persons ('000s)

Note: Average annual employment growth (per cent) by industry is given in parentheses.
Source: ABS (2012f).

An increasingly affluent Asian region has opened up market opportunities for
enterprises beyond the resources sector. Demand for Australian agricultural goods
has expanded as Asian countries have become more affluent (Chart 3.9), and
Australian exporters have diversified away from a traditional focus on wool and
cereals.

##### Chart 3.9: Australia’s agricultural exports to Asia have risen

Value of Australian agricultural exports (nominal)

China

Japan

Other North Asia

Indonesia

Other South East Asia

South Asia

Africa & Middle East

European Union-27

Americas

0 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000

$million

1990-91 2000-01 2010-11

Source: ABARES (2011).

96


-----

Education is the largest of our services exports, and the number of Asian students
studying in Australia (particularly students from the ASEAN countries, China and India)
has grown strongly in the past decade.

Asia has become the biggest source of visitors for the Australian tourism sector,
contributing around 40 per cent of visitor arrivals. Even so, Australia’s reliance on
Asian tourism is relatively low compared to that of most Asian countries (Boao Forum
for Asia 2012)—more than 70 per cent of arrivals to China, Hong Kong, Japan,
Malaysia, South Korea and Taiwan come from Asia.

Business services are Australia’s third-largest class of services exports (ABS 2012d).
Australian firms in business, financial, professional and mining services and niche
manufacturing, however they are categorised, have taken their considerable
expertise and experience to Asian markets. This is especially true for a number of
services firms in the areas of finance, engineering and design.

Thriving Australian businesses have not usually succeeded by competing against rivals
solely on cost. Despite the high exchange rate and cost pressures, they have
responded to opportunities and challenges by evolving and innovating their business
models (Box 3.6).


**Box 3.6: Tangalooma Island Resort**


Tangalooma Island Resort is a family-owned, eco-style holiday destination on
Moreton Island, not far from Brisbane. In the late 1990s, when it began to tap
demand in Asia, its customer base was 80 per cent domestic and 20 per cent
international. Today, the split is 50:50. The number of Chinese tourists visiting
Tangalooma has quadrupled to 20,000 in the past four years.

They have representatives in China, India and Thailand and a managed office in
South Korea. And Tangalooma invests heavily in relationships in the Asian region.
The sales and marketing director spends around five months of the year in Asia,
and several other sales and marketing managers travel to Asia every couple of
months.

A range of unconventional marketing approaches have been developed by
Tangalooma, such as co-marketing with retail chains that serve its target
demographic. It has worked to develop products for the specific needs of its Asian
customers. Staff members are Asia-literate, and marketing materials are available
in a range of languages. Tangalooma offers personal experiences customised for
customers from Asian countries, who are often looking for experiences that are
unavailable at home, such as participating in the resort’s wild dolphin feeding
program, customised helicopter or quad-bike tours and parasailing.

Their success in attracting tourists from many parts of Asia has helped shield
Tangalooma from downturns and low-season cycles, as different parts of the region
have different holiday periods. Initiatives such as the opening of a hospitality and
English training school have also diversified Tangalooma’s offering.


Source: BCG (2012).


97


-----

Many Australian businesses have found ways to add value, differentiate themselves
from the competition and target changing demands. Rather than just engaging in
transactions, they have built relationships and partnerships with others and formed
clusters with complementary firms and industries. Some have accessed large regional
markets by integrating into regional value chains.

Others have taken advantage of the high exchange rate and used their purchasing
power to establish enterprises elsewhere in Asia, just as Japanese businesses did in
the 1980s and 1990s in response to an appreciating yen (Chapter 4). Making the most
of complementary interests and working collaboratively with partners in Asia, rather
than competing against them, has been the best recipe for success.

Notwithstanding Australia’s recent strong performance, competition has been
increasingly fierce in the services sector. As the region has become more affluent, its
business services sector has expanded and developed. The size and quality of the
region’s domestic education sectors have risen. And tourism infrastructure has
improved, increasing competition for global tourism spending.

To make the most of the benefits flowing from the region, individual Australian firms
and industries will need to make big decisions about their futures, changing and
innovating to compete on the global stage.

### 3.4 How our society transformed alongside Asia’s

Since 1945, about 1 million migrants a decade have settled in Australia. Few nations
have absorbed so many migrants as a proportion of their populations in so short a
period. The dramatic changes in the ethnic and cultural composition of Australia that
have occurred in the space of the most recent generation and a half are as big as
those wrought in Canada over three generations, and over more than six generations
in the United States (National Multicultural Advisory Council 1999).

Today, nearly one-quarter of Australians were born overseas. Four million Australians
speak a language other than English at home. In all, Australians identify with over
300 ancestries, speak as many different languages and observe a wide variety of
cultural and religious traditions. Cultural diversity is at the centre of Australia’s
identity.

More people from Asian countries live, study and work in Australia than ever before.
Of the 5 million overseas-born people living in Australia, almost 2 million were born in
Asia—an increase from 276,000 in 1981. Close to 1 in 10 of Australia’s population
identifies with Asian ancestry. Today, there are more speakers of Chinese languages
in Australia than speakers of Italian or Greek. In 2010–11, for the first time in
Australian history, Britain was not the main source of permanent residents—more
people moved here from China than from any other country, and in 2011–12, India
was the number one source of permanent migrants. Australians are also increasingly
living, working and travelling in the region.

98


-----

The dramatic shift in orientation towards Asia in the past 40 years has changed the
face of Australian society and strengthened our connections with our region. The
scope of our ties has been broad, driven by trade, migration, tourism, education and
exchanges in business, arts, ideas and information.

Asia has become an important part of our Australian identity.

Australia’s people-to-people links with Asia grew stronger throughout the 1970s and
these connections deepened into the 21st century.

Many Indian professionals, such as doctors, teachers and engineers, came to Australia
in the late 1960s and 1970s. Further growth in migration from the region occurred in
the late 1970s, when Indochinese refugees and their families came to Australia
following the Vietnam War. Between 1975 and 1989, around 120,000 were resettled
here (Quilty & Goldsworthy 2003). Vietnam remained the main source of migrants
from the region through to the early 1990s. The period from the mid-1980s to the
mid-1990s brought an increase in migrants from elsewhere in Asia, such as the
Philippines, Malaysia and Hong Kong.

In 1984, for the first time, Asia-born permanent arrivals to Australia outnumbered
permanent arrivals born in Europe (ABS 2012a).

In the past 15 years, permanent migration from throughout Asia to Australia has
grown more than four-fold from around 25,000 in 1997–98 to about 112,000 in
2010–11. India and China have driven this growth in the skilled and family migration
streams; the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Vietnam, Malaysia and South Korea are also
important sources of permanent migrants from these streams. In this time, Australia
has resettled around 32,000 refugees and people in humanitarian need from the
Asian region, mainly from Myanmar and Sri Lanka.

And more Australians are living in and around the region. Nearly 4 in 10 of those
Australians who emigrated moved to an Asian country in 2011–12. China was the fifth
most common destination after the United Kingdom, New Zealand the United States
and Singapore. Of those Australians who were born overseas, 4 in 10 have moved to
live in an Asian country, most commonly China. Asia will become an even more
important emigration destination over time, reflecting the evolving composition of
Australia’s population, the rising incidence of dual nationality and the increasing
economic opportunities from a resurgent Asia.

More recently, along with other nations, Australia has benefited from the increasingly
complex and circular people flows in the region. These two-way flows include people
travelling for leisure and enjoyment, short-term visits to friends and family,
entrepreneurs, and people living, working and studying in multiple countries. Ideas,
culture and experiences are now more easily shared as technology and cheaper travel
make it easier to maintain relationships across the region.

There has been a large increase in the number of people from Asia who spend time
here studying or working temporarily. Around 40 per cent of long-term temporary

99


-----

skilled migrants to Australia are from countries in Asia—the number more than
doubled from 20,000 in 2001 to 48,000 in 2011. Many are from China, the Philippines
and India (Box 3.7). Some temporary migrants become permanent residents in
Australia; others return home or move to another country to pursue new
opportunities.


**Box 3.7: Dr Kanthanathan’s ‘Australian dream come true’**


Dr Vijay Kumar Kanthanathan was working as an anaesthetist in the bustling city of
Chennai, India, when he chanced across an advertisement in a medical journal for
medical practitioners to work in Australia. He researched Australia thoroughly and
became excited about the lifestyle and career opportunities a move offered him
and his family.

He arrived in Australia on a temporary business (long stay) 457 visa in 2006 and
worked as a general practitioner at Mareeba hospital in Queensland. He moved to
the Mulungu Aboriginal Medical Centre nearby in 2007 where he still works today.
‘It has been a rewarding experience to see the lifestyles of patients change over the
last five years and the standard of living of the community improve,’
Dr Kanthanathan said. He also feels as if he makes a contribution to the education
of medical students at James Cook University at Townsville—who are posted to
Mulungu as part of their rotations.

Through federal funding the centre has expanded into having a ‘Mums and Bubs’
clinic, which screens children for developmental problems and provides services in
collaboration with Mareeba hospital. It also started a ‘Well Being’ clinic to help
patients with chronic disease, empowering them to take control of managing their
own health care.

Dr Kanthanathan became an Australian citizen in May 2011. ‘Ever since we moved
to Australia, me and my family have never looked back,’ he says. ‘This seems to be
the Australian dream come true.’ His story highlights the value of Australia’s
multicultural society and the valuable contribution skilled migrants from Asia make
to the Australian community.

Australia has by and large managed its increasing ethnic diversity successfully. The
contributions of Australia’s Asian communities to Australian life have been diverse,
with Australians with Asian heritage being active participants in Australian community
and civic life. There are many longstanding community organisations and associations;
for example, the Chinese community’s Chung Wah Association of Western Australia
dates back to 1909.

But there have, from time to time, been difficulties. Australia needs to continue to
strengthen and build upon our institutional frameworks to address racial
discrimination and to preserve and promote social cohesion and inclusion (Chapter 6).
There are indications that many Australians hold misperceptions about some Asian
nations. For example, a Lowy Institute poll in 2011 found that many believe that

100


-----

‘Indonesia is essentially controlled by the military’, despite Indonesia’s democratic
system of government (Hanson 2011).

The Australia Indonesia Business Council has argued that a misalignment between
business perceptions of parts of Asia and new economic realities ‘is in large part
responsible for the under-performance of the Australian trade and investment
relationship with ASEAN and with Indonesia in particular’ (AIBC 2012). And Australian
media could more accurately represent our ethnic and cultural diversity (Law 2009).

The benefits of Australia’s cultural and religious diversity have become apparent in
other cultural and leisure activities. Following a rich history of European influences,
Chinese, Indian, Japanese, Malaysian, Thai and Vietnamese cuisines have permeated
Australian food culture. The calendar features an array of cultural celebrations, from
welcoming Chinese New Year or observing Ramadan to celebrating Diwali, the
Festival of Lights. In 2012, more than a million Australians participated in over
5,000 events on Harmony Day, which celebrates Australia’s cultural diversity.

Migrants from countries in Asia generally fare well in the Australian labour market,
with low unemployment rates and, among those employed, high proportions in
skilled employment. The level of educational attainment among the Asia-born
population is higher than among the population as a whole (ABS 2011c).

However, there are gaps in participation in some of Australia’s institutions and
organisations, such as in our parliaments, businesses, labour movement and civil
society organisations. Our parliamentary representatives do not reflect fully our
diverse population (Anthony 2006; Kennett 2012). In business, while there is
encouraging cultural diversity among accounting and business services firms, there is
a shortfall in the proportion of senior executives and up-and-coming executives who
originate from non-English-speaking countries and who speak languages other than
English (Diversity Council of Australia 2011).

Educational institutions, volunteering, exchanges and study programs continue to be
important ways for Australians to learn more about Asia and build lasting
relationships with people from the region.

Successive Australian governments have recognised the benefits of increasing
Australia’s knowledge and appreciation of Asian languages, cultures and countries. In
the 1970s and 1980s, building on efforts in the 1950s, a number of universities
opened specialist Asian and Southeast Asian studies departments, and there was an
expansion of language learning. For example, the majority of Australian universities
have some kind of program of Japanese studies.

But the growth in Asian studies in universities and schools has not been sustained on
a broader scale, and in many cases has declined (Asialink 2012; ASAA 2012). And
while more Australians are studying in Asia, even more need to be encouraged to take
up the opportunity, particularly as the quality of Asian universities continues to
improve (Chapter 6).

101


-----

Australia’s university system is a powerful link with the Asian region through the
number of students who come to Australia for their education, and more can be done
to strengthen these links (chapters 6 and 9). Since the late 1980s, the number of Asian
students studying in Australia has increased rapidly following the lifting of limits on
the number of international students. In the past decade, there have been around
2.5 million enrolments of international students in Australian educational institutions,
of which 1.9 million were by students from Asia.

Australia’s cultural diversity and creative links to Asia have increased the vitality of
our cities and regions (Box 3.8). The efforts of government, private sector and
community organisations and individual artists have sparked an enthusiasm for
Asian-Australian creative connections that has developed a life beyond official
institutions (Quilty & Goldsworthy 2003). Connections and exchanges between
Australia and Asia in the creative and performing arts increased during the 1990s:
Asialink Arts began in 1990 and the Asia–Pacific Triennial of Contemporary Art was
established in 1993 by the Queensland Art Gallery.

**Box 3.8: Asian influences in Australian arts and culture—OzAsia Festival**
**and the Asia–Pacific Triennial of Contemporary Art**

Established in 2007, South Australia’s OzAsia Festival is an annual two-week event
devoted exclusively to exploring links between Australia and our neighbours,
presenting works by Australian artists who identify with an Asian heritage,
collaborative projects between Australian and Asian artists, and activities that
include a cross-section of the traditional and contemporary cultures of Asia.

The OzAsia Festival includes theatre, dance, music, film, visual arts, literature, food,
design and multimedia. The 2011 program featured almost 450 artists from Japan,
China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, South Korea, Malaysia, Thailand and Vietnam,
as well as Australia’s best.

The Asia–Pacific Triennial of Contemporary Art is the flagship contemporary art
event of the Queensland Art Gallery and Gallery of Modern Art. For two decades it
has been the only major exhibition series in the world to focus exclusively on the
contemporary art of Asia, the Pacific and Australia.

Since the first triennial in 1993, more than 1.8 million people have visited the
event. The most recent triennial averaged a record-breaking 4,400 visitors daily.
The gallery is also one of few public institutions to collect both contemporary Asian
and Pacific art and it has built these collections in tandem with the series.

Many governments in Asia have played a formal role in promoting people-to-people
links; Japan’s support for Japanese language learning in Australia and, more recently,
the establishment of a number of Chinese Confucius Institutes in Australia are
examples. Independent bilateral and regional foundations, councils and institutes—
many supported through grants programs administered by secretariats in the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade—have also been established to foster
connections and cooperation. Along with many sister-state and sister-city

102


-----

relationships, these groups have created multifaceted, informal connections. A typical
example is the Latrobe City Council’s a sister-city relationship with Taizhou in China.
There have been exchanges in education, health care and culture since 2000 and the
focus is being broadened to include business opportunities and links.

Beyond government, many institutions across the region have developed
relationships over the years to nurture people-to-people connections. Bilateral and
regional business councils have supported business people to strengthen links. Young
people are building connections through new organisations such as the
Australia–Indonesia Youth Association, the Australia India Youth Dialogue and the
Australia–China Youth Association, which has amassed more than 2,000 members
since its formation in 2008 and has run a range of successful projects, dialogues and
events, including promoting the study of China in Australian schools.

Tourism and short-term travel to Australia from countries in Asia have grown
considerably, adding to our links. While the number of tourists from traditional
markets, such as Japan, declined in the past decade, the number of visitors from
China and India has grown. Arrivals from China have nearly increased by about
six-fold, partly as a consequence of the Chinese Government’s decision in 1999 to
grant Australia ‘approved destination’ status. And the total number of visitors coming
from Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan was almost double the number
coming from mainland China in 2010. Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand are also
significant sources of visitors.

And more Australians are taking holidays in the region. In 2011, 3.5 million Australians
left for visits to Asia, mostly Southeast Asia (Chart 3.10).By 1995, Asian countries were
the main destinations for almost 40 per cent of Australians, and in 1998 Indonesia
overtook the United Kingdom and the United States as a tourist destination.

##### Chart 3.10: More Australians have been travelling to Asia

Departures by destination Departures to Southeast Asia


8 Million Million 8

6 6

4 4

2 2

0 0

1991 1996 2001 2006 2011


3

2

1

0


Million Million

1991 2001 2011


3

2

1

0

|Col1|8 6 2 4 1 2|
|---|---|


Europe North America Indonesia Malaysia

Northeast Asia South and Central Asia Singapore Thailand

Southeast Asia Rest of world Vietnam Other Southeast Asia

Note: See glossary for definition of country groupings.
Source: ABS (2012a).

103


-----

## Chapter 4: Outlook for Australia to 2025

|Chapter 1: The rise of Asia The rise provide|Chapter 2: The future of Asia to 2025 of Asia s great|
|---|---|
|opportunities for Australia Chapter 3: Chapter 4: Australia in Asia Outlook for Australia to 2025 • Australia’s comparative advantages • demographic and environmental challenges • opportunities arising from Asia’s development||


**opportunities for**
**Australia**

**Chapter 4:**
Outlook for Australia
to 2025


-----

**Key points**


While our future success is not guaranteed, Australians can look forward to 2025
from a position of strength.

The Australian economy is one of the strongest in the world. Australia has a vibrant
multicultural society, a highly skilled creative population and a highly productive
economy with world-class institutions.

As the global centre of gravity continues to shift to our region, the tyranny of
distance is being replaced by the prospects of proximity.

Australia’s natural and created strengths are a source of comparative advantage
and we are a confident and outward-looking society.

The economic and social landscape of Australia will be increasingly shaped by the
dramatic transitions underway in Asia and developments in its diverse group of
countries.

Economic growth in Asia will continue to drive demand for Australia’s energy and
mineral resources. But Asia’s transformation and rising middle-class will also bring
unprecedented opportunities for Australia well beyond the mining and energy
sectors.

Asia will increasingly demand better quality housing and food; more sophisticated
consumer goods; a broader range of services, including tourism, education, health
and aged care, entertainment, financial and professional services; and many
products not yet invented.

Australia is well positioned to take advantage of these emerging opportunities but
our success will be based on choice not chance.

In order to succeed, Australia not only needs to sustain the policy settings that have
supported prosperity to date, but we need to sprint to keep up with the rapid
changes in our region.

Australia will need to build resilience and lift productivity growth, find new ways to
operate in and connect with growing Asian markets, build sustainable security and
forge deeper and broader relationships in our region.

This will require a concerted and coordinated effort by governments, business and
the broader community over many years.

105


-----

### 4.1 Introduction

While our future success is not guaranteed, Australians enter the Asian century in a
position of strength.

Australia’s economy has evolved as natural advantages have been converted into an
economy built on the skills, effort and innovation of our people and businesses.

Australia has experienced its longest period of economic expansion in a generation—
more than 20 consecutive years of growth have substantially boosted Australians’
living standards.

Since the Government came to office, Australia has moved up four places in the world
rankings of GDP per person, from 17th in 2007 to 13th in 2011. This demonstrates the
Australian community’s hard work and resilience, as well as our sound economic
management, during a time of heightened global economic turbulence.

Australia has an enviable combination of solid growth, contained inflation, low
unemployment and strong public finances. This stands in stark contrast to the weak
and challenging economic conditions faced in many parts of the developed world.

Our nation’s strong economic fundamentals did not come by chance. Because of
decisive policy action, the resilience of the community and our history of structural
reform, Australia weathered the Global Financial Crisis better than almost every other
advanced economy. Australia has also experienced a much smoother adjustment to
the recent surge in demand for resources compared to the booms of the past—
despite some difficult transitions for parts of our economy and community.

Australia has world-leading institutions, a multicultural and highly skilled workforce
and a productive, open and resilient economy—one of the strongest in the world.

Out to 2025 and beyond, three forces will shape the economic and social landscape of
Australia.

The first is the staggering scale and pace of the continued transformation of Asia.
Economic cycles affecting the region will occur around a rising long-term income
trend. By 2025, the economies of Asia are expected to account for almost 50 per cent
of global economic output, and the combined GDP of China and India is likely to
exceed the total output of the Group of Seven (G7). Average GDP per capita in Asia
will almost double by 2025 (Chapter 2). To put this into perspective, it took the United
Kingdom over 50 years to double its income per person during the epoch-defining
Industrial Revolution.

As they become more prosperous, the shape of the economies and societies in Asia
will also transform. While Australia will still be further from world economic activity
than some other advanced countries, developments in our region are ameliorating
the ‘tyranny of distance’.

The second is the ageing of Australia’s population. The proportion of Australians aged
over 65 is expected to rise from 13.5 per cent in 2012 to almost one-quarter by 2050

106


-----

(Australian Government 2010). This reflects factors such as growing prosperity and
better health. But it also poses challenges for continued improvements in living
standards. An ageing population will impact on labour force participation and create
fiscal pressures in areas such as health, aged care and disability services.

The third is environmental sustainability. Australia is a continent rich in environmental
assets. Australians derive a large share of wealth from those assets and they need to
be managed to ensure the wellbeing of future generations (Chapter 5).

It is impossible to predict precisely how Australia’s economy and society will look in
2025, though there will be significant change.

The choices Australians make today will influence future living standards, in the same
way that past decisions have shaped today’s society and economy. Becoming fully
part of our region will require economic reforms by all levels of government to unlock
the economy’s productive potential, a substantial elevation in our knowledge base, a
significant change in the mindset of Australian business and leaders in all parts of
society, a change in the structure of Australian business and the public sector,
longer-term vision on the part of investors, and sustained improvement in the
capabilities of Australian workers.

Rising incomes and higher living standards will not fall into Australia’s lap. But if
Australia can succeed in harnessing the opportunities presented by Asia’s
re-emergence, the benefits will be enormous.

Consistent with the Intergenerational report, Australia’s real income could rise from
around $62,000 per person in 2012 to about $70,000 by 2025—based on Australia’s
long-term historical productivity performance (referred to in this chapter as ‘business
as usual’) (Chart 4.1) (Australian Government 2010).

But if Australia aspires to reach the ambitious national economic goals set out in the
White Paper’s roadmap and grasp the opportunities on offer, then Australia’s real
income per person could rise to about $73,000 by 2025 (referred to in this chapter as
‘Australia’s 2025 aspiration’). [1]

Australia’s living standards would be in the world’s top 10 by 2025.

Against the backdrop of an ageing population and projected decline in the level of the
terms of trade in the coming decades, this would require a productivity performance
roughly comparable to that experienced in the 1990s—an ambitious undertaking.

But given Australia’s ageing workforce and a projected continuing decline in
Australia’s terms of trade over the medium term, if we fail to raise productivity
growth from the levels of the first decade of the 21st century, Australia’s income
could increase to only about $67,000 per person (the ‘low growth path’).

1 Assuming unchanged projections for labour utilisation, net income transfers and the terms of trade.

107


-----

80

70

60

50

40

30


##### Chart 4.1: Australian gross national income per person

$ '000 $ '000

1995 2010 2025


80

70

60

50

40

30


Business as usual Low growth path, in 2025 Australia's 2025 aspiration, in 2025

Note: In 2011–12 prices. The ‘Australia’s 2025 aspiration’ scenario is based on the business-as-usual case
but assumes GDP per person grows between 2012 and 2025 at a rate that is required for Australia to rise to
the world’s top 10 in 2025. The low growth scenario is based on the business-as-usual case but assumes
GDP per hour worked grows between 2012 and 2025 at the average growth rate observed in the 2000s.
Sources: Treasury projections based on ABS (2012b) and Australian Government (2011c).

Two main imperatives arise when discussing the implications for Australia of Asia’s
economic transformation.

First, the opportunities for Australia go well beyond mining—even though a robust
economic outlook in the region will drive strong demand for energy and mineral
resources over the medium term.

While demand for Australia’s commodity exports is likely to remain strong, their
prices have probably passed their peak as new global supplies enter the market, as
expected. However, the resources boom can be characterised as having three
overlapping phases—a price boom, an investment boom and an export production
boom. While the peak of the price boom is likely behind us, resource investment is set
to remain high for some time. Record investment in the resources sector is already
beginning to boost the economic capacity of the economy and will continue to drive
higher export production for many years to come.

The opportunities beyond mining are enormous. Australia needs to position itself to
take advantage of the next stage of Asia’s development, as the region becomes a
more dominant force in the world consumer market (Chapter 2). The growing cities of
Asia will be filled by an upwardly mobile population with increasing disposable
incomes and more sophisticated demands, bringing a broader range of opportunities
for Australia across a diverse range of sectors.

Second, Australia will only prosper if there is a concerted and coordinated effort by
government, business and the entire community to take advantage of the
opportunities ahead and effectively manage the challenges (chapters 5 through 9).

108


-----

Governments, businesses and organisations around the world are turning their
attention to the opportunities in our region, while economies in Asia will increasingly
draw on their own production to meet their growing demand. In education, for
example, Australia will be challenged by rapid growth and improvements in the
quality of competitor institutions elsewhere in Asia and in the rest of the world; in the
tourism sector, we have to build on Australia’s natural advantages, as well as
advertise them.

The ability of the Australian economy to flourish in coming decades depends upon our
ability to raise productivity, develop a deeper understanding of the changes taking
place in our region and build successful long term relationships. It will require new
capabilities, new business models, open mindsets, greater investment in skills and
education and a higher degree of specialisation in areas where Australia has a distinct
comparative advantage.

We will ensure that the policy reforms which have delivered today’s strong economy
are not unwound. We need to continue with reforms which increase the flexibility
and resilience of the economy and build its productive capacity. This will allow people
and businesses to embrace change, adapt and innovate.

Irrespective of how the Asian century unfolds, Australia’s destiny is in our own hands.
It is no coincidence that many of the policies needed to sustain the growth in
Australia’s living standards during the Asian century are the same as those needed to
deal with an ageing population, climate change and other environmental pressures.

#### Asia’s re-emergence and what it means for Australia

As people in Asia become wealthier and no longer need to spend as much of their
income on necessities, such as staple foods and shelter, they will demand a diverse
range of durable goods and services, from household goods to health care. Continued
urbanisation will sustain demand for resources and energy. With higher discretionary
income and more leisure time, consumers will demand better quality food, electronic
goods, tourism, education, entertainment, financial services and many products not
yet conceived.

Australia is well placed to supply many of those goods and services, with large natural
resource endowments that are complementary with the world’s fastest-growing
economies. Australia has abundant and high-quality mineral and energy reserves, a
diverse climate and a large expanse of land—and our locational disadvantage is fast
receding.

Australia’s comparative advantage is not limited to our natural resource endowments.
One of Australia’s great strengths is our people—we have a healthy, highly skilled and
creative population with deepening connections with the region and demonstrated
capability in innovation and complex problem solving. Decades of investment in
research and development have created world-leading research infrastructure and
highly capable scientific workforces with expertise in areas such as health and medical
research, environmental management, remote sensing and other fields that will be

109


-----

important in coming decades. Australia’s experience in tackling challenges such as
low-emissions growth, infrastructure development, urban design, stresses on air
quality, soil and water systems and health and aged care will create opportunities to
cooperate with our neighbours in these areas.

There will also be opportunities for Australian services firms and manufacturers to
become part of the region’s interconnected production networks. Some sectors will
be unable to maintain existing industry structures and their business models will need
to evolve in order for Australian firms to become increasingly integrated and
specialised, offering high-value solutions as part of wider cross-border value chains.

Opportunities are not limited to what Australia can supply Asia. Asia will become an
increasingly significant source of new ideas, technologies and leading-edge science for
Australia. There will be more opportunities for Australia to use deeper connections with
Asia to broaden the flow of ideas. Australia is well positioned to build collaboration with
the best and brightest in Asia as these countries develop and skill up.

Australian society reflects our multiculturalism. Australia’s socially cohesive and
diverse nation is one of our enduring strengths. Our nation brings the values of
fairness and tolerance to all its dealings in the region and the world.

As Asia’s focus on culture and entertainment expands—both as consumers and
producers—it will increasingly influence global cultural trends. This will provide new
markets for Australian artists, and Australians will have access to a broader range of
cultural experiences. These connections can build bridges between the cultures of our
region and promote open-mindedness and active engagement.

Australia’s endowments are the foundations of our comparative advantage in the
Asian century.

### 4.2 Australia’s outlook

Over the past decade, the most obvious economic display of Asia’s rapid growth for
Australia is the rise in the terms of trade, underpinned by strong demand for coal, gas,
iron ore and other minerals, and the access to low-cost manufactured goods sourced
primarily from Asia. Australia’s terms of trade recently rose to their highest level in
140 years.

While the decline in commodity prices since mid-2012 and the sustained high dollar
has created challenging conditions for some resource projects, the prospect of
continued strong demand for Australia’s non-rural commodities has supported the
build-up of about $500 billion of projects (BREE 2012b). Over half of these projects
are already at an advanced stage. There is still substantial resource investment to
come and it is expected to remain at high levels over the medium term.

While Australia’s terms of trade seemed to have peaked in 2011 at 140-year highs,
commodity prices and the level of the terms of trade are likely to remain high over
the medium term. Investment still to come will continue to increase Australia’s
production and export capacity (IMF 2012a).

110


-----

While income per person is projected to keep rising, its growth is expected to slow
due to the projected decline in the terms of trade and the projected decline in labour
force participation as the population ages.

The objectives and pathways in the White Paper roadmap provide the mechanisms to
transform Australia’s economy as we aspire to Australia’s GDP per person being in the
world’s top 10 by 2025, up from our ranking of 13th in 2011. This will require a lift in
Australia’s productivity (Box 4.1).

Productivity improvements will be the main determinant of growth in Australian
incomes. The Government will work to strengthen productivity through building on our
investments and reforms across the five pillars of productivity—skills and education,
innovation, infrastructure, tax reform and regulatory reform (chapters 5 and 6).

**Box 4.1: Australia’s living standards—international rankings**

Australia has one of the highest living standards in the world. Adjusted for
purchasing power parity, Australia’s income per person was the 13th highest out of
some 180 countries in 2011, up from 17th in 2007.

Based on International Monetary Fund projections, Australia is on track to raise its
ranking from 13th to 11th in the world by 2017 (Table 4.1). For Australia to reach
the top 10 by 2025, all else being equal, Australia’s labour productivity growth
needs a boost of about one-half of a percentage point a year above the
‘business as usual’ scenario.

Australia has achieved such a boost in the past, on the back of institution-building
and reform in the 1980s and 1990s. Labour productivity growth averaged
2.1 per cent a year in the 1990s compared to an average of 1.3 per cent in the
1980s—an increase of about three-quarters of a percentage point.

**Table 4.1: International rankings of GDP per person in 2017**

Australia ranks 11th in the world A productivity boost will help
based on IMF projections Australia reach the top 10

**Rank** **Economies** **Rank** **Economies**

_Requires a labour_
_productivity growth boost_

1 Qatar 1 Qatar

_of 1/2 of a percentage_

2 Luxembourg _point a year above the_ 2 Luxembourg

_'business as usual'_

3 Singapore _scenario._ 3 Singapore

… …

10 Switzerland **10** **Australia**

**11** **Australia** 10 Switzerland

12 Sweden 12 Sweden

13 Taiwan 13 Taiwan

Note: In 2017, Hong Kong ranked fourth, followed by Norway, the United States, Brunei, United Arab
Emirates and Ireland. GDP adjusted for purchasing power parity (in 2011 prices).
Source: Based on IMF (2012d).

111

|Rank Economies|Col2|Rank Economies|
|---|---|---|
|1 Qatar|Requires a labour productivity growth boost|1 Qatar|
|2 Luxembourg 3 Singapore|of 1/2 of a percentage point a year above the 'bus iness as usual' scenario.|2 Luxembourg 3 Singapore|


-----

But most of what is required to lift Australia’s productivity is in the hands of
individuals, especially managers of businesses. It will emerge through innovation in
business processes within firms and more sophisticated relationships among firms,
encouraging knowledge transfer and exploiting gains from specialisation.

Given that the fastest growing markets will be in the emerging economies of Asia,
Australian businesses and workers will need a good understanding of the cultures and
practices in those markets (Chapter 6). Australia’s access will require ongoing reforms
in regional markets to increase their openness (Chapter 7). To prosper, firms and
individuals operating in Asia will need to deepen and broaden their relationships
within the region (Chapter 9).

Labour force participation, along with productivity, will also determine growth in
Australian incomes. It will be affected by the ageing of the Australian population,
which has added to labour participation over the past four decades as the proportion
of children in the population has fallen steadily. However, Australia’s aggregate
labour force participation rate has now hit its peak. As the baby boomer generation
moves into retirement, the same process of ageing will detract from labour force
participation, and hence from growth in output and income per person.

Depending on the rate of immigration, the participation rate among working-age
people will fall from around 65 per cent to 60 per cent (Australian Government 2010).
Whereas today there are five people of working age for every person aged over 65, by
2030 this will have dropped to three (Chart 4.2). An ageing population and declining
participation rate could lower Australia’s economic growth and reduce the capacity to
fund infrastructure and essential services such as health. Of course, not all these
trends are immutable. There is scope to lift workforce participation rates across most
age groups, particularly mature age workers.

The ageing of the population is not solely an economic matter. Australians are living
for longer and a growing cohort of active and experienced Australians presents
economic and social opportunities. We will see increasing demand for products and
services related to seniors living in Australia and overseas. Businesses and
governments must position themselves to seize the opportunities from these new
patterns—ensuring that those senior Australians who wish to contribute their energy
and experience to the workforce have the option to do so.

Population growth will also have a substantial bearing on the size of the Australian
economy. Australia’s population is predicted to grow to around 27 million by 2025
(Chart 4.2). In 2025, Australia is expected to have almost 2 million new jobs
compared with today. An increasing population, including through well-planned and
well-managed migration, has the potential to add considerably to the growth of the
economy and boost incomes per person. However, if population growth is not well
managed, it could also detract from our economic performance and from the
wellbeing of Australians.

112


-----

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0


##### Chart 4.2: Proportion of Australia’s population of working age

Million Ratio

2010 2020 2030

0-14 (Left axis) 15-64 (Left axis)

65+ (Left axis) Ratio of working age to 65+ (Right axis)


6

5

4

3

2

1

0


Note: The ‘ratio of working age to 65+’ is the ratio of the population aged 15–64 to those aged 65 and over.
Source: Australian Government (2010).

Australia has one of the most urbanised populations in the world: 75 per cent of
Australians live in cities with populations over 100,000, and the capital cities hold
about two-thirds of the nation’s population. By 2025, an additional 4.5 million people
are projected to live in the capital cities. This will be driven mainly by firms and
individuals seeking to capture the benefits of greater productivity and access to
services in urban areas. In managing this urban growth, Australia will need to address
environmental sustainability, urban development and amenity, and the capacity of
infrastructure and services (Chapter 5).

Regional centres close to major metropolitan cities with good infrastructure, services
and amenities could play a critical role in relieving stress on capital cities arising from
urban growth.

Australia’s history shows that immigration can have positive economic effects and
enrich society. A well-managed immigration program, drawing on young and highly
skilled people, will have a positive impact on Australia’s demographics and labour
force participation rates.

The recent trends of more two-way flows of people between Australia and the rest of
the region are likely to continue. The number of Australians born in countries in Asia
or with an Asian heritage is likely to grow as Australia becomes increasingly integrated
into the region. The trends of people living, working or studying temporarily in
Australia will also continue.

Australia’s population—with more than a quarter born overseas—and the large
number of Australians living overseas help to build social and business networks that

113


-----

increase our cultural awareness and lower the costs of international trade and
investment. They foster connections with the rest of the world, helping to overcome
language and distance barriers.

As Asian prosperity lifts the educational attainment of the region’s populations, there
will be a growing pool of potential skilled migrants. At the same time, however,
Australia will face greater competition to retain its best workers and to attract the
region’s best to Australia. Asia is increasingly likely to be a region of immigration in
addition to emigration, as countries such as China, India, Malaysia and Thailand
become destinations as well as being countries of origin of many migrants.

Australia can address the challenges of a growing population and falling workforce
participation—through a well-planned and well-managed migration program,
appropriate assistance to ensure that economic circumstances do not present a
barrier to parenthood, and policies that deal effectively with infrastructure provision
and environmental sustainability. Australia can also support people to re-engage in
the workforce through targeted reskilling and training programs. The link between
population dynamics and policy does not run in one direction. Economic security and
high and rising living standards in Australia, secured by robust policies, remove a
major source of uncertainty for those considering having children, encourage
expatriates to return to Australia and attract migrants seeking opportunity.

The challenge now is to build productive capacity and ensure that Australia prospers
over coming decades.

### 4.3 Opportunities of the Asian century

Strong growth in Asia will present opportunities for most sectors of the economy in
some form. Those opportunities will arise not just from increased incomes and
changing consumer preferences in Asian economies. Changes in the Australian
economy, including increasing incomes, will change consumer preferences, creating
new opportunities for those supplying the domestic market. To capitalise on these
opportunities, there will be a need for the structure of the economy to transform.

The mining boom has brought significant economic benefits to Australia. It has also
brought challenges for some parts of the economy. The high level of the terms of
trade has been accompanied by a sustained high exchange rate. The Australian dollar
reached parity with the US dollar in October 2010 and has fluctuated around parity
ever since. The real trade-weighted index in mid-2012 was around 40 per cent higher
than its average since the 1983 floating of the Australian dollar (RBA 2012). Since the
float, the Australian dollar has never before increased in value so quickly and
remained elevated for so long.

The high exchange rate and competition for capital and labour from the
mining-related sectors are having profound impacts on the size and structure of the
Australian economy. The high exchange rate has also made it cheaper for consumers
to buy goods from overseas. The parts of the traded sector not linked in some way to
mining are facing sustained pressure from foreign competitors.

114


-----

This is not the first time in Australia’s history that there has been a structural
transition. A century ago, the Australian economy was heavily reliant on the country’s
natural resource endowment. By investing some of the benefits of Australia’s natural
wealth, we have created a diverse economy that is service-oriented, yet maintains a
core of technologically advanced sectors engaged in agricultural, mining and industrial
production. This pattern of growth is similar to that in other major developed
economies, notwithstanding Australia’s larger domestic mineral and energy resources
sector.

In the past decade, the process of structural change has been profoundly influenced
by economic growth in Asia and Australia’s integration with the region (Chapter 3).
This influence will continue well into the future. The effect on industries will be
uneven and some individuals and communities, whether because of their particular
skill sets or circumstances, may not easily benefit from the transition. Although
change will bring challenges to some, it will provide opportunities to many others.

Australians can also take some confidence from the fact that the economy has
adjusted to the recent resources boom more smoothly compared to past booms. This
reflects the impact of past structural reforms that increased the flexibility of our
economy (Box 3.5, Chapter 3).

New or expanded opportunities will not be isolated within individual sectors: active
collaboration between firms in different sectors will often be necessary. For example,
construction and engineering services and manufacturing will support resources
development; research and design services will, in turn, support manufacturing and
engineering. The financial services sector will enable investment in new projects and
infrastructure as well as expansion into Asia. Service industries such as logistics
underpin many other industries. The agriculture and food sector is also set to benefit
from increased demand in Asia (Case study). Collaboration need not be restricted
domestically and, increasingly, it will not be. Partnerships with firms in Asia provide
access to new and diverse ideas and allow integration into cross-border production
networks.

As the National Broadband Network is rolled out, it will create opportunities for
Australians to participate better in the digital economy, the global network of
economic and social activities that are enabled by platforms such as the internet,
and mobile and sensor networks. This will have an impact across Australia’s export
industries as the speed and capacity of Australia’s digital network expands.

The growing and populous nations in Asia will be increasingly important in driving the
size and shape of global consumer markets. This will not be restricted to China’s
influence; Australian firms can also capitalise on developments in India, Indonesia,
Thailand, Vietnam and other emerging economies.

Many new opportunities will emerge, not just from the provision of tangible products
and services, but from the value created from Australia’s intangible assets—
from the ability to think creatively in analysing and understanding problems, from
improvisation, and from designing imaginative and effective solutions to significant
societal challenges. Investment in intangibles creates capabilities that allow firms to

115


-----

find niches and become more competitive along their entire production chains,
thereby capturing a larger share of value. Australia already has significant intangible
assets that could potentially be shared with Asian economies.

The fastest growing sectors are likely to continue to be mining and those services and
manufacturing sectors related to mining. While the terms of trade are projected to
decline over the medium term, they are expected to remain at historically high levels
for some time, reflecting a prolonged shift in global demand. Coal and iron ore mining
output will continue to grow, while liquefied natural gas (LNG) production is expected
to develop rapidly to become a major export industry of global rank.

However, the services sectors of the economy are by far the largest producers of
output and create the largest number of jobs (Chart 4.3). The services sector is
expected to continue to grow and the composition of services will shift in response to
consumer and businesses preferences and Australia’s rising income. For example, the
ageing population will change the type of services that these consumers demand,
creating new opportunities.

##### Chart 4.3: Australian real GDP and industry composition


2,000

1,500

1,000

500

0


$billion $billion

2010 2025

Services (including construction and utilities) Mining

Manufacturing Agriculture, fishing and forestry


2,000

1,500

1,000

500

0


Note: Consistent with the business-as-usual scenario. Real GDP allocated to sectors based on nominal
value added shares. Data are in 2009–10 dollars.
Sources: Treasury projections based on ABS data and Australian Government (2011c).

Manufacturing output is projected to grow to 2025, albeit at a slow rate.
Manufacturing firms are finding ways to adapt by anticipating changes in their
markets, building the talents of their people and constantly innovating and lifting
their productivity. The manufacturing sector stands out as one in which firms are
reviewing their business practices and adopting new processes. In 2010, one in four
manufacturing firms adopted new operational processes—as opposed to less than
one in ten in other industries (Lowe 2012). The White Paper’s roadmap aims to
support the manufacturing sector to become even more productive and capitalise on
the opportunities arising from Asia.

116


-----

The burgeoning Asian middle class will also create opportunities in other areas. The
region will demand more agricultural products, a broad range of agricultural services
and more sophisticated consumer goods (Case study). Within sectors, the types of
firm will change as business transforms through the adoption of technology and other
opportunities.

Some of the benefits from the rise in the Asian middle class are already evident. One
example is education, which is Australia’s largest services export. The number of
students from Asia, particularly from China, India and the ASEAN–5, studying in
Australia has increased from around 170,000 in 2002 to over 320,000 in 2011,
contributing 79 per cent of the export income generated by international students
studying in Australia. A similar pattern can be seen for Australia’s wine exports, of
which China’s share is now five times what it was five years ago.

Future employment opportunities will largely mirror production, both by sector and
by location. Employment growth by each State or Territory will reflect their industry
composition and population growth.

With resources investment and production continuing to expand for some time,
northern Australia is likely to account for an increasing proportion of Australia’s
production and labour demand. Western Australia, Queensland and the Northern
Territory had amongst the highest population growth between 2006 and 2011, while
Perth had the highest growth of any capital city (ABS 2012a, 2012g). Significant new
projects in LNG, iron ore, coal and other resources and energy commodities are
expected to continue these trends.

Within Australian States and Territories, there will be areas with potential high
growth. The way this expanded economic activity is managed will have consequences
for regional development. The strong demand for skilled workers has resulted in the
emergence of ‘fly-in, fly-out’ and ‘drive-in, drive-out’ arrangements. Such
arrangements might also present opportunities for workers in other regions of
Australia.

The minerals and energy resources sector will continue to be a relatively small
employer in absolute terms, even though growth in mining and related construction
and professional services employment will remain high (DAE 2012). Services overall
will add the largest number of jobs, with strong growth in health, education,
professional and construction services. While manufacturing output is projected to
grow in the medium term, its share of employment relative to other sectors will
continue to fall.

What will emerge as a result of these opportunities is that Australia’s trade patterns
will change, urbanisation will continue to drive demand for resources and energy, and
new opportunities will emerge in manufacturing and in high-quality food production.
Rising incomes will also provide opportunities for the education and tourism sectors,
and for services more broadly.

117


-----

#### Australia’s trade patterns will change

Australia is already one of the most Asia-oriented trading nations in the world
(Chapter 3). Strong complementarity between the Australian and rapidly growing
economies in the region, further reductions in trading barriers, growing cross-border
value chains and technological trends will see Australia’s trade links with Asia
continue to expand (Chapter 7).

The composition of Australia’s exports is expected to reflect international demand.
The share of mining exports will remain elevated and the share of agricultural exports
is likely to rise, while the share of manufacturing exports is expected to fall
(Chart 4.4).

##### Chart 4.4: Composition of Australia’s exports, by industry


To Asia

Per cent Per cent

2005 2010 2015 2020 2025


100

80

60

40

20

0


100

80

60

40

20

0


To the world

Per cent Per cent

2005 2010 2015 2020 2025

Mining Manufacturing


100

80

60

40

20

0


100

80

60

40

20

0


Services Agriculture, fishing and forestry


Note: Consistent with the business-as-usual scenario. See glossary for definition of Asia.
Source: Treasury projections based on ABS data.

Although Australia has historically been among the most remote countries in the
world, the rise of Asia means that we will become closer to the centre of world
economic activity. The share of world output within 10,000 kilometres of Australia has
more than doubled over the past 50 years to more than a third of global output
today, and this share will rise to around half of global output in 2025. The reduction in
transport and communication costs will support new opportunities for exporters to
find new markets and integrate with cross-border value chains, just as others in the
region have done (Box 4.2).

A large share of Australia’s exports to Asia is mining exports (Chart 4.4). Australia’s
proximity to Asia is more of an advantage for goods with a higher freight component,
like resource commodities. In absolute terms, exports in the mining, manufacturing,
services, and agricultural sectors are all expected to increase between now and 2025.

118


-----

**Box 4.2: Exchange rate appreciation and successive relocations of**
**production in Asia**

In Asia, regional production networks developed in response to the appreciation of
the Japanese yen, which rose by 70 per cent against the US dollar in the decade to
1995. However, the effects of exchange rate fluctuations differ between simple
labour-intensive consumer goods, such as textiles, and more sophisticated
products, such as electronics, which can be produced in a process that is broken up
and spread across borders (Thorbecke 2011).

In response to rising cost pressures, Japanese firms shifted labour-intensive
assembly operations to other Asian countries while high paying jobs and profits
were retained in Japan. At first, in the 1980s, they channelled foreign direct
investment and intermediate goods to South Korea, Taiwan and other newly
industrialised economies. However, as their currencies appreciated and incomes
rose, lower-end, labour-intensive assembly operations were successively relocated
to China and the ASEAN economies.

Consequently, trading relations within Asia took on a ‘triangular’ rather than
bilateral pattern (Gaulier, Lemoine & Ünal-Kesenci 2005). Higher skilled workers
and industries in Japan, South Korea and Taiwan produced sophisticated
technology-intensive parts and components and shipped them to China and the
ASEAN economies for assembly and re-export to the rest of the world. In 2005, half
of the value added in China’s gross exports of high-technology goods was foreign
sourced; for Japan’s gross exports of high-technology goods, it was one-fifth
(Riad et al. 2011).

The development of regional value chains and trends towards specialisation has
influenced the pattern of trade in the region—benefiting people everywhere. The
electrical equipment industry is a case in point (Athukorala & Menon 2010). In
particular, the Japanese electronics industry underwent substantial vertical
integration with China and the ASEAN economies in the 1990s. The share of trade
between Japan and China in vertically differentiated electrical equipment products
rose from less than 10 per cent in 1988 to almost 60 per cent in 2000 (as a
proportion of total electrical machinery trade between the two countries) (Fukao,
Ishido & Ito 2003). That share also increased for Japan’s intra-industry trade in
electrical equipment with Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand.

119


-----

Time zones will also matter in coming decades. With increasing trade in services
possible through expansions in network technology and the tight interconnection
between production in agriculture, minerals and energy resources, manufacturing
and these service activities, Australia is well placed in the time zone of the dynamic
Asian region. For example, 60 per cent of the world’s population lives in the same
time zone as Australia’s west coast (UWA 2012). Time zone similarities will
particularly benefit services sectors, such as financial, legal and consulting services.

As Australia’s trade links with Asia have increased, so too have two-way investment
flows. This trend is set to continue as nations in Asia become an increasing source of
investment into Australia. Australian investors will also take up investment
opportunities elsewhere in Asia, particularly as restrictions to investment in overseas
markets ease. We will continue to advocate for greater investment access in Asian
economies. To make the most of these opportunities, firms will need to build their
knowledge and understanding of financial and legal institutions in the Asian region
(chapters 6 and 7).

#### Urbanisation will continue driving demand for resources and energy

Continued urbanisation in the developing nations of Asia, combined with Australia’s
natural resource endowments, which go well beyond domestic needs, will drive
strong demand for Australia’s energy and mineral resources (Chapter 2). Asia’s
growth has been spurred by heavy investment in physical and human capital across
the region. Capital investment across Asia is in the order of US$10 trillion a year and
could grow to more than US$20 trillion a year by 2030 (BCG 2012).

Even though many commodity prices have fallen somewhat from their historic highs,
Australian resources investment is expected to remain high in the medium term and
will continue to lift minerals and energy production and exports (Chart 4.5). Natural
gas is likely to be the primary fuel for transitioning the globe to a low-carbon future.
Australia is well placed to be a major supplier of LNG, and a number of new
world-scale LNG projects are already in development.

Australia is a resource-rich nation with a deep comparative advantage in mineral and
energy resource exports. Australia has the world’s largest economically demonstrated
reserves of lead, rutile, zircon, nickel, gold, silver and zinc. Australia ranks second in
world reserves for iron ore, bauxite, tantalum, tungsten and ilmenite, and is in the
top 10 for a number of other mineral reserves, including black coal (Geoscience
Australia 2012). Australia is also the world’s fourth-largest LNG exporter (EIA 2011).

Maintaining Australia’s current attractiveness for investment, based on a stable
political and regulatory environment and freight cost advantage to Asia, will be
important. This includes addressing constraints on investment and production
(Chapter 5). Our forthcoming Energy White Paper will set out a strategic policy
framework for the continued development of our world-class energy sector. The
opportunities from further growth in our energy exports will also support the
expansion of our domestic energy and downstream industrial infrastructure.

120


-----

Asia’s demand for Australia’s resources will continue to support growth in other parts
of the economy, including parts of the construction, manufacturing and services
sectors. And, as other nations around the world increase their resource production,
Australian mining services companies are well placed to export their high-quality
services (Box 4.3). The Australian mining technology services and equipment sector
has grown its exports rapidly over the past decade, from around $470 million in 1996
to around $2.5 billion in 2009, from total revenue of around $8.7 billion. Exports to
Asia make up the largest share, and exports to India and Indonesia exceed those to
China (Tedesco & Haseltine 2010).

##### Chart 4.5: Outlook for Australian commodity exports

LNG exports Coking coal exports


140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

450

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0


Megatonnes Megatonnes

2010 2015 2020 2025


Megatonnes Megatonnes

2010 2015 2020 2025

Low Medium


140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0


450

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0


350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0


Megatonnes Megatonnes

2010 2015 2020 2025


Thermal coal exports Iron ore exports


350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

1,200

1,000

800

600

400

200

0


1,200

1,000

800

600

400

200

0

High


Megatonnes Megatonnes

2010 2015 2020 2025


Source: BREE (2012a).


121


-----

**Box 4.3: Developing globally competitive mining services**


Australia is already on the way to meeting the conditions for developing a
world-class natural resource services cluster.

First, Australia has highly demanding and sophisticated global customers for its
natural resources. Natural resource companies, in turn, are world-class, highly
sophisticated customers for the service industries.

Second, Australia has a rich base of natural resources to underpin its natural
resource industries. While they provide a base, on their own they do not guarantee
sustained competitive advantage. Instead, factors such as a highly skilled
workforce, infrastructure and capital create longer-term competitive advantage.

Third, Australia has the sophisticated governance systems and strong legal system
needed to guide the way companies are created, organised and managed, as well
as the competitive legal frameworks to ensure that companies must compete
actively with each other. This drives innovation.

Fourth, Australia has a large and growing set of related and supporting industries
that cover a broad range of activities.

The strength of Australian natural resource industries has meant that many
providers of resources services have developed successful global strategies and are
growing rapidly on the back of their global businesses. Australian natural resource
players are increasingly outsourcing specialist skills to dedicated suppliers. These
organisations are following their customers offshore and are now exporting their
expertise around the world.

This process by which fast-growing, internationally competitive, resource-based
industries create clusters of rapidly growing suppliers and service providers is not
new. In the United States, Texas built an oil and gas services industry on the back of
its oil reserves. Israel has built an irrigation industry through its need to increase
water-use efficiencies. What is new is the prospect that, because of improvements
in communications technologies, Australian organisations are able to develop the
global critical mass they need to lead in their fields, far faster than the historical
experience.


Source: Port Jackson Partners (2011).


122


-----

#### New opportunities will emerge in manufacturing

The structural adjustment underway in the Australian economy in response to the
strong overseas demand for resource and energy commodities is making it difficult for
some sectors of manufacturing to compete for labour and capital, particularly in the
manufacturing sectors not supplying mining construction.

Despite these pressures, manufacturing is expected to play a critical role in Australia’s
future. The Prime Minister’s Manufacturing Taskforce was appointed to map out a
shared vision for the future of Australia’s manufacturing sector and help strengthen
local firms as they adjust to changes in our economy and the region. The report from
non-government members of the taskforce, Smarter manufacturing for a smarter
_Australia, concludes that manufacturing can prosper and grow in Australia if the_
sector takes advantage of emerging opportunities in the Asian region. We are
committed to ensuring that Australia retains a strong manufacturing industry and will
respond to the report’s recommendations with an Industry and Innovation Statement
(Chapter 5).

Australia’s largest manufacturing exports to Asia are currently pharmaceuticals and
industrial machinery (BCG 2012). Australia’s strong created endowments, highly
skilled labour and strong regulatory standards provide comparative advantages for
the pharmaceutical and other health-related manufacturing sectors. Australia has a
well-deserved reputation for high-quality methodology and high safety standards.

Manufacturing firms will have opportunities from the growing resources sector and
its infrastructure projects. For example, mining equipment and instrumentation,
explosives, energy systems, transportation equipment and personal protective
technologies for miners all present growth opportunities for the sector.

Increased trade and investment openness in the region, stable regulatory systems,
and having the ability to draw on a highly skilled Asia-capable workforce will be
important factors for the future of Australia’s manufacturing sector (chapters 5,
6 and 7). But the challenges that firms, especially small and medium-sized enterprises,
will face should not be underestimated. Manufacturing firms will need to change their
business models, improve their market orientation and improve their innovation
performance, including through their links with research organisations (Chapter 5).

Increasingly, wealthy consumers in Asia will provide new markets for Australian niche
manufacturers, as will the need to find innovative and sustainable ways to support
Asia’s urbanisation. Australian firms will need to tap into the cross-border production
and investment networks that will become more important over coming decades.
Australian firms that broaden their operations across national borders can lower their
cost base, reduce their dependency on the domestic market, increase their
productivity and create opportunities for Australians to live and work in the region.

Domestically and internationally, the introduction of carbon pricing will provide
opportunities for new low-emissions products and services to thrive (Box 4.4).

123


-----

**Box 4.4: Manufacturing can benefit from a clean energy future**


The introduction of carbon pricing in Australia and moves to price carbon globally
will create manufacturing opportunities as firms develop new low-emissions
technologies that can be deployed worldwide. Opportunities will include
developing:

- products and systems that support the growth of a low-carbon energy future,

such as components and energy management systems for solar and wind

- products that support the construction of a more sustainable built environment

and infrastructure, such as energy-efficient building systems and materials with
inherently lower embodied energy/carbon

- low-carbon manufacturing techniques and technologies and exporting those

developments



- high-value-added, manufactured products that are also high in intellectual

property value with relatively low-carbon transport, and hence low shipping
costs (often from the science and biotechnology areas, such as medical devices
and diagnostic equipment).


Source: FMIIC (2011).


#### Increased demand for high-quality food

Australia’s diverse climate systems and quality of agricultural practices position us
well to service strong demand for high-quality food in Asia (Case study). As a result,
agriculture’s share of the Australian economy is expected to rise over the decade
to 2025 (Chart 4.3).

With rising incomes in Asian economies, there will be a structural change in global
consumption to higher value food products and services. Strong demand is expected
to continue for the foreseeable future, especially for higher quality produce and
protein-rich foods such as meat and dairy products (Chart 4.6). This will also increase
the requirement for animal feed, such as grains. As well as an expansion of food trade
with Asia, changing consumer preferences will provide opportunities for a wider
range of processed foods, convenience foods and beverages, including wine.

Australia is a world leader in the production of grains for human consumption and for
feedlots, as well as in the production of land-intensive meat products such as beef
(BCG 2012). Strong regulatory and quality management systems allow Australia to
produce high-quality, safe foods that are traceable along the entire production chain.
As Australia integrates with Asia, it will be important to maintain those qualities
(Chapter 7).

There are also opportunities in exporting, and collaborative research in, agricultural
technologies to increase yields, reduce water use and lessen environmental
degradation. These technologies will improve food security within the Asian region
and also improve the sustainability of Australia’s agricultural practices as production
expands to meet growing demand (Box 4.5 and Chapter 8).

124


-----

##### Chart 4.6: Outlook for Australian agrifood production and exports


Beef

Wheat

Dairy products

Sheep meat

Sugar

2025


Beef

Wheat

Dairy products

Fruit

Sheep meat


Production

0 5 10 15

Billion US$

2007


Exports

0 5 10 15

Billion US$


Note: At 2007 prices.
Source: Linehan et al. (2012).


**Box 4.5: CSIRO—helping find opportunities within challenges**


The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) has a
long history of partnering with Australian development aid agencies, such as
Australian Agency for International Development (AusAID) and the Australian
Centre for International Agricultural Research, to build capability in the Asian
region. The rapid transitions occurring in some countries, such as Indonesia and
Vietnam, coupled with the ASEAN – Australia – New Zealand Free Trade
Agreement, mean that Australia has an opportunity to develop new research and
collaboration partnerships with them.

CSIRO’s Food Futures Flagship has engaged in a long-term project with the centre
aimed at improving feed sustainability for marine aquaculture in Vietnam and
Australia. The project looks at diet development and low-value fish replacement,
and aims to lead to greater adoption of manufactured feed in Vietnam and better
use of alternative raw materials in Vietnam and Australia. Collaborating institutions
in Vietnam include the Research Institute for Aquaculture and Nha Trang
University.

In 2010, a CSIRO–AusAID Research for Development Partnership project was
launched at the University of Mataram on the Indonesian island of Lombok in
West Nusa Tenggara Province. The project, ‘Climate Futures and Rural Livelihood
Adaptation Strategies’, is co-funded by AusAID and the Charities Aid Foundation.
In collaboration with Indonesian researchers from the University of Mataram, the
Research Institute for Agricultural Technology and the Indonesian Bureau of
Meteorology, the project will combine analysis of downscaled climate projections,
socioeconomic trends and adaptive capacity to identify and implement adaptation
strategies for rural people.

125


-----

#### Rising incomes provide opportunities for education …

Education is currently Australia’s fourth-largest export earner (DFAT 2012). [2]
Education also provides opportunities for cultural engagement and the building of
intangible assets, such as networks and knowledge of our region.

Although many governments and individuals in Asia are investing heavily in the
sector, demand for high-quality education is likely to continue to outstrip supply. In
the higher education sector, the number of outbound students from Asia has almost
doubled over the past decade to more than a million (BCG 2012).

Australia has a well-established reputation in the international education market—
with international student enrolments growing over the past decade. Over time,
Australian institutions have also begun to provide education services within the
region, either directly through collaborative arrangements with offshore partners or
at fully or partly owned campuses offshore.

Around 80 per cent of all international students in Australia are from countries in our
region. The top five countries for inbound international students are China
(29 per cent), India (13 per cent), South Korea (5 per cent), Vietnam (4 per cent) and
Malaysia (4 per cent). After a decline in recent years, overseas student numbers are
expected to increase in coming years.

The benefits of education exports are not restricted to direct income. Around
one-third of skilled migrants to Australia are former international students, bringing
the benefits of their skills and knowledge to Australian firms. And the additional
enrolments provided by international students allow educational institutions to
diversify their course and research offerings and provide an international focused
education in Australia. It fosters lasting connections and relationships between
Australians and people from all around the world.

Rapid growth in enrolments between 2006 and 2009 has been followed by a decline
in overall numbers since 2010 (Chart 4.7). The sector has faced challenges, and
following independent reviews, we have introduced a number of significant policies
to strengthen the quality of international students’ educational experience and to
improve the quality, integrity and competitiveness of the student visa program.

We are committed to ensuring that Australia is recognised as a partner of choice for
education and that education providers can adapt their existing practices to improve
their links with and access into the region (chapters 6 and 7). Future Unlimited, the
Australian Government’s international education brand, promotes Australia’s globally
recognised education sector, and associated career possibilities, as well as supporting
education providers to expand their engagement with the region.

2 Defined as ‘education-related travel services’.

126


-----

##### Chart 4.7: Growth in international student enrolments in Australia


'000s '000s

700 700

600 600

500 500

400 400

300 300

200 200

100 100

0 0

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Higher Education Schools ELICOS Other Vocational Education and Training

Note: VET stands for vocational education and training. ELICOS stands for English language intensive
courses for overseas students. ‘Other’ includes non-award courses and enabling courses.
Source: AEI (2012b).

#### … and for tourism …

Tourism is one of Australia’s largest export industries—worth about $24 billion in
2010–11 (ABS 2011b). Asia’s outbound tourism is growing rapidly as incomes rise, and
outbound tourists from the Asia–Pacific region are expected to reach 541 million
by 2030 (UNWTO 2011).

Australia’s natural endowments and position as one of the developed countries
closest to Asia provide us with natural advantages. In 2011–12, seven of Australia’s
top 10 most valuable inbound tourism markets were in Asia (TRA 2012b). In the same
year, China became Australia’s most valuable tourism market, and over time it will
also become the source of the highest number of visitors. Strong growth from India
and Indonesia, supported by a younger demographic and expansion in other
promising Asian markets, such as Vietnam, is expected to complement the growth
from China. This anticipated boost to tourism will have benefits for Australia’s tourist
industry, including for Indigenous Australians engaged in tourism and for regional
Australia. In particular, there are opportunities for new tourism hubs in northern
Australia around the growth of new Asian markets.

While overseas tourist numbers from all regions are expected to increase to 2020, the
growth in numbers from within Asia will outpace growth from all other markets in
both percentage and absolute terms. By 2020–21, Asia’s share of inbound arrivals is
expected to have increased from 41 per cent to 45 per cent (TRA 2012a) (Chart 4.8).
This will drive the total economic value of inbound tourism to around $35 billion
by 2020.

127


-----

Increasing air services between Asia and Australia, as demonstrated by the recent
expansion plans of Air India, China Southern, China Eastern and Jetstar, present a
strong opportunity to build tourism links with Asia. And Australia will need to expand
the supply of tourism infrastructure. Australia has one of the highest room occupancy
rates among OECD countries and will need another 40,000 to 70,000 hotel rooms by
2020 to meet projected demand (OECD 2010b).

Importantly, the tourism industry needs to develop culturally relevant products to
capitalise on growing Asian interest in Australia as a tourist destination. This will mean
developing sophisticated luxury urban tourism opportunities, such as those offered by
Crown Limited, as well as showcasing Australia’s outstanding natural beauty. Tourism
brings opportunities to other sectors in the economy, such as retail and transport.

##### Chart 4.8: Visitor arrivals in Australia


Millions Millions

3.0 3.0

2.5 2.5

2.0 2.0

1.5 1.5

1.0 1.0

0.5 0.5

0.0 0.0

1999-00 2004-05 2009-10 2014-15 2019-20

China Europe New Zealand

Rest of Asia United States Rest of world

Source: TFC (2012).

#### … and for services more broadly

Services now contribute about two-thirds of Australia’s economy and about one-fifth
of our exports (ABS 2012d; ABS 2012h). Over the period to 2025, services (including
construction and utilities) will continue to grow (Chart 4.3).

The services sector covers a broad and widening range of economic activities, from
professional and financial services to transport, construction and logistics. And the
contribution of services to the economy goes beyond the value of individual sectors.
Energy, transport, finance and insurance are important intermediate services used in
the production of other goods and services. These inputs can account for a large
proportion of the value of goods and services, especially in high-value-added
manufactures. The expected increase in resources, energy, tourism and education
exports will provide opportunities for the services sectors to expand.

128


-----

As Asian markets integrate, there is an increasing call on service capabilities in an
increasingly sophisticated market. Australian firms have developed strong capabilities
in a range of professional, information technology and other business services
(BCG 2012). Some Australian law firms have developed joint ventures or other
regional business models with firms in Asia and elsewhere. For example, the Norton
Rose Group recently merged with Deacons Australia as part of its regional expansion,
as it was more cost-effective to supply Norton Rose’s Asian firms with lawyers from
Australia rather than its London office.

Finance and insurance is the largest industry in the Australian economy (ABS 2012b).
Of the ten banks in the world that Standard & Poor’s rate as AA- or above, four are
Australian. Australian financial firms with presence in Asia and cross-border
capabilities are well positioned to capitalise on increasing investment and
intraregional trade flows (BCG 2012). New financial markets are also emerging
through the benefits of technology. Banks in India have started using biometrics
instead of identification numbers to allow a whole new class of customers to access
the banking system, particularly in rural areas. Such technological developments are
helping to overcome barriers caused by illiteracy, innumeracy and a lack of
identification documents.

A broad range of other Australian services firms are buying, building or partnering
with Asian businesses to deploy intellectual property developed initially in the
Australian market.

Improvements to information and communications technologies and their wider
distribution, in particular the rollout of the National Broadband Network, will make
trade and collaboration in many services easier within Australia and with international
partners. This is particularly the case for intermediate services, such as research and
development, product design and logistics.

For businesses to capture opportunities in the rapidly growing Asian market, Australia
needs to have a highly skilled and educated workforce that understands the region’s
diversity and builds enduring relationships with its people (chapters 6, 7 and 9).

As Australian incomes increase over the period to 2025, consumer preferences are
likely to change and demand for high-quality services will grow. Australia’s ageing
population will also drive demand for health services, creating domestic
opportunities.

With the surge in infrastructure investment in the region, there are opportunities for
Australian design, engineering and construction services. The largest opportunities,
such as those achieved by HASSELL (Box 4.6), are likely to be in Asia’s emerging
markets.

129


-----

**Box 4.6: HASSELL seizes opportunities in Asian markets**


HASSELL is one of the largest multidisciplinary design practices in the Asia–Pacific
region, with expertise in architecture, interior design, urban planning and design,
and landscape architecture. HASSELL entered the Asian market in 1991 when it
acquired a Hong Kong firm, EBC. After winning early master planning and urban
design commissions in China, it broadened its Chinese practice to include the full
range of disciplines it offers in Australia.

Today, HASSELL is China’s largest foreign multidisciplinary design practice and
employs more than 250 people in studios in Beijing, Chongqing, Hong Kong,
Shanghai and Shenzhen. Elsewhere in Asia, it has studios in Bangkok and Singapore.
HASSELL has maintained its commitment to Asia since the early 1990s—even while
other designers switched focus after the downturn of the late 1990s, HASSELL
stayed its course. Its commitment to China has been fundamental in gaining the
trust of its Chinese customers.

HASSELL has also retained control through its wholly owned entity rather than the
looser arrangements chosen by less successful entrants into China. Full ownership
of its practice has allowed it to bring the best of its global capabilities to bear for
clients.


Source: BCG (2012).


### 4.4 Risks to the outlook

Australia’s ability to capitalise on growth in the Asian region is contingent on getting
the policy settings right and the private sector and its partners taking up the
opportunities on offer. If both these happen, Australia could exceed the central gross
national income per person growth path outlined above. A downside risk is that
Australia fails to lift its productivity growth and capture these opportunities, which
would limit the growth in our living standards.

Asia’s long-term outlook is positive, but there will be volatility along the way. For
example, a sharp cyclical decline in Asia’s growth could see commodity prices fall
more rapidly in the near term than is currently assumed, with implications for
Australia’s terms of trade and national income. This highlights the importance of
macroeconomic policy settings for responding to shocks: a flexible exchange rate that
acts as a shock absorber, countercyclical monetary policy directed at achieving price
stability, and a strong fiscal position that provides the capacity to respond to adverse
circumstances should they arise.

Asia’s emergence is driving a global shift in comparative advantage, and the structural
adjustment that Australia is experiencing is happening internationally. With this
comes a heightened risk of protectionism. Restrictions on international trade and
investment would be at the expense of global economic growth and would
undermine Australia’s flexibility and ability to capitalise on growth opportunities in
the region. We will work in international forums such as the Group of Twenty (G20),

130


-----

the World Trade Organization and the Asia–Pacific Economic Cooperation forum to
dissuade other nations from pursuing more protectionist policies.

It is impossible to predict with certainty precisely how the Asian century will unfold.
However, Australia will need to lift Australians’ capabilities and improve our
businesses to prosper. Australia needs to engage and become fully part of the region.
A strong macroeconomic policy framework and policies that promote productivity
and flexibility to adapt as circumstances evolve will be important, irrespective of
external forces (Chapter 5).

The task of ensuring that Australia thrives in coming decades falls not just to
government. Individuals, communities, educational institutions, businesses and
governments at all levels will need to consider how to develop the capabilities and
connections that Australians will need to take advantage of and contribute to
opportunities in the region.

There are risks to Australia’s underlying prosperity if we do not manage Australia’s
environmental challenges. These encompass a range of pressures affecting Australia’s
natural and built environment, including climate change, declining soil fertility, loss of
species and ecosystems, biosecurity risks and stresses on water systems (chapters 5
and 8).

131


-----

# Chapter 5: A productive and resilient Australian economy


**Chapter 5**
A productive
and resilient
Australian
economy


-----

**Key points**


The Asian century requires us to focus on domestic economic settings, with
ongoing attention to the productivity, resilience and sustainability of the Australian
economy.

Australia is in a good position to capitalise on the opportunities that the rise of Asia
presents, but there is more work to do.

We have made substantial reforms and investments across the five pillars of
productivity—skills and education, innovation, infrastructure, tax reform and
regulatory reform—and these efforts will continue.

Ongoing reform and investment in education and training will help boost
productivity and participation in the workforce, and enhance Australia’s and
Australians’ capacity to respond to and benefit from changing demand.

Australia’s innovation effort should progressively align better with our comparative
advantages, attract top researchers and improve regional and global partnerships.

Better planning and prioritisation of infrastructure and greater private sector
investment will support a growing Australian population and increasing trade and
investment with the region. The National Broadband Network gives Australia
world-leading communications infrastructure to support this engagement.

Our tax system will be progressively reformed to better encourage investment in
Australia and participation in the workforce, and to ensure our public finances
remain sustainable.

Over time, we will remove unnecessary regulation costs on businesses and people.

Through careful management of Australia’s natural assets, we can meet, more
sustainably, Asia’s and our own growing demands for resources.

Australia’s macroeconomic framework—a floating exchange rate acting as a shock
absorber for the economy, independent monetary policy targeting low inflation
and a medium-term fiscal policy framework—remains crucial to success.

133


-----

### 5.1 Introduction

This White Paper provides a long-term roadmap for Australian governments, business
and the broader community to secure a more prosperous and resilient nation that is
fully part of our region and open to the world. Addressing many of these issues has
driven much of the Government’s policy agenda over the past five years and it is
important that our broad settings continue to be right.

Our roadmap for the Asian century is ambitious. We envisage a nation with
sustainably rising living standards, where all Australians enjoy a good quality of life.
Crucial to Australia’s success will be lifting productivity growth.

Irrespective of how the Asian century evolves, Australia’s prosperity will come from
building on our strengths, reinforcing the foundations of our society and our
productive, open and resilient economy at home. We have made substantial reforms
and investments across the five pillars of productivity—skills and education,
innovation, infrastructure, tax reform and regulatory reform—and these efforts will
continue.

Complementing these five pillars are efforts to ensure environmental sustainability
and strong macroeconomic and financial frameworks, plus ongoing policies to
increase workforce participation and create a fairer and more inclusive Australia
(Chapter 6).

Success in the Asian century requires a whole-of-Australia effort, with businesses,
communities and governments being partners in a transformation as profound as any
that have defined Australia throughout its history.

The private sector drives the lion’s share of productivity gains when firms and
businesses do more with the resources they have and can respond to emerging
opportunities. Governments have an important role in creating the conditions for
businesses to boost their productivity.

In coming decades, Asia’s economic rise will shift the centre of global economic
activity closer to Australia. This, along with a large and growing Asian middle class, will
bring further opportunities (chapters 2 and 4).

First, there are opportunities in the strong investment growth in Asia, both in building
and financing infrastructure, and expanding human capital through education and
training.

Second, enabling closer economic and social integration across the Asian region
brings opportunities in network infrastructure such as telecommunications, logistics
and financial systems.

Third, a broad set of opportunities will arise from the expanding consumer market,
including niche manufacturing, creative and professional service industries, health
and aged care, tourism and agriculture.

134


-----

Fourth, within the challenges of environmental sustainability and population ageing
likely to be faced in Australia and across the region, there are opportunities for
innovative solutions to address environmental constraints, urban planning and
regional development, and to improve health, aged care and other services.

Australian businesses need to remain competitive and resilient to secure these
opportunities, which will provide wealth and jobs for Australians. We have already
begun the process of adapting to drive future growth. Sound economic frameworks, a
history of good decisions and reforms, Australia’s comparative advantages and our
willingness to engage with the Asian region have put us in a strong position.

Continuing our focus of recent years, we will work to raise Australia’s productivity
performance as it will be the main driver of higher living standards—especially against
a backdrop of falling productivity growth in the early years of the 21st century, the
pressures of an ageing population, and the likely decline in Australia’s terms of trade
over the medium term, as the global supply of resources continues to increase.

We will ensure that Australia’s economy remains strong, resilient, diverse, productive
and on a sustainable footing.

### 5.2 Building a highly skilled and productive workforce

We are committed to building a highly skilled, educated and productive Australian
workforce. All Australians need the opportunity to acquire skills and education in
order to fully contribute to and participate in the economy. This includes securing the
skills needed for the jobs of the future.

Education and training are crucial to Australia’s future productivity. The greater the
skill level of each worker, the higher the potential productivity of the workforce—
a highly educated and skilled workforce supports innovation, the spread of
technological advances and the accumulation of physical capital (Australian
Government 2010). Rising educational qualifications can also boost productivity by
improving technical or problem-solving skills (Productivity Commission 2008).
Enhancing the skills and attributes of Australians will be fundamental for seizing the
opportunities from the rise of Asia, including greater capacity to innovate and adapt.

Education and training also shape the prosperity of individuals and families,
influencing their earning potential and improving future labour force participation.
Higher literacy and numeracy skills are strongly correlated with higher workforce
participation and earnings (Shomos 2010). As Australia adapts to the changes that will
occur, we need to equip people with the skills to take advantage of the shifts towards
higher skilled, higher wage jobs, which could potentially grow at around 1.6 times the
rate of low-skilled jobs to 2025 (AWPA 2012).

This has driven the investments and reforms we have made so far—from early
childhood education to universities and training systems. Reforms to higher education
have included the uncapping of the number of public university places from 2012 to
enhance the overall skill level of the workforce and to equip students to become
effective participants in the labour market of tomorrow. Our policies are designed to

135


-----

ensure that the future training system is responsive to the needs of Australian
industry and the economy and will provide graduates with relevant qualifications and
a better chance of securing employment.

We have already made large investments in schools to boost the capability of
school-age children. The recently announced National Plan for School Improvement
also aims to help every Australian child get a world-class education, no matter where
they live, the school they attend, or their family background. The aim of the plan is to
make sure that Australia is in the top five countries in the world in reading, writing
and maths by 2025 (Chapter 6).


_National objective_


1. All Australians will have the opportunity to acquire the skills and education they
need to participate fully in a strong economy and a fairer society.

Our aim is to have early childhood education, schools, universities and training
systems among the best in the world. The importance of this agenda to boosting
Australia’s productivity and ensuring people have the capabilities to take full
advantage of the Asian century is explored in more detail in Chapter 6.

Australia’s education and training systems need to be flexible and able to adjust the
quantity and mix of services they provide as needs and individual preferences change.
This will help ensure that the workforce skills match those demanded by employers.

Our efforts to boost workforce participation through skills and education attainment
(Chapter 6) are complemented by other measures intended to remove barriers for
those groups currently under-represented in the workforce—through child-care
assistance, paid parental leave, employment services and tax reform.

Governments can help people make the most of the Asian century by promoting fair
and responsive workplaces. As the structure of the domestic and international
economy transforms, flexibility in the labour market and collaboration between
employees, employers and unions will help people find new and rewarding
employment opportunities and boost productivity.

We will continue to develop, through the Fair Work Act 2009, and ongoing
partnership, a workforce culture in which employees, employers and unions
collaborate for continuous improvement and productivity growth.

### 5.3 Enabling new patterns of innovation

Australia’s ability to create, disseminate and apply knowledge is important to our
wealth and prosperity. Australian businesses, in particular small and medium-sized
enterprises are, and will continue to be, the engine room of innovation—supported
by the efforts of research organisations and governments. An ability to innovate, in
terms of finding better ways of doing business, developing new business models and
tailoring products for a changing market will be a primary source of competitive
advantage in the Asian century.

136


-----

Through their continuous learning and experimentation with employees, suppliers
and customers, businesses are the cornerstone of innovation-based economies and
the main avenue through which the benefits of innovation are shared.

Most innovation takes place in response to market pressures and opportunities, with
profit and competition—both domestic and foreign—important drivers (OECD 2007b
and 2010a). Businesses gain competitive advantage by commercialising new products,
processes or services faster than their competitors. Australian businesses that
innovate are twice as likely to report increased productivity as businesses that do not
innovate. Innovating businesses are also 40 per cent more likely to report increased
profitability (ABS 2011d).


_National objective_


2. Australia will have an innovation system, in the top 10 globally, that supports
excellence and dynamism in business with a creative problem-solving culture that
enhances our evolving areas of strength and attracts top researchers, companies
and global partnerships.

Governments, in general, have a role in creating the conditions for innovation through
fostering competition and the free flow of products, people and ideas both
domestically and internationally. Falling barriers encourage businesses to seek new
and better production processes, while giving them greater access to new ideas and
markets. These conditions can be as important as specific innovation policies and
programs.

We provide direct support for vital research—especially basic research that would not
be done by the private sector—and create and enforce intellectual property rights.
Investments in infrastructure and workforce capabilities help Australians to pursue
knowledge and undertake research and development, and to use and adapt
technology flowing from other countries (Chapter 6).

We are also helping to encourage innovation through our role as major providers and
consumers of innovative products and services—driving innovation by demanding
new and better inputs from the private sector and by developing better ways to
deliver services in such areas as health, education, social welfare, defence and
environmental management.

Overall, we provided direct support for science and innovation in the order of
$8.9 billion in 2012–13. This included expenditure undertaken by Australian
Government research institutions such as CSIRO, expenditure that supports business
research and commercialisation, expenditure on research and research training in
higher education institutions and cross-sectoral programs such as the National Health
and Medical Research Programs and Cooperative Research Centres.

137


-----

Another issue is the transfer of knowledge and ideas. The scope and speed of
knowledge sharing are partly driven by intellectual property rights regulations:
Australia’s domestic intellectual property framework is consistent with obligations
contained in relevant international agreements. We will seek to ensure that domestic
and international laws strike the right balance between supporting the availability and
use of intellectual property-based goods and services and protecting and promoting
the development of new products and the delivery of new services.

#### Improving the flexibility of our innovation support 

Our forthcoming Industry and Innovation Statement will articulate an ambitious
industry and innovation policy agenda, providing a framework for industry to respond
to the opportunities and challenges ahead and better linking businesses and research
institutions through our national innovation system.

The pace and patterns of innovation are changing, with new centres of global
creativity and innovation emerging, particularly within the region. The ways in which
businesses innovate are also changing. Businesses are adopting new models of
innovation, focusing more on better integrating internal activities, such as marketing,
operations and design, and less on traditional research-intensive approaches. At the
same time, they are more open to external ideas and the possibility of new routes to
market, engaging with a larger number and wider range of collaborators (Australian
Government 2011a; Cutler & Company 2008; Banks 2008).

Australia’s innovation support structures need to take account of these changes.

While some important measures to encourage innovation, such as the Research and
Development Tax Incentive, are broadly based, many are small, targeted to specific
areas and spread across a number of programs, organisations and levels of
government. For example, there are more than 200 initiatives to support business
innovation (CSTACI 2011). About one-third of these are administered by the
Australian Government, while States and Territories administer the remainder. This
makes it harder to respond to change and build the scale and flexibility needed to
ensure innovation efforts focus on areas of comparative advantage.

We are already working with the States and Territories to improve the consistency
and improve the overall accessibility and efficiency of innovation programs across
Australia. We will build on these efforts to avoid overlap and progressively increase
our flexibility to respond to current and likely future areas of comparative advantage.

By focusing on areas in which Australians can be national, regional or global leaders,
Australia can build on its strengths to better attract collaborative partners, top
researchers and access to world-class facilities, including from within the region.
Researchers and industry have begun to identify such advantages and to collaborate
to gain scale and network benefits (Box 5.1). The CSIRO Global Precincts framework
aims to encourage clustering of expertise and innovations across business, academic
institutions and government.

138


-----

**Box 5.1: Focused innovation efforts—the CSIRO experience**


CSIRO has shifted towards specialist research hubs, or precincts, that will
concentrate specialist research and development in specific locations.

CSIRO has identified five research precincts in Australia with the potential to
achieve global standing and scale. The benchmark was set at 3,000 researchers and
more than $1 billion in capital and facilities. These precincts are expected to
provide the scale and incentives to attract top researchers, funding, facilities and
partnerships with business here and overseas.

- The Canberra precinct will focus on plant and agricultural sciences, combining

science and science policy to help shape Australia’s innovation system.

- Brisbane’s Boggo Road precinct will become the world’s largest environmental

sciences hub.



- Resources sciences will be concentrated at Perth’s Kensington precinct, forming

an internationally recognised centre for minerals and energy research.

- The vision for Melbourne’s Clayton precinct is to be one of the world’s top three

advanced materials research facilities and to support a sustainable and vibrant
future for the manufacturing sector.

- Parkville precinct in Melbourne will integrate world-class health care, research

and education to translate research discoveries rapidly into clinical practice, and
nurture life sciences and biotechnology development.


Source: CSIRO (2011).


The National Research Investment Plan, being prepared by the Australian Research
Committee, will support efforts to build scale and identify strategic priorities. The
plan aims to guide and coordinate our future research investment by setting out a
framework that enables Australians to develop the quality and scale of research
capability needed to engage with the best global research teams. It will ensure that
business and non-business end-users can draw on that research to create economic,
social and environmental benefits here in Australia.

#### Tapping into new centres of global creativity

Global innovation activity is shifting towards Asia. Asia’s large markets are becoming
increasingly attractive places for multinational companies to introduce and develop
new technologies and products. Asia’s capabilities in science and research are also
increasing rapidly, adding to global scientific output and the pace of technological
progress worldwide (Chapter 2).

Australia has a strong international reputation as a community of early adopters of
technology and social innovators, which provides a good foundation for developing
and testing innovations.

The rollout of the National Broadband Network (NBN) will support innovation by
making it easier for people to interact. Innovation often flows from interactive and

139


-----

cumulative processes drawn from an array of learning and problem-solving activities.
The NBN is a vital piece of Australia’s tool-kit for becoming a more sophisticated,
knowledge-based economy.

Building on the demonstrated ability of Australians to be creative and excellent design
thinkers, Australia is well placed to form international links that will become
increasingly important in staying abreast of international research and technologies
across all frontiers.

There are great opportunities for those Australians in the Asian century who tap into
the creative economy from culture to design.

By strengthening regional links over time, Australia can link into Asia’s innovation
efforts and absorb overseas know-how and technology in two main ways. First,
engagement through investment and trade helps transfer technology and ideas
(Chapter 7). Multinational companies build modern facilities in Australia and join our
innovation system, while Australian businesses directly invest overseas and become
part of global and regional value chains. This facilitates the exchange of
state-of-the-art machinery, equipment and processes.

Second, Australia can benefit through collaboration and other people-to-people links
and connections with top research centres at the technological frontier. As Asia grows
as a global science and innovation hub, expanding long-term research and innovation
partnerships has the potential to produce significant dividends (Chapter 9).

#### Supporting financing for innovation

The translation of Australia’s good ideas into products, processes and new
competitive businesses has often involved funding from government, particularly in
the early phases on the path to commercialisation.

Increasingly, the focus is on attracting private sector capital. This involves efforts to
increase certainty for investors and entrepreneurs—including through effective
intellectual property, corporate and financial market regulation—and leveraging off
government investment in science and technology.

We currently provide a range of financial and tax-based support for venture capital,
which is supplemented by smaller-scale support from publicly funded research
organisations and State and Territory governments. This has seen the establishment
of the Commercialisation Australia initiative that assists researchers, entrepreneurs
and innovative businesses convert ideas into successful commercial ventures.

The $1.2 billion Clean Technology Program provides incentives for business to reduce
emissions and invest in clean energy technologies. The Australian Renewable Energy
Agency and $10 billion Clean Energy Finance Corporation will drive research and
development into, and the commercialisation of, clean energy technologies. These
measures provide strong incentives and opportunities for the private sector to
directly participate in clean energy projects, through partnering and co-funding
arrangements.

140


-----

### 5.4 Delivering the infrastructure to support opportunities

Infrastructure provides the backbone for business efficiency and helps people both
engage in productive work and enjoy greater amenity. All businesses and households
require reliable and affordable water and energy. Road, railway, port, airport and
telecommunications facilities connect businesses with markets, innovators with ideas,
people with goods and services, and commuters to their workplaces.

Increasing economic and social links with countries in the region will add to existing
infrastructure demands as more goods, services, people and ideas flow within and
across national borders.

#### Considerable reform has occurred, but challenges remain

In past decades, successive governments at all levels have reformed the use of
essential infrastructure by encouraging greater private sector involvement and relying
more on markets to determine when, where and how infrastructure needs are met.
This process has delivered real benefits, including gains in productivity and reduced
costs for users of some services.[1]

We greatly increased our investment in nationally significant infrastructure, with
$36 billion of Commonwealth funds being invested nationally from 2008–09 to
2013–14 through the Nation Building Program.

In addition to record funding of roads, rail tracks and ports, we have made a
concerted effort to rethink the way future infrastructure needs and projects are
identified and different ways to fund them. Recognising the need for more effective
planning, we established Infrastructure Australia in 2008. Infrastructure Australia’s
main role is to assist governments allocate infrastructure spending toward the right
projects. It is also helping to drive the development of a long-term, coordinated
national approach to infrastructure planning and investment.

Infrastructure Australia has focused on an ambitious planning program including the
development of the National Ports Strategy, National Land Freight Strategy and
National Public Transport Strategy. The strategies will be crucial to developing a
long-term pipeline of infrastructure projects attractive to public and private investors,
and to ensuring that the right investments occur at the right time. Our investments
are aimed at improving productivity, efficiency and reducing congestion. Inadequate
infrastructure can hamper productivity and the efficient movement of people and

1 Average telecommunications charges fell by more than 20 per cent between 1990 and 2003
(Productivity Commission 2005). More generally, the Productivity Commission’s review of National
Competition Policy reforms found that productivity gains in the six major infrastructure sectors which
underwent most reform permanently added at least 2.5 per cent to GDP over the period from 1990 to
2003, raising average income in all but one of 57 regions across Australia and in all income groups
(Productivity Commission 2005).

141


-----

goods, including through the impacts of congestion that cost Australia’s economy
billions of dollars.

Despite these achievements, reform challenges remain across all sectors. This is a
particular issue for State and Territory governments, which have responsibility for
much of this infrastructure.

Transport infrastructure is showing signs of strain. Traffic congestion is growing in
capital cities and infrastructure bottlenecks are emerging in some of Australia’s major
ports. At Sydney’s Kingsford Smith Airport, limitations of existing infrastructure will
start to have a sizable effect on airport operations from around 2015.

In response to the growing capacity constraints around the Kingsford Smith Airport,
we commenced a detailed investigation into the suitability of potential sites for a
second Sydney airport, including conducting preliminary economic, social and
environmental studies. And we have supported the development of the Moorebank
Intermodal Terminal in Western Sydney. This involves developing freight terminal
facilities linked to Port Botany by rail, increasing Sydney’s rail freight capacity and
reducing road freight on Sydney’s congested road network.

These strains will grow as demand increases. By 2025, our airports are expected to be
handling three times as many international passengers and our ports three times as
much containerised freight compared to the start of the decade, while air and
non-containerised freight volumes are expected to double (Chart 5.1).

##### Chart 5.1: Projected flows of people and goods to and from Australia 


Index Index

400 400

300 300

200 200

100 100

0 0

1999–00 2004–05 2009–10 2014–15 2019–20 2024–25

Air passengers Air freight

Non-containerised maritime freight Containerised maritime freight

Note: Air passengers are the number of international passenger movements to and from Australia; air freight
and maritime non-containerised freight is the total of imports and exports, measured in tonnes; maritime
containerised freight is the total of imports and exports, measured in twenty-foot equivalent units.
Source: Bureau of Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Economics.

142


-----

If left unchecked, this will erode productivity, the liveability and competitiveness of
Australia’s cities, and our capacity to connect with the region. The avoidable costs of
road congestion alone are likely to increase from around $9 billion in 2005 to around
$20 billion by 2020 (BTRE 2007).

Challenges are not confined to transport infrastructure.

In water supply, governments still dominate service provision and there is
considerable scope to improve efficiency. Decisions on urban water supply and
use—many intended to deal with growth in demand and a lengthy period of
drought—have not always focused on providing services at the lowest cost. This has
led to misdirected investment and higher prices that could persist for decades
(Productivity Commission 2011a).

Australia’s energy sector is one of the most reliable and low-cost suppliers in the
world (Infrastructure Australia 2008), but reforms need to establish truly national
electricity and gas markets and promote innovative and more efficient ways to supply
and use energy. Rising electricity network costs has been the main contributor to
rising electricity prices in recent years. Generation, transmission and distribution costs
account for around 40 to 50 per cent of a typical household electricity bill and have,
on average, increased by 18 per cent, 59 per cent and 30 per cent (respectively) from
2009–10 to 2011–12. These cost increases reflect replacement of ageing
infrastructure and new investment in capacity for peaks in demand.

Ensuring that regulatory settings in Australia’s energy market are right will help ensure
that networks deliver efficient and cost-effective outcomes for consumers (Australian
Energy Market Commission 2012). The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) has
requested a report from the Standing Council on Energy and Resources on the next
phase of national energy market reform for consideration by the end of 2012. Our
forthcoming Energy White Paper will outline our blueprint for progressing domestic
energy market reform. It is essential that regulatory settings in this area are closely
monitored to remove any unnecessary costs for Australian businesses and households.

#### Better planning and prioritisation of new infrastructure projects

Better planning of infrastructure projects will be essential to creating the right
investment conditions for new infrastructure projects to be supported. This will
involve long-term planning to guide infrastructure priorities, options for structuring
projects to attract private capital and expanding the investment pipeline. A nationally
coordinated approach to infrastructure will deliver greater long-term certainty for
constructors, owners, investors and, of course, users.


_National objective_


3. Australia will implement a systematic national framework for developing,
financing and maintaining nationally significant infrastructure that will assist
governments and the private sector to plan and prioritise infrastructure needs at
least 20 years ahead.

143


-----

Infrastructure Australia has delivered significant outcomes to date, such as an
infrastructure audit and development of a priority of pipeline projects and a policy
and guidelines for public–private partnerships.

Yet, more can be done, particularly in defining priorities and ensuring strategic
coherence for nationally significant infrastructure investment in agreement with the
States and Territories.

Through COAG, governments have the opportunity to develop a nationally agreed set
of infrastructure priorities. Some States and Territories have already released, or
intend to release, long-term infrastructure plans. We will take these plans into
account when considering our investment priorities in nationally significant
infrastructure. Adopting a common framework and timeline across jurisdictions will
allow for the development of a clear and strategic national hierarchy of infrastructure
plans.

We will work, including through Infrastructure Australia, with States and Territories,
the private sector and academic institutions to expand existing infrastructure plans by
creating a long-term national infrastructure strategy that focuses on corridor
planning, cross-jurisdictional networks and projects of national significance.

Such a strategy would be useful in developing a longer-term pipeline of projects and
in reserving and developing nationally significant land corridors that will assist future
project commencement. This approach will enhance the planning processes currently
underway through Infrastructure Australia.

One factor in considering infrastructure needs is the level and distribution of
Australia’s future population. So far, there has not been a systematic process to
ensure that the suite of localised infrastructure plans combine to capture the total
national projected population. Over time, we will work to better coordinate and
analyse data on the distribution of projected population growth throughout Australia
and its implications for government services including infrastructure provision.

Even with better targeting of projects, simply building more publicly funded
infrastructure will not be fully effective or sustainable. Not only would it be extremely
costly and difficult in an environment where government faces many demands,
building more infrastructure in highly developed cities like Melbourne and Sydney is
not always technically feasible.

Part of the solution to Australia’s infrastructure challenge is also to explore ways to
better use existing infrastructure, including through adopting new technology that
improves consumer choice through providing more information and intelligent
transport systems (Infrastructure Australia 2008). We have implemented a number of
initiatives to support smart infrastructure, including investing in the Australian Rail
Track Corporation’s Automatic Train Management System Trial.

144


-----

#### Boosting private sector involvement in infrastructure

Governments alone cannot meet the infrastructure needs facing Australia. Privately
provided infrastructure is necessary and desirable. Private sector involvement can
improve efficiency through greater accountability, cost effectiveness and financial
discipline (OECD 2008a).

To ensure a sustainable program of infrastructure investment, we will continue to
develop new ways to attract and retain private sector involvement.

The 2011–12 Budget included several measures that reduce barriers to private
investment in nationally significant infrastructure, such as removing impediments to
companies carrying forward losses in the tax system, and indexing losses to ensure
that their values are maintained over time.

And in May 2012, we launched the National Infrastructure Construction Schedule. For
the first time, information on all major infrastructure projects worth $50 million or
more, planned or delivered by all governments, and encompassing energy, water,
transport, communications and social infrastructure, has been brought together. This
portal provides the private sector with more information about future opportunities
for linking with major government infrastructure projects in Australia.

Good regulatory and policy frameworks—including contractual arrangements—are
valuable in encouraging private investment in infrastructure. We will continue to
sharpen the frameworks governing infrastructure provision and use across all classes
of infrastructure, including promoting greater competition in retail energy markets,
ensuring energy network investment is efficient and reviewing third-party access
regulation.

Mechanisms to encourage superannuation funds to invest in infrastructure and to
simplify public–private partnership (PPP) processes will also help encourage greater
private sector involvement (IFWG 2012). Our Stronger Super reforms will assist by
driving competition and consolidation in the superannuation sector. With greater
consolidation, superannuation funds will be in a better position to invest in
infrastructure assets.

The high cost of PPP bidding processes—and procurement costs across all forms of
infrastructure procurement—has been identified as a barrier to private sector
involvement in the financing of infrastructure projects. We are working with the
States and Territories to improve approaches to managing demand forecasting and
patronage risk for infrastructure projects. Work designed to remove incentives to
overbid for toll-road concessions has been completed, drawing on international
experiences. Addressing over-optimistic bidding is important to successfully engaging
with the private sector to help fund and finance our major motorways. We will
progress PPP reform through the National PPP Working Group.

145


-----

#### Responding to land-use change

The competitiveness of cities is becoming increasingly important as modern,
service-based industries become more important drivers of growth. These industries
are far more flexible in their choice of location than industrial enterprises.

One factor affecting the productivity of cities is planning and zoning arrangements—
an area of State and Territory government responsibility. States and Territories are
working towards establishing simpler and more flexible land-use controls to reduce
red tape, enhance competition, help free up land for a range of uses and give a
greater role to the market in determining what those uses should be.

If Australia is to fully exploit the opportunities afforded by the Asian century, our
planning regimes need to anticipate, rather than react to, change. The opportunities
in mining, agriculture and tourism across the country will require State and Territory
planning systems to be responsive to investment in these areas, including by ensuring
that planning rules and practices do not inadvertently impede businesses or access to
finance.

We will continue to work with the States and Territories to provide transparent and
forward-looking analysis focused on improving the productivity, amenity and
liveability of Australia’s cities. This work will be advanced through relevant forums
such as the Standing Council on Transport and Infrastructure.

### 5.5 Communications infrastructure

The internet has produced productivity benefits across the economy by allowing
businesses to sell, locate and purchase supplies more easily, maintain real-time
inventories and deal with customers more efficiently. The NBN will take this a step
further.

Businesses and governments enjoying internet-related productivity benefits
estimated at $27 billion in 2010, the internet is now essential infrastructure for the
Australian economy (Productivity Commission 2011b). The digital economy is
influencing almost all sectors of the Australian economy, from heath care to mining
services. And a greater share of Australian spending is now occurring online—
estimated at 4 per cent and rapidly growing (Productivity Commission 2011b).
Importantly, it is also the vehicle for a large amount of modern innovation and new
forms of social interaction.

A faster and more reliable network in Australia is necessary to grow online innovation
and ensure continued access to the exploding global internet economy.

146


-----

_National objective_


4. Australia’s communications infrastructure and markets will be world leading and
support the rapid exchange and spread of ideas and commerce in the Asian region.

Our reforms to the telecommunications sector through the rollout of the NBN and the
structural separation of Telstra—separating the wholesale provision of
telecommunications infrastructure from the retail provision of telecommunications
services—provide the opportunity to create a level playing field and enable
competition and investment to grow across the economy.

The NBN will provide high-speed broadband access for 100 per cent of Australian
premises. Ninety-three per cent of homes, schools and businesses will get access to a
fibre network capable of delivering broadband speeds of up to one-gigabit per
second. The remaining 7 per cent of premises will be served by a combination of
next-generation fixed wireless and satellite technologies providing peak download
speeds of 12 megabits per second (NBN Co 2011).

The provision of ubiquitous, high-speed and reliable internet connections has the
potential to change almost all facets of work and life. Broadband will bridge
geographical barriers to Asian markets by allowing all Australian businesses and
households to conduct more of their activities online.

The NBN will offer benefits across business, health, education and other services.
High-performing videoconferencing will boost collaboration between researchers,
community groups, schools and universities in Australia and with those in the Asian
region.

The application of the NBN will expand over time and so we will continue to monitor
potential barriers to its use along with barriers to expanding into new technological
markets.

We are helping realise the productivity gains from this physical infrastructure and
boost online security. These reforms and initiatives support the National Digital
Economy Strategy, which aims for Australia to be a leading digital economy by 2020.
Building on this, we are developing Australia’s first White Paper on cyber and digital
economy policy, which will provide an integrated policy framework to enable
Australia to realise the benefits of the digital age—including security, telework, skills
and encouraging innovation.

147


-----

### 5.6 Building a strong, fair and sustainable tax and  transfer system

The Asian region is becoming increasingly integrated. As Australia becomes fully part
of the region, the choices businesses make about where to invest and do business,
and some people’s choices about where to work, will become more sensitive to tax
policies.


_National objective_


5. Australia’s tax and transfer system will be efficient and fair, encouraging
continued investment in the capital base and greater participation in the
workforce, while delivering sustainable revenues to support economic growth by
meeting public and social needs.

We have introduced a range of tax reforms to support businesses to invest and adapt
to take advantage of the Asian century. These include the instant asset write-off for
small businesses which will help to simplify the tax system and promote new
investment, and the loss carry-back scheme, which will help companies to retrain,
retool and reinvest to take advantage of new opportunities.

We have also acted to encourage workforce participation and ensure a fair return for
effort through significant cuts to personal income tax. We provided $47 billion worth
of personal income tax cuts in our first three Budgets, and have tripled the tax-free
threshold from $6,000 to $18,200. Increasing the tax-free threshold will have the
added benefit of making the tax system simpler, freeing up to 1 million Australians
from having to lodge a tax return.

This reform will continue as we increase the tax-free threshold to $19,400 from
1 July 2015. In future years our first priority will be to increase the tax-free threshold
even further, to at least $21,000, and to remove the Low Income Tax Offset entirely.
This significant tax reform would mean better and more transparent rewards for
work, which would mean more Australians in work.

The transfer system also has a significant impact on incentives to participate in the
workforce. Our reforms to the transfer system will improve employment incentives
for unemployed people, single parents, young people who are not earning or learning,
and people with a disability. For instance, we will be reducing the taper rate for single
parents on Newstart Allowance and increasing the amount of income that young
people on Youth Allowance can earn before they lose benefits, which will
substantially reduce some effective marginal tax rates.

As the Australian population ages, and as the impacts of Asia’s economic rise flow
through our economy, it will become more important than ever that we remove
barriers that could prevent older Australians who want to remain in the workforce
from doing so, especially given improvements in life expectancy and health. With this
in mind, we have introduced new training opportunities and support for older

148


-----

Australians who wish to continue to work, and have also reformed the eligibility rules
and qualifying age for the Age Pension. We will also remove the maximum age limit
on the Superannuation Guarantee, to increase the incentive for workers aged 70 and
over to remain in the workforce.

At the same time we are delivering a better standard of living in retirement for
current and future generations of Australians, with our historic increase in the base
rate of the Age Pension and by gradually increasing the Superannuation Guarantee
from 9 to 12 per cent from 1 July 2013 to 1 July 2019.

The efficiency and fairness of the tax concessions provided for superannuation
contributions have also been improved, by increasing the concession received by
low-income earners and reducing the tax concession received by very high-income
earners. This will ensure they are more in line with the concession received by
average income earners. These reforms, together with our Stronger Super reforms to
improve the efficiency and integrity of the superannuation system, will be particularly
important as Australia’s superannuation savings pool continues to expand and as the
system matures. Australia’s younger generations are benefiting from the
Superannuation Guarantee through their entire careers.

These are significant reforms to encourage investment in the capital base and
participation in the workforce, while at the same time improving the fairness and
efficiency of the tax and transfer system. However, it is important that this direction
of reform continues. This will require concerted effort from all levels of government
to maximise the efficiency of the tax system.

The Minerals Resource Rent Tax (MRRT), which seeks to tax economic rent from the
extraction of Australia’s mineral resources, is a good example of the reforms that
have been made. Whereas state royalties are an inefficient means of raising revenue
which distort investment decisions by penalising all mines, the MRRT is an efficient
profits-based tax. The MRRT is one of nearly 40 reforms we have announced since
May 2010 that progress recommendations in the Australia’s Future Tax System
Review. These reforms span personal tax and transfer payments, business tax, the
superannuation system, environmental and social taxes, and tax system governance.

Tax reform is no easy task. It has the potential to alter the actual and perceived
fairness of the tax system, its complexity, and how widely opportunity and risk are
shared. Important discussions about tax and transfer reform have occurred through
processes like the Business Tax Working Group, the Superannuation Roundtable and
the Not-for-Profit Sector Tax Concession Working Group. We will continue to use
working groups and roundtables for national conversations in the years to come.

At the same time, ageing and rising societal expectations are likely to put continued
pressures on budgets. As with our previous reforms, future tax and transfer
reform will need to be undertaken in a fiscally responsible way that keeps to our
medium-term fiscal strategy and ensures the ratio of tax-to-GDP remains, on average,
at or below the level that existed in 2007.

149


-----

We will continue to examine, in consultation with the Australian community, ways to
reform the company income tax system—paid for by savings from within the business
tax system—in order to boost real wages through improved productivity. Business tax
reform is a long-term agenda and our efforts must be mindful of the need to ensure
Australia remains an attractive destination for globally mobile capital. This will
become an increasing challenge for open and integrated economies such as Australia.
Future discussion may need to take place on more fundamental changes to the
company tax base.

Existing State and Territory tax systems rely heavily on inefficient taxes and
structures, such as stamp duties and insurance taxes, that are not well placed to serve
the Australian community over time. States and Territories will need to identify ways
to phase out their inefficient taxes and make better use of their efficient tax bases,
through processes such as the State tax plan being developed by the New South
Wales and South Australian Treasurers, which provides States with a process that can
explore how to better create a more efficient tax base within their own taxation
systems. The ACT Government has recently shown that significant, progressive tax
reforms can be proposed, without financial assistance from the federal government,
if States and Territories are willing to make better use of efficient tax bases.

It will be important for the national debate about tax and transfer reform to be
informed by independent research, which is why we are establishing a Tax Studies
Institute. In additional to providing policy-relevant research about goals and
transitional pathways, the Institute will also provide opportunities for collaboration
and exchange across the region.

Tax and transfer reforms will be complemented by our broader participation agenda
(Chapter 6).

### 5.7 Reforming regulation

Regulation covers almost all aspects of Australian social and economic activity and, if
poorly designed, can act like a tax on business, raising costs and stifling innovation
(Australian Government 2012d). We have frameworks to improve the quality of
regulations and continue to refine them. But even regulations that were initially
appropriate and cost-effective may not continue to be so over time. Markets and
technologies change, as do people’s preferences and attitudes. And the accumulation
of regulations leads to interactions that raise costs (Productivity Commission 2011c).

Better quality regulation decreases red tape, lowers business costs and increases
labour mobility. Regulatory reform also removes regulatory barriers to competition,
which, as is widely recognised, increases the incentive for firms to be innovative and
boost productivity. An effective and consistent regulatory environment can increase
investment confidence and make Australia attractive to globally mobile capital.

COAG’s National Partnership Agreement to Deliver a Seamless National Economy has
delivered a range of reforms to regulation and competition over the past few years,

150


-----

including the national trade measurement system, the national health workforce
registration and accreditation scheme, the Australian Consumer Law and related
product safety reforms, and phase one of the consumer credit reforms. And there are
more gains to be made—fully implementing just 17 of the 27 deregulation priority
reforms being delivered under the National Partnership could ultimately provide cost
reductions to business of around $4 billion per year and, after an adjustment period,
increase GDP by over $6 billion per year in the longer term (Productivity Commission
2012a). The national occupational health and safety laws and the National
Occupational Licensing System are two examples of the important reforms remaining.

As a relatively open and globally integrated economy, Australia will face an ongoing
task to sharpen regulatory frameworks and reduce unnecessary burdens. The fact
that many other countries are now reducing regulatory barriers and seeking to exploit
the same opportunities in Asia adds to this need (Chart 5.2).

##### Chart 5.2: Australia’s barriers to entrepreneurship are falling, but so are other countries’

Scale from 0 (least restrictive) to 6 (most restrictive)


3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0


Per cent Per cent

1998 2003 2008

Australia OECD average Large emerging economies


3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0


Note: The indicator encompasses ‘regulatory and administrative opacity’ such as licences, simplified
systems for permits such as one-stop shops, communication, simplification of rules; ‘administrative burdens
for start-up’ and ‘barriers to competition’. See glossary for definitions of country groupings.
Source: OECD (2008b).

151


-----

_National objective_


6. Australia will be among the most efficiently regulated places in the world, in the
top five globally, reducing business costs by billions of dollars a year.

Through COAG, we will work with States, Territories and key stakeholders to
undertake an ambitious regulatory reform agenda to improve competition and
productivity and reduce business costs by billions of dollars a year.

Our aim is that, by 2025, Australia will be in the world’s top five for ease of doing
business.

We will progress six priority areas of major reform to lower costs for business and
improve competition and productivity, as agreed by COAG, following discussions at
the Business Advisory Forum (COAG 2012):

- addressing duplicative and cumbersome environmental regulation

- streamlining the process for approvals of major projects

- rationalising carbon reduction and energy efficiency schemes

- delivering energy market reforms to reduce costs

- improving assessment processes for low-risk, low-impact developments

- best-practice approaches to regulation.

Related reforms will aim to reduce regulation, particularly for small and medium-sized
enterprises, by removing overlaps in Commonwealth and State and Territory
reporting obligations and expanding the use of online business reporting.

To support these reforms, a new National Productivity Compact on competition and
regulation is being developed between the Commonwealth, the States and Territories
and business. The Compact will set out principles for effective regulation and reform,
and will include commitments for continued consultation with business on a new
reform agenda and improved regulatory processes at all levels of government, as well
as measures to ensure the hard won benefits of new national frameworks are
sustained over time.

We will work through other COAG forums to pursue reform opportunities, such as
those already identified by the Business Regulation and Competition Working Group
and the Standing Council on Federal Financial Relations. The focus will be on
high-value reforms and working in close consultation with States and Territories and
with the business community.

152


-----

### 5.8 Charting a sustainable course

Australia is rich in natural capital and environmental assets. From them Australia
derives a large share of our wealth, including in agriculture, mining and tourism
(Australian Government 2010). Australia has the world’s largest economically
demonstrated reserves of a number of resources, while the Great Barrier Reef alone
adds more than $5 billion to the Australian economy each year (State of the
Environment Committee 2011).

As the urban middle class in Asia grows and demands more diverse and better quality
goods and services, demand for Australia’s minerals, agricultural commodities and
tourism services is set to increase (Chapter 4). Growth in Australia’s own population
will put further pressure on our natural resource base.

But Australia’s environment is crucial: it regulates the climate, purifies water, absorbs
and transforms waste, prevents disease and provides the genetic resources that are
the basis for many medicines (DEWHA 2009).

Australians need to manage our environmental assets sustainably to ensure the
wellbeing of future generations is at least as good as ours. That means carefully
considering the varied and often competing roles environmental assets play in
Australia’s economy and society.

Many of Australia’s environmental assets are already under threat. The clearance of
vegetation and degradation of natural habitats are threatening the continent’s rich
biodiversity. Water scarcity and pollution, and over time climate change, will add to
these pressures. The costs to the Australian economy and the welfare of all
Australians if these assets degrade further will be large. They are expensive, and
sometimes impossible, to recover.


_National objective_


7. The Australian economy and our environmental assets will be managed
sustainably to ensure the wellbeing of future generations of Australians.

We have put in place a number of environmental policies to redress and prevent
further decline in the health of Australia’s environmental assets. They include policies
relating to climate change, biodiversity and water and soil management.

#### Acting on climate change

The world is warming, and high levels of carbon pollution risk environmental
and economic damage. Australia is a hot, dry continent, so we face acute risks.
Studies indicate that warming of more than two degrees Celsius runs the
risk of overwhelming the capacity of many of the world’s natural ecosystems
(Hennessy et. al 2007).

The Clean Energy Future legislation is a comprehensive strategy to cut greenhouse
gas emissions, introduce a carbon price, invest billions of dollars in renewable energy,

153


-----

transform the energy sector away from high-emissions sources, and store millions of
tonnes of carbon in the land through better land management. As well as being a
cost-effective way to reduce Australia’s carbon emissions, the Clean Energy Future
package drives a large-scale transformation of the Australian economy.

Our plan for a clean energy future is contributing to international action as economies
around the world move to low-emissions sources of energy. The Carbon Pricing
Mechanism will facilitate a smooth transition by Australian businesses and
communities to a low-emissions economy, in the context of increased global efforts
to reduce emissions.

We are looking to integrate our emission reduction plans with others overseas where
it is in Australia’s national interests to do so. From 1 July 2015, the significant step of
linking Australia’s carbon pricing mechanism with the European Union’s Emission
Trading System will begin. Australia will continue to work with partners in Asia to
build emerging carbon markets in the region (Chapter 8).

By 2025, Australia will have reduced emissions by at least 5 per cent below 2000
levels on the way to a clean energy future in which emissions are 80 per cent below
2000 levels by 2050.

Building on Australia’s status as a world leader in the research and deployment of
solar energy technologies, our aim is for Australia to become a world leader in the
commercialisation and deployment of renewable energy technology and energy
efficiency, with at least 20 per cent of Australia’s electricity generated by renewable
energy sources by 2020. And we are supporting the deployment of new technology
through the $10 billion Clean Energy Finance Corporation.

Acting on climate change requires global action, and many nations are adopting
policies to reduce their emissions. Many countries in the region are equally concerned
about the risks posed by climate change and have already begun to curb their
emissions and make substantial investments in renewable energy.

#### Promoting sound water and soil management practices

The Asian century will increase the importance of managing water resources
sustainably. While the link between water availability and agricultural production is
well known in Australia, water is also required in all stages of mining production—for
exploratory drilling, production and site rehabilitation, as well as in downstream
processing. Many manufacturing processes and service industries use water as an
essential input.

The level of sustainable extraction for many of Australia’s water resources is being
approached or exceeded (NWC 2011). The impacts of this are already evident in
reduced water quality, salinity and threatened biodiversity. While these problems are
primarily environmental, they could have adverse consequences for economic
production because of water’s role as an industrial input.

154


-----

Better water management—involving cooperation with the States and Territories to
increase environmental water flows, better understanding of water systems and
improved water management arrangements, including reliance on water markets—
has the potential to make better use of Australia’s available water resources.

Through the Water for the Future package, we are supporting improvements to the
sustainable management of water resources.

A major component of the package is to provide farmers and communities in the
Murray–Darling Basin with more confidence to plan for a future with less water, to
put water use on a sustainable footing, to enhance irrigation productivity, and to
improve river and wetland health. We will finalise and implement the Murray–Darling
Basin Plan to ensure the basin can support productive communities.

Australia’s soil is a major national asset, driving our agricultural productivity and
ability to be a net exporter of food. The potential for Australian agriculture to increase
productivity growth while managing climate change and reducing greenhouse gas
emissions will depend heavily on successful management of the soil resource base.

Most of Australia’s soils are ancient, low in carbon and nutrients, and poorly buffered.
Erosion, soil carbon rundown and soil acidification reduce the land’s ability to support
production, maintain resilience to climate change and provide ecosystem services,
including clean air and water, to the Australian community.

Through the Caring for our Country program, we will invest in projects that encourage
land management practices by farmers to improve the condition of Australia’s soil
resource. This work will be complemented by investments under the Carbon Farming
Futures program to improve soil management and for soil research, development and
extension.

#### Preserving Australia’s rich biodiversity

Australia’s biodiversity is in danger—more than 1,700 species and ecological
communities are known to be at risk of extinction.[2]

Threats to Australia’s biodiversity are largely the result of a long history of
unsustainable use and management of natural resources, habitat loss, degradation
and fragmentation, invasive species and changes to the aquatic environment and
water flows. More recently, climate change has added to these threats
(NRMMC 2010).

We are addressing these challenges. Australia’s Biodiversity Conservation Strategy
2010–2030 provides a guiding framework for conserving our nation’s biodiversity over
the coming decades. The framework recognises the importance of increasing the use

2 For details, see the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999—’List of
threatened fauna’; ‘List of threatened flora’; and ‘List of threatened ecological communities’.

155


-----

of markets and other incentives, such as environmental stewardship payments, for
managing biodiversity and ecosystem services. We are also seeking to protect
biodiversity in the seas by implementing the world’s largest marine reserve network.

This strategy is scheduled for review in 2015. So that meeting Asia’s and Australia’s
own growing demands for non-renewable resources does not come at the expense of
environmental sustainability, we will seek to ensure these risks are broadly assessed
as part of the review.

We also support the ongoing development and use of environmental accounting in
Australia.

### 5.9 Maintaining sound macroeconomic policy

Australia’s macroeconomic frameworks and settings have worked well over the past
two decades, with Australia having recorded more than 20 consecutive years of
economic growth—a record unmatched by any other advanced economy over this
period (Chapter 3). Sound macroeconomic frameworks and decisive policy responses
have allowed Australia to successfully weather significant economic shocks, including
the Global Financial Crisis. The Australian economy has also sustained the longest
mining boom in its history, managing to convert high commodity prices into more
enduring export capacity. This has been achieved at the same time as contained
inflation and low unemployment.

Maintaining our macroeconomic policy frameworks is necessary as Australia’s
economy becomes more integrated with the fast growing Asian region. While Asia’s
long-term outlook is positive and the growth paths of emerging economies should
follow a rising trend, there will be volatility along the way.

Australia has little direct influence on overseas economic volatility, but our robust
domestic macroeconomic policy frameworks moderate the impact of any volatility on
Australians.

Our macroeconomic framework comprises three pillars:

- a floating exchange rate that acts as a shock absorber for the economy

- independently operated monetary policy focused on managing the level of
demand to keep the economy on a stable growth path consistent with low
inflation

- fiscal policy that is focused on the medium term and responsive to the economic
cycle, set within the Charter of Budget Honesty.


_National objective_


8. Australia’s macroeconomic and financial frameworks will remain among the
world’s best through this period of change.

156


-----

#### Sound fiscal management will continue to serve us well

At this time of ongoing global economic uncertainty—when concerns around
governments’ fiscal positions have been a cause of economic distress in many
countries around the world—maintaining fiscal sustainability is crucial. Fiscal
sustainability is essential to maintaining macroeconomic stability, reducing economic
vulnerabilities, and achieving sustained growth in living standards.

Around the world, public finances that are viewed as unsustainable generate
uncertainty, as governments are expected to act to secure finances by reducing
expenditure or increasing taxes, or face the risk of default. A credible strategy to
maintain fiscal sustainability, therefore, provides a positive foundation for long-term
decision-making by households and businesses.

We give effect to promoting fiscal sustainability through our commitment to
achieving budget surpluses on average over the medium term and to improve our net
financial worth over the medium term.

In order to return the budget to surplus, we introduced a clear and credible plan with
strict fiscal rules that included (1) allowing the level of tax receipts to recover
naturally as the economy improves, while maintaining taxation as a share of GDP
below 2007–08 levels on average, and (2) holding real growth in spending to no more
than 2 per cent a year, on average, until surpluses are at least 1 per cent of GDP and
while the economy is growing at or above trend. Our commitment to fiscal discipline,
including the return to surplus in 2012–13, will ensure Australia’s balance sheet
remains one of the strongest in the developed world and will help maintain
confidence in the strength of Australia’s public finances—as reflected by Australia’s
AAA credit rating with a stable outlook from all three major credit agencies.

However, the return to surplus has been made more difficult by weakness in
revenues. Tax receipts are now expected to remain well below the unsustainable
peaks reached prior to the Global Financial Crisis. Despite these challenges, we are
returning the budget to surplus in 2012–13.

Higher government saving over the medium term, consistent with our medium-term
strategy, will also ensure we are better placed to deal with fiscal pressures arising
from an ageing population.

We have introduced a number of enduring savings measures that will build steadily
over coming years, providing ongoing improvements to the budget position and
helping make room for emerging priorities, like school funding reform and the
National Disability Insurance Scheme. These savings include progressively increasing
the Age Pension qualifying age, means testing the private health insurance rebate,
reforms to family tax benefit arrangements, dependent spouse tax offset and the
Baby Bonus, better targeting the tax concession for living-away-from-home
allowances and benefits, and reducing the contributions cap for superannuation and
the superannuation concessions for high-income earners.

157


-----

#### Proposal for saving through a sovereign wealth fund

With the return to surplus, our first priority is to strengthen our balance sheet by
reducing net government debt from already low levels, while maintaining a liquid and
efficient Commonwealth Government Securities market.

A number of submissions to the White Paper argued that sustaining the benefits of a
high terms of trade, as well as managing its immediate macroeconomic effects, could
be achieved by investing some portion of government revenues arising from the high
terms of trade in financial assets through a sovereign wealth fund.

Such funds are employed by a number of resource-rich countries, such as Norway and
Chile. Their sovereign wealth funds either build up financial assets for the long term
or set aside revenues when commodity prices are high so that those revenues can be
used when commodity prices are low.

But government revenues in these countries tend to be much more reliant on their
resources sector. For example, oil and gas make up around one-third of Norway’s
total revenue, while in Chile, copper generates about one-fifth per cent of
government revenue (Garton & Gruen 2012; IMF 2011). In contrast, Australia’s
mining sector contributes around 6 per cent of government revenue in 2008–09
(Garton & Gruen 2012).

Ultimately, the effectiveness of any sovereign wealth fund rests on underlying fiscal
discipline that ensures national saving rises in line with unusually high revenues. Just
as opening a new bank account does not compel an individual to save, the
establishment of a sovereign wealth fund on its own does not compel public saving.

At the moment, we consider it unnecessary to establish a sovereign wealth fund.

Over the longer term, what we do with revenues would depend on what the economy
needs at the time. Future surpluses could be used in three ways: to accumulate
financial assets; to invest in productive non-financial assets, such as well-targeted
investments in infrastructure and education; or to cut inefficient taxes. The latter two
policies would, through different channels, lift Australia’s economic growth and
increase the income and wealth of future generations.

#### Enhancing the efficiency and resilience of Australia’s financial system

Australia’s financial markets—our banking, insurance and managed funds sectors—
are open, stable, efficient and well regulated following decades of reform to deepen
them, strengthen their resilience and make them more attractive to foreign investors.
This also reflects the quality of the institutions Australia has created to oversee and
regulate them, including the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority and the Australian Securities and Investments Commission.

But the reform task is not complete.

158


-----

Australia’s financial markets will need to continue to evolve to be better able to
withstand the sort of volatility experienced during the Global Financial Crisis, which
threatened to deprive the Australian banking system of access to offshore wholesale
funding with potential flow-on effects for the supply of domestic credit—we acted
quickly to support the flow of credit during the Global Financial Crisis. Australian
businesses and investors also need to be better able to manage global financial risk.

We are committed to ensuring Australia has access to well-managed and efficient
financial markets offering a diversified range of financial products, with the risks and
complexity associated with particular products both transparent and appropriately
priced. This includes having an efficient and well-regulated funds management
industry, with the value of funds under management doubling in size by 2025.

An important part of our commitment is fostering a stable and competitive banking
system. To this end, we have implemented the Competitive and Sustainable Banking
System reform package and are advancing the financial stability reforms agreed by
G20 countries, including implementing the Basel ΙΙΙ capital and liquidity standards.
These reforms aim to further increase the resilience of the financial system—
requiring a higher quality and quantity of capital—and enhance the ability of financial
institutions to withstand funding stresses.

We are also working to ensure a more efficient superannuation system, following the
Super System Review, to encourage greater retirement savings (SSRP 2010).

Looking further ahead, we will work to remove impediments to the emergence of a
deep and liquid corporate bond market. An efficient corporate bond market will allow
businesses to borrow directly from the market, reducing their need to rely on
intermediated funding sources. This should also produce an attractive investment
asset for superannuation funds, a significant domestic source of investment capital.
As an initial step, we will be seeking to reduce regulatory complexity and costs
associated with issuing corporate bonds to retail investors.

We are also moving to allow Commonwealth Government Securities, such as Treasury
Bonds, to be listed on a security exchange. This will allow retail investors to diversify
their investment options, and establish a more transparent risk-free rate of return,
assisting the appropriate pricing of corporate bonds.

Other regulatory arrangements that drive an over-reliance on a particular source of
funding or investment vehicle will also be examined. This will include regulatory
burdens or barriers to greater financial market integration across the region.

Promoting open, well-regulated and resilient financial markets in our region will have
flow-on benefits for the stability of Australia’s own financial system. We will work
with regional partners to this end (Chapter 7). Together, these efforts will help ensure
sustainable, diversified and competitive financial markets.

159


-----

# Chapter 6: Building capabilities


**Chapter 6**
Building
capabilities

**By 2025,**
**Australia will be a**
**more prosperous**
**and resilient** **Chapter 7**


-----

**Key points**


Australia’s future prosperity will be built on our strengths and capabilities.


Improving the capabilities of all Australians will raise our productivity performance
and enable all Australians to participate and contribute in the Asian century.

Australians need to build ‘Asia-relevant’ capabilities—both broad-based and
specialised.

Our skills and education systems play a fundamental role in ensuring that all
Australians can develop the right capabilities.

We are improving the quality and accessibility of our skills and education systems,
from early childhood through schools to tertiary education, to be among the
world’s best.

This requires a long-term effort by all governments, in partnership with business
and communities.

Businesses, the public sector and national institution need to ensure they have the
right mix of capabilities to seize the opportunities and make the most of Asia’s rise.

We will work with our sectors and regions to help them adjust to change, take
advantage of new opportunities and promote sustainable growth.

Australia’s strong social foundations are the basis for our success in the Asian
century, and we will continue to strengthen them.

161


-----

### 6.1 Introduction

Central to Australia’s future prosperity is lifting our productivity and participation by
investing in our most important resource, our people. Improving the capabilities of all
Australians will raise our productivity and enable all Australians to participate
successfully, helping Australia seize the opportunities on offer in the Asian century.

Australia’s education and training systems play a fundamental role in ensuring that all
Australians have the right capabilities to take advantage of the Asian century.

Making sure we have world-class education is a central part of our strategy for
economic success.

Australians need an evolving set of Asia-relevant capabilities that are both broad and
specialised. Governments, businesses, institutions and individuals all have a role in
building these capabilities.

Developing Australia’s capabilities will require us, as Australians, to consider and in
some instances to change the way that we do things, such as the way we educate
ourselves, the way we do business and the way we operate our institutions.

These changes will continue to be based in Australia’s strong foundations—our robust
national institutions, our culturally diverse and outward-looking society and our
strong economy—which are crucial to building these capabilities.

### 6.2 The capability of Australia’s people and institutions 

All Australians need the opportunity to develop broad-based Asia-relevant
capabilities; some will go on to develop more specialised skills shaped by their
individual choices and circumstances. Australia’s education and training systems, from
early childhood through schools and on to tertiary institutions, will be central to
Australians developing these skills.

These Asia-relevant capabilities are critical—they are the fundamental skills and
abilities that will drive Australia’s economic and jobs growth in the years ahead. In
addition to these real economic benefits, these capabilities will increase Australians’
understanding of our region, preparing foundations for deeper and broader
relationships and enriching our society and culture.

Asia-relevant capabilities include adaptability, flexibility, resilience, creative and
design thinking and the confidence and readiness to interact with and operate in Asia
(Figure 6.1).

162


-----

##### Figure 6.1: Building capabilities for the Asian century


**Definition:**


**Responsibility:**

Our tertiary institutions are
central to developing these
capabilities.

Businesses and governments
will build and embed them.

Our education systems,
especially schools, support our
basic understanding of Asia.


Some people will require more specialised Asia-relevant capabilities, including greater
depth of expertise for specific jobs or technical requirements—such as high-level
expertise for our scientists and innovators who will collaborate to problem-solve with
colleagues from the region and our highly skilled engineers or legal experts who will
work across regional borders.

Others will seek a more general understanding of the region. Asia and its many
nations may be a conduit for new ideas, a source of new opportunities or a way to
benchmark our achievements. For example, Australian teachers will exchange ideas
and share resources on best teaching practices for subjects like science and maths.
Sporting organisations and athletes will identify opportunities and develop
partnerships by following the fast-changing sports environments in the region. And
Australia’s tourism industry will benefit from investing time and resources into better
understanding and catering to visitors from growing tourist markets such as India,
China and Korea.

For business and government, Asia-relevant capabilities mean having the advisory,
decision-making, cultural and representational skills to make informed decisions in an
increasingly complex environment.

For the whole community, having a more broadly informed understanding of the
region is both enriching and helps national engagement and deeper economic
integration.

163


-----

#### The role of schools

**_School reform_**

A world-class school system is essential to Australia’s success in the Asian century.
Improving the quality of all schools and lifting student achievement is critical for a fair
and prosperous nation in which all students can grasp the opportunities ahead.

Education from early childhood through school is the foundation of a skilled
workforce and a creative community. The higher a young person’s literacy and
numeracy skills, the more likely they are to continue at school, undertake tertiary
study, and go on to high-skill, highly paid work. During the Asian century, the
importance of education to Australia’s economic performance will continue to grow.
We can only remain a world-beating economy if we also deliver world-class
education.

While many Australian schools currently perform well, as measured by PISA,
Australia’s results have fallen behind in recent years.[1] In particular, from 2000 to
2009, Australia experienced substantial declines in reading and mathematics
performance matched by only three other OECD countries.[2] This decline appears to
have occurred among all student groupings, although students from low
socioeconomic backgrounds have the poorest educational outcomes (Gonski 2011;
Nous Group et al. 2011).

Four of the five highest PISA performers are in our region (the Shanghai region of
China, South Korea, Singapore and Hong Kong). The difference in performance is
significant. For example, in Shanghai the average 15-year-old mathematics student is
performing at a level two to three years, on average, above their age counterparts in
Australia, the United States, the United Kingdom and EU21 countries (Jensen 2012). [3]

Information from My School and other international sources such as the OECD shows
that the achievement gap linked to socioeconomic disadvantage is too great, and we
must aim higher for every child in every school, particularly for poorer children and
Indigenous children. By Year 3, 89 per cent of children from the poorest quarter of
Australian homes are reading below average. By Year 9, the average child from the
poorest quarter is two years behind children from the most well-off quarter of
Australian homes in reading and maths. In very remote Australia, the average
Indigenous child is still reading below a Year 3 level in Year 9.

1 Based on the most recent PISA survey, conducted in 2009. PISA is the OECD’s Programme for
International Student Assessment, which measures reading, mathematics and science literacy in a
sample of 15-year-olds every three years.
2 The other three countries were Ireland, Sweden and the Czech Republic.

3 These are the 21 OECD countries that are members of the European Union and for which data is
available or can be estimated: Austria, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Slovenia, the
Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom.

164


-----

Currently, Australia is ranked 7th on Reading and Science, 13th on Mathematics and
about 10th on providing a high-quality and high-equity education system.

Therefore, to achieve the level of educational performance needed in this century,
the Government has set challenging national objectives.


_National objective_


9. To build the capabilities of Australian students, Australia’s school system will be
in the top five schooling systems in the world, delivering excellent outcomes for all
students of all backgrounds, and systematically improving performance over time.

 - By 2025, Australia will be ranked as a top five country in the world for the

performance of our students in reading, science and mathematics literacy and
for providing our children with a high-quality and high-equity education system.

 - By 2015, 90 per cent of young Australians aged 20 to 24 years will have a

Year 12 or equivalent qualification, up from 86 per cent in 2010.

While challenging, these objectives are within our reach—if governments,
non-government education authorities, schools and their communities work together
in the right ways, improvement will happen.

Australia has already begun delivering national reforms to improve the quality of
schooling which are making a positive difference, including developing the Australian
Curriculum, providing unprecedented levels of information on schools and their
performance through the My School website, new professional standards for teachers
and a stronger focus on effective teaching. These changes have lifted school
performance in many places. For example, Currambine Primary School in
Western Australia, with support from targeted Australian Government funding, saw a
strong increase in the percentage of students in Year 5 performing above the national
minimum standard for numeracy between 2008 and 2011—from 70 per cent to
93 per cent. Over the same period, literacy results for Year 3 and Year 5 students have
also improved with performance above the national minimum standards in areas such
as grammar and reading increasing by 10 to 15 per cent.[4]

To continue this improvement and achieve our national objective by 2025, we will
legislate and deliver the National Plan for School Improvement, in partnership with
States and Territories and non-government school authorities. The Plan will set out
the reforms and actions that we need to improve performance and ensure that
additional school funding is used to get better student results. That means focusing
our actions in the areas where evidence shows the greatest difference can be made:
improving the quality of teaching, delivering a high-quality curriculum, empowering
principals to deliver school improvement and building strong partnerships with
parents and communities.

4 Based on changes in NAPLAN Outcomes from 2008 to 2011.

165


-----

Recent improvements in the performance of schools in the Asian region, and beyond,
should be a source of learning for Australia. Australia has its own unique schooling
system and not every approach would work here. But our schools can, and should,
adapt the lessons of school systems in our region to drive improvements here at
home, and to share our own successes with them (Jensen, 2012).

Every Australian child has the right to a world-class education, no matter where they
live, the school they attend or their family background. The Australian Government is
committed to a National Plan for School Improvement and funding Australian schools
in a way that reflects the needs of each individual child. This will help every student
get a great education and secure a good job when they leave school. It will help our
economy stay strong.

Under this Plan, every child’s education will be supported with a benchmark amount
of funding through a new Schooling Resource Standard based on what it costs to
educate a student at the schools we know already get strong results. Extra needs will
be met through a system of ‘loadings’—extra funding, per student, to help students
from low socioeconomic backgrounds, Indigenous students, students with a disability
and students with limited English skills, and to help with extra costs for small and
remote schools. The loadings will be fully publicly funded at all schools, so that every
student who needs more help will get it.

Under the National Plan for the School Improvement, every Australian school will
have the money it needs to do a great job. Government schools will continue to be
fully publicly funded. Like the current system, the public money provided to
non-government schools would be adjusted based on parents’ capacity to contribute
to school resources.

The National Plan for School Improvement will be based on evidence of what we
know works to improve results for children in every school in Australia.

The new requirements under the National Plan will deliver practical improvements to
lift teacher quality, including requiring more classroom experience before graduation
and higher entry requirements for the teaching profession.

Teachers will be of the highest calibre, and will have received the best training and
support as new teachers. They will be continuously honing their skills and receiving
structured feedback and support to help measure their skills and highlight areas to
focus effort on. Every school will have a school improvement plan outlining the steps
they will take to improve student results. These plans will be developed in
consultation with parents and the community. Every school will look at its results
each year and plan where and how it will do better.

More information about school finances, attendance, and teachers will be provided
on My School. Schools will need to provide more information to parents to help them
support their child’s education.

Principals will be empowered to lead their schools, making decisions that get
improvements unencumbered by bureaucracy. Under the Plan, school principals will
get more authority over staff selection and budgets—including in staffing,
maintenance and buying extra resources the school needs.

166


-----

All schools will implement the Australian Curriculum in all subjects—meaning every
student in Australia studies, and is assessed against, the same high-quality curriculum.

Schools will form strong partnerships with parents and the local community to work
with students with disruptive behaviour or who are under-performing. Every school
will need to include details on how they will work with parents on student behaviour,
as part of their overall annual School Improvement Plan.

High performing schools will share their strategies for success with others. All
principals will have information about best practice in driving school improvements,
including innovative ideas from our best performing schools around the country.

Through this long-term approach to improving school performance, Australia can
continue to build the capabilities that will underpin our success in the Asian century.

**_Asia-literacy in schools_**

As our schools improve, knowledge and understanding of Asia also needs to be a core
part of what our students learn. Governments have laid down the foundations for
this, especially through the Australian Curriculum. But we need to produce a step
change in the understanding of Asia and the acquisition of Asia-relevant capabilities.

The building blocks to develop knowledge of the history, cultures, societies and
languages of nations in Asia are laid at school. The diversity of Australia’s population,
which includes a large number of Australians born in Asia or of Asian descent, and the
growing number of Australians who holiday in the region, provide some community
understanding of the region. However, only a small proportion of Year 12 students
study anything about Asia in the subjects of history, literature, geography, economics,
politics and the arts under existing State-based curriculums (AEF 2012).

There have been various national and state education-based initiatives in recent
decades to increase studies of Asia and language learning in schools (Box 6.1).[5] These
programs have had limited, localised success, but have not produced a significant
cohort of young Australians completing secondary education with deep knowledge of
our region or high levels of proficiency in Asian languages.

Most students in most highly developed education systems around the world are
proficient in more than one language by the time they finish school, and many are
proficient in three (AEF 2012). Many Asian school systems teach English, and some,
such as Malaysia’s and Singapore’s, also teach other Asian languages. Countries in
Europe and North America are also increasing their teaching of Asian languages. For
example, Sweden has recently announced that Chinese (Mandarin) will be taught in
all Swedish schools by 2020 (AEF 2012).

5 The National Asian Languages and Studies in Australian Schools (1995–2002) and the National Asian
Languages and Studies in Schools Program (2009–2012).

167


-----

**Box 6.1: Asian languages in schools**


States’ and Territories’ policies on teaching foreign languages differ as to whether
or not a minimum number of minutes a week or hours a year are required, and
what that number might be. This creates significant differences in student
experience across States.

Several States have set up hubs and specialist schools, supported by start-up
funding from the Australian Government. For example, Queensland has established
28 Asian learning centres in strategically located secondary schools. Each centre is a
school of excellence for a particular Asian language. Western Australia has 24 hubs
(107 schools), some of which are developing partnerships with schools and
universities in China, Indonesia and Japan. South Australia is developing new
pathways from different stages of education for languages. Tasmania has
established a network of ‘Connected Language Centres’ that use new technologies
to help language learning and professional development for teachers.

Several States, such as New South Wales, are negotiating with universities to
ensure that teachers who wish to retrain as language teachers are given priority in
the allocation of Commonwealth supported places and access to HECS-HELP, while
the Australian Capital Territory conducts an Asian language teacher training
program with an in-country immersion course. New online syllabus documents
have been developed in Indonesian, Japanese and Chinese for primary and middle
schools in the Northern Territory.

Some States are also looking beyond language programs. Victoria has launched the
Leading 21st Century Schools Victoria: Engage with Asia program—a principal-led
project to build a sustainable approach to developing knowledge of Asia and
Australia’s engagement with Asia across the curriculum.

By contrast the share of Australian students studying languages, including many Asian
languages, is small and has fallen in recent times. Between 2000 and 2008, the share
of Australian students learning a tertiary accredited language other than English in
Year 12 dropped in a time where overall student numbers increased by almost 9 per
cent. In 2008, less than 6 per cent of Australian school students studied Indonesian,
Japanese, Korean or Chinese (Mandarin) in Year 12 (AEF 2012, MCEETYA 2008). Fewer
Year 12 students studied Indonesian in 2009 than in 1972 (Hill 2012). And, while
Japanese remains the most widely taught language in Australian schools, student
numbers fell by 16 per cent from 2000 to 2008 (de Kretser & Spence-Brown 2010).

In recognising the need to build a sound knowledge of Asia in schools, the ‘Asia and
Australia’s engagement in Asia’ cross-curriculum priority will be embedded in the
Australian Curriculum. The languages component of the Australian Curriculum will
enable all students to learn a language other than English—a curriculum for Chinese
(Mandarin) is one of the first in development.

168


-----

We provide funding to the Asia Education Foundation to support the implementation of
the ‘Asia and Australia’s engagement in Asia’ cross-curriculum priority. The Foundation
works with others, such as the Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership,
to help build teachers’ capacity to develop Asia-relevant capabilities for Australian
students, and with Education Services Australia to develop digital resources and online
professional support for teachers, including for implementing the Asia cross-curriculum
priority and teaching Asian languages (Box 6.2).

While these initiatives are steps in the right direction, there is more to be done.
Learning about Asia should be business-as-usual for every Australian school and every
Australian student.


**Box 6.2: Leongatha Primary School—connecting with Indonesia**


Over 250 schools and more than 400 teachers across Australia, China, Indonesia
and South Korea are involved in Australia–Asia BRIDGE School Partnerships,[6]
managed by the Asia Education Foundation and supported by the Australian
Government. Teachers and students in Thailand will soon be involved.

The partnerships develop students’ intercultural capabilities through a mix of
language and cultural studies based on people-to-people exchanges and online
collaboration.

For one school in particular, ‘the BRIDGE project was an ideal opportunity to
involve the school with Indonesia. We wanted to go beyond the walls of the school,
beyond our area, and indeed beyond Australia.’

Irene Beasley is the only teacher of Indonesian at Leongatha Primary School in
Gippsland, in the heart of Victorian dairying country. Leongatha Primary is
partnered with SD Pondok Labu 11, a school in the bustling 10 million-strong
metropolis of Jakarta. The two schools connect classes through Skype. This enables
the children to have authentic, real-time, face-to-face conversations. ‘We try to
speak Indonesian at our end and they speak English,’ Irene said. The students
investigate and use a range of Web 2.0 technologies to exchange their ideas,
interests and information about their country and culture. These exchanges have
led to regular teacher exchanges, and in 2012, to the first student exchanges.

She reflected on the genuine engagement fostered between her students and their
counterparts in Jakarta. ‘We’ve moved from being an isolated school to being part
of the wider global community, and that’s really important for the 21st century.’

The BRIDGE program demonstrates the potential of technology to enable
innovative learning strategies that overcome barriers and borders, creating a truly
global classroom.

6 The BRIDGE program began in 2008 as an initiative of the Asia Education Foundation and the
Australia–Indonesia Institute, with funding from the Australian Government and the Myer Foundation.

169


-----

The capacity for Australians to build deeper ties with Asia will be hampered if there is
not an increase in proficiency of languages other than English. Relying on the
language capabilities of Asian-Australians for all of Australia’s relationships and
engagement will not be adequate. Proficiency in more than one language is a basic
skill of the 21st century.


_National objectives_


10. Every Australian student will have significant exposure to studies of Asia across
the curriculum to increase their cultural knowledge and skills and enable them to
be active in the region.

 - All schools will engage with at least one school in Asia to support the teaching of

a priority Asian language, including through increased use of the National
Broadband Network.

11. All Australian students will have the opportunity, and be encouraged, to
undertake a continuous course of study in an Asian language throughout their
years of schooling.

 - All students will have access to at least one priority Asian language; these will be

Chinese (Mandarin), Hindi, Indonesian and Japanese.

Each of these goals will be achieved, over time, by ensuring Asian literacy and
languages are a core part of the Australian school system through full implementation
of the Australian Curriculum. Every school system and every government in Australia
has a stake in achieving these goals. To ensure we track how we are increasing
Australians’ knowledge of Asia, we will improve measurement, in consultation with
States and Territories and non-government education authorities.

We aim to embed these goals by making sure that every Australian student has
continuous access to high-quality Asian language curriculums, assessment and
reporting in priority Asian languages. We are working to make this access a core
requirement through new school funding arrangements between the Australian
Government, the States and Territories and non-government education authorities.

We will also lead a collaborative process with the State and Territory governments,
non-government education authorities and tertiary education institutions to develop
detailed strategies for studies of Asia to become a core part of school education and to
encourage the take-up of Asian languages through innovation and best practice. These
strategies will include ways in which the NBN can be used to support studies of Asia.

Initial efforts should include a particular focus on working with business, the
university sector and the community to boost student demand by increasing
understanding of the benefits of studies of Asia, including Asian languages, among
students, principals, parents, businesses, employers and the community. For example,
the Asia Literacy Business Ambassadors initiative involves almost 300 ambassadors.

170


-----

These ambassadors demonstrate to more than 13,000 secondary school students
around Australia how Asia-literacy skills have assisted their careers.

While priority languages in school education should be Chinese (Mandarin), Hindi,
Indonesian and Japanese, governments should continue to support efforts to increase
the study of other languages such as Korean, Vietnamese and Thai. The selection of
priority languages reflects those nations where the majority of opportunities will be
available to Australians in the Asian century (chapters 2, 4 and 9).

Other efforts to support high-quality studies of Asia will need to focus on the quality
of teaching. Strategies should also make better use of existing Asian language
capabilities in the Australian community (AFMLTA 2012).

Achieving significant gains in the level of Asian literacy and Asian language skills of
Australian students will require governments, school systems and schools to share
responsibility for ongoing leadership and commitment.

#### The role of tertiary education and training systems

**_Reform of the higher education sector_**

Australia has a world-class university system. In 2012, after the United States and the
United Kingdom, Australia has the third-highest number of universities in the world’s
top 100 (ARWU 2012).[7] We are committed to reforms to deliver the best possible
higher education for more Australians to meet Australia’s future economic needs.


_National objective_


12. Australia will remain among the world’s best for research and teaching in
universities, delivering excellent outcomes for a larger number of Australian
students, attracting the best academics and students from around the world and
strengthening links between Australia and the region.

- By 2020, 20 per cent of undergraduate higher education enrolments will be

people from low socioeconomic backgrounds, up from 17 per cent in 2011.

- By 2025, 40 per cent of all 25 to 34-year-olds will hold a qualification at bachelor

level or above, up from 35 per cent in 2011.



- By 2025, 10 of Australia’s universities will be in the world’s top 100.



 - A larger number of Australian university students will be studying overseas and

a greater proportion will be undertaking part of their degree in Asia.

7 The 2012 Academic Ranking of World Universities placed five Australian universities in the top 100.

171


-----

We will continue to implement and pursue reforms to achieve these goals. For
example, the recently introduced demand-driven funding system for undergraduate
courses at public universities means that the type and amount of teaching will vary
over time in response to need and demand. The Government has created an extra
119,000 student places since 2007. This is allowing an extra 150,000 students to
study. An estimated 548,000 places will be funded at public universities in 2012, with
512,000 being undergraduate places.

At the same time, we are committed to improving quality. We will work with the
higher education sector to improve the reach, quality, performance and flexibility of
Australia’s higher education system. This includes establishing the Tertiary Education
Quality and Standards Agency and equity and structural adjustment funding
arrangements.

The higher education sector contributes significantly to building Australian
capabilities. For more than 60 years, Australia’s universities have also built capabilities
in students from Asia. In 2011, there were more than 550,000 international student
enrolments (77 per cent from within the Asian region) in Australian education
institutions. They contributed more than $15 billion to the Australian economy in
2011, making education Australia’s fourth-largest export (AEI 2011; DFAT 2012;
Austrade 2011). More than this, international students in Australia enrich our social
and cultural understanding of the region and deepen and broaden relationships.
These connections have enduring value.

The International Education Advisory Council, established in 2011, will continue to
advise us about the challenges and opportunities facing Australia’s international
education sector. The advice of the Council, which includes input from providers and
students, will help to inform the development of a national strategy to strengthen the
sector, in particular looking at its long-term quality and sustainability.

High-quality research is an important part of Australia’s world-class university system.
We are committed to supporting and expanding Australia’s research capabilities to
improve Australia’s knowledge and skills base and to drive innovation. Our agenda
includes actions to increase significantly the number of Australia’s higher degrees by
research and efforts that focus on supporting business innovation. Getting the link
between research and innovation right will be critical for Australia’s success in the
Asian century.

Our researchers and institutions will also increasingly need to link with their regional
counterparts. Countries in the region are focused on making rapid improvement to
their universities, and investment in the capacity of Asian institutions to conduct
sophisticated research is increasing quickly (Levin 2010). Australian universities are
already increasingly engaged in research, collaboration and engagement in the region,
with substantial success; for example, the University of Sydney’s level of research
collaboration with Asian academics resulting in publications has almost trebled in
eight years (University of Sydney 2012).

172


-----

Stepping up these kinds of efforts will ensure that Australia contributes to, and
benefits from, regional and global research. We will continue to support, through the
Australian Research Council and other mechanisms, high-quality research by
Australian publicly funded research organisations and stronger research and teaching
links with the region.

**_Asia specialists in the higher education sector_**

Australian universities have a strong reputation for knowledge and scholarship about
Asia. But the share of tertiary students undertaking language studies has declined
over the last decade for some priority Asian languages. For example, from 2001 to
2010, university enrolments in Indonesian dropped by 37 per cent, against a
40 per cent increase in total undergraduate enrolments (Hill 2012).

In other priority languages, such as Chinese (Mandarin), there have been some
positive gains in student enrolments. These largely reflect the growing number of
Australians of Chinese background and students from China studying in Australia
(McLaren 2011). While these gains are important, they have been accompanied by a
stagnation or decrease in the proportion of students from non-Chinese backgrounds
learning Chinese (Mandarin). This highlights the importance of flexible teaching
methodologies and pathways that cater to students’ varied learning backgrounds.

In response to the need to build a broader base of students for the future, many
universities are initiating structural changes to increase support for students to
develop Asia-relevant capabilities (Box 6.3). Some have recently increased language
studies by making curriculum changes and introducing new interdisciplinary course
structures. For example, since 2007 the University of Melbourne has required
undergraduate students to complete a major and undertake study outside their
primary discipline. This has significantly increased the take up of Asian languages—a
79 per cent increase in Chinese, 64 per cent increase in Japanese and 33 per cent in
Indonesian (University of Melbourne 2012). Similarly, the University of
Western Australia has promoted new course structures for language learning, and in
2012 enrolments increased so dramatically that in some cases demand exceeded
teaching supply (UWA 2012b).

Together with universities, we support in-Asia study by Australian students as a way
of developing Asia-relevant capabilities, regardless of the field of study. In-country
study allows students to experience another culture, develop skills and directly build
relationships that are likely to last a lifetime (Chapter 9).

One successful model for in-country learning is the Australian Consortium for
In-Country Indonesian Studies. This international consortium, which involves
25 universities, is hosted by Murdoch University and assists Australian and other
foreign students to study in Indonesian universities (ACICIS 2012).

173


-----

To significantly boost in-Asia study by Australian students, we will work with
universities to forge closer links with regional institutions and improve access
(Box 6.3).


**Box 6.3: Universities are preparing Australia for the Asian century**


Australia’s universities have earned international recognition for their knowledge
and scholarship about Asia. That expertise extends across the country, from the
University of Sydney’s China Studies Centre to the new Brisbane Universities
Language Alliance. Universities also reach out beyond the campus and develop
partnerships with the community. For example, Asialink, supported by the
University of Melbourne and the Myer Foundation, has worked with business,
government, philanthropic and cultural partners to initiate and strengthen
Australia’s Asia engagement.

The Australian Government created the Australian National University (ANU) with a
large and special Asia-focused mandate after World War II. The ANU has committed
to bringing its considerable Asian research and studies assets to the task of building
capabilities for the Asian century.


Some of the immediate initiatives that are part of this are:



 - expanding its suite of in-country study options and making the facility available

to students from other universities

 - expanding national access to Asian languages through online delivery of a new

Diploma of Asian Languages, and extending its Asian Studies teacher training
and outreach program for schools

 - developing the National Young Leaders Program to bring together young leaders

from Australia and the region, and expanding its National Parliamentary
Internships Program, which will place students into the personal offices of
leading legislators in Asia

 - developing the Commonwealth-sponsored national Public Policy Fellows

Program, to bring high-calibre officials from Asian countries to the ANU for
intensive periods of research and engagement on major policy problems.

We will provide more financial support and information for students who study in
Asia. And we will support universities to increase the number of students who
undertake Asian studies and Asian languages as a part of their university education,
using the NBN and digital technology.

In addition, we will encourage every Australian university to have a presence in Asia
and to establish an exchange arrangement, with transferable credits, with at least one
major Asian university.

174


-----

Following the 2012 APEC Summit in Vladivostok, APEC members agreed to examine
ways to better facilitate mobility of students, researchers and education providers in
the region, providing opportunities to enhance educational cooperation within the
region.

Australian universities will also need to form partnerships with business and other
institutions in the community to enable all parts of Australia to build Asia-capable
communities and workforces.

**_Reform of the vocational education and training system_**

Australia’s national vocational education and training system is important for
providing more people in Australia with the skills they need, including developing
Asia-relevant capabilities (Box 6.4).


_National objective_


13. Australia will have vocational education and training systems that are among
the world’s best, building capability in the region and supporting a highly skilled
Australian workforce able to continuously develop its capabilities.

 - By 2020, more than three-quarters of working-age Australians will have an

entry-level qualification (at Certificate III level or higher), up from just under half
in 2009.

 - Australia’s vocational education and training institutions will have substantially

expanded services in more nations in the region, building the productive
capacity of the workforce of these nations and supporting Australian businesses
and workers to have a greater presence in Asian markets.

We are pursuing these objectives together with the States and Territories through the
$1.75 billion Council of Australian Governments’ National Partnership Agreement on
Skills Reform, which makes a number of fundamental changes to ensure more
Australians receive higher quality, innovative vocational education and training, such
as delivering an entitlement to skills training for all. Supporting reforms include
initiatives to improve the quality of teaching and assessment; the Australian Skills
Quality Authority, which will ensure higher quality standards across the sector; and
better information on training courses and providers through the My Skills website.

Governments and industry need to continue to work together to address Australia’s
changing skills needs. The new Australian Workforce and Productivity Agency will
improve long-term workforce planning and development. It will ensure our
investment in training delivers the skills that industry and the economy need, in the
right place at the right time.

175


-----

**Box 6.4: A traineeship helped take Daniel from Illawarra to China**


Daniel Taylor was named the 2010 Trainee of the Year in the Illawarra region and
was a finalist for the 2010 NSW Trainee of the Year Award. During his traineeship in
Process Manufacturing Certificate III, Daniel was employed by Edmen Recruitment.
His host employer was Calderys Australia, a refractory business in Unanderra,
where he is now permanently employed.

Daniel was promoted to production supervisor in 2009 and manages site staff,
production issues and goods logistics. Calderys was so impressed by Daniel’s
dedication that they flew him to a sister plant in China last year for quality control
training using state-of-the-art equipment. Daniel says, ‘This was an amazing
experience, to learn about a new culture, and see the differences in the way they
work.’

Daniel hopes that with his willingness to continue learning and his dedication so
far, he will in the future be able to relocate to one of the company’s overseas sites
to learn about other applications and work processes.


Source: NSW Government (2012).


**_Vocational education and training connections in the region_**

Asia’s rise is presenting opportunities for Australia’s vocational education and training
institutions to develop deeper connections and partnerships in the region.

As economies in Asia develop, many have ambitious plans to upgrade the skills of
their workforces. Australian vocational education and training providers are already
working in Asia with local students and partners to deliver skills training. The majority
of programs are currently in China, though expanding across the region, and often
deliver Australian qualifications (Box 6.5).

Together with firms and Australian industry partners, we will be working through
regional forums and bilaterally to build in-country partnerships and to develop
complementary skills and qualification assessment and recognition. This will allow
businesses and individuals to work across regional borders, sharing skills and
experience within the strong oversight that exists across Australia’s skilled migration
programs.

For example, through the East Asia Summit, Australia is collaborating with South
Korea to build a Regional Network of Technical and Vocational Education and Training
providers. The aim is to exchange ideas, share knowledge and expertise and form
institutional partnerships (DIISRTE 2012).

Stronger connections and relationships between Australian Industry Skills Councils
and Australian industry and their counterparts in the region will progress compatible
skills standards and build mutual recognition arrangements which will over time make
it easier to work across borders.

176


-----

**Box 6.5: India—investing in human capital**


The Indian Government has set an objective of upskilling 500 million people in India
by 2022. India has sought international partnerships to help it reach the goal,
including by creating a regulatory environment that enables international
institutions to participate in public–private partnerships.

The Australian Trade Commission (Austrade) and Australian industry are working
together to implement a range of offshore education and training models with
Indian counterparts. Examples of collaboration include in-company training, the
provision of vocational education and training courses in specific towns and
regions, and the delivery of Australian qualifications in a range of industries,
including retail, hospitality, education and health.

Through such efforts, Australia is advising on skills development and policy
frameworks, training content aligned to industry needs, faculty, certification,
accreditation, technology frameworks, delivery mechanisms and monitoring tools.

One Australian company group doing this is the Leighton Group, which is one of the
world’s leading contracting, services and project development organisations. In
2010, after seeing a gap in the capabilities of Indian recruits, Leighton set up a
trades training school to arm new recruits with basic Australian qualifications
(Certificate I) in construction trades, such as carpentry, masonry and scaffolding.
Leighton is building Indian capacity while improving its own quality of work and the
value of Australian qualifications (AEI 2011).

#### Participation

Access to education and training systems that are among the world’s best will give
each Australian the best opportunity to develop the capabilities needed to get highly
skilled, well-paid jobs and contribute to Australia’s success in the Asian century. This
applies to all Australians, from our children who are developing capabilities for the
first time, to our already skilled Australians who wish to extend their capabilities.

Learning new capabilities and improving existing capabilities is vital as jobs in coming
decades will likely require new and different skills—new jobs will be created which do
not exist today, and more traditional jobs will require Australians to have new
capabilities.

Increasing participation will help Australia adjust to the likely pressures of an ageing
population (Chapter 4). Many of our reforms to the tax and transfer system are
designed to reduce the negative participation incentives created by the interaction of
personal income taxes and the withdrawal of transfer payments, and ensure a fair
return for effort, such as the trebling of the statutory tax-free threshold from $6,000
to $18,200 (Chapter 5).

It is important to effectively support job seekers to re-enter the workforce. Job
Services Australia is the national employment services system which has been a key
part of our employment record. It provides jobseekers with personalised help to find
and keep a job. We are investing $6 billion in Job Services Australia over the next four

177


-----

years. And we have also introduced Disability Employment Services, which will deliver
more effective employment assistance for job seekers with disability.

For those who face specific barriers to participating in the workforce, changes have
been made which boost support to help those individuals overcome these barriers.
These changes sit alongside clearly defined responsibilities to participate in work and
improve skills. Some examples of this include specific support and requirements for
jobless families, in particular disadvantaged communities to help them break the
cycle of joblessness, and additional attention and support from government service
providers for vulnerable job seekers. And we are working to ensure that carers have
the same opportunities as other Australians to participate fully in work through the
National Carer Strategy.

Assistance to access affordable and high-quality child care is important to the
workforce participation of parents, and also plays an important role in supporting the
development of children, particularly those from disadvantaged backgrounds. We
have improved the affordability of child care for parents by significantly increasing the
rate of Child Care Rebate from 30 to 50 per cent, and boosted funding for Jobs,
Education and Training Child Care Fee Assistance.

Australia’s employment policies need to provide the appropriate incentives to
encourage mature age Australians to continue contributing to the community and the
economy. To provide this support and encouragement, we have been delivering a
range of reforms to maximise the workforce potential of senior Australians.

We announced a $41 million response to the final report of the Advisory Panel on the
Economic Potential of Senior Australians. This includes the establishment of an
ongoing Advisory Panel on Positive Ageing that will raise awareness and lead a
national dialogue on ageing issues, including how best to harness the economic and
social opportunities presented by an older population.

And we are investing $26 million over four years in the Mature Age Participation–Job
Seeker Assistance Program to provide additional assistance for eligible mature age
jobseekers and providing additional support through the National Workforce
Development Fund to improve the skills of mature age workers, aged 50 years and
over, consistent with their workforce development needs.

#### Business capabilities

Just as people will need to build their capabilities, so too will businesses to succeed in
the Asian century. Businesses are increasingly outward-looking, innovative and
capable of adapting and responding to change. More will require cultural and
language skills to collaborate and partner in the region. They will need more staff who
are flexible and responsive to customer needs. This applies to business of all types,
from small and medium-sized enterprises right through to larger corporations, and
across the breadth of sectors.

The productivity and profitability of firms are closely correlated with the culture of
the workplace, the corporate leadership style and the way work is organised,

178


-----

including employee-level participation in decision-making, strategy and skills
utilisation (Boedker et al. 2011).

Some businesses are adapting well to the opportunities presented by the Asian
century. For example, many businesses in the trade-exposed manufacturing and
services sectors are re-evaluating their business models. Some firms are finding ways
to adapt by anticipating changes in their markets, managing their exposure to risk,
building the talents of their people and constantly improving their productivity. More
businesses will need to adapt if Australia is to make the most of the opportunities in
the Asian century.

Indeed, while Australia generally rates above average in international comparative
studies of management practices, there is always scope to improve. For example, a
20-country comparison of medium to large manufacturing companies found that
Australia’s management practices in an overall management assessment[8] ranked
below those of other countries such as Canada, Germany, Japan, Sweden and the
United States (Bloom et al. 2012).

To support the development of high-performing organisations, we are committed to
getting the domestic economic framework right by improving settings for
infrastructure, innovation, tax and employment (Chapter 5). We have a number of
supporting mechanisms directed at improving business capability and performance to
improve access to markets in the region (Chapter 7).

#### Asia-capable workplaces

Organisations that are successful in the Asian century will need staff who have
specific knowledge of the products and markets of Asia, along with the cultural and
language capabilities needed to be active in the region. International evidence
connects language capabilities with export success, and shows losses where
companies lack skills to overcome language and cultural differences (Sen 2012).


_National objective_


14. Decision makers in Australian businesses, parliaments, national institutions
(including the Australian Public Service and national cultural institutions) and
advisory forums across the community will have deeper knowledge and expertise
of countries in our region and have a greater capacity to integrate domestic and
international issues.

 - One-third of board members of Australia’s top 200 publicly listed companies

and Commonwealth bodies (including companies, authorities, agencies and
commissions) will have deep experience in and knowledge of Asia.

 - One-third of the senior leadership of the Australian Public Service (APS 200) will

have deep experience in and knowledge of Asia.

8 The overall management assessment was based on three elements: monitoring management, targets
management and incentives management.

179


-----

Business recognises the need for these capabilities. Asialink, a body that includes
senior business, industry and education leaders, has called for Australia to increase
the number of workplaces that can attract, use and retain Asia-capable talent—
people who have the ‘knowledge, skills and mindset’ for successful engagement in
Asia (Asialink 2012). This is supported by survey data that shows a strong correlation
between Asia-relevant capabilities and business success in and with Asia. And this
data suggests that a large share of businesses consider that they do not have enough
leaders with the experience needed to engage with Asia adequately (Asialink 2012).

Businesses are taking action, and some are already well advanced, but more needs to
be done (Box 6.6). Asialink’s Asia Capable Workplace Taskforce (Asialink Taskforce) is
driving the development of a strategy to increase the Asia capabilities of the
Australian workforce. The Asialink Taskforce is developing measures of Asia
capabilities through the Asia Capable Workplace Framework. There are six elements
in this framework: strong leaderships and vision, talent development and retention,
productive local partnerships, aligned internal culture, knowledge of the local
environment, and supportive systems and processes (Asialink 2012). The breadth of
the framework recognises that business success in the region will not be solved by
acquiring a single generic ‘Asia-relevant capability’, but by each business assessing its
circumstances and tailoring capabilities accordingly.

As a step towards this goal, we encourage listed company boards to include more
business people with direct expertise from within the region. And we ask the
Australian Institute of Company Directors to consider integrating Asian cultural
competency training into its company directors training courses. In addition, to track
the rise in Asia-relevant capabilities, we encourage leading peak business
organisations to report annually on progress against this goal. One mechanism could
be by cooperating with the ASX Corporate Governance Council to incorporate into its
principles and recommendations reporting on business practices and processes to
promote relevant Asian expertise and knowledge.

Australia’s institutions and organisations, such as the labour movement organisations
and civil society organisations, can also play a role building Asia-relevant capabilities
and deepening our connections into the region. It will be important for the leaders of
these organisations to enhance their own capabilities so they can understand the
changes and the responses required to allow Australian workers to benefit from the
opportunities which flow from the Asian century. For example, Australia’s trade union
organisations can facilitate this through greater regional expertise and building
stronger partnerships in the region.

180


-----

**Box 6.6: ANZ—building a ‘super regional’ bank**


ANZ is pursuing a strategy to build a ‘super regional’ bank by growing its business
across Australia, New Zealand, Asia and the Pacific. ANZ is expanding in
high-growth Asian markets and high-growth industries with strong exposure to the
region, including natural resources, agriculture and infrastructure.

ANZ’s success in Asia is underpinned by a number of factors, including product
innovations and a client-centric culture that offers integrated services across the
region. In particular, ANZ regards its human resources strategy as essential to
building a strong, sustainable business. They recognise that a culturally diverse,
inclusive and engaged workforce with a ‘wide-angle lens’ view of the world is
critical to be able to understand and support customers who do business within
and across the Asia–Pacific region.

ANZ views employee diversity—different perspectives and experiences—as a
competitive source of innovation that can help open up new markets and business
opportunities. This approach has focused on attracting and developing leaders
with strong cultural capability, emotional intelligence and flexibility, and who have
the ability to get the best out of people from diverse backgrounds. ANZ has sought
to appoint and develop Asia–Pacific ‘insiders’—people who understand the client
and how to operate in key markets in the region. The bank has done this by
recruiting people within local markets as well as rotating senior leaders through its
Asia–Pacific network.

Today, 71 per cent of ANZ’s top 120 executives have significant international
experience and the organisation continues to actively attract and develop future
leaders with diverse cultural backgrounds and language skills (with a requirement
of international experience/mindset). Fifty-one per cent of ANZ’s 2011 graduate
intake in its Australian and New Zealand operations have languages in addition to
English.

As ANZ builds the diversity of its workforce, it is focused on improving cultural
awareness, capability and inclusiveness among teams, celebrating cultural diversity,
and building relationships with customers and communities from diverse
backgrounds.

#### Asia-capable public institutions

Not just business, but high-performing organisations of all kinds, will need staff who
can operate comfortably in the region. This includes our public institutions so that
public decision-making is closely informed by knowledge of the Asian region. For
example, the Australia and New Zealand School of Government has collaborative
public sector leadership programs with China and Indonesia. This type of peer-to-peer
collaborative learning, sometimes known as ‘twinning’, helps professional and
community-based organisations build relationships and expand their Asia-relevant
capabilities (AVI 2012; Chapter 9).

181


-----

Multiple pathways, some of which will develop from the relationships and types of
collaboration outlined above, will be needed to achieve this goal. Such pathways
would be valuable for the media and community group sector (Chapter 9).

In the public sector, we will ensure that our ministers build stronger ministerial
relationships through more regular engagement with their counterparts in Asia to
pursue policy outcomes. The Australian Public Service (APS) also needs to develop
Asia-relevant capabilities to improve the quality of its policy advice. As Australia
becomes more integrated with its neighbours, the lines between domestic and
international policy are increasingly blurred. Asia-relevant capabilities will be required
right across the public service, including among the leadership of the APS and beyond
traditional ‘external facing’ institutions. Officials will need to understand how
Australia’s domestic policy objectives intersect and are shaped by global and regional
factors and how domestic policy objectives can be achieved by looking out to the
region and beyond. Service delivery and regulatory agencies are likely to require
increased cross-cultural awareness.

Policy officers will require a more sophisticated understanding of the region, as well
as Asian language proficiency, to ensure that governments are better engaged with
the region, can collaborate with nations in Asia on policy issues of mutual interest, are
better able to link domestic, regional and international aspects of policy advice and
program delivery, and better able to support business and the broader community in
making the most of the opportunities in the region.

The building blocks are in place in the APS. The Australian Public Service Commission
partners with agencies to develop the fundamental skills that will underpin an
Asia-capable APS.

To further develop the APS’s Asia-relevant capabilities, the Secretary of the
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and the Australian Public Service
Commissioner will lead the development within 12 months of a strategy to strengthen
the APS by improving capabilities for integrated policy analysis, problem solving and
implementation across domestic and international matters. The strategy will embed
practices that ensure international and domestic policy outcomes are considered
together in the development of government policies.

A number of APS agencies already have exchange and collaboration programs with
their regional counterparts. The Department of Defence, for example, currently
facilitates major programs of senior and working-level exchanges. There are also
some training programs in place. For example, the Leading Australia’s Future in the
Asia–Pacific program provides opportunities, in partnership with the ANU, for
APS leaders to deepen their understanding of the region.

As a further step, we will support building stronger relationships through the
development of interactive programs and regular exchanges of senior officials at
mid-career points, including through the university sector.

182


-----

### 6.3 Adaptability 

The rise of Asia, and other factors such as technology, will continue to change the
structure of Australia’s economy (Chapter 4). These changes bring opportunities and
challenges to which people, businesses and institutions need to adapt.


_National objective_


15. Australian communities and regions will benefit from structural changes in the
economy and seize the new opportunities emerging in the Asian century.

Building on existing social systems and support for businesses, we will continue to
work with communities, regions and sectors to help them better manage structural
change in the economy and take advantage of new opportunities, and we will
continue to create environments that promote sustainable growth and jobs. We will
also continue to work cooperatively with industries and firms to develop strategies for
ensuring those same outcomes.

Greater labour mobility can reduce the impacts of change at both the regional and
household levels. Some barriers to mobility are natural, such as people’s
unwillingness to leave family and support networks. But some are artificial, such as
the differences in the recognition of skills and qualifications across jurisdictions,
differences in education systems and the perceived liveability of cities and regions,
where the availability of housing and access to high-quality services such as schools
are real considerations for most people.

Australians are quite mobile in the way they change jobs, occupations and industries.
But more can be done to enhance labour mobility. We are working to reduce artificial
barriers, through national licensing for selected occupations and support for job
seekers to relocate. In addition, our focus on higher quality and consistent education
and training is likely to improve labour mobility as well as connecting people with new
job opportunities through employment services.

Structural changes to the Australian economy present challenges and opportunities.
Some regions and sectors have seen strong growth in population, employment and
income while others have faced stiff global competition. The uneven impact on
different communities and regions underscores the importance of tailoring
approaches to take into account differing circumstances.

One region that has seen strong opportunities from recent economic changes is
Darwin (Box 6.7). An alignment of policies supporting development, coupled with a
clear vision, provide real opportunity to shape the direction of Darwin’s future.

Together with business and the Northern Territory Government, we will work, over
time, to accelerate Darwin’s evolution as a sophisticated, liveable city built around a
gateway to Asia, and as a regional hub for a significant number of goods and services.
We will do this through coordinated infrastructure, planning and international
engagement activities. Learning more from this experience, we, together with

183


-----

States and Territories, will explore options to extend this strategy to other
well-positioned, high-growth centres in northern Australia as well as other regions
across Australia with growing links to Asia.


**Box 6.7: Darwin’s evolution**


Darwin is unique among Australian cities in its capacity to transform itself in coming
decades because of its proximity to Asia, natural attributes, potential sites for new
ports and expanding liquefied natural gas processing industry. Closer to Jakarta
than it is to Sydney, Darwin has great opportunities to become a world-leading
centre for engineering, financial, medical and education services. It is on the cusp
of evolving in the same way as Singapore, which has used its location to become a
modern thriving city with high-quality housing, services and quality of life.

Natural resources developments are leading the transformation of Darwin, which is
experiencing an investment boom that is driving and diversifying its economic
expansion and creating thousands of new jobs. With access to rich gas fields off its
coast, land to process the gas onshore and ports close to its central business
district, Darwin is poised to reap substantial benefits. Not only will it help meet
Asia’s growing demand for energy, it has the capacity to become a centre for gas
industry services and for vocational education for students from Asia.

To achieve its potential, Darwin will need all levels of government to work together
with a strategic focus on infrastructure, skills and liveability. This includes ensuring
that amenities, services, skills and infrastructure are aligned with business
investment and population growth. Careful and coordinated planning will help
Darwin create opportunities for Indigenous Australians, maintain affordable
housing and attract a highly educated permanent workforce.


Decisions made today will shape the direction of the city for decades to come.


### 6.4 Social foundations

Australia’s social foundations, with support from governments, will continue to be a
basis for Australia’s success.


_National objective_


16. By preserving and building on our social foundations, Australia will be a higher
skill, higher wage economy with a fair, multicultural and cohesive society and a
growing population, and all Australians will be able to benefit from, and participate
in, Australia’s growing prosperity and engagement in Asia.

To achieve this objective, all governments and communities must maintain and
support Australia’s stable, liberal democratic institutions and laws.

We will maintain Australia’s world-leading social systems, including pensions and
family support, to assist people who need them.

184


-----

Despite Australia’s broad prosperity, not everyone enjoys access to the same
opportunities. A small but significant number of people experience multiple
disadvantages, particularly those in the lowest socioeconomic groups who live in
disadvantaged areas. In some areas this inequality has widened in recent years
(ASIB 2012). Australia ranks 21st out of 29 OECD countries on employment
participation rates for those with disability (PwC 2011), and the gap between
Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians over a range of health, education and
other indicators is still far too wide (Australian Government 2012b).

To help address these gaps in opportunity, we will pursue long-term social reforms
and investments to provide the services Australians need. Long-term reforms include
health and aged-care reform and implementation of the first stage of the National
Disability Insurance Scheme. This scheme will fundamentally change how
governments deliver disability care and support to improve the lives of people with
disability and their families.

Maintaining Australia’s social cohesion is essential. Australia’s openness to migration and
cultural diversity have delivered social and economic benefits and influenced how we
see ourselves, our neighbours and the world—and how the region and the world sees us.

As Australian society evolves and more people from the region and elsewhere visit,
work and live in Australia, an ongoing commitment to promote a cohesive and
multicultural society through continued efforts to combat racism and close the gap
with Indigenous Australians is necessary. Adhering to this commitment requires
involvement from all levels of government, together with businesses and
communities.

Australia’s culturally diverse population, including the large number of Australians
living and working in Asia, is a distinct competitive advantage. Australia should draw
on and nurture this advantage through continued support for a wide range of
connections with the region. These include migrant communities in Australia,
Australians living abroad, people who have lived or worked here, and others who
have a special connection with Australia and Australians.

Australia’s recognition of dual citizenship for Australian-born citizens and for migrants
to Australia has helped to promote these links and supports mobility in the region.
Our flexible and responsive migration frameworks also support these.

We remain committed to ensuring that our migration programs, particularly for
skilled migrants, are flexible and responsive to Australia’s changing needs. For
example, the temporary skilled migration (‘457 visa’) program is demand driven,
making it highly responsive to economic conditions, while strong oversight of the
program and minimum training benchmarks for sponsors preserves the work and
skills opportunities for Australians. Recent reform in the permanent skilled migration
program includes a stronger focus on English language proficiency, on-the-job work
experience and higher levels of education. We will continue to assess and review our
migration programs through mechanisms such as the Long-Term Migration Planning
Framework and continued consultation with stakeholders.

185


-----

# Chapter 7: Operating in and connecting to growing Asian markets


-----

**Key points**


Australian businesses and their employees can be big winners from the Asian
century, with new and expanding opportunities for our miners, manufacturers,
farmers and a broad range of service providers.

To make the most of these opportunities, Australian businesses must become fully
part of the region, adjusting their strategies, linking with regional value chains and
developing long-term relationships.

Australian businesses need to continue developing products, services and expertise
that are valued in Asia—by innovating and by understanding the diversity in
demand, conditions and customs.

The Government will work with businesses, especially small and medium-sized
enterprises, to build their capabilities, identify opportunities and open markets.

We will work with industry to raise awareness of the opportunities available to
firms from Asia of doing business, and partnering, with Australian businesses,
focusing on Australia’s many areas of strength.

We will work at home to support Australian businesses—welcoming foreign
investment and reducing tariffs and other barriers to the movement of goods,
services and people.

But even the most competitive Australian businesses cannot participate in the
Asian century if they are locked out of markets.

The Government will work beyond Australia’s borders to strengthen regional
economic and financial architecture, increase openness to trade and improve
outward investment opportunities for Australian businesses across the region.

We support the ambition of a free trade area for the Asia–Pacific and will traverse
various pathways in order to bring it to completion, including through the
Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement, the Regional Comprehensive Economic
Partnership and expanded agreements involving countries in the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations.

We are committed to concluding high-quality agreements with China, India,
Indonesia, Japan and South Korea and a regional trade agreement in the long term.

The Government will press for early completion of agreements on trade facilitation
as part of the Doha round and on services under the auspices of the World Trade
Organization involving 46 economies, and negotiations on agriculture liberalisation.

Collaborating with governments within the region will be vital to securing greater
accord between our arrangements and those of our neighbours.

187


-----

### 7.1 Introduction

The Asian century offers a wealth of opportunities for Australian businesses and
consumers as the flow of goods, services, people and capital increases between
Australia and the region.

Economic integration with Asia and openness to the region have been beneficial for
Australian businesses and consumers (Chapter 3).

Greater openness within the region, more sophisticated and affordable
communications and transport systems and rising incomes will bring closer
connections and increased demand for more diverse goods and services (Chapter 4).

Australia’s domestic market supports many Australian businesses, but the region
provides scope to sustain, transform and grow many more, no matter what their size.

Governments and businesses will need to work together to seize these opportunities.
The region will be a highly competitive environment as businesses from around the
world seek to secure similar opportunities.

Australian businesses need to build on their existing advantages by developing new
capabilities and approaches as they become fully part of the region.

### 7.2 Tapping into regional opportunities

The rise of Asia presents Australian businesses with many new opportunities, as
cross-border flows of goods, services, people and capital increase (Chapter 4).
Australia’s trade with Asia will grow strongly (Chart 7.1), as will our investment flows.

##### Chart 7.1: Australia’s trade links

Two-way trade with Australia


60

50

40

30

20

10

0


Per cent of GDP Per cent of GDP

2005 2010 2015 2020 2025

Asia European Union-25 United States Rest of the world


60

50

40

30

20

10

0


Notes: Consistent with the business-as-usual scenario (Chapter 4). See glossary for definitions of country
groupings and the details of the Treasury projections.
Source: Treasury projections based on ABS data.

188


-----

_National objective_


17. Australia’s businesses will be recognised globally for their excellence and ability
to operate successfully in Asian markets.

Australian businesses will be quick to recognise opportunities as they emerge and
have both the understanding and capacity to adapt to the way business is done across
the region. This means more Australian businesses, including small and medium-sized
enterprises, will be integrated into Asian markets.

They will build on existing advantages, including in mining, agriculture, finance,
design, construction, health and aged care, education, professional services and
tourism, to deliver the products and services that are valued in Asia. They will
continue to innovate and develop long-term relationships.

Australian businesses and their employees will improve their Asia-relevant capabilities
by investing in people and knowledge to support expansion of their businesses
(Chapter 6). The diversity within the region means there is no standard model.

Many businesses have made these connections already. Their knowledge will be
invaluable to others seeking to develop new business models (Box 7.1).


**Box 7.1: Building links internationally**


The Mahindra Group, a multinational based in India, employs more than 100,000
people worldwide. It enjoys a leadership position in utility vehicles, tractors and
information technology, and has a growing presence in financial services, tourism,
infrastructure, trade and logistics. When Mahindra decided to expand into the
aerospace sector, it looked globally for investment prospects and found its perfect
match in two established Australian aerospace companies.

In 2009, Mahindra took a majority stake in Gippsland Aeronautics and Aerostaff
Australia. Gippsland Aeronautics is an established brand, having delivered more
than 200 aircraft in 32 countries. Aerostaff Australia is a highly regarded
manufacturer of high-precision close-tolerance aircraft components and assemblies
for major players, such as Boeing and Lockheed Martin.

Mahindra was well aware of Australia’s general advantages through previous
investments, and was drawn to Gippsland Aeronautics’ highly skilled and
multilingual workforce and research and development capability.

Mahindra has retained key management personnel in both companies. Gippsland
Aeronautics’ staff has more than doubled to around 155 people since Mahindra
became involved and it is investing for long-term growth.

This investment is a valuable opportunity for Australia’s aerospace sector to build
its international presence. Austrade worked closely with Mahindra to provide
advice and assistance on the investment process and introductions to contacts in
the Victorian Government and other professional service providers.

189


-----

While Australian businesses will be at the heart of this push, we will support their
efforts—particularly small and medium-sized enterprises—to access these
opportunities, through capacity-building, reducing the costs of doing business in
Australia, welcoming foreign investment and working to open regional markets to
trade and investment.

#### Linking with regional and global value chains

The capacity of Australian businesses to become fully part of regional and global value
chains will heavily influence their success in the Asian century, and will also influence
wealth and job creation in Australia. East Asia leads the world in such value chains.
While Australia has achieved an increase in Australian-produced elaborately
transformed manufactures to China and commodity exports to countries in the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) (Durban & Paterson 2011), we have
relatively low participation in these value chains—something that must change
(OECD 2012d).

Cross-border value chains are proliferating across all sectors of the international
economy, including services. This trend is set to continue in coming decades, with the
business models supporting these arrangements varying from fully vertically
integrated corporate structures to contractual networks.[1] There is no single approach.

Increasingly, legal, accounting, engineering and design services will be supplied across
national borders. For example, the Ford Ranger vehicle was designed in Australia and
is produced across the global Ford production network, including in Thailand, and is
sold in 180 countries.

Structural change in response to technology and changes in relative costs is not new
for Australian businesses and is likely to continue. Business strategies and operating
models will continue to respond. For example, the opportunities provided by the
increasing sophistication and affordability of information and communications
technology, particularly for service provision, are there for all. Many businesses have
recognised these opportunities and are managing complex changes to their business
models to secure them.

Integrating with regional value chains provides Australian industries with the
opportunity to build on their strengths and expand their businesses. Australian
businesses are already identifying those elements of value chains—from conception
to production to consumer—where they have a comparative advantage. Traditionally,
this has been at the start of these chains, providing minerals and agricultural
products. These industries will remain important, but opportunities are increasingly
likely to come from the efficient delivery of high-value-added inputs focused on

1 For example, Swedish furniture company IKEA has for years outsourced manufacturing to
subcontractors in countries like Poland and China, retaining design engineering in Sweden. See also the
Blundstone Australia example in Chapter 3.

190


-----

customer demand in Asia, particularly for services (chapters 2 and 4). Capturing these
opportunities will require a highly skilled labour force, access to technology, a strong
focus on service provision and deeper engagement with Asian customers so as to
understand and meet their requirements (Chapter 6).

Recent competitiveness studies suggest that Australian businesses can further
enhance their international outlook and management experience, business systems
and connectivity to suppliers and the region. This necessity is reflected in Australia’s
relatively low rating on the development of value chains (see, for example,
CPA Australia 2012).

The value chain model is driving regional specialisation. Specialised production hubs
are one possibility that Australian businesses should explore. These hubs involve a
clustering of specific production steps in a particular region or country—for example,
where transport or overhead costs are reduced or technology spillovers are enhanced
by co-location (Athukorala 2010). Australia needs to prioritise cluster strategies,
based on strong supplier networks and greater inter-firm cooperation
(CPA Australia 2012).

Choices over the location of business activities, especially in the region, are also a
factor for the competitiveness of Australian businesses. In many cases, cross-border
partnerships, mergers or acquisitions will be necessary to build sufficient scale to be
regionally competitive (Box 7.2). For example, BlueScope Steel, Australia’s largest
steel manufacturer, recently reconfigured its Australian operations and formed a joint
venture with the Japanese company Nippon Steel to improve domestic growth and
access new Asian markets, including Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand
and Vietnam, and to secure a greater presence in the United States (BlueScope
Steel 2011).

Australian businesses are recognising the benefits of building commercial links with
businesses in other countries—collaborating rather than competing to offer goods
and services that align with areas of comparative advantage. For example, Australian
financial services providers are increasingly targeting their products to complement
other regional financial services centres.

In this environment, strategies to manage business risks and pressures that can arise
from more sophisticated and integrated value chains are necessary. Disruptions to the
global automotive components system following the earthquake and tsunami in
Japan and the floods in Thailand in 2011 illustrated the importance of such skills and
relationships (Boao Forum for Asia 2012). Building redundancy and resilience into
value chains will be necessary, as will having a diverse set of partners and suppliers.

Strong relationships with these partners and suppliers will be essential.

191


-----

**Box 7.2: Accessing cross-border value chains—Binder Group**


The Binder Group, established in 1982, is one of the world’s leading designers,
manufacturers and suppliers of pipe support and pipe suspension systems
incorporating the latest technology in accordance with international design codes.
Binder’s systems are used in heavy engineering to secure and keep pipes in place.

Binder understood that to be a long-term sustainable manufacturer it needed to
expand internationally, offer a cost-competitive product and be the supplier of
choice to multinational customers.

Binder worked hard to develop exports by researching international markets and
developing relationships with multinational customers. It accessed the global
supply chain by continually ‘knocking on the doors’ of major engineering
procurement and construction companies, getting added to approved vendor lists
and developing a strong network of agents in target markets.

Using the latest design software, Binder can integrate with many of its customers’
design packages to provide a seamless service that adds value and removes the
time-consuming task of support design. The company has production spread across
national borders. Its Perth factory focuses on short lead-time, high-flexibility
products, and its joint venture manufacturing facilities in Indonesia allow it to
compete in markets where price is a major factor.

Doing the homework and building up an international presence has paid dividends.
Binder supplies the world’s top 30 engineering companies and has worked with
companies such as KBR, Bechtel, Saipem and Toyo. It has completed projects in the
Middle East, Southeast Asia, Japan and South Korea.

Binder’s competitive advantage is that it is a long-term global player offering
bespoke solutions with a track record of projects; it also offers a competitively
priced world-class product. The company has a strong international reputation and
network of agents and has at various times been assisted by Austrade—through the
Export Market Development Grants scheme—and the Export Finance and
Insurance Corporation.

The Government will create a domestic environment with stable systems and a strong
productivity agenda that allows Australian businesses to expand into regional
markets, through policies based on improving skills and education, better planning of
infrastructure investment, greater innovation and reducing regulatory burden
(chapters 5 and 6). We will also work to increase market information and access.

And businesses can help each other. Some Australian businesses, including banks and
suppliers of professional services such as legal and accounting services, can do a lot to
help others become part of the region. In particular, they can and are assisting small
and medium-sized enterprises to connect with potential customers and business
partners in the region.

192


-----

#### Building deeper business partnerships in the region

Australian businesses expanding into Asia cannot rely solely on strategies developed
for the domestic market. Building a successful business in Asia requires an ability to
establish and adapt relationships with regional partners and customers. Strong
relationships are particularly important in the Asian market—business relationships
cannot be established by a single visit, transaction or acquisition.

Some Australian businesses are deepening their relationships with Asia by ensuring
that their senior management teams or company boards include people with Asian
capabilities and experience, and that those skills are recognised and valued within the
business. This trend has scope to broaden across industry sectors, and move beyond
business leaders and large companies to form part of the business strategy for small
and medium-sized enterprises looking to enter regional markets (Chapter 6).

Relationships across borders can be reinforced through a range of mechanisms,
including joint ventures, local agents and direct ownership—the same mechanisms
for joining regional and global value chains.

Australian businesses recognise that their approach must be based on a good
understanding of the region, including an awareness of cultural differences across
Asian countries and the impact these may have on social and business relationships
(Box 7.3). Having leaders with cultural knowledge, language skills or experience in
Asia are factors that will contribute to Australia’s success.


**Box 7.3: Linfox in Asia**


Linfox is Australia’s largest privately held logistics company. It delivers supply chain
solutions across the Asia–Pacific region, including domestic transport and
warehousing, cold-chain support and supply-chain network design.

Linfox first established operations in Asia in 1984. Today it operates in 10 countries,
including Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and China, and has around 12,000 staff
based in Asia. Its operations in Vietnam and India have recently grown rapidly. Its
Asian business is profitable and growing twice as fast as its non-resource Australian
business. Central to Linfox’s success in Asia is a keen understanding of the cultural,
political and business practices in each area of its operations.

Linfox’s strategy, in Australia and abroad, has been built on developing an effective
business model and staying with it. This strategy includes not compromising on
critical elements of the model such as a commitment to safety, fair work practices
and respectful staff relations. Building and maintaining long-term relationships with
business partners and customers has also been important. The Linfox model
demonstrates that applying best international practice along with deep regional
knowledge can deliver a competitive advantage in business.

193


-----

Businesses that are successful in Asia understand the importance of reciprocity and of
differences in negotiating styles and social norms across Asian cultures, show
courtesy in their relationships, and demonstrate a commitment to fostering and
developing these relationships in both personal and professional dimensions
(BCG 2012; UGM Consulting 2012; RBC 2012).

Businesses that understand their markets will be best able to tailor their products and
capitalise on opportunities. Services sectors, in particular, rely on the ability of
business to understand and engage with Asian economies and communities. Tourism,
education, financial services, retail and information technology require a high degree
of personal interaction. In many cases, building local teams has been important for
success (BCG 2012).

Bilateral business councils, chief executive officer and similar forums, and industry
and professional associations can support Australian businesses to network and make
enduring regional connections.

Organisations, too—such as the Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration
Association, the Australian Services Roundtable, the Business Council of Australia,
CPA Australia, Engineers Australia, Master Builders Australia and chambers of
commerce—can forge effective partnerships with international counterparts. Some of
these associations have been pioneers in building bridges with Asia (Box 7.4). For
example, over the past 50 years, the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry
has provided support to the Australia Japan Business Co-operation Committee, which
meets annually with Japanese counterparts at the top levels of business.

Opportunity exists to further leverage the capabilities and connections of Australia’s
business organisations. Through our Asian Century Business Engagement Plan, and
with the support of the Austrade network, we will support the activities of Australia’s
member-based business groups to develop and execute projects to strengthen their
long-term engagement in the region. This would see Australian businesses more
effectively access in-market networks, develop new relationships with potential
partners in Asian economies and help identify and secure more opportunities for
Australian businesses to compete and succeed in regional value chains.


**Box 7.4: A history of engagement—CPA Australia**


CPA Australia’s involvement in Asia began in the late 1940s, in an era when many
nations in the region were newly independent or approaching independence and
needed business institutions, infrastructure and processes to promote economic
growth. A strong accounting profession was central to achieving those aims. Its
approach is focused on forging strong formal and informal relationships with local
professional bodies, universities and government agencies.

Today, it has 33,000 members in Asia, and offices in Beijing, Guangzhou, Hanoi,
Ho Chi Minh City, Hong Kong, Jakarta, Kuala Lumpur, Shanghai and Singapore,
among others. In Vietnam, CPA Australia has an agreement with the Ministry of
Finance to help develop an international best practice legal framework to govern
the local accounting and auditing profession. This will deliver results for the
Vietnamese economy, and for Australian businesses looking to operate in Vietnam.

194


-----

### 7.3 Starting at home

To secure the opportunities emerging in Asia, Australia needs to have in place border
controls that do not impose unnecessary barriers to cross-border activity, and that
support Australia’s economic integration with the region.

The Government will remove unnecessary regulatory impediments and disincentives
to doing business in Australia and moving goods, services, people and capital across
our borders. While there are legitimate reasons for certain measures, these will be
examined against the benefits that further economic integration brings.

Maintaining Australia’s reputation as an attractive place to invest is crucial to our
future. We will ensure that Australia remains open to investment from across the
region and the globe.

We will work to further enhance Australia’s reputation as a preferred business
destination. Australia tends to do well on competitiveness and similar indices overall,
but the results across individual elements can be highly variable (CPA Australia 2012).
We cannot afford to be complacent, but should focus on building on Australia’s
existing advantages and improving our performance in areas where we are doing
relatively less well.

Our domestic policy priorities are to meet our commitments to lower remaining
tariffs, improve regulatory frameworks (particularly in support of greater financial
integration), make the movement of low-risk goods and people easier, maintain
consistent and transparent foreign investment screening and ensure that our
regulations are well understood by domestic and foreign companies.

Appropriate infrastructure—airports, ports and communications systems—is essential
to enabling effective cross-border trade and travel (Chapter 5). These facilities need
to link into regional networks.[2]


_National objective_


18a. The Australian economy will be more open and integrated with Asia, through
efforts to improve our domestic arrangements. The flow of goods, services, capital,
ideas and people will be easier.

 - Australia’s trade links with Asia will be at least one-third of GDP by 2025, up

from one-quarter in 2011.

To support these efforts, we will place regional economic integration at the centre of
decision-making processes (Chapter 6). The relationship between our policies and
regulations and those of our neighbours will be examined and we will look to the
region, as well as across the globe, for better ways of doing things.

2 Our Aviation White Paper sets out national priorities for the industry, including the coordination of
airport planning and investment (Australian Government 2009).

195


-----

We will work closely with Australian businesses, particularly small and medium-sized
enterprises, to build their capacity to access emerging opportunities.

#### Continuing to lower our tariffs

Australia already has some of the lowest tariffs on industrial and agricultural products
in the world. The Government will continue scheduled tariff reductions, such as the
reduction of textile and clothing tariffs as well as those associated with commitments
made to our trade partners in bilateral and regional agreements.

Ensuring the efficient administration of Australia’s tariff system is important for
reducing unnecessary transaction costs. For example, we are reviewing the legal and
administrative framework for excise-equivalent goods to identify further possible
improvements to this framework, including opportunities for streamlining
arrangements and reducing costs to businesses.

#### Removing unnecessary regulatory impediments to doing business

We will build on our progress in simplifying and harmonising business regulations in
cooperation with State and Territory governments (Chapter 5), through removing
unnecessary regulatory measures or impediments to cross-border business activity
over time and continuing to better align our regulatory frameworks with those of
other countries in the region.

Continued financial market integration is a priority. This requires domestic and
international efforts. Reforms are currently underway to further build on the strength
of Australia’s banking system, deepen Australia’s corporate bond market and improve
the efficiency and effectiveness of Australia’s superannuation and financial sectors
(Chapter 5). We will continue efforts to increase access by foreign businesses and
investors to Australian financial markets, without risking system integrity, and to
secure greater regional use of Australian financial services, such as funds
management.

The Government has taken a number of steps towards this outcome, such as
progressing an Investment Manager Regime, recommended in the Australian
Financial Centre Forum’s report Australia as a financial centre (the Johnson Report).
The Investment Manager Regime will clear the path for growth of offshore funds in
Australia and boost the attractiveness of Australia as a regional headquarters for fund
managers. We are also progressing the Asian Region Funds Passport, which will
increase the opportunities for Australia’s funds management industry to manage the
growing wealth in the region. Our present focus is on ensuring that licensing and
other regulatory requirements applying to foreign financial participants strike the
right balance between the integrity of the system and market access, and that
Australian exchanges can effectively service the region.

Australia’s tax settings have implications for increasing cross-border trade and capital
mobility. Our bilateral tax treaty network, which sets out tax arrangements with
partner countries and establishes mechanisms for dealing with disputes, needs to

196


-----

cover our emerging trade and investment links across the region. The Government
will give priority to negotiations within Asia, where it is in the national interest and
where fiscal circumstances permit.

Our rules will be clear and consistent in their application, and better able to
accommodate differences in definitions of income, debt and equity, capital, and
accounting practices across the region. We will make efforts to ensure that ambiguity
or conflict can be resolved in a credible and timely manner.

In these efforts, there will be trade-offs that will need to be balanced. The
opportunities provided by increasing integration also present potential risks to
Australia’s revenue base.

#### Improving the movement of goods across Australian borders

The Government is developing an Australian border management strategy to respond
to the challenges of the dynamic regional and global environment. This strategy will
continue our intelligence-led, risk-based approach to intervention, whereby border
protection agencies can concentrate on high-risk people, goods and environments,
and low-risk goods and people can move in and out of the country with minimum
disruption. Coordinating efforts offshore, at the border and onshore will be important
for the effectiveness of border management arrangements in managing risk (Box 7.5).

Implementation of our biosecurity reform agenda includes stronger partnerships with
State and Territory governments, industry, trading partners and the general public.

Reducing compliance costs is a shared responsibility. The Australian Customs and
Border Protection Service works closely with industry, mainly through the Customs
and Border Protection National Consultative Committee, to improve trade facilitation
through co-design work. An example of this collaboration is work being conducted
under the Cargo Control Framework; identifying measures to streamline the clearance
of legitimate cargo is one area of focus. Customs and Border Protection undertakes an
annual time release study to measure improvements in cargo clearance times.

The Government will encourage the Australian trading community to develop new
collaborative mechanisms, such as the ‘port community systems’ being explored in
the United Kingdom and elsewhere in the European Union. These systems seek to
support efficient collection, collation and communication of data to border
management authorities.

We remain committed to operating a robust and transparent trade remedies system
that complies with Australia’s international obligations. This system, which includes
mechanisms for imposing anti-dumping remedies for under-priced imports that cause
material injury to a domestic industry, is an important complement to the trade
liberalisation commitments Australia makes to other countries. Reforms announced in
the June 2011 Streamlining Australia’s Anti–Dumping System package are in the
process of being implemented (Australian Government 2011b). These reforms will
provide better access to the system, particularly for small and medium-sized
enterprises and primary producers, and will enhance the rigour and timeliness of
decisions.

197


-----

**Box 7.5: Time release studies—measuring progress at home and abroad**


Australia’s time release studies provide a holistic view of the cargo operating
environment and how different participants—government and businesses—affect
clearance times. The studies allow year-on-year improvements in clearance times
to be measured and further improvements to be identified. They also provide
industry with a measure of how the Australian Customs and Border Protection
Service and other agencies perform in delivering timely cargo clearance.

Data from time release studies indicates that clearance times at Australia’s
seaports and airports are improving. Since the first study was conducted five years
ago, sea cargo is now cleared approximately 1.5 days earlier. It also shows that
early reporting by industry supports improved cargo clearance performance,
enabling border agencies to complete risk assessments before cargo arrives in
Australia. Early clearance reduces transaction costs for industry as traders are able
to prearrange collection and inland transport. The earlier identification of high-risk
cargo, which may require additional scrutiny, supports more efficient handling of
legitimate cargo.

Australia actively supports the carrying out of time release studies in other
countries through the Asia–Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum and other
international trade facilitation forums, and contributes to the expansion of regional
expertise and capacity in this area.

#### Supporting the cross-border movement of people

Rising living standards in Asia will alter the pattern and volume of migration and travel
(Chapter 2). The Government will ensure that our migration policy and regulatory
settings are consistent, fair and have a reduced impact on trade and travel, while
effectively managing the risks associated with the cross-border movement of people
from many places.

We will strive to provide the best visa services in Asia by learning from existing
services and the experience of travellers in the region, developing a new
client-centred approach, and undertaking close discussions with countries in the
region to work through impediments.

Low-risk visitors need to be able to enter Australia more easily if we are to take
advantage of the expected increase in regional travel. We will expand our network of
service delivery partners, progress label-free visa arrangements, support longer
validity periods and multiple entry visas, and extend online visa lodgement to most
visitors by 2013–14.

China will be a focus. The Government will build on a recent trial to streamline access
for independent Chinese tourists and China’s recent agreement to label-free visa
arrangements. This follows the successful conclusion in 2011 of the Memorandum of
Understanding on Strengthening Tourism Cooperation with China.

198


-----

These initiatives add to existing efforts; respondents to a 2012 survey of Chinese
travellers found the Australian visa application process easier than or comparable to
those of other long-haul destination countries (GfK Blue Moon 2012).

Improved recognition of overseas educational qualifications and trade skills and a
flexible, responsive skilled migration system, with appropriate controls, are required
to help meet Australia’s changing labour force needs while ensuring greater
opportunities for Australians across a range of industries (Chapter 6).

#### Foreign investment

Foreign investment has been, and will continue to be, important to Australia’s
prosperity (Chapter 3). Investment links between Australia and the region are low
relative to our trade relationship. Two-way investment links with our region should
continue to grow over time.

The Government welcomes foreign investment into Australia (Box 7.6). Foreign
investment supplements domestic savings and provides additional capital for
economic growth, supports existing jobs, and creates new opportunities. It helps
boost productivity by introducing new technology, providing capital for infrastructure,
supporting global value chains and markets, and enhancing Australia’s skill base
through greater knowledge transfer and exposure to more innovative work practices.

Transparency regarding Australia’s foreign investment screening process is important
to give confidence to investors and the Australian community. The Government has
improved transparency by outlining the factors that are considered when assessing
the national interest implications of proposed investments. National interest
considerations include the impact on national security, the economy, the community,
competition, Government revenue or other policies, in addition to the character of
the investor and the independence of its operations from foreign governments. An
easy-to-read version of our foreign investment policy, which sets out these national
interest considerations, was released in 2010 and translated into Chinese (Mandarin),
Japanese and Indonesian.

The Foreign Investment Review Board website is regularly updated to provide
guidance to assist investors to understand the foreign investment regime. The board
has published a number of fact sheets to alert investors to their obligations when
investing in Australia, including on issues such as corporate governance, corporate
law, market activity, directors’ duties, competition and consumer law, and taxation.

We will continue to enhance the transparency of Australia’s foreign investment
screening process, including publicly explaining significant decisions where possible,
and making greater efforts to reach out to businesses and governments. We will
ensure that our assessment framework and expectations for operating within
Australian markets are well understood.

199


-----

Our focus for promoting Australian investment opportunities to overseas investors
will be on four priorities: economic and social infrastructure; tourism infrastructure;
clean energy; and innovation (including advanced manufacturing). The Australian
Trade Commission (Austrade) works closely with State and Territory governments to
deliver Australia’s investment priorities.


**Box 7.6: Foreign investment in Australia**


Around 450 business proposals for foreign investment in Australia are approved
each year (with an average annual value of around $135 billion), most within
30 days. Since 2001, only two business proposals have been rejected, one in 2001
in the resources sector and one in 2011 in the financial services sector.

The Government’s foreign investment screening regime is designed to enable us to
consider proposed investments on a case-by-case basis and, where necessary, stop
those that are not in the national interest. We can also impose conditions on
investments or require undertakings by foreign investors to address concerns.

Within this framework, however, foreign investment from all enterprises is
welcomed. Recognising some community concern in this area, the screening
arrangements are being made more transparent. For example, we have outlined
some of the factors considered when reviewing proposals by foreign governments
and their related entities and when reviewing investment proposals in agricultural
land and businesses.


**_Investment in Australia by foreign government–related entities_**


Foreign investment across the region involves sovereign wealth funds, pension
funds and state-owned enterprises, along with private enterprises. In Australia, all
direct investments by entities related to foreign governments[3] will continue to be
subject to screening, regardless of the value of the investment, as will proposals by
such entities to establish new businesses or acquire land in Australia.

For proposals involving a foreign government or a related entity, we give particular
attention to whether the investment is commercial in nature or if the investor may
be pursuing broader political or strategic objectives that may be contrary to
Australia’s national interests.

The increased understanding of Australia’s foreign investment regime has helped
reduce issues around foreign government investment and resulted in a smoother
screening process.

3 Foreign governments and their related entities include a body politic of a foreign country; companies
or other entities in which foreign governments, their agencies or related entities have more than an
aggregate 15 per cent interest; and companies or entities that are otherwise controlled by foreign
governments, their agencies or related entities (Australian Treasurer 2012).

200


-----

**Box 7.6 (continued)**


**_Australian agricultural land and businesses_**


Foreign investment, along with domestic investment, will continue to be important
for expanding Australia’s food production and supporting Australia’s position as a
major exporter of food and agricultural produce.

We will continue to screen all proposed acquisitions of agricultural land and direct
investments in agribusinesses by foreign government-related entities, irrespective
of their value. Proposed investments by private investors in agribusinesses are
subject to the same thresholds that apply to investment in other Australian
company or business assets.

We recognise the need to preserve and, where possible, enhance the sustainability
of Australia’s national agricultural resources. In assessing foreign investment
applications involving agriculture, we consider the impact of the proposal on:



- the quality and availability of Australia’s agricultural resources, including water



- land access and use



- agricultural production and productivity



- Australia’s capacity to remain a reliable supplier of agricultural production to

both the Australian community and our trading partners



- biodiversity



- employment and prosperity in Australia’s local and regional communities.


Data collected by the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) in 2010 indicates that
there is little foreign ownership of Australian agricultural land or businesses
(89 per cent of agricultural land was wholly Australian-owned and a further
5.5 per cent was at least 50 per cent Australian-owned) (ABS 2011a). These results
are broadly comparable with results from a 1983–84 ABS survey. High-quality data
is crucial to public debate in this area and to maintaining public confidence in the
foreign investment screening process. Consequently, we have funded ongoing and
expanded data collection by the ABS.

A working group to consult on the development of a foreign ownership register for
agricultural land has also been established. A national foreign ownership register
for agricultural land would provide the Australian community with a more
comprehensive picture of the size and locations of foreign agricultural landholdings
than is currently available. We will pursue a register where it clearly improves
transparency of foreign ownership in agriculture without imposing unnecessary
burdens on investors or duplicating work already undertaken by State and Territory
governments.

201


-----

#### Greater collaboration between business and government

Australian businesses and governments can make a fresh commitment to work
together to seize the opportunities before us.

The Government will step up efforts to help businesses to identify and secure
opportunities on offer in the region. By offering practical in-market support and
advice, helping businesses to secure finance and providing ‘badge of government’
support, we can make doing business in the region a little easier.

There will be opportunities for Australia’s small and medium-sized enterprises
through greater international engagement. The Government’s main focus will be
assisting these enterprises, which often find it more difficult to identify market
opportunities and regulatory requirements, to gain access to trade finance and to
establish contacts in target markets. Addressing the impediments these companies
face in conducting business in Asia will be important for Australia to capture the
benefits of the Asian century.

This support should be well targeted. We will work closely with the business
community, including through peak industry and small business groups across the
economy, and through bilateral and regional business forums.

We ask that businesses and industry groups get involved in these processes, as they
have extensive networks and insights that complement and expand those of
government. Such collaboration will also assist government efforts to get policy
settings right, both domestically and internationally.

Collaboration between business, academics and government will be encouraged to
generate ideas and strategies to resolve problems.

The Government will continue to work with non-government groups such as the APEC
Business Advisory Council, the Business-20 (B20) forum as part of the Group of
Twenty (G20) process, the Tasman Transparency Group and the Pacific Economic
Cooperation Council. We will also work with leading university research groups and
think tanks such as the G20 Studies Centre within the Lowy Institute and the G20 Asia
Forum at the Australian National University.

Leaders across all levels of government have been supporting trade delegations and
business tours across the region to build government-to-government and
business-to-business links. Bilateral business councils are also important. These
pathways to building business relationships will reinforce collaboration within the
region.

New openings are emerging for Australian businesses to partner with governments
and institutions in the region. For example, many countries in Asia have ambitious
plans to upgrade the skills of their workforces. This creates opportunities for
Australian education and training providers, some of whom are already working in the
region (Chapter 6).

202


-----

The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Austrade (Box 7.7), Enterprise Connect
and the Export Finance and Insurance Corporation (EFIC) will be at the heart of the
Government’s efforts to help Australian businesses to become part of regional
markets. These agencies will better coordinate their activities abroad and at home,
and better target the growth opportunities of the Asian century. We will improve
cooperation and coordination with State and Territory agencies so we can work
together under an overall ‘Australian’ umbrella.

Enterprise Connect supports Australian small and medium-sized enterprises to
develop the skills, capabilities and knowledge needed to make the most of
opportunities at home and abroad. Its business advisers work directly with
companies. This support was extended recently to the tourism industry.

EFIC assists Australian businesses exporting overseas through the provision of
financial services. The Government will revise EFIC’s mandate to ensure more of its
resources are devoted to addressing the market failures that impede Australian small
and medium-sized exporters, especially in emerging and frontier markets.


**Box 7.7: The Australian Trade Commission in Asia**


Austrade is our international trade, education and investment promotion agency. It
assists businesses and institutions through the combination of its knowledge of,
and connections in, markets, and its status as a government organisation to
promote Australian products and services.

Austrade has increased its efforts in high-growth economies, particularly in Asia’s
emerging and frontier markets where support is most needed, such as Mongolia,
western China and Central Asia. It is active in 16 countries across Asia, with
60 per cent of its 558 international staff based there. Austrade has offices in
45 locations in Asia, including 13 in China and 11 in India.

It employs skilled local staff who are supported by a leadership group of
41 Australian trade commissioners, the majority of whom are recruited from the
private sector and have Asian business experience and language skills. More than
410 Austrade employees speak one or more Asian languages.

Austrade is seeking to improve the quality of the information, advice and services it
provides to Australian businesses that want to capture trade opportunities,
including in value chains in Asian markets, as well as to potential investors into
Australia and Australian educational institutions that are providing high-quality
opportunities for Asian students in Australia or seeking to deliver education and
training in Asia.

It is enhancing Australia’s reputation through the Building Brand Australia program,
which aims to project a more contemporary and holistic image of the nation
through the brand identity Australia Unlimited. Brand Australia highlights the
world-class ideas and achievements of Australian business leaders, academics,
scientists, administrators, innovators, creators and social entrepreneurs.

203


-----

Other measures to support small and medium-sized enterprises will continue to
operate. These include the Small Business Support Line, the Small Business Advisory
Services program, the Buy Australian at Home and Abroad initiative,
Commercialisation Australia grants, and research and development tax incentives.
The Government will review these programs regularly to ensure that they respond to
shifts in the business environment. Austrade will ensure that the Export Market
Development Grants scheme continues to support the changing needs of Australian
exporters.

Under the Tourism 2020 strategy, the Government has established a $48.5 million
Asia Marketing Fund to accelerate the promotion of Australian tourism to growing
markets in Asia. The fund will be administered by Tourism Australia.

Tourism Australia, together with the States and Territories, is also supporting small
and medium-sized tourism enterprises to secure opportunities in Asia through
industry missions, trade events and digital promotion connecting to the Australia
Tourism Data Warehouse. Product and destination information is currently being
translated into Chinese (Mandarin). Austrade is a partner in these efforts through its
strategy of targeting Asia to fund the development of new products and services in a
number of industries, including tourism.

### 7.4 Working in the region to strengthen openness

Australia has a solid record of building international coalitions for greater openness. It
proposed the establishment of APEC and hosted the first meeting in 1989. Australia
was a founding member of the Cairns Group, which was instrumental in achieving a
breakthrough in agricultural market access barriers and subsidies at the Uruguay
Round negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. We were an
active part of the negotiations that led to China’s accession to the World Trade
Organization (WTO).

The Government remains determined to strengthen regional and global institutions
and architecture to support effective regional economic and financial systems. This
will be a carefully considered process, as countries are at different stages of
development. We will seek to reduce tariffs and other barriers to trade imposed by
countries at the border and beyond. We will constantly strive to increase access for
Australian businesses and investment in Asian markets. This will complement our
efforts to ensure that Australia remains open to investment from the region.

The stalling of the WTO Doha round, now in its 11th year, and the implementation by
G20 economies of 124 new restrictive measures between October 2011 and
April 2012 (WTO 2012) are particularly troubling. Some of Australia’s major trading
partners maintain barriers to our goods, services and investments. We are working
hard to reduce these barriers faced by Australian businesses.

204


-----

The WTO, the G20, APEC, ASEAN and the East Asia Summit will all be important for
the emergence of effective regional and bilateral agreements and institutions, and for
progressing economic integration. They will drive both greater collaboration in the
development of national regulatory frameworks and better understanding of each
other’s arrangements.

We work pragmatically across these forums to further the opportunities for greater
openness and integration as they arise.


_National objective_


18b. The Australian economy will be more open and integrated with Asia, through
comprehensive regional agreements, better aligned economic regulations, greater
infrastructure connectivity and enhanced understanding of each country’s
arrangements. The flow of goods, services, capital, ideas and people will be easier
and Australian businesses and investors will have greater access to opportunities in
Asia.

Our efforts have a clear focus on reducing administrative, compliance and
enforcement costs. To this end, we are engaging the business community and
broader institutions, academics, regulators and other experts.

We will continue to work with our neighbours to break down trade and investment
barriers and to build a deeper knowledge and understanding of each other’s
arrangements. The risks that can emerge from greater economic and financial
integration, such as greater exposure to negative events in other countries, must be
carefully managed.

#### Effective and stable regional financial and economic systems

The Government will seek full economic and financial integration across the region,
supported by the evolution of stable, efficient and well-regulated financial markets.
Greater integration requires strong global and regional institutions, with an emphasis
on inclusive, rules-based systems.

The G20 is the main vehicle for putting this strategy into practice. Its membership
reflects the growing dynamism of the region and the global influence of emerging
economies (Chapter 8). It is now the pre-eminent forum for international economic
cooperation, with a focus on rules-based and market-oriented approaches.

Australia is hosting the G20 in 2014. We will use this opportunity to promote strong,
sustainable and balanced growth, working with other G20 and non-G20 countries and
drawing on the interest and expertise of business leaders, academic communities and
non-government organisations.

205


-----

While the East Asia Summit and APEC are at different stages of development, they
complement each other. They each offer avenues for nurturing regional support for
reform. Efforts across these forums provide Australia with the best chance to shape
outcomes that are in Australia’s and the regions’ interests.

APEC’s efforts in pursuing financial reform and regional financial integration are
fundamental—the Asia Region Funds Passport initiative and the Asia–Pacific
Public–Private Partnership Mentoring Scheme are two examples of the practical
changes that can be achieved.

The APEC Business Advisory Council 2012 Report to APEC Economic Leaders
recommended the establishment of an Asia–Pacific Financial Forum to promote
progress in financial market integration, in support of the region’s financial
development goals. Australia is hosting an international symposium in 2013, which
will bring together private sector leaders and regulators in the financial services
industry from across the Asia–Pacific region. The focus will be to explore the Business
Advisory Council’s recommendation.

APEC leaders reaffirmed their commitment this year to move more rapidly to regional
economic integration, including greater exchange rate flexibility, and to intensify
efforts to bolster financial sector stability. Australia will work closely with Indonesia
and China—APEC hosts in 2013 and 2014—on the agenda for deepening regional
integration.

The Government supports ASEAN’s plans to formally establish an economic
community by 2015, and we welcome ASEAN’s proposal to link this community with
its external trading partners, including Australia, through the Regional Comprehensive
Economic Partnership. We will also seek appropriate opportunities to participate in
work underway in the ASEAN+3 grouping and similar forums of which we are not a
member. In particular, we remain interested in participating in the financial crisis
management fund established by the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralisation to
support regional financial and economic stability. Similarly, we would seek to join any
Asian monetary fund or similar institution that might emerge. This would strengthen
Australia’s economic, financial and political links with the region, formalise our
involvement in regional crisis management and ensure that we could participate in
the evolution of regional processes.

Australia is a member of the Asian Development Bank, and supports its contribution
to ASEAN regional initiatives. As in the past, we would be a willing participant in
resolving regional financial crises if they were to occur.

Further integration of Australia’s equity and bond markets with the emerging markets
in Asia and with global bond markets is a priority. This will support the development
and diversification of Australia’s local currency corporate bond market, and provide
new opportunities to access the capital pools resulting from Asia’s high savings rates.

206


-----

We are working with China to support the internationalisation of its currency, the
renminbi (RMB). Earlier this year, the Reserve Bank of Australia and the People’s Bank
of China announced a $30 billion bilateral currency swap agreement, one of the
largest such swaps China has entered into.

In July 2012, we announced an annual Australia–Hong Kong RMB trade and
investment dialogue, recognising Hong Kong’s role as the financial gateway between
China and the rest of the world. The dialogue is led by the private sector and focuses
on business opportunities arising from the internationalisation of the RMB.

The Australian dollar is currently one of nine currencies convertible with the RMB on
the Chinese foreign exchange market; the others are the US dollar, the Euro, the
Japanese yen, the British pound, the Hong Kong dollar, the Canadian dollar, the
Malaysian ringgit and the Russian rouble.

A further priority is the establishment of direct trading between the Australian dollar
and the RMB in mainland China; other currencies that are directly traded at present
are the US dollar, the Japanese yen, the Malaysian ringgit and the Russian rouble. We
have held preliminary discussions with the Chinese Government to explore how soon
direct convertibility can be practicably achieved. We are continuing these discussions,
and also exploring other opportunities to work with China to support the
internationalisation of the RMB.

We are making reform of infrastructure delivery throughout the region a priority in
our cooperation dialogues with regional partners. Our focus is on creating the
conditions necessary for both private and public participation in regional
infrastructure development. This builds on efforts being advanced through APEC,
including the Asia–Pacific Infrastructure Partnership dialogues.

#### Trade barriers

The WTO has established a set of global trade rules, an internationally recognised
system for avoiding or resolving disputes, and seeks to deliver multilateral trade
negotiations. Australia has the credentials and incentive to continue to be at the
forefront of initiatives for reform in the WTO and the global trading system, deploying
diplomatic and non-official (Track 2) processes to secure a robust global trading
system.

The WTO is the Government’s preferred vehicle for pursuing trade liberalisation. We
will continue to identify new pathways for making progress in the WTO Doha
Development Round, seeking early outcomes where agreement is close and
developing fresh approaches to the more intractable issues.

Australia is pressing hard for the completion of negotiations on trade facilitation. By
streamlining and simplifying customs procedures, an agreement on trade facilitation
would reduce non-tariff barriers to trade. The trade facilitation agreement is
estimated to contribute 44 per cent of the entire benefit of the Doha round,
two-thirds of which would accrue to developing countries.

207


-----

Australia is co-chairing, with the United States, negotiations among 46 economies for
an agreement on the liberalisation of trade in services under the auspices of the WTO.
This plurilateral agreement, which would cover 70 per cent of global GDP and 70 per
cent of global trade in services, could be expanded over time to take in more WTO
members. Australia is also participating in discussions aimed at expanding the product
coverage and membership of the WTO Information Technology Agreement.

Agriculture remains a high priority for Australia in the Doha round negotiations.
Australia will continue working with members of the Cairns Group and other
like-minded countries to negotiate reforms to market access, agricultural export
policies and farm production subsidies.

Within the Asian region, Australia is negotiating bilateral trade deals with China, India,
Indonesia, Japan and South Korea. Successful conclusion of these negotiations,
following the signing of a free trade agreement with Malaysia in May 2012 and the
negotiation of agreements with Singapore and Thailand by the previous Government,
could assist in paving the way for more complete regional economic integration.

By completing the ASEAN – Australia – New Zealand Free Trade Agreement
(AANZFTA) in 2009—a high-quality, truly liberalising agreement covering countries
accounting for 18 per cent of Australia’s total trade—we have contributed to the
development of an important region-wide agreement.

The vision of regional integration is a free trade area that covers the Asia–Pacific.
Australia will continue to work through APEC to encourage trade liberalisation by
member economies, as has occurred over the past two decades. Average tariffs of
APEC members have declined from 16 per cent in 1989 to around 6 per cent in 2010.
The agreement of APEC members at Vladivostok in September 2012 to limit tariffs on
54 environmental goods to no more than 5 per cent constitutes further progress
towards free trade.

There are different possible pathways to a free trade area of the Asia–Pacific. The
Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement negotiations involve 11 APEC members and
membership is likely to continue expanding. Australia will support the
November 2012 launch of, and participate in negotiations for, the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership involving ASEAN, Australia, China, India, Japan,
New Zealand and South Korea.

Negotiations for the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement and the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership could create momentum for competitive
liberalisation and put Australia on two complementary pathways to a free trade area
of the Asia–Pacific. Australia welcomes and encourages these processes. We
recognise that outcomes agreed in one negotiation that facilitate deeper economic
integration will encourage new members to join, and also create pressure to adopt
similar liberalisation in competing negotiations.

We also need to be open to other opportunities to position Australia as part of
networks of regional trade agreements. For example, four Latin American countries—

208


-----

Chile, Peru, Colombia and Mexico—have formed the Pacific Alliance for free trade.
We will make an assessment of the merits of seeking to join the Pacific Alliance, which
is likely to expand to include other countries such as Costa Rica and Canada. If it
joined the Pacific Alliance, Australia could form a connecting rod between open
trading countries of Latin America and the markets of Asia that might facilitate an
open trade agreement.

In negotiating these bilateral and regional trade agreements, Australia supports
simple, liberal rules of origin to keep business compliance costs to a minimum and to
enable the agreements to be expanded over time towards the ultimate goal of a free
trade area of the Asia–Pacific.

#### Regulatory change and practical assistance

Australia will continue to provide practical advice and technical assistance directly to
regional countries to build market resilience and improve access for Australian
businesses.

Advocating policy changes beyond other countries’ borders in support of open and
well-regulated economic and financial markets will remain a priority. We seek greater
mutual understanding of national arrangements and a better interface between our
regulatory frameworks and those of our neighbours.

We look to collaborate further with other countries in developing regulatory
frameworks, and to provide practical capacity-building and technical assistance.
Similarly, efforts to promote joint standard-setting work and advocate international
standards will continue (Box 7.8).


**Box 7.8: Embedding international standards**


The International Accounting Standards Board’s International Financial Reporting
Standards (IFRS) support the cross-border comparison of businesses, investments
and commercial opportunities in countries that have adopted the standards.

Australia adopted the standards in 2005 and works to encourage their adoption by
other countries. In this context, Australia recognises the importance of ensuring
that regional perspectives and the circumstances in particular countries are taken
into account as the standards evolve. For example, the technical complexity
inherent in the standards complicates their adoption in countries where the
accounting profession’s capacity is limited by lack of experience and/or scale.

The Asian–Oceanian Standard–Setters Group and the IFRS Regional Policy Forum,
both of which Australia supports, are mechanisms through which countries in the
region contribute to the international standard-setting process.

The work Australia does with other countries through APEC and the East Asia Summit
is important. APEC, with its track record of achievement in strengthening
collaboration and building capacity for reform, has much to offer (Box 7.9).

209


-----

**Box 7.9: APEC delivers on reducing trade and investment barriers and**
**building capacity for reform**

The APEC Business Travel Card provides visa pre-clearance and express lane airport
processing for around 104,000 businesspeople in APEC member economies.
Improvements in customs procedures, regulatory cooperation, logistics and
infrastructure delivered US$58.7 billion in savings for businesses in the
APEC economies between 2007 and 2010.

In 2010, APEC economies agreed to work towards a regional improvement in
cross-border supply chain performance of 10 per cent by 2015. This includes
identifying choke points that limit fast, cost-efficient movement of goods and
services and addressing them through capacity-building and regulatory reform.

The food security action plan is pursuing sustainable development in the
agricultural sector and facilitating investment, trade and markets in the APEC
region. Various APEC economies, including Australia, have undertaken specific
capacity-building activities to strengthen food security.

APEC’s cross-border privacy rules provide best-practice guidance to economies on
the design of privacy laws and help to foster regulatory complementarity.

The 2010 APEC New Strategy for Structural Reform has seen Australia and other
economies publish individual plans for domestic structural reforms that are
designed, among other things, to promote open, well-functioning, transparent and
competitive markets. Implementation of the plans will be supported by practical,
voluntary cooperation among APEC economies. Australia has taken a lead role by
establishing a fund to help APEC economies implement their plans through
targeted capacity-building activities.

In 2011, leaders reaffirmed their commitment to the Investment Facilitation Action
Plan and agreed on a set of ‘non-binding investment principles’ covering issues
such as expropriation, compensation and dispute settlement. Implementation of
the plan is supported through capacity-building and technical assistance.

In 2012, leaders agreed to reduce tariffs to five per cent or less by 2015 on
54 environment products; these include solar cells, wind turbine blades, waste
water technologies and renewable energy electricity generating equipment. Lower
tariffs will boost trade in green products and help the region move towards a clean
energy future.

More recently, leaders have committed to promoting convergence on how APEC
economies address transparency in their trade agreements and reaffirmed the
need to build good regulatory practice that supports regional economic integration,
product safety, supply chain integrity and environmental protection, including
through capacity-building.

210


-----

The East Asia Summit (EAS) also offers scope to secure greater regional regulatory
collaboration. The inaugural EAS Finance Ministers’ Meeting in 2010 discussed
regional cooperation and capacity-building programs that focus on structuring and
restructuring financial markets. At the July 2012 EAS Education Ministers’ Meeting,
two new education cooperation projects were announced, and Australia will take part
in both projects. Our efforts will be pragmatic, based on informed discussions with
the business community and relevant governments. We are not interested in full
harmonisation for its own sake, and recognise that our approach could be one of
many possible pathways to a positive outcome.

Australia is already active on many fronts regarding regulatory reform in the region.
For example, within the context of APEC’s activities, the Australian-initiated Services
Trade Access Requirements database helps small businesses expand into regional
markets, while the Australian-led Non-Binding Guidelines for the Regulation of
Foreign Accountancy Professionals initiative provides best-practice guidance on the
design of rules for the accounting profession.

A range of bilateral exchange programs and activities aimed at public sector
capacity-building already exist. For example, the Australia Indonesia Partnership for
Economic Governance supports partnerships between the Australian and Indonesian
government departments responsible for economic governance and public sector
reform by funding long-term technical adviser deployments, staff visits and
secondments. In 2011, nine Australian Government officials worked in Indonesia on
activities to strengthen its investment policy and regulatory environment.

The Productivity Commission is undertaking an innovative ‘twinning’ program with
other APEC economies under the auspices of APEC’s New Strategy for Structural
Reform. Under the program, the Productivity Commission is sharing with other
countries its experience as an independent advisory body to government.

Our Government Partnerships for Development program (previously the Public Sector
Linkages Program) links Australian public sector agencies and universities to their
counterparts in developing countries and provides direct support for capacity-building
work. For example, the Australian APEC Study Centre at RMIT University draws on the
program to fund training courses and symposiums for government officials from
across the region, focusing on such areas as sustainable economic growth,
strengthening financial systems and food security.

211


-----

Further education and training for financial regulators from Australia and the
Asia–Pacific region will be delivered by the Centre for International Finance and
Regulation, located at the University of New South Wales.[4]

We offer technical assistance and capacity-building work as part of our free trade
agreement negotiations and implementation. AANZFTA negotiations were supported
by extensive technical assistance, and the agreement includes a commitment to
ongoing economic cooperation (Box 7.10).


**Box 7.10: Economic cooperation through trade agreements—AANZFTA**


The AANZFTA includes economic cooperation commitments with an associated
five-year Economic Cooperation Work Program, which supports ASEAN countries
and businesses to implement and use the agreement. Australia is contributing up to
$20 million over five years to the program.

Program activities are approved by the AANZFTA’s Free Trade Agreement Joint
Committee. A support unit in the ASEAN Secretariat manages project
implementation and often partners with international organisations, including the
World Intellectual Property Organization, the UN Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia
and the Pacific, the OECD and the World Trade Organization.

Examples of economic cooperation activities in 2010–11 included capacity-building
and technical assistance on rules of origin, monitoring the use of tariff preferences,
the two-annex approach to the scheduling of investment reservations, intellectual
property crime and accession to the World Intellectual Property Organization’s
Madrid Protocol, and statistics relating to international trade in services.

The Economic Cooperation Work Program activities are designed to leave a
long-lasting legacy. For example, the ASEAN Regional Diagnostics Network will
contribute to the system-wide delivery of credible plant pest and disease diagnostic
services, and a multiyear project is planned for training patent examiners.

4 The Centre for International Finance and Regulation, established in 2011, is a strategic link between
academia, financial regulators, government and the financial industry. It will drive our contribution to the
regional and global examination of financial sector developments and the design of regulatory responses
to them.

212


-----

## Case study: Australia’s agriculture and food sector

For Australia’s agriculture and food sector, substantial opportunities are emerging
from Asia’s rise. This will result in a boost to Australia’s economic and social
prosperity, particularly supporting jobs and income in rural and regional communities.


_National objective_


19. Australia’s agriculture and food production system will be globally competitive,
with productive and sustainable agriculture and food businesses.

 - Australian food producers and processors will be recognised globally as

innovative and reliable producers of more and higher-quality food and
agricultural products, services and technology to Asia.

##### Figure C.1: Australia’s agriculture and food sector in the Asian century

                                      - develop Asia-relevant capabilities in

    - improve innovation through joint

agriculture through education and training

government and industry investment

                                      - enhance access to markets in Asia

    - manage Australia’s natural resource

through stronger supply-chain

base

management skills

**Chapter 5**

**Chapter 6**

A productive and

Building

resilient Australian

capabilities

economy

**Australia’s**
**agriculture and food**
**production system**

**Chapter 9** **will be globally** **Chapter 7**
Deeper and **competitive, with** Operating in

**productive and** and

broader

**sustainable** connecting to

relationships

**agriculture and food** growing
**businesses** Asian markets

**Chapter 8**
Building sustainable
security in the region                   - reducing tariff and

  - enhance private and

technical barriers to

public engagement in

food trade

the region

                                                 - reducing farm subsidies

  - build better

and export support

relationships between   - supporting regional

subsidies

governments, and global food

                                                 - strengthening supply

industry and the security through trade

chains through market

community and technical expertise

access and investment

213


**competitive, with**
**productive and**
**sustainable**
**agriculture and food**
**businesses**

**Chapter 8**
Building sustainable
security in the region


management skills

**Chapter 6**
Building
capabilities

**Australia’s**
**agriculture and food**
**production system**
**will be globally** **Chapter 7**


-----

#### Asia’s demand for food is surging

Population and income growth in the region is driving increased demand for food—in
quantity, quality and product integrity. The real value of global food demand is
expected to rise by around 35 per cent by 2025 from 2007 levels, with most demand
coming from Asia (Chart C.1). China and India alone could account for almost
60 per cent of the global increase (Linehan et. al 2012).

The size and scale of global food markets will shift as an increasingly affluent region
demands higher value food and greater food choice. Consumer food preferences and
diets in our region will change.

##### Chart C.1: Demand for food will grow


Global demand by commodity

Vegetables and fruit

Meat

Cereals

Dairy products

Fish

Other food

Vegetable oils

Vegetable meal

Fish meal and oil

0 1,000 2,000

Billion (2007 US$)

2007 2025

Source: Linehan et al. (2012).


Global food demand

Rest of world

Asia

China

India

Rest of Asia


Breakdown
of demand
in Asia


0 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000

Billion (2007 US$)


2050


Although Asia contains some of the world’s largest agricultural economies, the
projected increase in consumption in the region will require greater food imports—
demand is likely to outpace food production over coming decades based on recent
global agricultural productivity performance and emerging environmental constraints.
The production of agricultural commodities for non-food use—particularly
plant-based biofuels—and non-agricultural uses of land, including urban
encroachment, will also constrain the supply response.

Australia’s agriculture and food sector is extraordinarily well-placed to build on its
strengths: proximity to markets in Asia, complementarity in production systems, a
robust biosecurity system, a record of innovation and reputation for producing
high-quality and safe food products, and a skilled workforce.

214


-----

#### Lifting productivity to increase output and capture value-adding opportunities

While Australia is a relatively small global food producer, we are a reliable exporter of
high-quality, ‘clean and green’ agricultural commodities and food products.
The sector has emerged from wide-ranging reforms over the past decades more
resilient and competitive. A renewed focus on productivity and investment will
underscore the sector’s next phase of growth.

We need to build on the sector’s strengths and build competitiveness through all five
pillars of our productivity agenda—skills and education, innovation, infrastructure, tax
reform and regulatory reform, while ensuring we manage our environmental assets
sustainably.

Through long standing investment in research and development and industry
innovation, Australian agriculture is one of our most productive industries. We
already encourage innovation across the food value chain through investment in rural
research and development corporations, the CSIRO, Cooperative Research Centres
program and other programs and incentives.

By continuing Australia’s strong track record of investment in research and
development, by both government and industry, we can continue to develop
products for Asian markets and solutions to the challenges of production uncertainty
and climate change. The Government is making large investments to support
adaptation through the Securing a Clean Energy Future plan. Better links between
scientists, researchers and businesses both in Australia and across the region will
further underpin the application of innovation, science and best practice in the food
production and value-adding chain. And the intellectual property that is generated is
a growing export opportunity in its own right.

Industry investment will be required in response to the opportunities ahead and as
new business models emerge. Access to capital will be essential, and we are creating
the right operating environment, including through our regulatory and tax reforms
and sound macroeconomic policies. Removing unnecessary regulation supports
investment and allows industry to transform. Significantly for the agriculture and food
sector we are reforming environmental regulation, undertaking agricultural and
veterinary chemical reforms and improving our biosecurity system. Our goal is to
place Australia in the top five countries for ease of doing business.

Public and private sector infrastructure investment—especially for transport, energy,
communication and water—will be needed. Moving into new areas and methods of
production, ensuring that businesses can connect to growing markets, and
accommodating sophisticated logistics requirements—all require careful planning and
infrastructure provision. State and Territory governments, which are responsible for
land-use planning, need to ensure that regulation supports, and does not impede,
sustainable agricultural development. We will be ensuring that the needs of the

215


-----

agriculture and food sector are fully considered in national infrastructure planning
and investment.

The long-term productivity of agriculture—both here and elsewhere—is tied to the
sustainability of food production. Our environmental stewardship is also a source of
competitive advantage. We will develop ways to clearly identify our ‘clean, green and
environmentally friendly’ credentials so that Australian exporters can reap the
benefits of this valuable national ‘brand’.

We need to maintain the health of our natural resources, including soil and water,
through quality regulation, assisting farmers and fishers to adopt sustainable
management practices and through robust markets. The Murray-Darling Basin Plan
and other water reform policies are critical measures to safeguard the future water
needs of agriculture, communities and the environment. The Caring for our Country
program, which funds management of our natural resources, is another such
measure.

The boost to the agriculture and food sector’s prospects from Asia’s rise could see the
development of new technologies and practices, as well as the necessary commercial
incentives for new infrastructure investment that will enable sustainable production
in northern Australia to flourish.

#### Enhancing capabilities to build successful businesses 

Building Asia-relevant capabilities in the agriculture and food sector will help
productivity and support deeper connections with our trading partners in Asia. The
sector needs highly skilled people who understand and can respond to the changing
demands of the modern agricultural and food business operating environment and
global market place.

Stronger entrepreneurial, management and technical skills will be necessary to be
successful in an increasingly interconnected global food industry, and this is placing a
premium on partnerships in value chains. The prevalence of multinational food
processing and retail companies means our businesses need to show world-class
supply chain management skills, including consistency of supply and the tailoring of
products and services to specific market needs. Businesses will need to manage issues
further removed from the boundaries of their own operations than ever before.

Developing a deeper understanding of the work practices and cultures of countries in
Asia will make it easier to build relationships—at the industry and customer levels.
Australian businesses will need to understand the diversity of preferences, cultures
and circumstances that can affect how products are produced, presented and
transported. This requires strong understanding of the market and capabilities in
agriculture and food science and technology.

216


-----

Together with industry, we can build the capability and responsiveness of the sector’s
workforce and improve the sector’s attractiveness as a career. We are building
flexible and high-quality universities and vocational education and training systems
and we have appropriate migration policies. We will ensure that skills and training
systems create the pathways that Australia’s agriculture and food businesses need.
Through AgriFood Skills Australia, we support industry-led skills agendas and
workforce development in the agriculture and food sector.

Industry needs to complement these platforms to build on-the-job training and career
opportunities in the sector.

#### Securing growth through better access to markets

Australia has a strong record of exporting agricultural and food products—and Asia is
home to many of our largest food markets—as well as a reputation as a leader in
agricultural and food technology and science solutions.

The Government has recently gained new or improved market access for a number of
products to a range of markets in our region, including chilled meat, citrus and table
grapes to China, and plums and carrots to Taiwan. This builds on existing access to
Asian markets. We will continue to work hard to improve market access for our
agricultural and food exports, including ensuring appropriate presence of our
overseas staff in the region.

In cooperation with industry we will work to remove barriers to trade and other
policies around the world that are distorting trade and production. Broad-based,
multilateral reforms remain our priority. We remain committed to working through all
means and forums to lower agricultural subsidies and tariff and non-tariff barriers in
markets, including in the Doha Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations, which
provide the best vehicle to achieve open trade. As Chair of the Cairns Group of
agricultural exporting countries, we will continue to lead efforts to secure agricultural
trade reform in the World Trade Organization.

We have successfully concluded a number of free trade agreements, including the
recent Malaysia–Australia Free Trade Agreement (MAFTA) which builds on the
ASEAN – Australia – New Zealand Free Trade Agreement.

217


-----

Under MAFTA, Malaysia will guarantee tariff-free treatment for the vast majority of
agricultural products from day one. Key MAFTA outcomes for agriculture and food
exporters include:

- milk—a liberalised licensing arrangement for liquid milk exporters, allowing access
for higher value retail products

- processed foods—immediate elimination of virtually all tariffs

- wine—a guarantee for Australian exporters of the best tariff treatment Malaysia
gives any country

- rice—open access arrangements from 2023 and all tariffs eliminated by 2026.

Our agriculture and food sector is set to benefit from agreements we are pursuing
with our trading partners in the region, including China, India, Indonesia, Japan and
South Korea.

Free trade agreements give concrete benefits and help agriculture and food exporters
to compete on equal terms. The comprehensive Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement
and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership have the potential to provide
complementary pathways towards the goal of a free trade area of the Asia–Pacific,
which would see tariffs with some of our most significant trading partners eliminated.

We will continue to provide a range of support to our agriculture and food businesses
looking to capture opportunities. The Australian Trade Commission (Austrade)
distributes trade opportunities to potential Australian suppliers and provides a range
of market entry services. Austrade also works closely with industry bodies on
international marketing and promoting awareness of Australia’s high-quality goods—
for example Wine Australia (for wine) and the Australian Industry Group (for food and
beverages). Recent legal recognition by China of the Australian Made, Australian
Grown country of origin symbol will provide additional benefits for our exporters of
food and beverages to that market.

Australia’s policy on foreign investment encourages investment and ensures that
investments are in the national interest. We will continue to welcome foreign
investment in our agriculture and food sector, as we have done in the past. Foreign
investment provides much needed capital for expansion and supports market
development and access, customer insights, and the transfer of technology and
management skills.

Austrade is working with government partners to develop strategies to attract
productive foreign investment into Australia’s agriculture and food sector. Investment
in agricultural research and development is one element of the Australian
Government’s inward investment priorities on innovation. A further priority on
agricultural science and food technology and processing is currently being explored
with State and Territory governments. And we will continue to push for lower barriers
for Australian companies that wish to invest overseas. Two-way investment flows will
help Australian businesses develop value-adding activities, build strong connections

218


-----

with markets, and form strong partnerships in increasingly sophisticated and
integrated food value chains.

Increased trade will require continued investment in our border controls to build
capacity and manage biosecurity risks. We are reforming our biosecurity
arrangements to deliver a modern system that is responsive and targeted and covers
the entire biosecurity continuum (offshore, at the border and onshore). Moving to an
even more collaborative approach with our trading partners will ensure that risks are
identified and better known before products reach Australia. This will allow Australia
to efficiently and effectively respond to our changing risk profile and to the growing
pressures on the system. As biosecurity arrangements in Asia mature, we should
jointly manage biosecurity risks through increased recognition.

Maintaining the integrity of Australia’s pest and disease status, through a science and
risk-based approach to biosecurity, will remain vital to safeguarding our environment,
our people and the competitiveness of our agricultural and food sector.

#### A shared interest in food security

Food security is at the heart of social and political stability in our region. As
production increases lead to scarcer land and water, concerns about food security
and poverty alleviation will rise.

We are confident that policy reform in the region and globally will support food
security through the development of efficient and resilient food markets, will
strengthen food-supply systems, and will allow food to move from where it can be
produced efficiently to where it is most needed.

We will continue to be active in institutions that support trade, productivity and
market-oriented development assistance, including the World Trade Organization,
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, the World Bank, and the Asian
Development Bank. We will also draw on APEC’s strengths in trade and investment
liberalisation to advance the food security of our region. Our role in the Group of
Twenty (G20) is an important way to maintain momentum on global and regional
food security policy.

Lifting production capacity and improving distribution infrastructure is a regional
and global task. Australia has much to offer in policy development and through
collaboration in science and research, in areas such as animal and plant health
and biotechnology, production practices, natural resource management and
remediation, logistics and product safety. The Australian Centre for International
Agricultural Research is an important channel through which we build networks and
share our research capabilities with the region. The Indo–Australian program on
marker-assisted wheat breeding is an example of Australia working with partners on
problems of mutual interest and is co-funded. The program associates key Indian and
Australian institutions involved in wheat research in a suite of collaborative projects.
The program has entered into its fifth year, and an extension for another five years is
being finalised.

219


-----

The Australian and Chinese governments are conducting a ground-breaking joint
study on cooperation on food security. The study focuses on the potential for
investment in new productive capacity in the agriculture sectors of Australia and
China to be available for sale on world markets. It would also involve the application
of research and development and technology on a commercial basis to raise
agricultural productivity in both countries. This includes looking at opportunities in
agricultural services and throughout the agribusiness supply chain generally.

The objective of this study is to establish a best-practice approach to food security
cooperation between Australia and China that will lead to improved policy
coordination across all levels of government to provide consistent advice to potential
investors and to avoid regulatory duplication, in line with Australia’s regional
development goals. It will also assist investors to better understand the requirements
of good corporate citizenship.

We are also working in partnership with countries in the region to improve
biosecurity arrangements and animal and plant health systems. These partnerships
will support food security by mitigating risks to production across the region and
providing greater confidence in the trade of food.

#### Building relationships in the region

Achieving liberalisation of agricultural trade through formal trade negotiations is an
important aspect of the Government’s support for the growth of Australia’s
agriculture and food sector, but it is not the only aspect. We will also support the
sector’s growth through diplomacy, buttressed by industry expertise and partnerships
in the region. Australia’s strong diplomatic and business-to-business relationships
underscore our position as a reliable supplier of ‘clean and green’ food products.
Knowing the region well helps us understand our neighbours and work with them to
identify new opportunities and build confidence in our products. To develop
successful commercial links, it is essential that Australian agriculture and food
exporters know what their customers want. We will work with industry to identify the
emerging food needs of Asia and develop strategies to help Australia’s exporters
respond to those needs.

Strong relationships also support a consistent and ongoing dialogue to manage issues
as they arise. Our in-country presence will continue to be important for clarifying and
resolving trade issues and negotiating access, as will achieving more consistent and
better aligned standards in the region and globally.

Our businesses, communities and institutions involved in agriculture and food need to
nurture and strengthen their links with the region. People-to-people links across the
spectrum—for example, between winegrowers in Australia and emerging winegrowing areas in Asia, scientists working on collaborative research projects, consumer
advocates encouraging consistent food labelling laws, and connecting the experiences
of tourists—will be increasingly important for raising the profile of what Australia has
to offer.

220


-----

#### Leadership and strong policy frameworks are essential 

By managing productive resources sustainably, raising productivity and securing
access to markets in Asia, Australia’s agriculture and food sector is embracing the
Asian century and can look to the future with confidence. Australia is well placed to
capture a healthy share of growing markets, despite fierce competition.

Australia can build a food system that is globally competitive and offers reliable,
high-quality food products. At the same time, Australia can be an important partner in
building food production capacity in our region.

The Government’s forthcoming National Food Plan, Industry and Innovation
Statement and National Research Investment Plan, as well as our Rural Research and
Development Policy Statement, Food Processing Industry Strategy Group and ongoing
trade negotiations, are all significant steps in achieving these goals.

Our agriculture and food sector will be transformed by the changes occurring in Asia
and, if industry and governments make the right choices, will be a strong, resilient and
flexible part of the Australian economy, reinforcing the confidence we have in our
own food security.

The mechanisms outlined in this White Paper, through partnership across industry,
government and the broader community, lay the ground work on which to build a
more integrated and productive food sector in the region.

221


-----

# Chapter 8: Building sustainable security in the region


**Chapter 9** **nation,** Operating in
Deeper and **fully part of the** and connecting
broader **region and open** to growing
relationships **to the world** Asian

markets

**Chapter 8**
Building sustainable
security in the region


-----

**Key points**


Australia’s future prosperity and security are inextricably linked to what happens in
our region.

The security environment is shifting in response to the region’s economic growth,
the change in the strategic power of nations, and the behaviour of non-state actors.

We will promote cooperative arrangements among nations in the region as the
economic and strategic landscape shifts.

We support China’s participation in the region’s strategic, political and economic
development.

We will work with the United States to ensure it continues to have a strong and
consistent presence in the region, with our alliance contributing to regional
stability, security and peace.

Global and regional institutions will be central to efforts to develop collective
security in the region through building trust and supporting norms and rules.

During our 2013–14 term as a non-permanent member of the United Nations
Security Council, Australia will ensure that regional perspectives are brought to the
Council’s deliberations.

We strongly support the Group of Twenty (G20)—to be hosted by Australia in
2014—as an important forum for the world’s leaders to address major economic
challenges and opportunities.

We will work within the region to develop the East Asia Summit (EAS) as a crucial
regional institution in East Asia so that it can help manage regional challenges,
foster strategic dialogue and promote cooperation on political, economic and
security issues.

We will strengthen human security by supporting the development of resilient
markets for basic human needs—especially food, water and energy—and by
tackling climate change.

223


-----

### 8.1 Introduction

Much of this paper has been concerned with how Australia must prepare itself for the
Asian future. But, as can be seen, while that future is promising, it is not immutable.
Challenges to the economic order, the security order and the environmental order are
all real. What the countries of the region, including Australia, do to shape the future,
through effective statecraft and domestic policy reform, will be critical.

Some of the challenges emerge from the internal dynamics of Asia itself—the
consequences of changing power relationships as Asian economies grow. China’s rise
and the resulting impact on its regional and global interests and those of its
neighbours, India’s growing re-engagement with East Asia, and Washington’s
‘rebalancing’ of its global interests towards the region will all be central.

Other challenges will arise from the impact on the region of broader global trends.
These include growing pressures on energy, food and water, the unpredictable
actions of harmful non-state actors, and the need to make international organisations
more effective and representative.

Australia seeks to build an environment for the region in the Asian century that is
marked by sustainable security.

We seek security in a broad sense—meaning the security of Australia from attack or
coercion; the collective economic and political security of this rapidly evolving region;
security of supply for food and energy as the region grows; the human security of
individuals in the region, especially those most at risk from hunger or natural disaster;
and the security of the natural system as the globe enters a period of rising
temperatures and new environmental challenges.[1]

And that security must be sustainable in all its meanings—workable, defensible,
viable and maintainable. It must have solid foundations and lasting impact.

Australia can contribute to the sort of sustainable security we will need if the
advantages of the Asian century are to be realised.

### 8.2 How security has underpinned Asia’s development

Earlier chapters outlined how a secure and predictable strategic environment
provided a strong foundation for Asia’s growth. It enabled governments to focus on
their development and build their economic relations in the broad knowledge that
the security and order of the region would not be seriously disrupted. These
foundations included a framework of rules, open to all who agreed to be bound by

1 Human security, which the United Nations broadly defines as ‘freedom from fear, freedom from
want and freedom to live in dignity for all’, lies at the heart of the nexus between security, development
and human rights (UN 2012a).

224


-----

them, to govern trade and economic relations; the stabilising impact of the
US strategic presence; and internal development priorities in Asia itself.

The post-World War II international system established a predictable rules-based
economic order into which Asia’s developing economies could emerge (Chapter 2). It
supported the longest period of economic expansion ever seen.

The United States’ alliances and partnerships with Japan, South Korea, Australia and
other regional states, its guarantee of extended deterrence—the promise that it
would project power across the Pacific if any of its allies were attacked—and the
development of an effective working relationship between Washington and Beijing
after 1972, provided a reliable and stable security environment that further
underpinned the economic rise of Japan, then South Korea, the other ‘Asian tigers’
and China. India’s economic reforms from the early 1990s contributed to its closer
engagement with the region.

The policy choices and actions of Asian countries themselves reinforced this stability.
China’s reform program, particularly from the late 1980s onwards, refocused Beijing’s
attention on internal growth and gave it a large stake in the established international
system. Its relations with the United States and its regional neighbours expanded and
deepened as complex regional investment patterns and value chains developed. The
deeper economic interaction between China, Japan and South Korea helped keep
historical tensions in check.

In Southeast Asia, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) emerged as a
stabilising regional force following the tensions of the 1960s, and its expansion in the
1980s and 1990s to encompass Brunei, Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar and Vietnam as
well as Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand has helped
ensure stability and encourage economic integration.

### 8.3 New challenges

Our security environment is being challenged by three developments, which will
continue to shape the Asian century.

The first change, and in some ways the most basic, is coming from the systemic
impact of Asia’s economic growth—the cumulative effects of the resource demands
already made and still to come, and their environmental consequences. Economic
growth has given regional states a new and broader range of interests and
responsibilities, including in global economic governance and the security of energy,
resource and food inputs to their development. So the sources of those resources and
assured supply routes will feature more in their strategic considerations.

Over the period to 2025, the pressure on water resources, food, energy supplies and
air quality will increase (Chapter 2). Climate change is likely to add to the frequency
and severity of natural disasters.

225


-----

Second, and directly related, the economic growth and broader international interests
of Asia’s large powers, especially China and India, are having an impact on the
established strategic order.

At the same time, rising government incomes are enabling many states to modernise
their defence forces with more advanced capabilities. Some countries are enhancing
their defence industrial capacity, including leading-edge technological innovation, and
boosting their defence exports.

It is important to keep regional defence expenditure in context: in some cases,
increases over recent years come from relatively low baselines, while the US defence
budget continues to dwarf those of other countries (Chart 8.1). But regional states’
defence capabilities will continue to grow and China’s military modernisation has
made steady progress in recent years. China largely focuses its military capabilities on
the region, whereas the US capabilities are spread globally.

##### Chart 8.1: Regional defence expenditure


800

600

400

200

0


800

600

400

200

0


US$ billion US$ billion


ASEAN Australia China India Japan Russia South
Korea

2001 2006 2011


United
States


Note: All expenditure is reported in 2011 dollars. ASEAN military expenditure excludes that of military
expenditure by Myanmar due to data unavailability. China’s actual defence budget is likely to be more than
the publicly available figure in Chart 8.1.
Source: DIO (2011).

The third change to the familiar regional environment has to do with the growing
empowerment of individuals and non-state actors. This change will by no means be
completely, or even predominantly, negative. There is a growing capacity for groups
in society to organise within countries and across national boundaries. And in some
regions and nations there are changing demands for better governance and more
transparency from individuals who have better access to information and can share
their views more easily. Improved lines of communication may help governments in
the region respond more effectively to concerns that arise as nations transform in the
Asian century.

226


-----

But, at the same time, greater access to information and communications technology,
particularly if information is not accurate, can help negative influences in society.
Combining easier information transfer with the increasing mobility of people, goods,
services and money will help raise the capabilities of more dangerous transnational
groups such as terrorists, people traffickers and smugglers, pirates, transnational
criminals and hackers. Self-radicalised terrorists or lone hackers can often be even
more difficult to identify and combat than organised groups.

None of these developments of themselves make major power conflict likely—in
some important ways they will probably act as a constraint. All the major powers
recognise how interdependent their economic interests are. The regular high-level
strategic and economic dialogue between the United States and China has been
useful in managing differences. And similar institutionalised bilateral links are being
established between other key regional players, such as India and China. Most
regional countries will adapt their policies over time in response to new issues that
arise and to ensure they balance their various interests.

But these developments certainly make the consequences of any conflict more
far-reaching and dangerous. They raise the cost of miscalculation in a range of
longstanding regional flashpoints—North Korea, the Taiwan Strait, territorial disputes
in the South China and East China seas, India–Pakistan relations—and give greater
urgency to efforts to manage them.

### 8.4 Australia’s response

For more than 60 years, Australia has been a committed partner to the countries of
the region and a strong supporter of regional institutions. Our diplomatic, defence,
intelligence, business and people-to-people links have helped spearhead this work.
Australia’s longstanding commitment to active middle-power diplomacy, with its
focus on practical problem solving, effective implementation and building coalitions
with others, will continue to drive our approach.

But, as we have discussed, changing power relativities and other regional and global
dynamics are driving change in our security order. We need not be pessimistic about
this future, but nor should we be complacent. New mindsets and creative approaches
will be needed. We will need to continue to strengthen our institutions and
mechanisms, bilaterally and regionally, to help manage change.

As Asia becomes more central to the global economy, and the large Asian countries
more important to global decision-making, we will face increasing competition for
access and influence in the region.


_National objective_


20. Australian policies will contribute to Asia’s development as a region of
sustainable security in which habits of cooperation are the norm.

227


-----

Cooperative relations among the pre-eminent powers in the region—China, India,
Indonesia, Japan and the United States—will be fundamental to regional security and
prosperity (Box 8.1). Because those relationships will almost certainly have both
competitive and complementary aspects to them, their management will be critical.


**Box 8.1: China, the United States and Australia**


The relationship between China and the United States, the two most powerful
states influencing the region, will do more than any other to determine the
temperature of regional affairs in coming decades.

Beijing and Washington both want to develop constructive relations and avoid
conflict: their governments have consistently said so; the intensity, structure and
sophistication of their engagement, often underestimated, has shown it; and they
have deeply interlinked interests that will push them that way.

We are optimistic about the ability of China and the United States to manage
strategic change in the region. But their relationship will inevitably have a
competitive element, especially as China’s global interests expand, it becomes
more active on a broader range of international issues and its defence capabilities
grow in areas dominated for more than half a century by the United States.

The danger of miscalculation and accident therefore requires ongoing investment
in bilateral and regional efforts, such as the East Asia Summit and other regional
bodies, to build trust and transparency and to ensure that communications are
open and military-to-military dialogue is effective.

In managing the intersections of Australia’s ties with the United States and China,
we will need a clear sense of our national interests, a strong voice in both
relationships and effective diplomacy.

We consider a strong and consistent presence by the United States in the region
will continue to be as important in providing future confidence in Asia’s rapidly
changing strategic environment as it has in the past. We will support this through
our alliance with the United States.

At the same time, China’s importance to Australia, economically and politically, will
only grow in decades to come.

We welcome China’s rise, not just because of the economic and social benefits it
has brought China’s people and the region (including Australia), but because it
deepens and strengthens the entire international system. We have consistently
supported the reform of global institutions to make them more representative of
the large emerging economies and the modern world.

We accept that China’s military growth is a natural, legitimate outcome of its
growing economy and broadening interests. It is important that China and others in
the region explain to their neighbours the pace and scope of their military
modernisation, to build confidence and trust.

228


-----

**Box 8.1 (continued)**


This is not a world in which anything like a containment policy can work or be in our
national interests: compared with the Cold War period, our mutual interests are
much deeper and ideological differences much less marked.

We want, therefore, to deepen our already close and cooperative relationship with
China at every level, including enhancing our defence cooperation. We come to the
relationship with China as a dependable economic partner, a constructive
participant in regional affairs, one of the world’s oldest democracies, a good
international citizen, and a close ally of the United States. None of these
dimensions will change. Together they offer the strongest possible foundation for
engagement with China and the region as a whole.

The perspectives of Australia’s neighbours vary widely. Some share our views,
including on issues of principle, while others differ. Divergences between our cultures
and systems sometimes compound inevitable frictions. So our policy responses will be
shaped by the broad objective of building trust. That means making every effort to
build between the states of the region (and globally) deeper understanding, greater
transparency, clearer communications, more effective and reliable rules and
dependable markets.

Large-scale change like that expected in Asia will put a premium on the development
of mutual trust and confidence between the countries of the region. All the major
Asian states will have a deep interest in avoiding armed conflict, but the form and
conditions of regional peace will be just as important a consideration.

We will encourage, as we have traditionally, the construction of a peace in which all
the region’s countries have a voice in its future, which is guided by established rules
and transparent behaviour, and in which decisions are taken without threats of the
use of force or other forms of intimidation.

The first way of building trust will be to work bilaterally to deepen our relationships
with regional partners. By deepening relations, we mean engaging more broadly than
at present across governments and societies, developing reliable and practical habits
of cooperation, and increasing the levels of understanding between our peoples
through business links, people-to-people engagement, media and other networks
(Chapter 9).

Building trust will also require us to continue to work on building global and regional
institutions whose form and functions reflect the emerging world and can deal
effectively with new issues.

229


-----

### 8.5 Sustainable security in the Asian century

The sustainable security that we will seek to build in the region encompasses our own
national security, the collective security interests of the region, and the human
security needs of its people.

#### National security

National security is a broad and evolving concept. Within a broader security agenda,
the Government’s national security policy is primarily concerned with the protection
of Australia’s sovereignty, population and assets, and shaping a favourable
international environment. We will release a National Security Statement that
articulates our national security priorities in the context of the emerging global
strategic environment, drawing on the analysis and guidance in this White Paper.

At the core of Australia’s national security lies the capability of our defence forces—
the Australian Defence Force’s ability to deter or defeat any attack on our territory, to
contribute to the stability and security of Australia’s immediate region—including
through peacekeeping and stabilisation operations—and to help meet our
international obligations, such as those under our alliance with the United States. It
also needs to be able to respond to regional needs for humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief.

And national security depends on partnership—building trust—with others. Australia
has a long tradition of working to build security with regional partners bilaterally and
through regional agreements such as the Five Power Defence Arrangements. We have
defence cooperation programs with regional partners, especially in Southeast Asia,
that include training, joint exercises, specialised exchanges and shared professional
perspectives on defence doctrine. Regular exchanges take place between ministers,
military officers and officials.

As regional countries modernise their defence forces, these programs are opening up
opportunities for us to pursue deeper strategic and security partnerships. We will
direct increasing effort in the period ahead to the development of deeper defence
cooperation, joint exercises and other forms of defence and security engagement
with our neighbours, particularly Indonesia, other Southeast Asian countries, Japan,
South Korea, India and China (Box 8.2).

Such interactions will build mutual trust—increasing patterns of contact, reducing the
risk of misunderstandings and helping with practical challenges like maritime security
and the effective provision of humanitarian assistance and disaster relief.

Accurate information is important for building trust, avoiding misunderstandings and
encouraging rational decisions. So we will support actions that promote clearer
communication and greater transparency about intentions, strategies, and military
budgets and capabilities. We regularly release public documents, such as Defence
White Papers, to make our views and intentions on such issues clearer. Our next
Defence White Paper will set out in more detail the role we will play with regard to
defence and security throughout our region.

230


-----

**Box 8.2: Indonesia–Australia Defence Alumni Association**


In March 2011, the Indonesia–Australia Defence Alumni Association (IKAHAN) was
officially launched.

Through an annual program of seminars, cultural and sporting events, IKAHAN
encourages all participants in Australia–Indonesia defence engagement activities to
renew and maintain their relationships. Since its launch, IKAHAN has grown to over
800 members. Celebrations in Jakarta to mark its first anniversary were attended
by the Indonesian Defence Minister, Australia’s Chief of the Defence Force and
Secretary of Defence, and their Indonesian counterparts.

Training and education is a longstanding element of our bilateral defence
relationship with Indonesia. Each year, around 100 Indonesian military officers
participate in courses, short-term visits and other exchanges in Australia through
the Defence Cooperation Program. Around 50 Australian Defence personnel visit
Indonesia in an official capacity each year. Australian and Indonesian military
personnel participate in regular joint exercises. This level of engagement is growing
on both sides.

The role of the United States in East Asia has been central to the strategic
environment for nearly 70 years. And our alliance with the United States has been the
cornerstone of our defence and security policy for most of that period.

The alliance is driven by shared values, a long history and a common set of aspirations
for the global system. It has never required us to abandon our independent national
interests or policies and there will always be issues on which our views diverge. But
the alliance embodies trust. It impels us to understand and take into account the
views of our partner.

We consider that a strong and consistent United States presence in the region will be
as important in providing future confidence in Asia’s rapidly changing strategic
environment as it has been in the past. We will continue to support US engagement in
the region and its rebalancing to the Asia–Pacific, including through deepening our
defence engagement with the US and regional partners.

We welcome Japan’s active diplomatic role on a wide range of international issues,
including regional architecture, climate change, non-proliferation and disarmament,
and energy. Despite its modest growth in recent decades, the Japanese economy
remains one of the world’s largest. Japan is also the world’s largest creditor,
continuing to wield significant influence in regional and global economic organisations
such as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the Asian Development
Bank. Australia and Japan have substantial shared interests and values, including as
allies of the United States, which are reflected in a range of trilateral dialogues at the
Ministerial, senior officials’ and working levels, including the Trilateral Strategic
Dialogue and other processes. Our relationship with Japan is likely to become even
more important over coming decades in building sustainable security in our region.

231


-----

We are working closely with China to build a comprehensive, constructive and
cooperative relationship that encompasses not only trade, resources and investment,
but also political, security and people-to-people connections. To sustain regional
prosperity and security, we will continue to work actively with China to advance our
shared interests, in regional institutions such as the EAS and APEC, and globally
through the G20 and other bodies. With a long commitment to peace and security in
the region, we have a key interest in building defence and broader security
cooperation with China.

Elsewhere in Northeast Asia, South Korea is a growing security and environmental
partner for Australia. We work together bilaterally and through a shared commitment
to active middle-power diplomacy in bodies such as the United Nations, the G20, the
EAS and APEC. Areas of common interest include climate change, international
development and non-proliferation. We are pursuing a high-quality free trade
agreement and our defence links are also increasing.

India’s growing economic and strategic weight will increasingly influence the balance
of power within Asia, and amplify India’s global influence. The wider regional
construct of the Indo-Pacific, linking the Indian and Pacific oceans as one strategic arc
that includes Southeast Asia, illustrates this influence. Trans-Asian transport and
wider connectivity is another (Chapter 2). Important determinants of evolving
relations in the region will be how India’s relationship with China develops, and the
role of strategically located countries such as Myanmar. These factors will also
influence which conception of the region’s future comes to dominate.

Stronger Australian engagement with Southeast Asia, especially with our biggest
neighbour, Indonesia, will remain important for our security and environmental
policies. The continuing rise of a stable, democratic and more prosperous Indonesia,
which plays a leadership role in the region and has an increasing global influence, is
unequivocally in our strategic and wider interests. We will deepen our comprehensive
partnership with Indonesia and step up engagement with ASEAN more broadly. We
will focus more attention on engaging active regional powers such as Vietnam,
Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines on security and sustainability issues.

In the contemporary international environment, it is clear that national security
cannot be delivered only within national borders. Threats to Australia’s people or
institutions from non-state actors like terrorists, traffickers, pirates, hackers or other
transnational criminals must be addressed with partners in other countries.

Australian capacities, like those found across the public service in the areas of law
enforcement, border protection and health, are increasingly used to deliver
sustainable security for Australia and our region.

For example, one effective way to reduce cross-border crime is to ‘follow the money’
through regional collaboration using a mix of anti-money-laundering and proceeds of
crime laws to confiscate the assets of criminal organisations. Australian Federal Police
officers are currently attached to 13 of our diplomatic missions in Asia, working with

232


-----

their counterparts on money laundering and other issues such as illicit drugs and
identity theft.

Sustaining regional efforts against terrorism will also require continued collaboration
among security agencies. Australia will continue its law enforcement cooperation and
capacity building role across the region, including through joint leadership with
Indonesia at the Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation (JCLEC). While
regional countries, especially Indonesia, have become increasingly effective in
capturing and prosecuting high-profile terrorists and degrading their networks,
jihadist ideology continues to motivate and focus an increasingly loose, geographically
diverse and largely independent range of violent movements, cells and individuals,
some of which remain highly capable.

We will continue to work with regional partners on joint approaches to managed
migration, such as the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and
Related Transnational Crime, which Australia co-chairs with Indonesia. We will
continue to support the group’s commitment to further develop a regional
cooperation framework on combating people smuggling and irregular migration
through strong cooperation at the operational level. We will enhance cooperation on
migration management, business processes, intelligence, policy and legislative
development, by means such as exchanges, training and the funding of specific
projects.

Given these transnational security threats, our approach will emphasise practical
action through law enforcement cooperation, better information and intelligence
exchanges, and capacity-building to support effective governance.

#### Collective security

Sustainable security in the Asian century will require governments to work
multilaterally as well as bilaterally. Global and regional institutions will be central to
efforts to develop collective security in the region.

As is evident with other dimensions of global change, the emergence of new centres
of power is shaping the evolution of global and regional institutions and the way
international rules, norms and standards are developed. Such rules are important
because they provide predictability, underpin coordination and cooperation, and
offer some defence against arbitrary action.

Strengthening aspects of international law through the negotiation and
implementation of treaties and other international legal instruments is important to
sustainable security. For example, implementing the United Nations (UN) Convention
on the Law of the Sea, to which most countries in the region have acceded, and
progressing negotiations under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change are
two aspects of international law on which progress should be made. We will continue
to engage in dialogue with our neighbours on international legal issues and to share
our expertise.

233


-----

Many of the rules by which the international system operates remain relevant,
effective and durable, and directly serve Australia’s interests. Emerging economies
have as great an incentive to support them as established powers. But the rules-based
system is evolving as emerging economies become more globally engaged, and new
issues arise.

As a middle power, with global and regional interests, Australia has a stake in the
outcome of change in these areas.

With its universal membership, broad agenda and unique norm-setting role, the UN
remains at the centre of global governance. As a founder member of the body,
Australia will continue our long history of support for its goals and involvement in its
work.

Within the UN, the Security Council is the cornerstone of international peace and
security. To promote a Council more representative of the 21st Century, we support
efforts to expand the Council’s membership to include Japan, India and Brazil as
permanent members, as well as appropriate African representation. Australia has
long been committed to seeking to ensure that regional perspectives are brought to
the Council’s deliberations. During Australia’s 2013–14 term as a non-permanent
member of the UN Security Council we will continue this commitment.

That same commitment by Australia to support the reform of international
architecture, so that it is properly representative of the 21st century world, will guide
our approach to other existing and prospective organisations. It is why we have
strongly supported the creation of the G20 (Box 8.3).

As Australia prepares to chair the G20 in 2014, we will support efforts to make its
agenda as practical and useful as possible, with a particular focus on economic growth
and jobs. We will work not just for its immediate members but for the wider
international community. Through our stewardship responsibilities we will work with
G20 members, non-G20 countries, and international organisations and others, such as
business, labour and non-government bodies, to ensure global economic norms, rules
and institutions are fully effective and relevant in a period of economic change.

We will use our role in the UN and the G20 to strengthen regional relationships and in
turn use these relationships to address global and regional issues and strengthen
these institutions. We will continue to support and promote international frameworks
that preserve open, competitive and well-regulated markets and inclusive,
sustainable growth. This will take time and require careful management. It is likely to
include a shift in the group of nations that takes responsibility for providing global
public goods, with China and India, in particular, adopting a higher profile over time.

234


-----

**Box 8.3: The G20**


The formation of the G20 in 1999 and its elevation to a leader-level forum in 2008
represented a powerful recognition of the growing influence of emerging
economies, including Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Russia and Asia more generally.
The G20 has permitted a more inclusive response to macroeconomic policy
coordination and financial regulatory arrangements than smaller groupings such as
the G7 and G8. Detailed policy development for leaders is carried out in working
groups co-led by an advanced economy and an emerging market economy. For
example, Canada and India co-chair the G20’s framework working group and the
United Kingdom and Indonesia co-chair the energy and commodities markets
working group.

The G20 provides an opportunity for Asia’s emerging economies to assume greater
responsibility in the global economic system, as their impact on the policy
directions of other countries grows. The announcement of additional funding in
June 2012 to the International Monetary Fund by emerging G20 economies
demonstrates their willingness to engage actively.

The G20 needs to maintain its character as a flexible forum in which leaders can
focus on global challenges. The implementation of existing commitments will be
important for its credibility. The G20’s success will depend on the extent to which
countries can build consensus and shape mutually reinforcing economic objectives
to support the economic transformation underway.

Elements of the G20 agenda of particular interest to countries in Asia include
development, food security, investment in infrastructure, open markets and
resisting protectionist pressures. The G20 will also continue to drive further
reforms of other international organisations, working with the broader
membership of those bodies.

Asia does not currently have the advanced security institutions and
confidence-building measures developed in Europe. In such a diverse region, with its
different history, that is not surprising. Regional security architecture in Asia will
continue to develop at its own pace and with its own characteristics. But, building on
ASEAN’s success, a number of institutions already provide forums in which
sustainable security is being built. They include the EAS, the ASEAN Regional Forum
(ARF) and the ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting-Plus (ADMM+) among others.

We advocated successfully for the inclusion of the United States and Russia in the
EAS. The EAS now has the right membership and the mandate to address political,
economic and security issues, and has emerged as a critical regional institution in
East Asia.

The significance of the expanded EAS is clear. Its members account for 55 per cent of
the world’s output and an equal proportion of its population, at 3.8 billion. Eight
EAS members are in the G20; three are permanent members of the UN Security

235


-----

Council. These three, along with India, possess four of the five largest armed forces in
the world.

We will continue to play a leading role in efforts to develop the EAS, including its
political and security agenda. Trust and confidence can be built through cooperation
in non-traditional security issues like disaster relief, where Australia and Indonesia are
leading a joint project.

The EAS complements and supports ASEAN’s community-building agenda in
Southeast Asia. It also complements APEC’s role of supporting regional trade
liberalisation, economic reform and economic security.

Our active involvement in the ADMM+ is a component of our regional military
engagement. The ADMM+ brings together Defence Ministers from all EAS member
countries, and has a mandate for practical military-to-military and defence-to-defence
cooperation in areas such as maritime security, humanitarian assistance and disaster
relief, counter-terrorism, military medicine and peacekeeping. It provides the
opportunity for our defence forces to exercise alongside regional partners, and our
active contribution will strengthen bonds with our neighbours.

As an Indian Ocean state, Australia also has security, environmental and economic
interests in South Asia and the wider Indian Ocean region. South Asia, in which India
plays the predominant role, has its own distinctive dynamics.[2] It is characterised by
less regional integration than Northeast and Southeast Asia, partly because of
disparities and differences in economic development and national perspectives.

We strongly support India’s growing global and wider Asian engagements, including
working closely with India and other partners to boost South Asian and wider
Indian Ocean cooperation. Specifically, Australia is supporting the Indian Ocean Rim
Association for Regional Cooperation, which we will chair in 2014–15, and is helping
to develop a practical work program. We are also participating in the Indian Ocean
Naval Symposium, an initiative of the Indian Navy.

The effective management of a number of regional flashpoints will become
increasingly urgent as Asian military capabilities and global interests grow. Managing
competing maritime and territorial claims will be particularly important. Over recent
years, tensions have arisen in relation to some disputed areas, especially the
South China Sea and maritime parts of Northeast Asia. While nationalist sentiment
plays a part in these tensions, so do access to fisheries and concerns about energy
and resource security. Some disputes have been, or are being, resolved through
negotiation or international legal adjudication. The parties involved generally appear
to be aware of the serious consequences of escalation. Even so, the risk of mistakes
and misadventure remains high. In relation to the South China Sea and other
territorial disputes in the region, Australia does not take a position on the competing

2 India accounts for 75 per cent of South Asia’s population, 63 per cent of its area and 82 per cent of its
output.

236


-----

claims. We continue to encourage the parties to clarify and pursue their claims and
maritime rights in accordance with international law, including the UN Convention on
the Law of the Sea.

We will support conflict prevention and risk reduction frameworks that provide early
warning of possible conflicts, identify and apply the measures most likely to be
effective in averting them, and manage them if they occur. Such actions range from
the establishment of agreements on incidents at sea and hotlines to longer-term
assistance with institution- and capacity-building.

Australia has a long record of contributing to global efforts on arms control,
non-proliferation and disarmament (Box 8.4). These efforts remain important in
achieving sustainable security.


**Box 8.4: Non-proliferation and disarmament: Australia and Japan**


Australia and Japan have worked closely and productively together on
non-proliferation and disarmament for many years in international forums such as
the UN, the International Atomic Energy Agency and various export control
regimes. Collaboration has included promoting adherence to the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, strengthening
nuclear safety and security, and applying more effective export controls against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, especially in our region.

Japan provided a distinguished expert to participate in the Canberra Commission
established by the then Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans in 1995. With
Mr Evans, former Japanese Foreign Minister Yoriko Kawaguchi co-chaired the
International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament, which
delivered its report in 2008. The commission has been succeeded by the
Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative, an intergovernmental group in which
Australia and Japan have the joint lead role.

In particular, efforts to control the proliferation of technologies and materials needed
for nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their delivery will be important to
Asia’s security, especially as technology advances and trade links become more
complex.

Issues of particular importance for Australia will be enhancing the effectiveness of
relevant export controls, including securing closer regional engagement with export
control regimes such as the Australia Group, and supporting practical forms of
cooperation such as the Proliferation Security Initiative.

Because the reduction of arsenals of nuclear weapons in the region is important, we
will continue to press China, India, Pakistan and North Korea—as well as the United
States—to ratify the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty so the treaty can be brought into
force, and will press to begin the long-stalled negotiation of a Fissile Material Cut-off
Treaty.

237


-----

With our regional partners in the Asia–Pacific Safeguards Network and as a member
of the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency, we will work to
promote best practice in nuclear safeguards and security in the region through
training and professional development.

As missile technology becomes more sophisticated and more widely available, missile
proliferation, especially of anti-ship ballistic missiles, poses particular challenges.
Closer engagement among regional nations on missile defence will be necessary. We
will work with the United States and regional partners to develop a constructive
regional approach to dealing with the missile threat posed by rogue states, and the
proliferation of enabling technologies in our region.

More effective regulation of the trade in conventional arms, including small arms and
light weapons, can also help. We will support the implementation of global standards
to enable more effective regulation in this field, for example, through the Arms Trade
Treaty currently under negotiation.

Shared transport and communications infrastructure, notably the internet, is
becoming more important in the region. We will work closely with regional partners
to strengthen and protect this infrastructure, while avoiding unnecessary
impediments to legitimate business, travel and other transactions. This will require
active engagement with Australian businesses and the wider community.

We are developing Australia’s first White Paper on cyber and digital economy policy in
recognition of the growing importance of cyberspace to Australia’s national interests.
The White Paper will provide an integrated policy framework to enable Australia to
take full advantage of the opportunities offered by the digital age through minimising
risks and enhancing trust and confidence in online engagement.

We will work cooperatively on cyber issues through policy, diplomatic and wider
dialogue with businesses and communities. Improving practical cooperation to
strengthen network resilience and to respond to cyber-incidents will be increasingly
important. This can be done by developing closer regional links, especially between
national institutions such as computer emergency response teams.

Countries in Asia have taken advantage of the opportunities ushered in by the digital
age, and now have a large stake in an open, stable and secure internet. They are well
placed to make a contribution in this area.

The internet needs to remain open and free of unnecessary government regulation.
To enable this, while also ensuring that the online environment remains stable and
secure, Australia and its international partners are working towards the development
of international norms of behaviour in cyberspace. In our view, the starting point is
the existing framework of international law. In 2013, South Korea will host the third in
a series of international conferences, known as the London Agenda, which bring
together governments, businesses and other groups to discuss international
cyber-issues and the development of norms.

238


-----

Space-related technologies, such as those used to observe the Earth from space, are
increasingly important for security, environmental and commercial interests. In the
maritime domain, for example, information from space can provide essential data for
anti-piracy measures, fisheries enforcement and environmental operations. Advanced
space-enabled positioning systems, which are highly accurate and based on existing
systems such as the global positioning system maintained by the US Government, are
driving innovation in the logistics, agriculture, construction and other sectors.

Some regional countries are increasing their investment in space technology. For
example, India, China and Japan are flying satellite missions and are developing
independent satellite positioning systems. And Vietnam is investing US$600 million in
a space technology centre in the Hoa Lac hi-tech zone in Hanoi.

Protection of this space-based and space-related infrastructure will become
increasingly necessary.

Australia’s regional connections, geographical location and long-term engagement on
space issues position us well. However, we need to continue our investment in
space-related ground infrastructure to capitalise on our location and ensure that our
capabilities remain relevant.

Asia has a strong tradition of diplomacy through non-official channels (called Track 2
diplomacy) on security issues, which reaches beyond national governments to
business, academia, non-government organisations and the wider community, and
helps to set forward agendas and address difficult issues. Some of these processes are
well established, such as the annual Shangri-la Dialogue in Singapore, which attracts
wide ministerial participation. Others, such as the Council for Security Cooperation in
the Asia–Pacific, have built a role underpinning the formal intergovernmental work of
the ASEAN Regional Forum. We will continue to support strong Australian
participation in such dialogues.

#### Human security

Over the past decade most armed conflicts have been fought within states rather
than between them. According to the Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute (2012), only one interstate conflict (over Kashmir) was recorded in our region
between 2001 and 2010, compared with between five and eight intrastate armed
conflicts each year during the same period. Internal violence and fragility can also spill
over international borders, undermining the security of other countries, displacing
populations, and setting back economic development.

The sustainability of Asia’s security environment will depend not just on the
traditional dimensions of national and regional defence and collective security
approaches but on the human security of the region’s people as well.

The 855 million people in the region who still live on less than $1.25 per day are
especially vulnerable to shortages of water, energy and food and the consequences of
their misuse (World Bank 2012b). Ageing populations, inequality within societies and

239


-----

rising social tensions will all help shape the regional security environment. Our
policies will be directed at building trust at the level of human security.


_National objective_


21. The region will be more sustainable and human security will be strengthened
with the development of resilient markets for basic needs such as energy, food
and water.

Energy, food and water resources are all coming under greater pressure and, along
with climate change, these pressures are increasingly intertwined (Chapter 2). Policies
seeking to address problems in one area can have unintended impacts in another.
Shortages of energy, food or water, or rising prices, can lead to community unrest and
even to conflict between states.

So far, within the region and in Australia, there has been limited recognition of the
interdependencies between these issues, and the consequent trade-offs and
synergies. For example, in some parts of the region, subsidised electricity for farmers
in an effort to boost agricultural output has resulted in over use of energy and
extraction of ground water.

We recognise the need to form energy, food and water security policies and tackle
climate change in a holistic and integrated manner. Adjusting policy settings and
governance arrangements to account for interdependencies will require a multistage
response. The immediate priority will be to support efforts to better understand the
connections and trade-offs. Basic metrics for these critical relationships are needed to
inform policy. To this end, we will support the use of environmental accounting in the
region.

Over the longer term, regulatory and institutional arrangements will need to be
progressively modified to allow for integrated decision-making. This could include
providing better links to ensure consistent incentives across carbon, energy, food and
water markets so that users, not just governments, take account of their
interdependencies.

**_Working towards a more water-secure region_**

Given the importance of water resources to Asia’s development, and the risk that
they may become a future source of political tension, we will continue to work with
the region by contributing to good policies and sustainable management practices.

Already a relatively water scarce region, the scale and complexity of Asia’s water
problems are set to grow (Chapter 2). Improving water-use efficiency will be central in
achieving regional water security, but water-saving policies, practices and
technologies only help if they are accompanied by incentives that encourage their
adoption.

240


-----

We are well placed to collaborate and share our experience of replacing centrally
planned water allocations with a market. This process has been crucial in managing
our water resources, especially during the recent drought. By exposing the
opportunity cost of water, users as well as governments now make complex decisions
about who should use water, where and for what purpose.

Australian firms have developed valuable expertise. This country’s experience with
drought and water markets has prompted considerable technological innovation in
water recycling and irrigation infrastructure. Systems devised for Australian
agriculture have been adapted for application in China. We will continue to showcase
our technology, providing commercial openings for innovative Australian firms.

Sharpening incentives to use water wisely is just one way of helping to improve water
management. We will work to strengthen capacity at all levels of partner
governments to manage water resources. This will include working with the region on
water management issues, particularly in the Greater Mekong region and South Asia
(Box 8.5).


**Box 8.5: Australia’s involvement in the management of the Mekong River**


The growing challenges of water resource management in the region are well
demonstrated by the Mekong River. The river flows for more than 4,800 kilometres
through Cambodia, China, Laos, Myanmar, Thailand and Vietnam, all of which
depend on it heavily for agriculture and fishing.

As populations and economies in the Mekong region have grown, so have demands
on the river. In recent years, a number of large hydropower dams and irrigation
projects have been proposed. Such developments threaten to alter flows and affect
the livelihoods of downstream users.

The public protests and diplomatic disagreements spurred by such proposals have
highlighted the trade-offs between the needs of upstream and downstream water
users. The trade-offs become more pressing as development of the basin
continues. Collective decision-making and a whole-of-basin approach in the
Mekong region will be essential to adjudicate disagreements and support water
and food security in coming decades.

Progress towards a common approach has already been made. In 1995, countries in
the lower Mekong Basin agreed to cooperate through the Mekong River
Commission in managing, using and further developing their segments of the basin.
Recently, Myanmar has informally signalled its interest in joining the commission.
And after recognising the downstream impacts of its hydropower developments in
2010, China has now agreed to expand technical cooperation with its
lower-Mekong neighbours through a negotiated memorandum of understanding.

We support these efforts through the Australian Mekong Water Resources
Program.

241


-----

Australians have already been working collaboratively with China to produce a ‘report
card’ on river health to inform Chinese policy development, monitor progress and
raise public awareness (Byron & Jiang 2012). There are opportunities to take this
relationship further, including by working together to develop financial incentives,
such as polluter-pays systems, to address water pollution.

**_Stepping up to the plate—working together on food security_**

Food security is a critical dimension of human security in the region. Two-thirds of the
world’s food insecure reside in Asia and sharp upward price movements can result in
political and social unrest.

To feed a larger, richer population, the region will need to increase productivity and
use its resources more efficiently. In some parts of the region, that will involve
adopting proven farming techniques and processes. Yields in some developing
countries have ample room to improve. For example, India’s rice yields are one-third
of China’s.

In other parts of the region, governments and the private sector will need to find new
and better ways of increasing production and helping agriculture adapt to and
mitigate the effects of climate change. This will require innovations in biological
sciences, resource management and agricultural processes. Encouraging investment
in agricultural research and development, and the subsequent adoption of new
technologies and varieties, will be essential. Given the long lag time before the gains
from investment in research and development are realised, further research into
hardier crop types, pest control and more efficient water and fertiliser use must begin
now.

Australia is well placed to work with the region to bolster agricultural productivity.
Australians have expertise in agricultural technology, economics and policy—
supported by strong educational and research institutions—and can provide technical
assistance to improve agricultural capacity.

Australia’s research and development capabilities are well recognised. We will use
established networks, such as those of the Australian Centre for International
Agricultural Research (ACIAR), to share our research capabilities with the region.
Recent evaluations show that ACIAR projects—which make Australian agricultural and
rural development expertise available to developing country partners—have
delivered around $11.4 billion of benefits to developing countries and $1.2 billion to
Australia, from a total expenditure of $234 million (Harding et al. 2009).[3] We currently
expect to invest around $455 million, or 8 per cent, of Australia’s official development
assistance in agricultural and food security activities in 2012–13.

Our efforts to improve food security go beyond the farm gate. Investments in water
and transport infrastructure, particularly roads, irrigation systems and dams, are

3 In 2008 dollar present value terms.

242


-----

needed (Chapter 2). Such investments help farmers integrate into value chains and
markets and reduce food loss and waste. We can exchange lessons with our regional
partners on how best to encourage greater private sector participation to help
finance growing infrastructure needs (Chapter 7).

Adequate national supply is only part of the challenge. No country will achieve full
food self-sufficiency at all times—international trade and efficiently functioning
markets will be necessary to meet the region’s growing food demands. We will
continue to argue and work bilaterally, and in international organisations, against
trade distortions such as production and export subsidies and export restrictions, and
to improve market access conditions for food and agricultural exports (Case study).

**_Addressing climate change_**

Recognising the threats to human security—and to economic development—that will
come from climate change, many countries in Asia have started to build climate
resilience and reduce the emissions intensity of their growth paths. Emissions
reduction policies are gaining traction, through national development strategies and
through clean and low-emissions energy targets.

The biggest Asian emitters, China and India, have pledged to reduce growth in their
emissions. China will reduce its carbon intensity (carbon emissions per unit of GDP) by
40–45 per cent between 2005 and 2020. India has committed to reduce its emissions
intensity by 20–25 per cent over the same period. Other countries in the region have
also made international pledges to limit or reduce their emissions by 2020, including
Japan, South Korea and Indonesia. With a growing share of global emissions, Asia’s
transition to a low-carbon development path is critical to a global climate change
solution.

To spur greater mitigation and adaptation effort in Asia, we already contribute
financial assistance through our aid program. Along with other developed nations, we
have committed to helping to mobilise US$100 billion annually by 2020 to assist
developing countries, many in Asia, tackle climate change. Capacity-building—by
sharing experience on practical matters such as renewable energy targets, energy
efficiency standards and sea level mapping—provides another avenue through which
we encourage greater regional climate action.

Globally and regionally, there is growing interest in harnessing the potential of carbon
pricing, and the international carbon market, to deliver effective and least-cost
emission reduction. Many countries in Asia are developing or considering carbon
pricing and emissions trading schemes to maintain strong economic growth as they
make the transition to a low-carbon development pathway.

China plans to develop emissions trading schemes in several cities and provinces, with
the aim of scaling up to a nation-wide approach after 2015. South Korea has passed
legislation for an emissions trading scheme to start from 2015. Japan has an emissions
trading scheme operating in the Tokyo and Saitama regions, covering 20 million
people.

243


-----

Sharing our experience and expertise in carbon pricing will help build well-functioning
and comprehensive carbon markets in our region. Through this work, we can also
explore ways to realise the additional benefits that come from carbon market
integration. Australia’s emissions trading scheme has been designed to link to other
credible emissions trading schemes to realise such benefits. Integrated carbon
markets, in our region and beyond, have the potential to increase access to a broader
range of credible, low-cost abatement opportunities. They will incentivise trade and
investment, particularly in renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies. They
will also expand opportunities for the financial services sector. The Australian
financial industry is well qualified to offer intermediary and advisory services to
integrated carbon markets.

Australia already has well-established mechanisms for exchanging these ideas and
experiences through links with counterparts in the region, academia and policy
organisations. We already share technical expertise on emissions trading design with
China, Indonesia, Japan and South Korea. We also engage with regional neighbours
through initiatives such as the World Bank’s Partnership for Market Readiness.

Within and beyond formal government exchanges, Australian thinking and know-how
continues to play a role in shaping emerging arrangements. Experts from Australian
universities are sharing their economic, quantitative, energy, policy and low-carbon
technology expertise with countries in the region. These activities have already
included assisting in the preparation of Indonesia’s Green Paper on strategies for
climate change mitigation, and working with Chinese counterparts on policy options
for energy efficiency, low-carbon cities, and the design of market mechanisms to
reduce emissions.

Even with substantial mitigation efforts, climate change is expected to have
significant impacts around the world, including in Asia. Adaptation will be critical in
minimising its economic, social and environmental costs. Some countries in Asia are
starting to act. For example, China, Indonesia and Vietnam have recognised
adaptation as a high-level priority within their domestic policy settings. While many
less-developed countries have limited capacity to respond and adapt effectively,
countries such as Bangladesh, Cambodia, Laos and Myanmar are completing National
Adaptation Action Programmes. Impact assessments are being used across Asia to
investigate at-risk sectors.

We will share adaptation expertise. In coastal zones, we can help countries put in
place regulatory frameworks to adapt to climate risks. Australian businesses are well
placed to export their knowledge and expertise in coastal mapping technology and
support tools to assist in adaptation planning decisions. For example, a number of
Australian companies have the capability to undertake digital elevation modelling of
coastlines, which allows for a more detailed understanding of the range of possible
impacts of climate change.

244


-----

**_Improving energy security_**

Countries in Asia will become increasingly focused on energy security in coming
decades as China and India transform the global energy system by their sheer size.
Meeting the energy needs of these two economies, along with those of others in the
region, will require a combination of bolstering technological innovation to open up
new sources of energy, including renewables, and prompting users to find new ways
to use energy more efficiently.

Many countries in the region already use energy efficiency targets and performance
standards, along with renewables targets, to encourage new sources and greater
energy efficiency. Others are progressively shifting towards market-based pricing as a
means of stimulating improvements in energy efficiency and alleviating some of the
upward price pressure. For example, countries such as India, Indonesia and Malaysia
are making plans to remove energy subsidies (IEA 2011). These and other efforts to
improve energy efficiency offer the additional benefit of restraining growth in
emissions.

Australia can collaborate with the region to sharpen these responses by supporting
partner countries to implement energy efficiency measures. This includes working
together on minimum energy performance standards—a proven way to improve
energy efficiency as people become more affluent and use more energy-hungry
appliances—and continuing our work through the APEC Expert Group on Energy
Efficiency and Conservation and the UN Environment Programme’s en.lighten
initiative. We will work with Vietnam and Indonesia to support energy-efficiency
standards and labelling programs.

We will use established forums to enhance cooperation on technology research,
development, deployment and commercialisation, including for clean energy
technology.

**_Dealing with energy uncertainties_**

While energy resources are expected to meet global needs through to 2025, there
may be surprises. Energy security risks will be more diverse and more complex than in
the past—technological change, social and political unrest and extreme weather all
have the potential to disrupt markets.

Global and regional energy security and response frameworks will need to expand
and diversify as global and domestic energy markets evolve, technologies advance,
energy systems integrate and energy consumption patterns shift. Australia will work
through the International Energy Agency on a more comprehensive approach to the
security of energy supplies, including more comprehensive coverage of energy
resources, such as natural gas, and major energy use within the region.

245


-----

**_Exchanging ideas on natural resource management_**

The region is exploring and developing solutions to its sustainability challenges, and
there is much that Australia can learn from those efforts. Japan and South Korea are
world leaders in energy efficiency. China has embarked on an ambitious agenda of
environmental reforms and will invest around US$608 billion during the next decade
in projects to improve water conservation (Byron and Jiang, 2012).

A large share of funding for our collaborative work with the region on sustainability
issues comes through our aid budget. This presents two related challenges. First,
many worthwhile collaborations (whether they be with Japan on energy or with China
on water) do not fall within the scope of aid. Second, it means that Australia is often
focused on what we can impart, rather than what we can learn from working with the
region.

We need to reconsider our approach to collaboration with the region. That does not
mean we need to rethink the aid budget—we have robust processes for determining
which programs receive funding and which do not. Rather, we need to promote other
forms of collaboration.

**_Improving resilience to natural hazards_**

The region is especially vulnerable to natural hazards—floods, earthquakes, tsunamis,
cyclones and volcanic eruptions. The 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami and the 2011
earthquake and tsunami in Japan highlighted the scale of such disasters and the
complexity of the responses needed. Population growth, the pace of urbanisation,
environmental degradation and extreme weather brought on by climate change are
all likely to increase the scale of such disasters and the region’s vulnerability to them
(Figure 8.1).

Regional countries are increasingly focusing on risk reduction measures to prevent or
mitigate the effects of such disasters. Policy responses include tightening building
codes in earthquake and flood prone areas; providing better information and more
timely warnings to the people in affected areas; and the use of new technologies—
including open data, early-warning systems, system mapping of geographical
information and the use of mass instant text messaging.

A number of regional institutions are involved in this work. The East Asia Summit, in
particular, is working with existing ASEAN mechanisms to improve regional disaster
response arrangements.

246


-----

##### Figure 8.1 Asia’s natural hazard and exposure index 

Note: The natural hazard index was created for each country by aggregating the mean value of exposure to
tropical cyclone, flood, landslide and drought (1980–2000); earthquake (1973–2007); tsunami (historical
2,000 years); volcano (historical 10,000 years). This was then combined with population density data to
generate the overall Natural Hazard and Exposure Index.
Source: Miller & Weber (2012).

Drawing on our experience in dealing with natural hazards, we are engaged with a
number of countries and organisations in efforts to improve information sharing,
overcome bottlenecks in the delivery of assistance and build countries’ capacities to
respond to disasters and receive assistance. For example, the Australia–Indonesia
Facility for Disaster Reduction, launched in 2010, brings together a range of
government agencies in both countries as well as multilateral bodies (including the
UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the UN Development
Programme and the World Bank) and non-government organisations.

We will continue to deploy whole-of-government teams of civilian and military
personnel, as we did after the 2008 major earthquake in Sumatra and during the 2010
Pakistan flood disaster. The National Critical Care and Trauma Response Centre—
established in Darwin after the Bali bombings in 2002 and 2005—is an important hub
for our emergency medical responses in the region. It also delivers training to
clinicians in the region. Given Darwin’s proximity to Southeast Asia, its large military
population and its capacity for growth in the decades ahead, the centre is well placed
to become a regional centre of medical excellence in the region.

247


-----

In a number of regional countries, including Australia, military personnel and assets
play an important role in disaster response. The Australian Civil–Military Centre
promotes stronger civil–military collaboration in dealing with conflict and disaster
management. It brings together police, military and civilian agencies and
non-government organisations to improve national capacities to prevent and respond
to disasters and conflicts.

Continued cooperation with our partners in Asia in the maintenance and protection of
international agreements, such as the Antarctic Treaty, will also be an asset. The
development of the close relations we have with our Asian regional partners involved
in Antarctica will be increasingly important in protecting the Antarctic region as well
as in frontier marine, biological and climate research in the Asian century. Australia’s
scientific research and basing capacities in Hobart and in Antarctica have fostered
closer cooperation with China, Japan, Korea, Malaysia and Indonesia and other
partners on Antarctic research and logistics. This cooperation can be elevated through
the Australia’s Antarctic science strategic plan, working within the Antarctic Treaty
system.

**_Aid and broader institutional connections_**

Our aid program is one of the main avenues through which we provide support for
human development and human security in the region. In 2010, 58 per cent of our aid
budget was expended in Asia, the second-highest proportion among all OECD
Development Assistance Committee donors, after South Korea. We were the
sixth-largest international donor to the region.

Our focus is on poverty alleviation and assisting the most vulnerable, but by helping
to build skills and strengthen institutions, we also contribute to Asia’s economic
development.

As former aid beneficiaries have become aid donors, we are increasingly engaging
with others in the region, such as China and South Korea (Chart 8.2). While aid from
traditional donors to Asia fell from US$45 billion in 2005 to US$25 billion in 2010,
non-traditional donors have partly filled the gap. China’s grant aid has doubled
since 2005. It also has a much larger concessional loan program. India recently
announced that it would be establishing the Development Partnership Administration
to manage its rapidly growing aid program, worth US$610 million in 2009. This
‘south–south’ assistance has begun to change the landscape as new donors bring
experience and lessons from their recent development experience.

In the area of human security, our trust-building policies will be directed towards
information sharing and building contacts between specialists. For example,
managing public health and biosecurity across borders will require particularly close
regional cooperation between authorities and experts. Our biosecurity reform agenda
recognises the transition now underway from an approach where we have provided
capacity-building assistance to our neighbours to a new phase of biosecurity
partnership and mutual recognition of capability and performance.

248


-----

##### Chart 8.2: Official development assistance to Asia 

10 US$ billion Per cent

5

0

-5

2010 Level (Left axis) Growth 2005-2010 (Right axis)


200

150

100

50

0

-50

-100


Note: (a) India’s measured assistance is from 2005–06 to 2008–09, and is not strictly comparable with other
nations as it differs from the OECD Development Assistance Committee’s criteria; it excludes lines of credit.
(b) China’s measured assistance is for 2005–2008 and is not strictly comparable with other nations as it
differs from the OECD Development Assistance Committee’s criteria; it includes grants, interest-free loans
and subsidies for concessional loans. Estimates of assistance that include concessional loans and debt relief
are one-and-a-half to three times higher.
Sources: OECD (2007a and 2012a), Smith, Fordelone & Zimmermann (2010) and Information Office of the
State Council (2011).

Our engagement with multilateral bodies such as the International Labour
Organization (ILO) provides opportunities to strengthen ties with our region and
address shared policy challenges. We signed a five-year partnership agreement with
the ILO in 2010 to provide funding to support ILO technical assistance programs that
promote sustainable development and fair work, such as improving conditions for
factory workers in the garment industry in several Southeast Asian countries.

While countries in our region have different cultures and histories, we can learn from
each other’s distinctive experiences in pursuing our common goal of promoting
respect for universal human rights.

We recognise the connections between human rights and human security. Events in
our region have demonstrated links between serious abuses of human rights and
threats to regional security and stability. Strengthening governance, security, justice
and the rule of law in all our societies assists in managing and resolving conflict
without violence (World Bank 2011). We will continue to support dialogue and
practical collaboration on human rights in the region. We endorse cooperative
models, such as the ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights and the
Asia–Pacific Forum of National Human Rights Institutions.

We will also engage our region more actively on wider peace-building questions, such
as how we can together assist countries in other parts of the world, including the
Pacific, to build stronger, more resilient and more accountable national institutions
(UN 2009).

249


-----

# Chapter 9: Deeper and broader relationships


-----

**Key points**


Australia’s connections with the region have, over decades, been woven into a
pattern that is both deep and complex.

We engage across the board—through governments at all levels, businesses,
unions, academics, universities, the media, students, migrants, tourists, volunteers,
scientists and people involved in the arts and sporting activities.

From these strong foundations, Australia will need to deepen and broaden our
relationships across the community as competition for influence and access to
markets increase in coming decades.

Stronger and more comprehensive relationships with countries across the region
will be built through collaboration and cooperation and based on trust, mutual
respect and understanding.

We will maintain an effective diplomatic network, with the necessary capabilities,
and with an expanded footprint across Asia over time.

We will work with the Australian community to develop comprehensive country
strategies, with China, India, Indonesia, Japan and South Korea as our initial
priorities, to bring a stronger national purpose and cohesion to these relationships.

Australia’s people-to-people links will be deeper and broader, through government
support and through the actions of the entire community. This will include the
substantial flows of people and ideas between institutions, such as parliaments,
educational institutions, business and community groups and the public service.

We will commit 12,000 Australia Awards (Asian Century) over the next five years to
nations in Asia to encourage people-to-people links with the region.

Cultural connections across a range of areas can be powerful forces for bringing
people together. Exchanges in culture build greater understanding, foster cultural
appreciation and offer commercial opportunities.

251


-----

### 9.1 Introduction

The importance of Australia and Asia being ‘in each other’s minds’ has long been
recognised (Garnaut 1989). The scale and pace of change taking place in Asia makes it
even more important today.

In earlier chapters, just part of the long story of Australia’s relationship with Asia was
traced. As we have seen, it has been an economic story, a foreign policy story, a
defence story, a story about society. It has involved political leaders, diplomats,
business people, unions, researchers, educators, students, migrants, tourists and
artists. And from the beginning it has been a story of change and reinvention.

But in the decades ahead, the terms of the exchange between Australia and Asia will
change again.

In some ways, Australia’s importance to our Asian partners will be even greater—the
result of resource flows, migration patterns, political engagement and education
exchange—at the same time as Asia’s importance for Australia grows significantly.
And technology will provide extraordinary new opportunities to learn from each other
and communicate.

But Asian states will have a wider range of global interests and certainly a greater
range of interlocutors competing for attention and influence in coming years. So
Australia will need to work harder to advance our interests in the region. In particular,
the broad nature of the relationships Australia wants to develop will require greater
involvement by many parts of our society outside government to bring success.

Two-way people movements will further strengthen the fabric of Australian society
and our way of life. Improving people-to-people links can unlock large economic and
social gains. Australia is well positioned to continue attracting highly skilled and
talented people from the region to live, study and work in Australia. And Australians
have much to offer the region.

Importantly, our links with Asia are social and cultural as much as they are political
and economic. The arts, culture and creativity play an important role in strengthening
Australia’s relationships with people in Asia. Australia’s cultural strengths underpin
values of respect, understanding and inclusion that help to connect people, business,
institutions and governments across the region.

A transformational agenda for Australia’s engagement with the region is needed.

252


-----

### 9.2 The work of government 

Diplomacy is the term used to describe the broad processes by which states deal with
each other. At the most senior levels of diplomacy, Australian political leaders
promote Australia’s interests in the region through frequent contact with their Asian
counterparts.

Ministers have a greater range of opportunities for regular meetings with their
regional colleagues than ever before and heads of government now meet annually at
the East Asia Summit (EAS), Asia–Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum, the
Group of Twenty (G20) and other forums and meetings.

Resident diplomatic missions provide the day-to-day framework for dealings between
states. They give us an on-the-ground understanding of the countries Australia is
working with and enable us to directly advocate our interests with those in power and
with decision-makers more broadly.

Australia’s diplomatic missions are staffed by professionals from a range of
departments, working together under whole-of-government arrangements. People
who are ‘in country’ for long periods develop the relationships and local knowledge
needed to provide the right advice and to get things done. A targeted and flexible
diplomatic capacity is essential for promoting and protecting Australia’s interests
overseas.


_National objective_


22. Australia will have the necessary capabilities to promote Australian interests
and maintain Australia’s influence.



- Australia’s diplomatic network will have a larger footprint across Asia.


Successive Australian governments have recognised that our prosperity and security
are intertwined with our region, and have shifted diplomatic resources accordingly.
More Australia staff from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) in
overseas diplomatic and consular posts are in the Asian region than in any other part
of the world. At 30 June 2012, 42 per cent of the 593 Australia-based DFAT staff in
posts overseas were located in Asia (Chart 9.1). And of DFAT’s 1,700 locally engaged
staff in overseas posts, 45 per cent were in Asia.

253


-----

##### Chart 9.1: DFAT staff posted overseas

Mulitlateral

7 per cent

New Zealand and Pacific

10 per cent

North, Central and
South America

11 per cent

Middle East and Africa

14 per cent

Europe

16 per cent


Asia

42 per cent


Note: As of June 2012. Multilateral refers to staff accredited to international organisations.
Source: Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

Asia’s strong economic growth and increasing strategic weight are focusing
international attention on the region. This means Australia faces growing competition
for influence as others devote more resources to the task of building relationships
(Chart 9.2). And Australia’s level of official representation is lower than that of similarly
sized countries seeking greater engagement in the Asian region. At the same time,
demands on the diplomatic service have expanded as our agendas with countries in the
region have become more diverse and complex. While the growing number of
Australians travelling abroad place increasing demands on our consular services.

The Government recently opened new posts in Mumbai (India), Chennai (India) and
Ulaanbaatar (Mongolia), and will soon open one in Chengdu (China). But Australia’s
overall diplomatic capacity has remained static—and at times declined—since the
mid-1990s. In North and Southeast Asia, the number of DFAT policy positions has
fallen while our interests have expanded rapidly. In South Asia, they have increased in
the same period, largely in India but also to support Australia’s efforts in Afghanistan.
During this period, the number of DFAT policy staff in Europe has dropped.

To support Australia’s interests in the region, when circumstances allow, we will open
a full embassy in Ulaanbaatar (Mongolia) and consulates in Shenyang (China), Phuket
(Thailand) and in eastern Indonesia. Over time, we will continue to review our
diplomatic representation in Asia to reflect new priorities, both in capital and regional
cities.

254


-----

##### Chart 9.2: Diplomatic posts in Asia

Number of posts Number of posts
50

40

30

20

10

0

Note: Compiled using data as of July 2012 from relevant foreign ministries websites. See glossary for
definition of Asia.
Source: Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.


50

40

30

20

10

0


Our approach to diplomacy must adapt to the evolving environment, a more complex
policy agenda and new communications technologies (Box 9.1). Diplomacy will
increasingly be a skill set, not a job description—our missions will need to draw on an
increasing range of government agencies and external sources of expertise as
Australia builds the specialist links and knowledge described in earlier chapters.


**Box 9.1: 21st-century diplomats abroad—a day in the life**


Until recently, Australia’s diplomats were concerned mostly with
government-to-government relationships, including advocating Australian interests
in host capitals, reporting on developments and negotiating international
agreements with other governments. Those remain important tasks—but more is
asked of today’s diplomats. The tasks of staff in overseas posts have multiplied and
can now include any of the following:



- negotiating a science and technology agreement



- discussing market access for Australian agricultural products



- attending the trial of an Australian detainee



- participating in a forum to combat illegal fishing



- working with local authorities and the Australian Electoral Commissioner on

possible electoral cooperation in future



- engaging in Ramadan festivities with a local community group



- promoting a cultural festival.


Source: Richardson (2011).


255


-----

Today, almost every domestic policy issue has an international dimension, and most
international issues have significant domestic repercussions.

As the agenda grows, Australia’s overseas posts will more than ever be
whole-of-Australia hubs promoting and managing a growing number of links—both
physical and virtual. And they will continue to grow as hubs for greater business,
institutional and community collaboration between Australia and the region.

A growing number of departments and agencies are already represented in Australia’s
overseas diplomatic posts (Appendix B). And other Australian Government agencies
and promotion bodies work throughout Asia, such as Meat and Livestock Australia,
Wine Australia, and Tourism Australia which has representation in China, India, Japan,
Malaysia, Singapore and South Korea.

Each of Australia’s six State governments has representative offices in various cities in
Asia, some of which have been established for many years. State and Territory
representatives, as well as some local governments, participate in trade, investment,
tourism and cultural promotion and other missions to countries in the region. They
also pursue other forms of engagement, including by promoting subnational,
sister-state and sister-city relationships with regional counterparts, which involve
their broader communities. Australia has over 100 of these relationships with Japan
and more than 80 with China. We will continue to support stronger relationships
between state and local governments and their regional counterparts.

DFAT has a central role in shaping and driving Australia’s Asia engagement, including
by consulting widely, drawing on external expertise, and connecting the domestic and
international dimensions of policy. To do this effectively, it must work closely with
other agencies and levels of government, with business and across the entire
community.

At the same time, all Australian Government departments and agencies need to
ensure that international considerations are embedded into their domestic policy
analysis and implementation. They need to further invest in the development of
effective working relationships with their regional counterparts.

#### Stronger and more balanced relationships

As Australia’s individual bilateral relationships become more complex, we need to
review the official bilateral architecture that underpins our stable and mature
relationships within the region to ensure that it can help us manage this complexity
(Appendix B). The bilateral architecture already in place with Indonesia, Japan and
South Korea, for example, is well developed. Australia’s relationships with China and
India will be the immediate priority for future development of bilateral architecture.

256


-----

We will look at ways to further enhance ties with Asia. This will include expanding
regular high-level meetings between government leaders, ministers and senior
business leaders. We will also build dialogues between young leaders and increase
the flow of people and ideas between institutions. Institutions that should look to
expand their links include parliaments, the judiciary, academia, cultural institutions,
research organisations and businesses. In addition, we will continue to implement
agreements and treaties across a wide range of areas.

Strengthening Australia’s economic and business diplomacy is important. We need
deeper and more comprehensive bilateral ties between Australian and regional
economic agencies, greater involvement with regional economic forums, stronger
links between Australian and regional business groups and effective Australian-based
think-tank and university networks that are well connected to the region (often
referred to as Track 2 diplomacy).


_National objective_


23. Australia will have stronger and more comprehensive relationships with
countries across the region, especially with key regional nations—China, India,
Indonesia, Japan and South Korea.

To bring a stronger national purpose and cohesion to our relationships with Asia, we
will consult widely to develop comprehensive country strategies. This will include
discussions with business and other community leaders to help identify opportunities
to deepen and strengthen our national relationships. Deepening our people-to-people
links will be a particular focus. These strategies will be tabled in Parliament and
regularly evaluated and updated.

Because of their size, economic links with Australia and strategic and political
influence in the region and globally, China, India, Indonesia, Japan and South Korea
will be the initial priorities for the development of these country strategies.

At the same time, Australia will reinforce our partnerships with other countries across
the region, including members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
such as Vietnam, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore and the Philippines.

ASEAN, as an organisation, has amplified the voice of Southeast Asian countries and is
at the core of regional groupings. To deepen Australia’s engagement with the ASEAN
Secretariat and ASEAN member countries, Australia will appoint a Jakarta-based
Ambassador to ASEAN.

Australia will be able to strengthen our relationships in the region by pooling
expertise and coordinating our Asia-focused programs more effectively across all
levels of government under an overall ‘Australia’ umbrella. Coordination and
consultation across agencies, levels of government and non-official expertise will be
made easier through using new technology, such as the National Broadband Network.

257


-----

#### Public diplomacy

The work of diplomacy is clearly no longer confined to dealing with governments and
officials. The range of actors influencing the international agenda has proliferated to
include business, the media, think tanks, cultural and educational institutions,
community groups and individuals. If we are to advance our national interests across
Asia, Australia must increasingly listen to, engage with, and try to influence the views
of this broader constituency. To do this, Australia must draw on the connections and
interests of a broad group of individuals and organisations, not only government and
officials.

This means there is a core role for public diplomacy.

Public diplomacy, which includes cultural diplomacy, has traditionally been defined as
the actions taken by government to shape the perceptions of individuals and groups
in other countries in ways that will promote Australia’s foreign policy goals (Senate
Standing Committee 2007). But in recent times, with the influence of new technology
including social media, the evolving nature of communications, and the proliferation
of interest groups, a broader definition that takes into account the dynamics of
two-way connections and a broader range of actors is more useful. And public
diplomacy has a role to play both within Australia and overseas.

Foreign affairs ministries in the region are devoting more resources and using a wider
range of public diplomacy tools to promote their culture and achievements
internationally. And many countries outside the region have major public diplomacy
programs that they use to promote understanding and awareness of, and interaction
with, communities in the region; for example, the United States and the
United Kingdom.

As the international environment becomes more contested, communication channels
more complex and power more diffuse, public and cultural diplomacy tools help to
start conversations, share knowledge and convey nuanced messages about Australia
and our regional partners. The value of public diplomacy was demonstrated in helping
to repairing Australia’s image in India during 2009–10 (Box 9.2).

Australia’s public diplomacy programs include: the Australia Awards program; cultural
exchanges and projects in our overseas posts; country-specific foundations, councils
and institutes;[1] international broadcasting services (Australia Network and Radio
Australia); various schemes to encourage high-level visitors to come to Australia
(including the Special Visitors Program, the International Media Visits Program and
the International Cultural Visits Program); and the Building Brand Australia program.

1 Including the Australia–China Council, the Australia–India Council, and the Australia–Indonesia
Institute, the Australia–Japan Foundation, the Australia Korea Foundation, the Australia–Malaysia
Institute, and the Australia–Thailand Institute.

258


-----

Social media is increasingly being used as a public diplomacy tool. It provides new
opportunities to foster engagement and collaboration amongst community and
business groups around the region. Through the creative use of these new tools, we
can reach and engage new constituencies in Asia and Australia.


**Box 9.2: Public diplomacy in action—repairing Australia’s image in India**


In response to widespread negative fallout in India as a consequence of incidents in
Australia involving Indian students, in 2009–10 the Government developed, in
consultation with India experts, a public diplomacy strategy to help repair
Australia’s damaged reputation. Drawing on the expertise of the federal and State
governments, the City of Melbourne, media, educational institutions and the
community, it included:

 - intensive advocacy led by the Prime Minister and involving State Premiers and

senior ministers

 - encouraging more informed media coverage in India and Australia through

fact-finding visits to Australia by more than 30 Indian journalists; providing
regular media interviews and briefings; and holding regional seminars involving
Indian, Australian and regional journalists

 - promoting greater mutual understanding by bringing senior Indian opinion

leaders to Australia; stepping up cultural connections, including by supporting a
concert in Parramatta by Indian composer AR Rahman; touring a photography
exhibition on Australia’s Indian community to major cities; and producing
‘interstitials’ (short items shown between features) on multicultural Australia
for television and web distribution in India.

Time and persistence are needed to address reputational issues and to build the
goodwill and resilience necessary for a bilateral relationship to withstand tensions
that can arise. Research by the Reputation Institute shows that Australia’s
reputation in India has improved since 2011, but that is not a reason for
complacency.

Cultural exchanges build greater understanding between countries at all levels and
the arts, culture and creativity can strengthen Australia’s relationships with nations in
Asia both formally and informally (Box 9.3). Australia’s cultural strengths, as home to
the world’s oldest living culture and one that welcomes great diversity, underpin
values of respect, understanding and inclusion that help to connect people, business,
institutions and governments.

259


-----

In addition to its role in forging people-to-people connections, media is a particularly
powerful public diplomacy vehicle for projecting a positive image of contemporary
Australia abroad.

The newly reconfigured Australia Network service, which combines the resources and
experience of the Australia Network and Radio Australia, provides a more flexible
public diplomacy tool that includes an extensive on line component to build
knowledge about Australia in the region.


**Box 9.3 The Indigenous dimension of Australia’s cultural diplomacy**


Indigenous Australians have had a leading role in bringing Australia to the world.
Contemporary Indigenous visual arts is one of the most highly regarded art
movements in the world.

There are frequent exhibitions involving leading Indigenous artists touring Asia,
both through our national collecting institutions and through Australia’s diplomatic
missions. The exhibition curated by the National Museum of Australia of works by
Emily Kame Kngwarreye toured to Tokyo and Osaka in Japan and attracted
record-breaking crowds and much local media attention. Indigenous music was a
major component of Australia’s cultural programs at the Shanghai and Yeosu expos
in 2010 and 2012. Performing arts groups, such as leading dance ensemble
Bangarra Dance Theatre, regularly tour overseas. Indigenous performing and visual
art will feature prominently at OzFest, a major Australian cultural festival being led
by the Australian Government in India from late 2012.

Presentations such as these demonstrate the vitality and uniqueness of Australian
culture, which in turn assists Australia’s national interests, including in our region.
Each year, the Government supports a tour of a contemporary visual arts exhibition
that showcases the richness of Australia’s Indigenous cultures. Ongoing interaction
between Asia and our Indigenous cultures is crucial and will lead to outcomes in
tourism, economic growth and cultural exchange.

Through the provision of a mix of news, current affairs and business, English-language
learning, education, documentaries, drama, sports and children’s programs, the
Australia Network will allow Australia’s ‘voice’ to be available throughout Asia
(Box 9.4). Ensuring that programming, applications and platforms respond to demand,
while at the same time ensuring the editorial independence and integrity on which
Australia Network’s reputation depends, will increase its relevance and influence in
the region.

260


-----

**Box 9.4: International broadcasting—reaching mass audiences**


International broadcasting has the potential to reach more people each day than
any other public diplomacy tool, enabling swift responses to unfolding events.

Australia’s international television broadcasting service, the Australia Network,
reaches an estimated 31.2 million homes in 46 countries in the Asia–Pacific region.
It has a mandate to encourage awareness of Australia, promote cross-cultural
communication and build regional partnerships. It is among the most-watched
government-funded international television services in the region.

Radio Australia, which recent surveys estimate has a weekly reach of 1.54 million,
provides content to Asia in six languages—English, Chinese (Mandarin), Indonesian,
Vietnamese, Cambodian (Khmer) and Burmese (ABC 2012). It is a multichannel,
multiplatform, multilingual service with nine new audio channels for radio and
online, broadcasting 24 hours a day.

Other international broadcasters are competing for audiences in Asia, and spending
considerable money in doing so, include Al Jazeera (Qatar) ($359 million in 2009),
CCTV (China) ($280 million in 2009) and NHK World/Radio (Japan) ($226 million
in 2008).

Diplomatic dialogue through non-official channels, often referred to as Track 2
diplomacy, comes under the heading of public diplomacy. It generates new ideas and
strategies and allows the non-government sector from different countries—usually
academics, business people or officials acting in an unofficial capacity—to interact in
processes aimed at creating and enlarging common ground to assist policy
development. By its nature, these dialogues are more about the dynamics of building
trust and common preferences than about ‘bargaining’ or negotiating strategies.

As demonstrated effectively in the past, Australian non-government sector networks,
including business, universities, think-tanks and other networks, are a valuable
resource for promoting foreign policy priorities, and an avenue for mobilising a
broader set of resources. These networks can be used and deployed strategically to
make Australian initiatives more likely to succeed and Australian foreign and trade
policy more effective. Australia’s public diplomacy efforts over time will continue to
grow in influence.

We will routinely draw on non-official expertise and influence in developing and
implementing foreign policy initiatives. Through greater coherence and connection
between official and non-official dialogues, we can enhance our diplomacy to
promote greater mutual understanding between communities in Australia and Asia.
And over time, in partnership with the community, we will explore new avenues for
intensifying our public and cultural diplomacy and engagement with the region.

261


-----

### 9.3 The work of communities

The work of preparing Australia for the Asian century cannot depend on the
Government alone. While the Government will play a leading role in strengthening
and building truly comprehensive relationships with partners in the region, others
across a broad spectrum of society, spanning business, unions, community groups,
educational institutions and arts and cultural institutions, will play their role too.
Public diplomacy and people-to-people connections are mutually reinforcing.


_National objective_


24. Australia will have deeper and broader people-to-people links with Asian
nations, across the entire community.

Polling indicates that Australians’ views of Asia, while largely positive, do not always
recognise the dramatic regional transformations that have occurred over the past
decade (Box 9.5). Similarly, some of our regional neighbours hold dated and
stereotyped impressions of Australia.

So change is needed in the way Australians think about and engage with the region.
The active support of the community will be critical in challenging traditional
mindsets, identifying new opportunities and intensifying our regional engagement.

We will work to put in place structures that help this process, but Australia will only
succeed in the Asian century by engaging the whole community.

Australia’s community and institutional connections with Asia are diverse and
growing. In recent decades, Australia’s cultural wealth has been boosted through
greater Asia engagement, particularly migration flows. This is reflected in the food
Australians enjoy, where we choose to travel, the books we read and the films we
watch.

Australians of Asian heritage bring a wide range of valuable perspectives to our
nation:

[G]reater engagement with Australians with Asian heritage and backgrounds is
needed to better utilise talents and resources in these communities. Senior and
future leaders in these communities have extensive contacts and interaction with
business and social interests that will benefit Australia’s presence and economic
prosperity in the long-term. (AIYD 2012:4)

In addition to encouraging informed and up-to-date perceptions of Asia in Australia,
Australians of Asian heritage can also help to project more accurate perceptions of
Australia into our region.

Partnerships with individuals, groups and institutions in Asia have intrinsic value for
those involved as they link Australians with the dynamism and diversity of the region.

262


-----

But over and above this intrinsic value, Australia’s rich network of people-to-people
connections provides ballast to our official relationships. They are a conduit for ideas
and opportunities, and a mechanism for exploring sensitive or complicated issues that
may not be amenable to government resolution.


**Box 9.5: Australians’ views on Asia and Asia’s views of Australia**


The 2012 Lowy Institute poll presented Australians with six possible responses from
the Australian Government ‘as the Asian region grows and becomes more
significant’ (Hanson 2012).

The strongest support was for doing more to get ‘Australia included in Asian
political forums’ (37 per cent of respondents said that it was ‘very important’),
increasing ‘defence spending’ (32 per cent) and encouraging ‘Australians to learn
more Asian languages’ (31 per cent). A quarter said the Government should
‘increase the number of Australian diplomats we send to Asia’, but there was less
support for doing ‘more to attract Asian investment into Australia’ (16 per cent) or
increasing ‘the number of migrants Australia accepts from Asia’ (13 per cent).

Responses differed across generations. Australians aged 60 years or older were
twice as likely as 18–29-year-olds to say that increasing defence spending is ‘very
important’. Older Australians were more likely to say that encouraging ‘Australians
to learn more Asian languages’ was ‘very important’. Australians 18 to 29 years old
were the most likely age group to say it was ‘very important’ that the Government
‘increase the number of Australian diplomats we send to Asia’.

In international polls, Australia regularly ranks among the top countries to visit and
to live, work and study in. However, our reputation is stronger in Group of Eight
(G8) countries than in countries in our region. In a 2011 Reputation Institute poll,
G8 countries ranked Australia 3rd behind Canada and Sweden, whereas non-G8
countries (including Brazil, China, India, Indonesia and South Korea) ranked us 14th
overall (Reputation Institute 2011).

Our reputation in Asia remains strongly linked to our landscape and lifestyle, and
does not fully reflect the intellectual, creative and commercial credentials of
Australia today. Promoting a modern, innovative and multicultural image of
Australia in Asia is a public diplomacy priority.

Our international reputation matters because it affects our policy influence, rubs
off on Australian businesses, builds negotiating capital and helps to attract tourists,
international students, and trade and investment opportunities.

#### Travel, study, migration and work links

A rich network of personal relationships links Australia to our region through travel,
study, migration, work flows and volunteering.

Almost one million Australians are living abroad, of whom an estimated 230,000
reside in Asia (Hugo 2006). This includes Australians who are working, volunteering or

263


-----

studying in the region (Box 9.6). Australians abroad have great potential as unofficial
ambassadors and when back in Australia they bring knowledge and experience that
enriches our society as a whole.[2] And the reverse is true: large numbers of people
from the region live, work and study in Australia before returning to their home
countries. Enabling young Australians to travel and work in Asia is a high priority since
Australians abroad are important conduits for building capabilities and exchanging
ideas.


**Box 9.6: Australian Volunteers International**


Since its founding in 1951, Australian Volunteers International has enabled more
than 9,000 Australians to work in developing communities around the world,
including 4,319 in Asia. Australia’s first volunteers were graduates from the
University of Melbourne who responded to a request from Indonesia for technical
experts not only to share their knowledge, but also to participate in the life of the
then newly independent society. The Government has provided funding for
volunteer programs since 1965 and continues to provide significant support.

Australian Volunteers International is adapting its approach to volunteering in
response to the changing international environment. It is partnering with the
ANZ Banking Group to develop community engagement opportunities for bank staff,
providing young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people with overseas
volunteering opportunities, and helping Macquarie University to create the only
whole-of-university volunteer program in Australia by sending students to South and
Southeast Asia. Australian Volunteers International is increasingly ‘twinning’
Australian and Asian organisations to share expertise, technology and strategic
thinking through two-way exchanges.

Australia’s working holiday maker program fosters cultural exchange and enhances
people-to-people links with partner countries. We have formal working holiday maker
program agreements with Bangladesh, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, South
Korea, Taiwan and Thailand that make it easier for young Australians to work and
study there. Given the value of these arrangements in building connections between
young people, we will expand Work and Holiday program agreements with countries
in Asia over time, starting with an increase to 1,000 places in the Work and Holiday
Visa program we have with Indonesia.

Links formed through study are another important channel for building
people-to-people relationships. Australia’s large number of overseas students
reinforces our links to the region (Box 9.7). Some are funded through Australia’s
extensive Australia Awards program.

2 This was demonstrated by the contributions being made by groups, such as Advance, a global
not-for-profit network founded in 2002 for Australians living and working overseas.

264


-----

Students who return to their home countries are a particular source of goodwill for
Australia, and Australia will do more to encourage stronger alumni networks of
Australian-educated leaders in Asia. Prominent Australian alumni include Indonesian
Foreign Minister Dr Marty Natalegawa; the founder of Asia’s largest biotechnology
firm, Kiran Mazumdar-Shaw from India; the founder of China’s largest manufacturer
of solar panels, Shi Zhengrong; and Japan’s first NASA astronaut and head of its
National Museum of Emerging Science and Innovation, Mamoru Mohri.

To consolidate the branding of Government scholarships and awards and to
strengthen our alumni networks, we established the Australia Awards program
in 2009.

Australia’s official scholarship and awards program is worth $325 million in 2011–12
and is much larger in scale than the Colombo Plan (Box 9.7). It is in our interests to
continue to forge enduring links with the countries of Asia through these programs.
We commit to 12,000 Australia Awards (Asian Century) over five years to nations in
Asia. The awards will be for Australians to study in the region and students from
regional countries to undertake study or professional development in Australia. Some
awards will be extended to include work placements and support mid-career
sabbaticals.


**Box 9.7: International student flows**


In 2011, Australia had 550,000 enrolments by international students in our
education institutions. Around three-quarters of these enrolments were from
countries in Asia. China, India and South Korea were the top three source nations.
Australia draws the second-largest number of tertiary students from Asia studying
abroad, behind only the United States

This year, there are around 6,800 international students, researchers and
professionals on Australia Awards, most of whom are from Asia. Australia’s current
inbound scholarship and awards programs are larger than the Colombo Plan
scholarship program, which brought some 20,000 students from Asia to study in
Australia over 35 years.

Increasingly, Australian students are studying abroad. In the five years to 2010, the
proportion of Australian undergraduate degree students who studied overseas
during their courses (from short-term placements to double-degree programs with
partner universities) more than doubled, to around 12 per cent. More than
30 per cent of outbound Australian students studied in Asia. We will implement a
suite of policies to boost the number of Australian students who take up an in-Asia
study experience (Chapter 6).

265


-----

Greater emphasis will be placed on maintaining lifelong links with and between
scholarship and award recipients. We will strengthen the extensive alumni networks
of Australian-educated leaders in Asia by providing a focal point for coordinating the
networks through an Australia Awards Office.

We will also continue to support high-quality private-sector scholarships that bring
future Asian leaders to Australia and encourage greater numbers of Australians to
study in Asian institutions through grants and other exchange programs (Chapter 6).
For example, the Hong Kong company Cheung Kong Group is a co-sponsor of the
Endeavour Australia Cheung Kong Awards, which support undergraduate and
postgraduate education exchange between Australia and Asia.

Students at university level are not the only ones who benefit from links within the
region. A growing number of high school graduates benefit greatly from Asian
exchanges during a gap year. And digital technology will boost online collaboration
between students of all ages and backgrounds, as well as between researchers,
businesses and community groups.

#### Academic, scientific and professional links

A growing proportion of global scientific research is taking place in Asia. Partnerships
with research and technology communities are crucial to supporting Australia’s ability
to access new ideas and to build our future competitiveness.

The scope for mutually beneficial research is considerable. Countries in the region,
including China, India, Japan, Singapore and South Korea, have world-class research
infrastructure and capabilities. China and Japan are home to two of the world’s most
powerful supercomputers. Despite its small population, Singapore has developed as a
world hub of biotechnology research and development, particularly in
pharmaceuticals.

Australia’s connections with research communities in the region are strong and
growing (Figure 9.1). Measured by the number of joint scientific publications,
Australia is among the top 10 most important partners for China, Japan, India, South
Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan and all 10 members of ASEAN. Australian researchers are
collaborating more with their international counterparts and the proportion of
Australia’s publications produced through international collaboration rose from less
than 35 per cent to more than 45 per cent between 2000 and 2010 (Thomson Reuters
2011b). At the institutional level, the Chinese Academy of Sciences is now the single
most frequent partner institution for Australian collaboration, as measured by
publication data between 2004 and 2008 (Adams, King & Webster 2010).

266


-----

##### Figure 9.1: Scientific links between Australia and Asian nations

2002 2010

Sources: Thomson Reuters (2011a) and Scopus.

As the international focus on Asia intensifies, Australia will face more competition for
opportunities to collaborate with the region’s most capable researchers. Sustaining
Australia’s present links will need continued investment and stewardship by
governments, our leading scientists, innovators and institutions.

Over time, Australia should broaden and strengthen our partnerships across the
region to link with Asia’s growth as a global science and innovation hub. We will use
the National Broadband Network and digital technology to boost online collaboration
between researchers, community groups, students, schools and universities in
Australia with their counterparts throughout the region (Chapter 5).

Australia’s professional collaboration with regional partners extends beyond pure
research. Australia has broad and longstanding ties in fields as diverse as
jurisprudence, and library and information sciences. Sustaining our commitment to
these relationships is important for developing shared bodies of knowledge and
experience, enabling the easy flow of ideas.

The Burnet Institute argues that ‘the impact of these relationships that are developed
over long periods of time, based on mutual interests and with a genuine sense of
equality, trust and understanding, is difficult to measure but unarguably important’
(Burnet Institute 2012).

We recognise the importance of these research and professional links, and science
and research exchanges, and support a wide range of pathways to maintain and
expand them.

267


-----

#### Connections through faith and community service organisations

Cooperation across national boundaries through faith communities can strengthen
understanding within and between nations and help dispel misperceptions.

Across our region, many local and national interfaith organisations and networks have
emerged and implemented a diverse range of programs and activities. In Australia,
peak bodies—such as the Federation of Australian Buddhist Councils, the Australian
Federation of Islamic Councils, the Executive Council of Australian Jewry and the
National Council of Churches—have integrated interfaith dialogues with the region.

These communities are promoting regional peace and cooperation. Regional
interfaith dialogues, such as those held in Yogyakarta (2004), Cebu (2006), Waitangi
(2007), Phnom Penh (2008), Perth (2009) and Semarang (2012), and similar initiatives,
contribute to peace and understanding in the region by connecting faith communities
in constructive and practical ways.

More generally, Australian communities are linked with Asian communities by groups
with an interest in community service. These include groups such as Lions and Rotary
and various development, environmental, human rights and other not-for-profit
organisations. While many once had a traditional emphasis on aid, service groups are
now increasingly focused on supporting shared visions, developing joint projects and
promoting a greater two-way flow of knowledge and ideas.

We promote these connections in a wide range of ways, including by supporting
regional interfaith dialogues, assisting organisations working for development and
sustainability in Australia and across the region.

#### Sport

Australia is a growing part of Asia’s sporting culture. Many Australian sporting groups
are strengthening their partnerships with regional groups, including in sports that
have larger followings in parts of Asia than in Australia, such as badminton and table
tennis. Australia is an active member of the Asian Football Confederation, and three
Australian teams compete in the annual Asian Champions League. The Australian
Open tennis tournament is the most watched tennis event in the Asia–Pacific region
(Tennis Australia 2012), and the Northern Territory has hosted thousands of athletes
from the region every two years since 1993 as part of the Arafura Games. India is a
main driver of Twenty20 cricket.

Our sporting connections can open doors and create links between people in the
region (Box 9.8). Industry leaders in Australia and Asia often have close connections
to sport through board appointments or team ownership, providing unique business
networking opportunities. Sports in which Australia shares a connection with
particular countries in Asia (such as football and cricket) provide obvious
opportunities for businesses to develop links with Asian markets. This already occurs
through sponsorship or team ownership. In the other direction, businesses and
business figures from the region invest in Australian sport and the broader Australian
economy through similar mechanisms.

268


-----

**Box 9.8: Football diplomacy**


When Football Federation Australia became a member of the Asian Football
Confederation in 2006, for the first time Australia had a significant, ongoing
sporting relationship with a large number of Asian and Middle Eastern countries,
complementing our diplomatic and other links. Australians have competed against
their Asian counterparts in a variety of sports, but those links have tended to be
limited to particular countries (most notably, cricketing ties with the Indian
subcontinent) or have occurred only occasionally. By contrast, Australian teams
now play regular competitive matches against teams from throughout the region.

As countries in Asia continue to develop and as their middle classes continue to
grow, football will become increasingly popular. More than 80 million people in
Asia played football in 2006. By 2020, that number may be more than 380 million.
More people will watch games. Professional football leagues will continue to
develop and there will be a steady shift in professional football leadership to Asia
creating considerable business and other opportunities.

Our football engagement with Asia is not limited to national teams and A–league
clubs. State representative teams make regular visits to China, Indonesia, Japan,
Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam and they often travel and play outside
capital cities. Club teams from Asia often visit Australian States, Territories and
regions, particularly Western Australia, northern New South Wales, Victoria and the
Northern Territory (FFA 2012).

In 2015, two major sporting events will be held in Australia—the International Cricket
Council Cricket World Cup and the Asian Football Confederation Asian Cup. In
addition to players and officials participating and supporters visiting, hundreds of
millions of people in our region will watch these games using many different
technologies. Such events offer opportunities for Australia to build on our
international reputation for delivering major sporting events, and to promote
Australian tourism, trade and other interests in Asia.

#### Cultural connections

Cultural connections across a range of areas can be powerful forces for bringing
people together. Exchanges through culture build understanding and foster cultural
appreciation. The people-to-people links forged through arts and culture can open up
new business, training and market opportunities and are an integral part of
strengthening political and trade relationships.


_National objective_


25. Australia will have stronger, deeper and broader cultural links with Asian
nations.

269


-----

Australia’s arts and cultural community is increasingly connected with Asia. Australia
has a dynamic Asian–Australian arts scene and our leading cultural institutions and
major performing arts groups have strong relations with Asian partners. There is
extensive collaboration between some smaller arts and cultural organisations and at
an individual level.

Our major performing companies have a long history of successful tours to most Asian
countries. These tours involve not only performing Australian works and
interpretations for Asian audiences, but also often include artist exchanges and
ongoing company partnerships resulting in lasting collaboration.

Australia’s creative sectors allow us to connect with the region in new and clever
ways that provide commercial and innovation benefits (Box 9.9).


**Box 9.9: Digital ninjas from Down Under**


Fruit Ninja is a game in which players slice fruit with a blade controlled by swiping
their fingers across a smartphone or tablet screen. The flagship product of Brisbane
developer Halfbrick Studios, it is the no. 1 paid application in Taiwan, Germany and
Russia, and the no. 2 in China, the United States and Australia.

Halfbrick is now one of the world’s leading independent game-app developers.
Fruit Ninja has reached 300 million players worldwide and amassed more than
20 million paid downloads.

Working at the crossover of culture, technology and design, companies such as
Halfbrick demonstrate what is possible when creativity and energy come together.

But more needs to be done. Australia’s arts and cultural engagement should be
strengthened across all of Australia’s major regional relationships. And we can do
better in encouraging cooperation and exchanges of expertise and specialists with
cultural institutions from Asia, including through training and capacity building and
through the creative use of digital technology.

We support the arts community through a range of pathways including the provision
of competitive grants for international touring, coordinating an Australian presence at
major arts events such as the Korea International Art Fair, and assisting organisations
such as Asialink which promotes collaboration between Australian and Asian artists
through a long-running residency program. We encourage the arts community and
arts institutions, including those in regional Australia, to look to Asia when planning
programs and future growth strategies.

Formal government-to-government cultural agreements can support cultural
exchange and collaboration between nations, such as the formal agreement on
cultural cooperation between China and Australia. These agreements provide
incentive to grow relationships through a range of arts and cultural activities that link
Australians with our Asian neighbours. For example, Imagine Australia, the Year of
Australian Culture in China, together with its counterpart program, Experience China,
is the biggest bilateral cultural exchange program ever held between the two

270


-----

countries and comes as we celebrate the 40th anniversary of diplomatic relations.
And in 2011, Australia marked the 50th anniversary of diplomatic relations with
South Korea with the Australia–Korea Year of Friendship. In 2012 and 2013, we joined
with some of India’s best cultural festivals and venues to stage events across India as
part of OzFest.

Over time, Australia’s cultural links should grow and prosper through both private
endeavour and government support. The mindset should be that Australian
organisations should become fully part of the region through two-way collaboration
and partnership arrangements.

The Government’s consideration of the Review of the Australia Council will ensure
that the Australia Council is well placed to respond to the arts and culture sector into
the future. We will also revamp the Australia International Cultural Council to ensure
a strategic approach to cultural diplomacy and deliver support to Australian artists
and cultural organisations to undertake international cultural exchange. The reforms
could include a greater role for external peers in determining the council’s strategic
direction and the prioritisation of cultural diplomacy objectives and artistic excellence
when assessing applications for funding.

#### Media 

Media is central in shaping perceptions and enhancing communications between
Australia and the region, and the information revolution offers unprecedented
opportunities to connect in new ways. This is illustrated by the current popularity of
_Junior Masterchef Australia in Indonesia, and the parallel exchanges that the show_
has prompted through social media.

Asia has a dynamic, crowded and fragmented media environment with over a
hundred 24-hour news channels operating across the region, a proliferation of new
international channels and major growth in the use of digital and mobile
technologies. At the end of 2011, Asia had an estimated 932 million internet users
and the Asia–Pacific region had an estimated 2.9 billion mobile phone subscriptions.
India now has more than 800 television channels (from only two in 1990)
(Indian MIB 2012) and Indonesia has 43 million Facebook users (IWS 2012).

Our engagement with the region must acknowledge and respond to the rapid pace of
change in media technologies and consumer behaviours: modern coverage of news
and information is now practically instantaneous and transcends borders. As an
illustration, Tourism Australia’s new ‘There’s Nothing Like Australia’ campaign
advertisement in China had 20 million digital downloads over three months to
September 2012.

The content and coverage of the region in Australia’s media need to improve. This is
the responsibility of media organisations themselves. It is an important part of the
whole-of-Australia approach to building links and engaging with Asia that is needed.
We will explore opportunities to convene third-party expert panels with leading

271


-----

media organisations and journalists to discuss the scope and quality of coverage of
Asian countries and developments in the region of importance to Australia.

We will also support collaboration between regional media services; we will work
with the media industry through its representative bodies such as press clubs, foreign
correspondents associations and media and journalism schools, to ensure that
Australians receive more day-to-day news about major events and issues from across
the region. In addition, we will continue to encourage two-way media exchange
programs with the region to build knowledge.

Within Australia’s public broadcasting service, the Australian Broadcasting
Corporation (ABC) Charter obliges it to transmit to other countries programs to
encourage awareness of Australia and an understanding of Australian attitudes on
world affairs. At the same time, both the ABC and the Special Broadcasting Service
(SBS) have a role in reflecting a modern vision of Asia back to Australia through their
correspondents in Asia and in the Asia–Pacific News Centre. This includes SBS’s role as
a news provider to Asian-Australian communities in their languages.

We will request the boards of the ABC and SBS to examine how to promote more
extensive coverage of the Asia region in all aspects of their content and programming,
with special attention to news and information coverage, to ensure their content
reflects the depth and diversity of our regional connections.

The scale and pace of change in Asia presents great opportunities for Australia. Right
across our nation—in governments, businesses, unions, educational and cultural
institutions and broad community groups—we need to become even more
innovative, efficient and adaptable. All of us will need to work smarter to maximise
prosperity.

272


-----

## Appendix A: Asia’s resurgence

The rapid economic growth unfolding at our doorstep represents a resurgence of
Asia’s economic fortunes.

Until the 19th century, the diverse nations in Asia made up more than half of the
world economy. Together, the economies of Asia were larger than those of
Western Europe and North America combined. People in Asian countries were
reasonably prosperous, enjoying living standards that were at levels around
two-thirds of those in North America and Europe (charts A.1 and A.2). In the 1500s
and 1600s, China was advanced in a number of areas, including its meritocratic civil
service, long-distance maritime technologies and agriculture. The kingdoms of
Southeast Asia—which now form parts of Indonesia and Malaysia—were enjoying the
heights of the spice trade. The numerous kingdoms of India—such as the Moguls and
other neighbouring states—were also at the height of their economic and political
power, although their interests were more focused on domestic activities than those
of many of their Asian neighbours.

##### Chart A.1: Rising Asian income per person

Percentage of income per person in North America and Europe


Per cent North America and Europe Per cent North America and Europe

100 100

80 80

60 60

40 40

20 20

0 0

1500 1600 1700 1820 1870 1913 1950 1970 1990 2010

China India Indonesia Japan South Korea

Notes: GDP is adjusted for purchasing power parity (1990 prices). See glossary for definitions of
North America and Europe.
Sources: Maddison (2010) and Conference Board (2012).

273


-----

100

75

50

25

0


##### Chart A.2: Rising Asian economic output 

Percentage of world output

Per cent Per cent

1820 1870 1913 1950 1970 1990 2010

Asia North America and Europe Rest of world


100

75

50

25

0


Notes: GDP is adjusted for purchasing power parity (1990 prices). See glossary for definition of
North America, Europe and Asia.
Sources: Maddison (2010) and Conference Board (2012).

However, from the middle of the 18th century up to the mid-20th century, economic
power shifted towards the West as it industrialised—dispersing and adapting new
technologies and scientific, commercial and social advances.

Meanwhile, in Asia, once-powerful states became more inward looking—stifling
entrepreneurial dynamism and curbing the spread of technological advances.
Persistent internal conflict and instability increased their vulnerability to colonial
intrusion. Compared to the West, average living standards fell dramatically, hitting
their lowest point in the middle of the 20th century.

Fast-forward to today, and the region has been enjoying an economic resurgence.
Asia’s share of global output has reverted to something akin to what it was 200 years
ago, and its people are enjoying a revival in prosperity.

Asia’s resurgence has spanned a wide range of nations, all with distinct histories,
emerging at different speeds and at various times after World War II. The trade and
industrial transformation of Asian economies, which occurred in three waves, has
been underpinned by staggered surges in productivity growth (charts A.3 and A.4).[1]

1 The waves of economic transformation have been identified using the growth acceleration
framework from Hausmann, Pritchett & Rodrik (2005) and the model of the ‘second gaggle of the flying
geese’ (see, for example, Furuoka 2005). See also Drysdale (2004).

274


-----

100,000

10,000


100,000

10,000


##### Chart A.3: Asia’s three waves of income take-off

Income per person (log scale)

US$ US$


1,000


1,000


100 100

1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010

Australia China India Japan


Malaysia South Korea United States


Note: GDP adjusted for purchasing power parity (1990 prices).
Sources: Maddison (2010), Maddison (2006) and Conference Board (2012).

##### Chart A.4: Asia’s three waves of productivity growth

Average annual growth in GDP per worker


10

8


10

8


6

4


6

4


2

0


Per cent Per cent

Waves 1& 2 Wave 3

1950–73 1973–97 1997–2010


2

0

|Col1|Waves 1& 2|
|---|---|


(a) 1960–73 for Singapore and Malaysia (rather than 1950–73).
Note: GDP is adjusted for purchasing power parity (1990 prices). See glossary for definition of North
America and Europe.
Sources: Maddison (2010), Maddison (2006) and Conference Board (2012).

275


-----

The first wave comprised Japan’s remarkable emergence, which resumed after the
disastrous impact of World War II, and its subsequent reintegration into the global
community. The period between the mid-1950s and the early 1970s was a golden era
for Japanese economic growth, fuelled by investment and energy-intensive
industrialisation. Incomes per person doubled in the 1950s and again in the 1960s. By
1966, Japan had become the third-largest economy in the world.

Japan’s economic emergence had impacts throughout the region, including in
Australia. With limited domestic resources, Japan looked to global markets for the
raw materials to fuel its ongoing industrialisation. Australia’s stable supply of minerals
and energy to Japan became essential for powering the Japanese economy.

As Japan’s productivity and living standards approached world-best levels in the late
1980s, growth slowed, exacerbated by an ageing population and the bursting of an
asset price bubble. Since that time, Japan’s productivity has remained on par with
that of other advanced economies, indicating that Japan has been using its resources
as effectively as other leading economies in generating wealth.

The second wave of economic catch-up consisted of a cluster of mainly Northeast
Asian and, soon after, Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) economies,
which industrialised following Japan’s lead (charts A.3 and A.4). The first group
comprised a set of export-oriented economies, including Hong Kong, Singapore,
South Korea and Taiwan. As with Japan, these high-income economies are now
among the most prosperous in the world. Between 1960 and the Asian financial crisis
in 1997, income per person increased by a factor of 11 in South Korea and Taiwan, a
factor of 9 in Singapore and a factor of 7 in Hong Kong.

The second wave also included a group of relatively populous ASEAN economies—
Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand—which emerged over the same period to become
middle-income economies. While these economies have closed some of the gap in
living standards between them and advanced economies, their rate of development
has been more moderate. Incomes per person in Malaysia and Thailand are currently
around one-third of United States levels, and are around one-sixth in Indonesia.
Despite a lower level of income, the sheer size of Indonesia’s population—at around
240 million people—means that its economy is larger than Australia’s.[2]

The Asian financial crisis in 1997 had profound impacts across the region, particularly
in South Korea and in Southeast Asia. Since that time, the high rates of economic
growth in the second-wave economies have moderated considerably. Even so, most
have continued to grow faster than advanced economies.

2 Measured in purchasing power parity terms.

276


-----

The third wave comprises the two most populous Asian states—China and India—
which emerged economically in the late 1970s and early 1990s, respectively.[3]
Underpinned by high productivity, economic growth has accelerated even further in
the past decade (charts A.3 and A.4). While China and India have generated headlines
over the past decade for the rapid pace of their growth, Vietnam—a populous nation
of around 90 million—has also been part of the third wave of economic catch-up.

In the 20 years since their economic take-off, the sizes of the economies of China,
India and Vietnam have quadrupled. The rate at which China’s average living
standards have increased—they doubled in the 1990s and doubled again in the
2000s—is reminiscent of Japan’s speedy period of growth. India and Vietnam, where
take-off started about a decade after China’s, close to doubled their national output
the 2000s.

Economic conditions in China and India, which are large enough to be conceived as
continents more than countries, have differed widely, contributing to uneven growth
within those countries. Many states and provinces have lagged behind their urban
and coastal counterparts.

In India, rural incomes were almost one-third of those in urban areas in 2009. The
divide is even starker in China, where the 2008 mean income of rural areas was 40 per
cent of those in cities (World Bank 2012). However, some gaps have been closing in
recent years. Regions in the Chinese hinterland are now enjoying more rapid
economic growth, particularly those that are rich in resources, while some poorer
Indian states, such as Bihar, are enjoying more favourable economic times.

With a combined population of more than 2.5 billion, the sheer sizes of the
third-wave economies are leading to profound shifts in economic, political and
strategic landscapes, both globally and regionally.

3 As with many economies in the region, the precise timing of India’s take-off is contentious. Economic
growth had already taken off in the early 1980s (Hausmann, Pritchett & Rodrik 2005).

277


-----

## Appendix B: Australia’s bilateral relationships with Asia

Australia has extensive and comprehensive connections with countries across Asia.
Country and region profiles which contain facts and figures about our bilateral
relationships with Asian countries can be found
[at: www.dfat.gov.au/publications/asian-century/index.html and](http://www.dfat.gov.au/publications/asian-century/index.html)
www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.

This appendix contains background material on the history of Australia’s engagement
with the region, the distribution of government agencies across the region and the
types of bilateral architecture Australia has in place.

**Table B.1: Evolution of Australia’s relations with the region**

Year Events

1901 Federation of Australia.

1901 Immigration Restriction Act puts White Australia policy into effect.

1908 Tariffs are tied to centralised arbitration of wages under Australia’s ‘New Protection’ policy.

1914–18 Japan declares war on Germany; does not send forces, but escorts Australian troops to war.
Japan takes responsibility for some of Germany’s Asia–Pacific colonial holdings.

1919–20 Australia supports the defeat of Japan’s attempt to insert a declaration of racial equality into
the League of Nations Covenant.

1929–32 During the Depression, Japan’s and China’s shares of Australian exports rise.

1929 The Brigden report is equivocal about raising or lowering tariffs.

1936 Australia applies a ‘trade diversion’ policy and restricts Japanese and US imports in favour of
Britain.

1940–41 Australia establishes diplomatic missions in Tokyo and Chongqing.

1941–45 Australia at war with Japan.

1941–45 US provided war materiel to China and British Commonwealth allies under Mutual Aid
agreements (Lend-Lease); Australia provided materiel to US under reverse lend-lease
arrangements.

1942 Japan defeats Allied forces in Singapore.

1945–52 After the defeat of Japan, Australia represents the Commonwealth on the Allied Council for
Japan and leads the British Commonwealth Occupation Force.

1947 Australia initiates United Nations intervention in the colonial war between Indonesian
republicans and the Dutch, and supports the republic in its efforts to gain independence.

1947–50 Australia supports independence for the countries of South Asia, and supports India
remaining in the Commonwealth as a republic.

1950–53 Australia commits forces to the UN-authorised unified command in defence of South Korea.

1950–60 Australia contributes forces to the Malayan emergency.

1951 48 nations sign San Francisco Peace Treaty with Japan marking formal end of the war.

1951 Australia, New Zealand and the United States sign the ANZUS Treaty.

1951 Colombo Plan launched in Australia.

1954 Australia joins the Southeast Asian Treaty Organisation (SEATO).

1957 Australia concludes Commerce Agreement with Japan, despite historical frictions and
popular sentiment.

1962–75 Australia is involved in the Vietnam War.

278


-----

**Table B.1 (continued)**

Year Events

1968–71 Negotiation of Five Power Defence Arrangements with Malaysia, Singapore, the UK and
New Zealand.

1972 Australia recognises the People’s Republic of China and establishes diplomatic relations.

1973 Following previous incremental changes, the White Australia policy is fully dismantled.
Australia’s immigration policy ceases to discriminate on the basis of race.

1973 Across-the-board tariff cut of 25 per cent.

1974 Australia becomes first ASEAN external dialogue partner.

1975–89 Australia accepts more than 110,000 Indochinese refugees.

1976 Australia and Japan sign the Basic Treaty of Friendship and Co-operation.

1980 Pacific Community Seminar held in Canberra at the initiative of Australian and Japanese
Prime Ministers; establishment of Pacific Economic Cooperation Council (PECC).

1984 The Jackson report sparks a series of higher education sector changes increasing inbound
Asia students.

1989 Garnaut report on the Northeast Asian ascendancy.

1989 First meeting of APEC is held in Canberra after Australia proposed the grouping.

1989–93 Australia leads the development of the UN peace plan for Cambodia and provides the force
commander for the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia.

1993 First APEC Economic Leaders’ Meeting in Seattle.

1997 Australia contributes to the International Monetary Fund rescue packages for countries
affected by the East Asian financial crisis (Indonesia, South Korea and Thailand).

1999 Australia is one of the first Western countries (along with New Zealand) to be granted
‘approved destination status’ by China.


1999–
2002


Australia leads a multinational force in East Timor and plays a leading role in support of the
UN transnational administration preceding the country’s independence in 2002.


2001 China enters the World Trade Organization, following two decades of economic reform.

2002 East Timor formally secures independence as Timor-Leste.

2002 First Bali terrorist bombing.


2003
2004

2005
2005


Singapore–Australia Free Trade Agreement enters into force.
Indian Ocean tsunami—Australia and other countries rally to provide humanitarian and
disaster relief and reconstruction assistance to Indonesia, Thailand, India and Sri Lanka.

Thailand–Australia Free Trade Agreement enters into force
Australia signs the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia (the Bali Treaty).


2005 Australia participates as a founding member in the inaugural East Asia Summit held in Kuala
Lumpur.

2006 Lombok Treaty between Australia and Indonesia is agreed.


2006–
present


Australia provides support to Timor-Leste through Operation ASTUTE to restore stability and
provide a secure environment for the ongoing development of Timor-Leste.


2008 Australia participates in the first leaders meeting of the G20.

2010 ASEAN – Australia – New Zealand Free Trade Agreement enters into force for Australia and
a number of other countries.

2011 Australia attends East Asia Summit in Indonesia. The summit includes all major regional
powers, including the United States and Russia.

2012 India becomes the largest source of migrants to Australia.

2012 Malaysia–Australia Free Trade Agreement is signed. It will enter into force once Australia
and Malaysia have completed their domestic ratification procedures.

279


-----

**Table B.2: Australian-based representation at Australian missions in Asia**

|Location|DFAT|DIAC|Austrade|AusAID|DAFF|AFP|ADF|Customs|DIISRTE|DRET|RBA|Treasury|AGD|DIT|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Bangladesh|X|X||X|||||||||||
|Brunei|X||||||||||||||
|Cambodia|X|X||X||X|X||||||||
|China|X|X|X|X|X|X|X|X|X|X|X|X|||
|Hong Kong|X|X|X|||X|||||||||
|India|X|X|X|X|X|X|X|X|X|||X|||
|Indonesia|X|X|X|X|X|X|X|X|X|||X|X|X|
|Japan|X||X||X||X||X|||X|||
|Laos|X|||X|||||||||||
|Malaysia|X|X|X|||X|X|X|X||||||
|Mongolia|||X||||||||||||
|Myanmar|X|||X||X|||||||||
|Nepal|X|||X|||||||||||
|Pakistan|X|X||X||X|X||||||||


-----

**Table B.2 (continued)**

**Location** **DFAT** **DIAC** **Austrade** **AusAID** **DAFF** **AFP** **ADF** **Customs** **DIISRTE** **DRET**

**Philippines** X X X X X X

**Singapore** X X X X X X

**South Korea** X X X X X X

**Sri Lanka** X X X X X

**Taiwan** X X

**Thailand** X X X X X X X X X

**Timor-Leste** X X X X X

**Vietnam** X X X X X X X

[Note: In the absence of formal representation in Taiwan, the Australian Office in Taipei unofficially represents Australia’s interests.](http://dfat.gov.au/missions/countries/tw.html)
Source: DFAT.

|Location|DFAT|DIAC|Austrade|AusAID|DAFF|AFP|ADF|Customs|DIISRTE|DRET|RBA|Treasury|AGD|DIT|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Philippines|X|X|X|X||X|X|||||||X|
|Singapore|X|X|X|X||X|X||||||||
|South Korea|X|X|X||X||X||X||||||
|Sri Lanka|X|X||X||X||X|||||||
|Taiwan|X||X||||||||||||
|Thailand|X|X|X|X|X|X|X|X|X|||||X|
|Timor-Leste|X|X||X||X|X||||||||
|Vietnam|X|X|X|X||X|X||X||||||


-----

**Table B.3: Bilateral architecture in major relationships**

**China** **India** **Japan** **South**
**Korea**

|Mutual membership of leaders-level regional institution|China |India |Japan |South Korea |Indonesia |Vietnam |Thailand |Malaysia |Singapore |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Regular/institutionalised head of government meeting Joint Foreign and Defence Ministers meeting (2+2)||||||Note 16||||
|||||Note 12|||||Note 29|
|Regular/institutionalised Foreign Ministers meeting Regular/institutionalised Trade Ministers meeting|||||||||Note 29|
||||||||||Note 29|
|Regular/institutionalised Defence Ministers meeting Other ministerial meetings||||||||||
|||||||||||
|Parliamentary exchanges Strategic dialogue|||||||Note 19|||
||||||||Note 20|||
|Senior officials talks Other political leaders dialogue|||||||||Note 30|
|||||||||||
|Unofficial leadership dialogue Government staff secondment/exchange arrangement||||||||||
|||||||||||
|Young leaders dialogue Free trade agreement||||||||||
||Note 1|Note 4|Note 10|Note 13|Note 15|Note 17|Note 21|Note 25|Note 31|
|Other trade agreement Regular joint trade commission meeting||||||||||
|||||Note 14||||Note 26||
|Australian Chamber of Commerce/business association in-country Other officially supported business forums| | | || || |||


-----

**Table B.3 (continued)**

**China** **India** **Japan** **South** **Indonesia** **Vietnam**
**Korea**

Investment agreement (a)   *  

|Col1|China|India|Japan|South Korea|Indonesia|Vietnam|Thailand|Malaysia|Singapore|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|

|Double taxation agreement (a)|Note 2|||||||||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|


Mutual legal assistance agreement (a)   Note 11      

Social security agreement (a) Note 5  

Science/research agreement (a)      Note 18   

|Social security agreement (a)|Col2|Note 5|||Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|

|Nuclear cooperation/safeguards agreement (a)||Note 6|||||Col8|Col9|Col10|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|


Extradition treaty  Note 11    Note 22  Note 32

Bilateral aid recipient Note 3 Note 7  

Scholarship program       Note 23 

|Bilateral aid recipient|Note 3|Note 7|Col4|Col5|||Col8|Col9|Col10|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|

|Counterterrorism cooperation|Col2|||||Col7||Note 27||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|


Disaster relief cooperation     Note 24 

Bilateral foundation/institute/council       

Dedicated cultural/sporting program/exchange       

|Bilateral foundation/institute/council||||||Col7|||Col10|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|

|Defence cooperation arrangements (note 33)||Note 8||||||||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|


Defence staff college exchanges (note 32)  Note 9      

Transport cooperation agreements (note 35)         

Note: This table provides only a snapshot of bilateral architecture in major relationships. (a) The term ‘agreement’ is used in the broader non-legal sense.

|Transport cooperation agreements (note 35)||||||||||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|


-----

**_Notes to Table B.3_**

1. A bilateral FTA is under negotiation.

2. A scoping study is underway for a double taxation agreement.

3. Australia is phasing out its bilateral aid program.

4. A bilateral Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement / FTA is under negotiation.

5. A bilateral Social Security Agreement is under negotiation.

6. The government is considering how it might put in place arrangements that would enable
exports of Australian uranium to India.

7. Australia no longer provides bilateral aid to India but will continue to provide targeted
assistance to India through regional programs and multilateral organisations (such as the
World Bank).

8. Navy to Navy and Air Force to Air Force talks are provisionally scheduled annually, and
Army to Army talks biennially.

9. Each year Australia offers places on our defence staff college to India. India also offers
Australian officers places at military training institutions. There is no specific agreement
that a certain number of officers will be exchanged.

10. A bilateral FTA is under negotiation.

11. While there are no extradition or mutual assistance treaties with Japan, Australia is able
to cooperate on these matters under our legislative framework.

12. Australia and South Korea agreed in 2011 to work toward establishing a regular ‘2+2’
bilateral Foreign and Defence Ministers’ meeting.

13. A bilateral FTA is in the final stages of negotiation.

14. A Ministerial Joint Trade and Economic Commission (trade ministers’ meeting) has been
long established; it was last held in May 2009. The investment agreement relates to
information sharing and cooperation regarding mineral resource investment and clean
energy opportunities only.

15. As well as the bilateral Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement under
negotiation, Australia and Indonesia are both parties to the ASEAN – Australia – New
Zealand Free Trade Agreement (AANZFTA).

16. In 2009, Australia and Vietnam signed a Comprehensive Partnership. This is currently
being implemented through the Australia–Vietnam Plan of Action (2010–13) signed in
2010.

17. Australia and Vietnam are both parties to AANZFTA and are both involved in the
Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement free trade negotiations.

18. A science and technology agreement is under negotiation.

19. The Australian Political Exchange Council and Thailand’s King Prajadhipok’s Institute will
sign a Memorandum of Understanding on 28 May to establish an exchange program
between young political leaders.

20. The last strategic dialogue was in 2009.

284


-----

21. As well as the Thailand–Australia Free Trade Agreement, Australia and Thailand are both
parties to ANZFTA.

22. Covered under an extradition treaty between the United Kingdom and Siam (Thailand)
which dates from 1911. Negotiations for a bilateral extradition treaty are underway and
have resulted in a near final text.

23. A new ‘Discover Thailand’ scholarship program is being introduced to provide assistance
to Australians studying in Thailand.

24. Thailand suffered from widespread flooding in the second-half of 2011. Australia provided
100,000 sandbags and $1 million in assistance.

25. As well as the Malaysia–Australia Free Trade Agreement, Australia and Malaysia are both
parties to ANZFTA, and are both involved in the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement free
trade negotiations.

26. Dr Craig Emerson and Malaysia’s Minister for International Trade and Industry Mustapa
Mohamed co-chaired the 16th Australia–Malaysia Joint Trade Committee meeting on 31
January 2012.

27. Australia and Malaysia signed a Memorandum of Understanding on Combating
Transnational Crime and Developing Police Cooperation on 13 May 2009 and a
Memorandum of Understanding on Maritime Security on 12 July 2011.

28. Establishment of annual leaders-level meeting in April 2012.

29. The Singapore–Australia Joint Ministerial Committee involves Foreign, Defence and Trade
ministers.

30. Regular Secretary-level meetings between our Foreign Ministries and, separately, Defence
Secretaries regularly meet, although there is no formal strategic dialogue. In 2011 a
secretaries’ roundtable involving 10 secretaries from each country was started.

31. As well as the Singapore–Australia Free Trade Agreement, Australia and Singapore are
both parties to ANZFTA, and are both involved in the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement
free trade negotiations.

32. No bilateral treaty, but have the London Scheme for extradition within the
Commonwealth.

33. The Defence Cooperation Program focuses on Southeast Asia and the Pacific. Priority
areas for cooperation with Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand and Vietnam include
counter-terrorism, peacekeeping, maritime security, defence reform, and English
language training.

34. Every year, mid-level military officers in regional countries attend courses at the Centre
for Defence and Strategic Studies and Australian military officers attend staff colleges in
countries such as Thailand, Indonesia and Japan.

35. Cooperation agreements in the transport sector include air services agreements, capacity
building frameworks, and transport cooperation frameworks covering road and rail
transport, maritime transport, aviation safety, aviation security, and accident investigation
activities.

285


-----

-----

## Abbreviations

AANZFTA ASEAN – Australia – New Zealand Free Trade Agreement

ABC Australian Broadcasting Corporation

ABS Australian Bureau of Statistics

ADB Asian Development Bank

ADF Australian Defence Force

AFP Australian Federal Police

AGD Attorney-General’s Department

APEC Asia–Pacific Economic Cooperation forum

APS Australian Public Service

ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations

AusAID Australian Agency for International Development

Austrade Australian Trade Commission

BITRE Bureau of Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Economics

BREE Bureau of Resources and Energy Economics

CIE Centre for International Economics

COAG Council of Australian Governments

CSIRO Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation

DAFF Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry

DEEWR Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations

DFAT Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade

DIAC Department of Immigration and Citizenship

DIISRTE Department of Industry, Innovation, Science, Research and Tertiary
Education

DIT Department of Infrastructure and Transport

DRET Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism

EAS East Asia Summit

EFIC Export Finance and Insurance Corporation

EIA Energy Information Administration

287


-----

ERIA Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia

FAO Food and Agriculture Organization

FTA free trade agreement

G20 Group of Twenty

G7 Group of Seven

G8 Group of Eight

GATT General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

GDP gross domestic product

IEA International Energy Agency

IFRS International Financial Reporting Standards

ILO International Labour Organization

IMF International Monetary Fund

LNG liquefied natural gas

NBN National Broadband Network

OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

PISA Program for International Student Assessment

RBA Reserve Bank of Australia

RMB renminbi

SBS Special Broadcasting Service

TFC Tourism Forecasting Committee

TRA Tourism Research Australia

UNEP United Nations Environment Programme

UNESCO United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization

UNWTO United Nations World Tourism Organization

VET vocational education and training

WTO World Trade Organization

288


-----

## Glossary

Africa and Middle
East


The definition of Africa and the Middle East for the purposes
of the charts varies due to data constraints. Chart 3.9: Africa
and Middle East refers to Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Benin,
British Indian Ocean Territory, Botswana, Burundi, Burkina
Faso, Central African Republic, Cape Verde, Chad, Republic of
Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Djibouti, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, St Helena,
Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Iran,
Qatar, Reunion, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland,
Syria, Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Western Sahara, Yemen, Zaire, Zambia and Zimbabwe.

Chart 9.1: Middle East and Africa refers to Egypt, Ethiopia,
Ghana, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Mauritius, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Turkey,
United Arab Emirates and Zimbabwe.


Agrifood Food-based agricultural commodities and fish.

Americas For the purposes of Chart 3.9, Americas refers to Antigua and
Barbuda, Anguilla, Argentina, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize,
Bermuda, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Cayman Islands, Chile,
St Christopher and Nevis, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Falkland
Islands (Malvinas), French Antilles, French Guiana, Guatemala,
Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, St Lucia, Mexico,
Montserrat, Netherlands Antilles, Nicaragua, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, St Pierre and Miquelon, Puerto Rico,
Suriname, Turks and Caicos Islands, Trinidad and Tobago, the
United States, the United States Virgin Islands, Uruguay,
Venezuela, St Vincent and the Grenadines and the Virgin
Islands.


APEC Business
Advisory Council


A private sector body that presents recommendations to APEC
Leaders in an annual dialogue and advises APEC officials on
business sector priorities and concerns.


ASEAN The Association of Southeast Asian Nations comprises
10 countries: Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam.
For the purposes of Chart 2.3, Brunei has been excluded due
to data constraints.

289


-----

ASEAN+3 The 10 ASEAN country members with China, Japan and South
Korea.

ASEAN-4 Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand.

ASEAN-5 A sub-regional grouping within ASEAN, comprising Indonesia,
Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand and the Philippines.

Asia The definition of Asia for the purposes of the charts varies due
to data constraints. Charts 1, 1.1, 2.1 and A.2: Asia refers to
Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia,
Japan, Malaysia, Myanmar, New Zealand, Pakistan, the
Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Thailand and
Vietnam.

Charts 1.5 and 2.11: Asia refers to Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei,
Cambodia, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Laos,
Macao, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal, North
Korea, Pakistan, the Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri
Lanka, Thailand, Timor-Leste and Vietnam.

Charts 2.2, 2.3, 2.5 and 2.7: Asia refers to Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, Cambodia, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia,
Japan, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, the
Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Thailand and
Vietnam.

Charts 2.9, 4.4 and 7.1: Asia refers to Brunei, Cambodia, China,
Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar,
the Philippines, South Korea, Singapore, Thailand, Timor-Leste
and Vietnam.

Chart 4.8: Asia refers to Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei, Cambodia, China, Georgia, Hong
Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic,
Laos, Macau, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal,
North Korea, Pakistan, the Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka,
South Korea, Taiwan, Tajikistan, Thailand, Tibet, Timor-Leste,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Vietnam.

Chart 8.2: Asia refers to Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei, Cambodia, China,
Georgia, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyz Republic, Laos, Lebanon, Macao,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal, North Korea,
Oman, Pakistan, the Philippines, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Syria, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan,
Vietnam, and West Bank and Gaza Strip.

290


-----

Chart 9.1: Asia refers to Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Brunei,
Cambodia, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Laos,
Malaysia, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines,
Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste and Vietnam.

Chart 9.2: Asia refers to Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei,
Cambodia, China, Timor-Leste, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia,
Japan, Laos, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal,
Pakistan, the Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka,
Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.

Asian tigers A term used in reference to the highly developed economies
of Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan.


Asia–Pacific
Economic
Cooperation

Asia–Pacific
Safeguards Network


A forum with 21 members established in 1989 to facilitate
economic growth and prosperity in the Asia–Pacific region,
with the vision of creating a seamless regional economy

An informal network of nuclear safeguards authorities,
ministries and other organisations responsible for
implementing safeguards in the countries of the Asia–Pacific
region. It comprises Australia, Canada, China, Indonesia,
Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, the Philippines, Russia,
Singapore, South Korea, Thailand, the United States, Vietnam
and the International Atomic Energy Agency.


Australia Group An informal forum of 41 countries which, through the
harmonisation of export controls, seeks to ensure that exports
do not contribute to the development of chemical or
biological weapons.


Australia–Hong Kong
RMB Trade and
Investment
Dialogue


A dialogue between senior banking and other business leaders
from Australia and Hong Kong, facilitated between the
Australian Treasury, the Reserve Bank of Australia and the
Hong Kong Monetary Authority. It aims to maximise the
opportunities flowing from the wider use of the RMB in trade
and investment in the region.


Bali Process A process co-chaired by the Australian and Indonesian
governments that brings together participants to work on
practical measures to help combat people smuggling,
trafficking in persons and related transnational crime in the
Asia–Pacific region.

Basel III A comprehensive set of reform measures, developed by the
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, to strengthen the
regulation, supervision and risk management of the global
banking sector.

291


-----

Cairns Group A unique coalition of 19 developed and developing agricultural
exporting countries with a commitment to achieving free
trade in agriculture.

Chiang Mai Initiative A multilateral currency swap arrangement among the
10 members of ASEAN, China (including Hong Kong), Japan
and South Korea.

Colombo Plan A regional intergovernmental organisation for the furtherance
of economic and social development of the nations of the
Asia–Pacific. It was formed in 1950 by a group of seven
Commonwealth nations—Australia, Britain, Canada, Ceylon,
India, New Zealand and Pakistan—and has developed into an
international organisation of 26, including
non-Commonwealth countries.

Developing Asia For the purposes of Chart 2.7, Developing Asia refers to
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Cambodia, China, India, Indonesia,
Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines,
Sri Lanka, Thailand and Vietnam.

Doha round The current round of trade negotiations among the World
Trade Organization membership. Its aim is to achieve major
reform of the international trading system through the
introduction of lower trade barriers and revised trade rules.

European Union-21 All European Union countries prior to the accession of the
10 candidate countries on 1 May 2004, plus the four eastern
European member countries of the OECD, namely Czech
Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovak Republic.

European Union-25 For Chart 7.1, this refers to Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom.

European Union-27 For charts 2.4 and 3.9, this refers to Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the United
Kingdom.

Euro Area For charts 2.2 and 2.3, this refers to Austria, Belgium, Cyprus,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland,
Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovenia,
Slovakia and Spain.

292


-----

Europe The definition of Europe for the purposes of the charts varies
due to data constraints. Chart 3.10: Europe refers to Aland
Islands, Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Channel Islands, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Faroe Islands, Finland,
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, France, Germany,
Gibraltar, Greece, Greenland, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Isle of
Man, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro and Kosovo, the
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian
Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Slovenia, Slovakia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, the United Kingdom and the
Vatican City.

Chart 4.8: Europe refers to Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belarus,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Faroe Islands, Finland,
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, France, Germany,
Gibraltar, Greece, Greenland, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Moldova,
Monaco, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia and
Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Ukraine, the United Kingdom and the Vatican City.

Chart 9.1: Europe refers to Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Cyprus,
Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Malta,
the Netherlands, Palestine, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, the Vatican City
and Yugoslavia.


Five Power Defence
Arrangements

free trade
agreement


A series of defence relationships established in 1971 by
bilateral treaties between Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Singapore and the United Kingdom.

An agreement to eliminate tariffs, import quotas and
preferences between signatory countries.


Group of Seven For Chart 2.4, this refers to Canada, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States.


Indian Ocean Naval
Symposium


A biennial and voluntary initiative started in 2008 that seeks to
increase maritime cooperation among navies of littoral states
of the Indian Ocean region by providing an open and inclusive
forum for discussion of regionally relevant maritime issues.

293


-----

Indian Ocean Rim
Association for
Regional
Cooperation

International Atomic
Energy Agency

Large emerging
economies

Latin America and
Caribbean


A regional forum established in 1997 linking most countries on
the Indian Ocean rim through an annual foreign ministers’
meeting.

The world’s centre of cooperation in the nuclear field, set up
in 1957 as the ‘Atoms for Peace’ organisation within the
United Nations.

For Chart 5.2, this refers to Brazil, China, India, Indonesia,
Russia and South Africa.

For the purposes of charts 2.2 and 2.3, Latin America and
Caribbean refers to Argentina, Barbados, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, St Lucia, El Salvador, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uruguay and Venezuela.


Middle class For the purposes of this White Paper, the middle class is
defined as allowing daily expenditures of between US$10 and
US$100 per person in purchasing power parity terms. The
lower limit was chosen by the authors with reference to the
average poverty line in Portugal and Italy, the two advanced
European countries with the strictest definition of poverty.
The upper limit was chosen as twice the median income of
Luxembourg, the richest advanced country. Defined in this
way, the middle class excludes those who are considered poor
in the poorest advanced countries and excludes those who are
considered rich in the richest advanced country.


New Zealand and
Pacific


For Chart 9.1, this refers to Fiji, Kiribati, Federated States of
Micronesia, Nauru, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Papua New
Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga and Vanuatu.


non-state actors Entities that participate in international relations that are not
states, some positively such as NGOs, multinational
corporations and international media, others negatively, such
as terrorists, people traffickers and smugglers, pirates,
transnational criminals and hackers.

North America For the purposes of charts 2.2 and 2.3, North America refers
to Canada and the United States.


North America and
Europe


For the purposes of charts 1.1, A.1, A.2 and A.4, North
America and Europe refers to Austria, Belgium, Canada,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands,
Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United
Kingdom and the United States.

294


-----

North, Central and
South America


For the purposes of Chart 9.1, North, Central and South
America refers to Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Mexico,
Peru, Trinidad and Tobago and the United States.


North Korea Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

North East Asia For the purposes of Chart 3.10, North East Asia refers to
China, Hong Kong, Japan, Macau, Mongolia, North Korea,
South Korea and Taiwan.


Organisation for
Economic
Co-operation and
Development


For the purposes of Chart 5.2, OECD refers to Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chile, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovak
Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the
United Kingdom and the United States.


Other Advanced For the purposes of Chart 2.12, Other Advanced refers to
Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the
United Kingdom.

Other Emerging For the purposes of Chart 2.12, Other Emerging refers to
Argentina, Brazil, Indonesia, Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia,
South Africa, South Korea and Turkey.

Other North Asia For the purposes of Chart 3.9, Other North Asia refers to Hong
Kong, North Korea, Macau, Mongolia South Korea and Taiwan.


Pacific Economic
Cooperation Council

Programme for
International
Student Assessment


A partnership of senior individuals from business and industry,
government, academic and other intellectual circles, for the
discussion of current, practical policy issues of the Asia–Pacific
region.

An international study by the OECD that aims to evaluate
education systems worldwide every three years by assessing
15-year-olds' competencies in the key subjects of reading,
mathematics and science. To date over 70 countries and
economies have participated.


public diplomacy Diplomacy that promotes the national interest of a country
through engaging, understanding, informing and influencing
foreign audiences.

renminbi The name of the official currency of China. The yuan is the
name of a unit of this currency.

295


-----

Shangri-La Dialogue An annual international intergovernmental forum on the
[security of the Asia–Pacific, hosted by the International](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Institute_for_Strategic_Studies)
[Institute for Strategic Studies in Singapore, attended by](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Institute_for_Strategic_Studies)
defence ministers from the region, and their civilian and
military chiefs of staff.

South Asia For the purposes of Chart 3.6, South Asia refers to
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal,
Pakistan and Sri Lanka.

South Korea Republic of Korea

South East Asia The definition of South East Asia for the purposes of the charts
varies due to data constraints. Chart 3.9: South East Asia
refers to Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam.

Chart 3.10: South East Asia refers to Brunei, Cambodia,,
Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines,
Singapore, Thailand, Timor-Leste and Vietnam.


South and Central
Asia


For the purposes of Chart 3.10, South and Central Asia refers
to Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Georgia, India, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Maldives, Nepal,
Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.


Track 2 diplomacy Diplomatic activity that is taken by non-government
individuals or agencies.

Treasury projections Projections from the Australian Treasury undertaken using the
Global Trade and Environment Model (GTEM) as described in
Australian Government (2011c). The projections use updated
economic and commodity price data and projections from
Australian Government (2012a), Australian Government
(2012c), IMF (2012c), Treasury’s long-term projections
(Au-Yeung, Kouparitsas, Luu and Sharma, forthcoming) and
the International Energy Agency (2011).


Trilateral Strategic
Dialogue

United Nations
Security Council


A ministerial-led dialogue between Australia, Japan and the
United States to promote regional stability and security.

The UN organ that has responsibility for international peace
and security.


United Nations The international organisation founded in 1945 that is
committed to maintaining international peace and security,
developing friendly relations among nations and promoting
social progress, better living standards and human rights.

296


-----

## References

ABARES (Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences) 2011,
_Agricultural commodity statistics 2011, December, Canberra._

ABC (Australian Broadcasting Corporation) 2012, Submission 207 to the Australia in the Asian
[Century White Paper, www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.](http://www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au/)

ABS (Australian Bureau of Statistics) 2009, Australian economic indicators, January 2010—
_business characteristics of small and medium-sized Australian exporters, cat. no. 1350.0,_
ABS, Canberra.

——2011a, Agricultural land and water ownership survey, December 2010, cat. no. 7127.0,
ABS, Canberra.

——2011b, Australian national accounts: tourism satellite account, 2010–11, cat. no. 5249.0,
ABS, Canberra.

——2011c, Experimental estimates of industry multifactor productivity, cat. no. 5260.0.55.002,
ABS, Canberra.

——2011d, Selected characteristics of Australian business, 2009–10, cat. no. 8167.0, ABS,
Canberra.

——2012a, Australian demographic statistics, cat. no. 3101.0, ABS, Canberra.
——2012b, Australian national accounts: national income, expenditure and product, cat. no.
5206.0, ABS, Canberra.

——2012c, Balance of payments and international investment position, Australia, June 2012,
cat. no. 5302.0, ABS, Canberra.

——2012d, International trade in goods and services, Australia, cat. no. 5368.0, ABS, Canberra.
——2012e, Labour force, Australia, cat. no. 6202.0, ABS, Canberra.
——2012f, Labour force, Australia, cat. no. 6291.0, ABS, Canberra.
——2012g, Regional population growth, Australia, 2011, cat. no. 3218.0, ABS, Canberra.
——2012h, Year book Australia, 2012, cat. no. 1301.0, ABS, Canberra.
Acemoglu D & Robinson J 2008, The role of institutions in growth and development, World
Bank, Washington DC.

ACICIS (Australian Consortium for In Country Indonesian Studies) 2012, Murdoch
[University, www.acicis.murdoch.edu.au/.](http://www.acicis.murdoch.edu.au/)

Adams, King & Webster 2010, Global research report: Australia and New Zealand,
Evidence/Thomson Reuters, Leeds.

ADB (Asian Development Bank) 2011a, Asia 2050: realizing the Asian century, ADB,
[Manila, www.adb.org.](http://www.adb.org/)

——2011b, Asian development outlook 2011 update: preparing for a demographic transition,
[ADB, Manila, www.adb.org.](http://www.adb.org/)

——2011c, Evaluating the environment for public–private partnerships in Asia–Pacific: the
_[2011 Infrascope, ADB, Manila, www.adb.org.](http://www.adb.org/)_

——2011d, Water operational plan 2011–2020, [ADB, Manila, www.adb.org.](http://www.adb.org/)
AEF (Asia Education Foundation) 2012, Submission 149 to the Australia in the Asian Century
[White Paper, www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.](http://www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au/)

297


-----

AEI (Australian Education International) 2011, Australia’s strategy for partnership on education
_[and training in India (2012–2017), discussion paper, www.arc.edu.au.](http://www.arc.edu.au/)_

[——2012a, Chinese students abroad—2011 figures released, Canberra, www.aei.gov.au.](https://aei.gov.au/Pages/default.aspx)
[——2012b, International student data, www.aei.gov.au.](https://aei.gov.au/Pages/default.aspx)
AFMLTA (Australian Federation of Modern Language Teachers Association), Submission 51 to
[the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper, www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.](http://www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au/)

AFTS (Australia’s Future Tax System) Review Panel 2009, Australia’s future tax system: report
_[to the Treasurer, AFTS Secretariat, Canberra, www.taxreview.treasury.gov.au.](http://www.taxreview.treasury.gov.au/)_

AIBC (Australia Indonesia Business Council) 2012, Submission 171 to the Australia in the Asian
[Century White Paper, www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.](http://www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au/)

AIYD (Australia India Youth Dialogue) 2012, Submission 187 to the Australia in the Asian
[Century White Paper, www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.](http://www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au/)

Anthony K 2006, The political representations of ethnic and racial minorities, NSW
Parliamentary Library Research Service, Briefing Paper, March 3/06.

APEC (Asia–Pacific Economic Cooperation) Secretariat 2010, Progressing towards the APEC
_Bogor Goals: perspectives of the APEC Policy Support Unit, APEC Secretariat, Singapore._

Armstrong S & Thanh VT 2012, International institutions and Asian development, Routledge,
London.

Aron J 2000, ‘Growth and institutions: a review of the evidence’, World Bank Research
_Observer, 15(1): 99–135._

ARWU (Academic Ranking of World Universities) 2012, Academic ranking of world
_universities—2012, Shanghai Ranking_
[Consultancy, www.shanghairanking.com/ARWU2012.html.](http://www.shanghairanking.com/ARWU2012.html)

ASAA (Asian Studies Association of Australia) 2012, Submission 58 to the Australia in the Asian
[Century White Paper, www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.](http://www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au/)

Asialink 2012, Submissions 208 and 235 to the Australia in the Asian Century White
[Paper, www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.](http://www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au/)

ASIB (Australian Social Inclusion Board) 2012, Social inclusion in Australia: how Australia is
_[faring, ASIB, Canberra, www.socialinclusion.gov.au.](http://www.socialinclusion.gov.au/)_

Athukorala P 2010, Production networks and trade patterns in East Asia: regionalization or
_globalization?, Working Paper Series on Regional Economic Integration no. 56, Asian_
[Development Bank, Manila, August, www.aric.adb.org.](http://www.aric.adb.org/)

Athukorala P & Menon J 2010, Global production sharing, trade patterns, and determinants of
_trade flows in East Asia, Asian Development Bank (ADB) Working Paper Series on Regional_
[Economic Integration, no. 41, ADB, Manila, www.aric.adb.org.](http://www.aric.adb.org/)

[Austrade, International student data for 2011, www.austrade.gov.au.](http://www.austrade.gov.au/)
Australian Energy Market Commission 2011, Possible future retail electricity price movements:
_[1 July 2011 to 30 June 2014, Sydney, www.aemc.gov.au/.](http://www.aemc.gov.au/)_

Australian Financial Centre Forum 2009, Australia as a financial centre: building on our
_strengths, report by the Australian Financial Centre Forum, Canberra._

Australian Government 2009, National Aviation White Paper 2009, Department of
[Infrastructure and Transport, Canberra, www.infrastructure.gov.au.](http://www.infrastructure.gov.au/)

——2010, Intergenerational report 2010: Australia to 2050: future challenges, Australian
[Treasury, Canberra, http://archive.treasury.gov.au/igr/igr2010/.](http://archive.treasury.gov.au/igr/igr2010/)

298


-----

——2011a, Australian innovation system report 2011, Department of Innovation, Industry,
[Science and Research, Canberra, www.innovation.gov.au.](http://www.innovation.gov.au/Pages/default.aspx)

——2011b, Streamlining Australia’s anti-dumping system: an effective anti-dumping and
_countervailing system for Australia,_ Australian Customs and Border Protection Service,
[Canberra, www.customs.gov.au.](http://www.customs.gov.au/)

——2011c, Strong growth low pollution: modelling a carbon price, Australian Treasury,
[Canberra, www.carbonpricemodelling.treasury.gov.au.](http://carbonpricemodelling.treasury.gov.au/)

——2012a, Budget strategy and outlook, Budget Paper no. 1, 2012–13, Commonwealth of
[Australia, Canberra, www.budget.aph.gov.au/2012-13.](http://budget.aph.gov.au/2012-13)

——2012b, Closing the Gap: Prime Minister’s report 2012, Department of Families, Housing,
[Community Services and Indigenous Affairs, Canberra, www.fahcsia.gov.au.](http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/)

——2012c, Mid-year economic and fiscal outlook, 2012–13, Commonwealth of Australia,
Canberra.

——2012d, Streamlined, effective, productive: an annual update on the Australian Government
_deregulation agenda, June 2012, Department of Finance and Deregulation,_
[Canberra, www.finance.gov.au.](http://www.finance.gov.au/)

Australian Treasurer 2012, Australia’s foreign investment policy, Foreign Investment Review
[Board, Canberra, www.firb.gov.au.](http://www.firb.gov.au/)

Au-Yeung W, Kouparitsas M, Luu, N, & Sharma D (forthcoming), Long-term international GDP
_projections, Treasury Working Paper._

AVI (Australian Volunteers International) 2012, Submission 244 to the Australia in the Asian
[Century White Paper, www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.](http://www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au/)

AWPA (Australian Workforce and Productivity Agency) 2012, Future focus: Australia’s skills
_and workforce development needs, discussion paper for the 2012 National Workforce_
[Development Strategy, AWPA, Canberra, www.awpa.gov.au.](http://www.awpa.gov.au/)

Banks G 2008, Industry policy for a productive Australia, Colin Clark Memorial Lecture,
[Brisbane, 6 August, Productivity Commission, Melbourne, www.pc.gov.au.](http://www.pc.gov.au/)

Barro RJ & Lee JW 2010, A new data set of educational attainment in the world, 1950–2010,
NBER working paper no. 15902, April, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
MA.

BCG (Boston Consulting Group) 2010, Winning in emerging-market cities: a guide to the
_[world’s largest growth opportunity, BCG, Boston, MA, www.bcg.co.](http://www.bcg.co/)_

——2012, Imagining Australia in the Asian century: how Australian businesses are capturing
_[the Asian opportunity, Sydney, www.bostonconsulting.com.au.](http://www.bostonconsulting.com.au/)_

Besley T, Pande L & Rao V 2004, ‘The politics of public good provision: evidence from Indian
local governments’, Journal of the European Economic Association, 2: 416–26.

Bloom D, Canning D & Malaney P 2000, ‘Demographic change and economic growth in Asia’,
_Population and Development Review, 26: 257–90._

Bloom D & Sachs JD 1998, ‘Geography, demography and economic growth in Africa’, Brookings
_Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 207–95._

Bloom D & Williamson J 1997, Demographic transitions and economic miracles in emerging
_Asia, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no._
[6268, www.nber.org/papers/w6268.](http://www.nber.org/papers/w6268)

——1998, ‘Demographic transitions and economic miracles in emerging Asia’, World Bank
_Economic Review, 12(3): 419–55._

299


-----

Bloom N, Genakos C, Sadun R & van Reenen J 2012, Management practices across firms and
_countries, working paper no. 17850, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,_
[Massachusetts, www.nber.org/papers/w17850.](http://www.nber.org/papers/w17850)

Bloomberg 2012, Bloomberg Professional®, Bloomberg Finance.
BlueScope Steel 2011, BlueScope Steel annual report 2010/2011, BlueScope Steel Limited,
Melbourne, www.annualreport2011.bluescopesteel.com.

Boao Forum for Asia 2012, Progress of Asian economic integration, Annual Report 2012, The
[Boao Forum for Asia, Beijing, www.english.boaoforum.org.](http://english.boaoforum.org/)

Boedker C, Vidgen R, Meagher K, Cogin J, Mouritsen J & Runnalls J 2011, Leadership, culture
_and management practices of high performing workplaces in Australia: the high_
_performing workplaces index, study funded by the Department of Education, Employment_
[and Workplace Relations, Society for Knowledge Economics, Sydney, www.deewr.gov.au.](http://www.deewr.gov.au/)

[BP (British Petroleum) 2012, BP Statistical Review of World Energy, June 2012, www.bp.com/.](http://www.bp.com/)
Brandt L, Rawski T & Zhu X 2007, ‘International dimensions of China’s long boom: trends,
prospects and implications’, in W Keller & T Rawski (eds), China’s rise and the balance of
_influence in Asia, University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh, PA._

BREE (Bureau of Resources and Energy Economics) 2012a, Australian bulk commodity exports
_[and infrastructure—outlook to 2025, July 2012, BREE, Canberra, www.bree.gov.au.](http://www.bree.gov.au/)_

[——2012b, Mining industry major projects, April 2012, BREE, Canberra, www.bree.gov.au.](http://www.bree.gov.au/)
BTRE (Bureau of Transport and Regional Economics) 2007, Estimating urban traffic and
_congestion cost trends for Australian cities, working paper no. 71, BTRE, Department of_
[Transport and Regional Services, Canberra, www.bitre.gov.au.](http://www.bitre.gov.au/)

Bubalo A & Cook M 2010, ‘Horizontal Asia’, The American Interest, 5(5): 12–19.
Buiter W & Rahbari E 2011, ‘Global growth generators: moving beyond ‘emerging markets’
and ‘BRIC’ ’, Global Economics View, Citigroup Global Markets.

Burnet Institute 2012, Submission 152 to the Australia in the Asian Century White
[Paper, www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.](http://www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au/)

Byron & Jiang 2012, Australia China Environment Development Partnership 2007–2012:
_synthesis report, Beijing._

Campos-Vázquez RM & Rodríguez-López JA 2011, Trade and occupational employment in
_Mexico since NAFTA, OECD Trade Policy Working Paper no. 129, OECD, Paris,_
[www.oecd-ilibrary.org.](http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/)

CEIC Data 2012, China Premium Database, CEIC Data, New York.
China MOE (Ministry of Education) 2012, The overall situation of studying abroad,
[Beijing, www.moe.edu.cn.](http://www.moe.edu.cn/publicfiles/business/htmlfiles/moe/s3917/201007/91574.html)

CIE (Centre for International Economics) 2009, Benefits of trade and trade liberalisation, CIE,
[Canberra, May, www.dfat.gov.au.](http://www.dfat.gov.au/)

Clark C, Geer T & Underhill B 1996, The changing of Australian manufacturing, staff
information paper, Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra.

COAG (Council of Australian Governments) 2012, Communiqué, 13 April, COAG,
[Canberra, www.coag.gov.au.](http://www.coag.gov.au/)

Coates B & Luu N 2012, ‘China’s emergence in global commodity markets’, Economic Roundup,
Issue 1, 2012, Australian Treasury, Canberra.

Coleman W, Cornish S & Hagger A 2006, Giblin’s platoon: the trials and triumphs of the
_economist in Australian public life, ANU E press, Canberra._

300


-----

Conference Board 2012, The Conference Board total economy database™, January
2012, reproduced with permission from The Conference Board, Inc. © 2012 The
[Conference Board, Inc., www.conference-board.org.](http://www.conference-board.org/)

Connolly E & Orsmond D 2011, The mining industry: from bust to boom, research discussion
[paper, Reserve Bank of Australia, www.rba.gov.au.](http://www.rba.gov.au/)

CPA Australia 2012 (forthcoming), Australia’s competitive future: international perspectives on
_Australia, report prepared by Professor Michael Enright, in possession of Australia in the_
Asian Century Task Force, Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Canberra.

Cruz R et al. 2007, ‘Asia’, in M Parry, O Canziani, J Palutikof, P van der Linden & C Hanson (eds),
_Climate change 2007: impacts, adaptation and vulnerability, Contribution of Working_
Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, Cambridge.

CSIRO (Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation) 2006, Climate change
_in the Asia/Pacific region, consultancy report prepared for the Climate Change and_
Development Roundtable, CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research, Victoria.

[——2011, CSIRO Strategy 2011–2015, CSIRO, Canberra, www.csiro.au.](http://www.csiro.au/)
CSTACI (Commonwealth, State and Territory Advisory Council on Innovation) 2011, CSTACI
_[innovation initiatives database, CSTACI Secretariat, Canberra, www.innovation.gov.au.](http://www.innovation.gov.au/)_

Cutler & Company 2008, Venturous Australia: building strength in innovation, Cutler &
[Company Pty Ltd, Melbourne, www.innovation.gov.au.](http://www.innovation.gov.au/)

DAE (Deloitte Access Economics) 2012, Economic modelling of skills demand and supply, report
commissioned by the Australian Workforce and Productivity Agency,
[Canberra, www.awpa.gov.au.](http://www.awpa.gov.au/)

de Kretser, A & Spence-Brown, R 2010, The current state of Japanese language education in
_[Australian schools, Education Services Australia, Melbourne, www.deewr.gov.au.](http://www.deewr.gov.au/)_

DEWHA (Department of the Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts) 2009, Ecosystem
_services: key concepts and applications, occasional paper no. 1, DEWHA,_
[Canberra, www.environment.gov.au.](http://www.environment.gov.au/)

DFAT (Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade) 2012, Composition of trade Australia 2011,
[DFAT, Canberra, www.dfat.gov.au.](http://www.dfat.gov.au/)

DIISRTE (Department of Industry, Innovation, Science, Research and Tertiary Education) 2012,
‘East Asia education summit commits to strengthening global partnership’, media release,
[DIISRTE, Canberra, ww.mwww.innovation.gov.au.](http://minister.innovation.gov.au/)

Defence Intelligence Organisation 2011, Defence economic trends in the Asia–Pacific 2011,
[Defence Intelligence Organisation, Canberra, www.defence.gov.au.](http://www.defence.gov.au/)

Diversity Council of Australia 2011, ‘How well are Australian organisations “capitalising on
[culture” in senior ranks?’, media release, www.dca.org.au](http://www.dca.org.au/)

Drysdale P 1987, ‘Australia’s relationship with Japan: despite the vicissitudes’, in L Evans &
J Miller (eds), Policy and practice: essays in honour of Sir John Crawford, Australian
National University Press, Sydney.

——2000, ‘The implications of China’s membership of the WTO for industrial transformation’,
in P Drysdale & L Song (eds), China’s entry to the WTO: strategic issues and quantitative
_assessments, Routledge, London._

——2004, ‘Japan and East Asia: economic prospects and challenges’, extract from paper
published in the Asian Journal of Economics, 2004.

301


-----

Durban M & Paterson C 2011, Asian markets—purely a commodity export destination?, issues
paper no. 8, Australian Trade Commission (Austrade), Sydney.

Easterly W 2005, ‘National policies and economic growth: a reappraisal’, in P Aghion &
S Durlauf (eds), Handbook of economic growth, Volume 1A, Handbooks in Economics
series, Elsevier, Amsterdam.

EIA (US Energy Information Administration) 2011, Country analysis brief: Australia,
[US Department of Energy, Washington, DC, www.eia.gov.](http://www.eia.gov/)

——2012, Country analysis brief: Japan, US Department of Energy,
[Washington DC, www.eia.gov.](http://www.eia.gov/)

Eichengreen B, Park D & Shin K 2011, When fast growing economies slow down: international
_evidence and implications for the People’s Republic of China, Asian Development Bank_
[Economics Working Paper Series no. 262, Manila, www.adb.org.](http://www.adb.org/)

ERIA (Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia) 2010, The comprehensive Asia
_development plan, ERIA Research Project report 2009-7-1._

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations) 2009, How to feed the world in
_2050, issues brief prepared for How to Feed the World 2050 High-Level Expert Forum,_
[FAO, Rome, www.fao.org.](http://www.fao.org/)

[——, FAOSTAT, FAO, Rome, www.fao.org.](http://www.fao.org/)
Felipe J & Kumar U 2011, Unit labor costs in the eurozone: the competitiveness debate again,
working paper no. 651, Levy Economics Institute of Bard College, New York.

FFA (Football Federation of Australia) 2012, Submission 160 to the Australia in the Asian
[Century White Paper, www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.](http://www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au/)

Flanagan RJ & Khor N 2011 (forthcoming), Trade and the quality of employment: Asian and
_[non-Asian countries, working paper, Asian Development Bank, Manila, www.adb.org.](http://www.adb.org/)_

FMIIC (Future Manufacturing Industry Innovation Council) 2011, Trends in manufacturing to
_2020: a foresighting discussion paper, Department of Innovation, Industry, Science and_
[Research, Canberra, www.innovation.gov.au.](http://www.innovation.gov.au/)

Fukao K, Ishido H & Ito K 2003, Vertical intra-industry trade and foreign direct investment in
_[east Asia, discussion paper, Institute of Economic Research, Tokyo, www.ier.hit-u.ac.jp.](http://www.ier.hit-u.ac.jp/)_

Furuoka F 2005, ‘Japan and the Flying Geese Pattern of East Asian Integration’, Journal of
_Contemporary Eastern Asia, 4(1): 1-7._

Garnaut R 1989, Australia and the Northeast Asian ascendancy: report to the Prime Minister
_and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Australian Government Publishing Service,_
Canberra.

——2011, The Garnaut review 2011: Australia in the global response to climate change,
Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency, Cambridge University Press, New
[York, www.garnautreview.org.au.](http://www.garnautreview.org.au/)

Garton P & Gruen D 2012, ‘The role of sovereign wealth funds in managing resource booms: a
comparison of Australia and Norway’, speech to Third Annual Asia Central Bank and
[Sovereign Wealth Fund Conference, www.treasury.gov.au.](http://www.treasury.gov.au/)

Gaulier G, Lemoine F & Ünal-Kesenci D 2005, China’s integration in East Asia: production
_sharing, FDI and high-tech trade, working paper no. 2005-09, Centre d’Etudes_
[Prospectives et d’Informations Internationales, Paris, www.cepii.fr.](http://www.cepii.fr/)

Geoscience Australia 2012, Australia’s identified mineral resources 2011, Geoscience Australia,
[Canberra, www.ga.gov.au.](http://www.ga.gov.au/)

302


-----

GfK Blue Moon 2012 (unreleased), China know the customer research, consultancy report for
Tourism Australia, Sydney.

Gifford P 2001, ‘The Cold War across Asia’, in D Goldsworthy (ed.), Facing north: A century of
_Australian engagement with Asia, Volume 1: 1901 to the 1970s, Department of Foreign_
Affairs and Trade and Melbourne University Press, Melbourne.

Gill I & Kharas H 2007, An East Asian renaissance: ideas for economic growth, World Bank,
[Washington DC, www.worldbank.org.](http://www.worldbank.org/)

[Gonski D 2011, Review of funding for schooling: final report, www.deewr.gov.au.](http://www.deewr.gov.au/)
Government of India Planning Commission 2011, Faster, sustainable and more inclusive
_growth: an approach to the Twelfth Five Year plan (2012–_
_[17), www.planningcommission.nic.in.](http://www.planningcommission.nic.in/)_

Gruen D, Li B & Wong T 2012, ‘Unemployment disparity across regions’, Economic Roundup,
Issue 1, 2012, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra.

Hanson F 2011, The Lowy Institute poll 2011: Australia and the world—public opinion and
_[foreign policy, Lowy Institute for International Policy, Sydney, www.lowyinstitute.org.](http://www.lowyinstitute.org/)_

——2012, The Lowy Institute poll 2012: Australia and New Zealand in the world—public
_opinion and foreign policy, Lowy Institute for International Policy,_
[Sydney, www.lowyinstitute.org.](http://www.lowyinstitute.org/)

Harding M, Tingsong J & Pearce D 2009, Analysis of ACIAR’s returns on investment:
_appropriateness, efficiency and effectiveness, ACIAR Impact Assessment Series report_
no. 63, Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research, Canberra.

Hausmann R, Pritchett L & Rodrik D 2005, ‘Growth accelerations’, Journal of Economic Growth,
Springer, 10(4): 303–29.

Hennessy K, Fitzharris B, Bates B, Harvey N, Howden S, Hughes L, Salinger J & Warrick R 2007,
‘Australia and New Zealand’, in M Parry, O Canziani, J Palutikof, P van der Linden & C
Hanson (eds), Climate change 2007: impacts, adaptation and vulnerability, Contribution of
Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, Cambridge.

Hill DT 2012, Indonesian language in Australian universities: strategies for a stronger future,
2nd edn (with corrections), Murdoch University, Perth,
[www.altcfellowship.murdoch.edu.au.](http://altcfellowship.murdoch.edu.au/)

HSBC 2012, The world in 2050: from the top 30 to the top 50, HSBC Global Economic Research,
[Global Economics, January, www.research.hsbc.com.](http://www.research.hsbc.com/)

Hugo G 2006, ‘An Australian Diaspora?’, International Migration, 33(1): 105-11.
Hurun 2012, The Chinese luxury consumer white paper, Industrial Bank Co Ltd and Hurun
[Report, Beijing, www.img.hurun.net.](http://www.img.hurun.net/)

Iapadre PL 2011, Trade and employment in Italy, Trade Policy Working Paper no. 126,
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris.

IEA (International Energy Agency) 2011, World energy outlook 2011, Paris.
——2012, Key world energy statistics, Paris.
IFWG (Infrastructure Finance Working Group) 2012, Infrastructure finance and funding reform,
[Infrastructure Australia, Canberra, www.infrastructureaustralia.gov.au.](http://www.infrastructureaustralia.gov.au/)

303


-----

IMF (International Monetary Fund) 2011, ‘IMF Executive Board concludes 2011 Article IV
consultation with Brunei Darussalam’, public information notice no. 11/76, IMF,
[Washington, DC, www.imf.org.](http://www.imf.org/)

——2012a, 2012 Article IV Consultation with Australia Preliminary Concluding Statement, IMF,
[Washington, DC, www.imf.org.](http://www.imf.org/)

——2012b, ‘IMF direction of trade statistics’ database, Thomson Reuters.
——2012c, World economic outlook: _growth resuming, dangers remain, April 2012, IMF,_
[Washington, DC, www.imf.org.](http://www.imf.org/)

——2012d, World economic outlook: coping with high debt and sluggish growth, October
_[2012, IMF, Washington, DC, www.imf.org.](http://www.imf.org/)_

Indian MIB (Indian Ministry of Information and Broadcasting) 2012, List of permitted TV‐
_[channels as on 06.03.2012, MIB, www.mib.nic.in.](http://www.mib.nic.in/)_

Information Office of the State Council 2011, China’s foreign aid, People’s Republic of China.
Infrastructure Australia 2008, A report to the Council of Australian Governments, Infrastructure
[Australia, Canberra, www.infrastructureaustralia.gov.au.](http://www.infrastructureaustralia.gov.au/)

IOR-ARC (Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Co-operation) 2012, IOR-ARC background,
[Republic of Mauritius, www.iorarc.org.](http://www.iorarc.org/)

ITU (International Telecommunication Union) 2012, Key ICT indicators for developed and
[developing countries and the world (totals and penetration rates), www.itu.int.](http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/statistics/at_glance/keytelecom.html)

IWS (Internet World Stats) 2012, Asia marketing research, internet usage, population statistics
[and Facebook information, www.internetworldstats.com/asia.htm#id.](http://www.internetworldstats.com/asia.htm#id)

Jensen B 2012, Catching up: learning from the best school systems in East Asia: summary
_[report, Grattan Institute, Carlton, Victoria, http://grattan.edu.au.](http://grattan.edu.au/)_

Kaldor N 1978, Further essays on applied economics, Holmes & Meier Publishers, New York.
Kelly P 1992, The end of certainty, Allen & Unwin, Sydney.
[Kennett J 2012, ‘Of the people’, About the House, April, Issue 44, www.aph.gov.au.](http://www.aph.gov.au/)
Kharas H & Gertz G 2010, ‘The new global middle class: a cross-over from West to East’, in
C Li (ed.), China’s emerging middle class: beyond economic transformation, Brookings
Institution Press, Washington, DC.

Kharas H & Kohli H 2011, ‘What is the middle income trap, why do countries fall into it, and
how can it be avoided?’, Global Journal of Emerging Market Economies, 3(3):281–9.

Kochar A 2012, ‘Reforming primary and secondary schooling’, in C Ghate (ed.), The Oxford
_Handbook of the Indian Economy, Oxford University Press, New York._

Kohli H, Sharma A & Sood A (eds) 2011, Asia 2050: realizing the Asian century, Sage
Publications, New Delhi.

Kohli H & Sood A (eds) 2010, India 2039: an affluent society in one generation, Sage, New
Delhi.

Krueger A 2005, ‘Mutual interdependence: Asia and the world economy’, speech to the
[Institute of Global Economics, Seoul, www.imf.org.](http://www.imf.org/)

Krugman P 1989, ‘Differences in income elasticities and trends in real exchange rates,’
_European Economic Review, 33: 1031–47._

Law B 2009, The new lows: representing Asian-Australians on television (screenplay &
[exegesis), PhD thesis, Queensland University of Technology, www.eprints.qut.edu.au.](http://www.eprints.qut.edu.au/)

Levin R, ‘Top of the class’ in Foreign Affairs, May/June 2010, 89(3): 63–75.

304


-----

Li K 1995, A glossary of political terms of the People’s Republic of China, The Chinese University
Press, Hong Kong.

Linehan V, Thorpe S, Andrews N, Kim Y & Beaini F 2012, Food demand to 2050: opportunities
_for Australian agriculture, Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and_
Sciences (ABARES) Outlook conference paper no. 12.4, Canberra,
[March www.adl.brs.gov.au.](http://www.adl.brs.gov.au/)

Lowe P 2010, ‘The development of Asia: risks and returns for Australia’, address to Natstats
2010 conference, Sydney, Reserve Bank of Australia.

——2012, ‘The changing structure of the Australian economy and monetary policy’, address to
the Australian Industry Group 12th Annual Economic Forum, Reserve Bank of Australia,
[Sydney, www.rba.gov.au.](http://www.rba.gov.au/)

Maddison A 2006, The world economy, Development Centre of the OECD (Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development), Paris.

——2010, ‘Statistics on world population, GDP and per capita GDP, 1–2008 AD’, Historical
_[Statistics, Groningen Growth and Development Centre, www.ggdc.net.](http://www.ggdc.net/)_

Mason A 2001, ‘Population, capital, and labor’, in A Mason (ed.), Population change and
_economic development in East Asia: challenges met, opportunities seized, Stanford_
University Press, Palo Alto, CA.

McCombie J & Thirlwall A 1994, Economic growth and the balance of payments, St. Martin’s
Press, New York.

MCEETYA (Ministerial Council on Education, Employment, Training and Youth Affairs) 2008,
_2008 national report on schooling in Australia, MCEETYA,_
[Canberra, http://cms.curriculum.edu.au.](http://cms.curriculum.edu.au/)

McKinsey & Company 2010, 2010 annual Chinese consumer study: trading up or trading off?
_Chinese consumers become increasingly pragmatic, McKinsey Insights_
[China, https://solutions.mckinsey.com.](https://solutions.mckinsey.com/)

——2012, Urban world: cities and the rise of the consuming class, McKinsey Global Institute,
[Washington, DC, www.mckinsey.com.](http://www.mckinsey.com/)

McLaren, A 2011, Asian languages enrolments in Australian higher education 2008–09, report
[commissioned by the Asian Association of Australia, http://asaa.asn.au.](http://asaa.asn.au/)

Menon J, Mitra S & Arnold D 2011, ‘Growth and inclusion’, in H Kohli, A Sharma & A Sood
(eds), Asia 2050: realizing the Asian century, Sage Publications, New Delhi.

Miller V & Weber R 2012, ‘Multi-hazard exposure of Asia—rapid analysis for Prime Minister
and Cabinet White Paper’, Geoscience Australia Professional Opinion 2012/07.

Mukhopadhyay P & Shyamsundar P 2012, ‘Economic growth and ecological sustainability in
India’, in C Ghate (ed.), The Oxford handbook of the Indian economy, Oxford University
Press, New York.

National Multicultural Advisory Council 1999, Australian multiculturalism for a new century:
_towards inclusiveness, National Multicultural Advisory Council,_
[Canberra, www.immi.gov.au.](http://www.immi.gov.au/)

NBN Co 2011, Statement of corporate intent, 2011–2013, NBN Co Limited,
[Sydney, www.nbnco.com.au.](http://www.nbnco.com.au/)

North D 1990, Institutions, institutional change, and economic performance, Cambridge
University Press, New York.

305


-----

Nous Group, National Institute of Labour Studies & Melbourne Graduate School of Education
2011, Schooling challenges and opportunities: a report for the Review of Funding for
_[Schooling panel, Melbourne, www.deewr.gov.au.](http://www.deewr.gov.au/)_

NRMMC (Natural Resource Management Ministerial Council) 2010, Australia’s biodiversity
_conservation strategy 2010–2030, Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water,_
[Population and Communities, Canberra, www.environment.gov.au.](http://www.environment.gov.au/)

NSW Government 2012, NSW Training Awards—Daniel Taylor, NSW Department of Education
[and Communities, Sydney, www.training.nsw.gov.au](http://www.training.nsw.gov.au/)

NWC (National Water Commission) 2011, The National Water Initiative—securing Australia’s
_[water future: 2011 assessment, NWC, Canberra, www.nwc.gov.au.](http://www.nwc.gov.au/)_

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) 2003, The sources of
_[economic growth in OECD countries, OECD, Paris, www.oecd.org.](http://www.oecd.org/)_

——2007a, Development aid at a glance 2007, statistics by region, Asia (2007, table
[4.2.1a), www.oecd-ilibrary.org.](http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/)

[——2007b, Economic policy reforms: going for growth, OECD, Paris, www.oecd.org.](http://www.oecd.org/)
——2008a, Transport infrastructure investment: options for efficiency, Transport Research
[Centre, OECD, Paris, www.oecd.org.](http://www.oecd.org/)

[——2008b, Indicators of product market regulation database, OECD, Paris, www.oecd.org.](http://www.oecd.org/)
——2009, Keeping markets open at times of economic crisis, OECD, Paris.
——2010a, Innovation to strengthen growth and address global and social challenges: key
_[findings, ministerial report on the OECD Innovation Strategy, OECD, Paris, www.oecd.org.](http://www.oecd.org/)_

——2010b, OECD tourism trends and policies 2010, OECD, Paris.
——2010c, PISA 2009 results: what students know and can do, vol. I, OECD, Paris.
[——2012a, Development aid at a glance 2012, statistics by region, Asia, www.oecd.org.](http://www.oecd.org/)
——2012b (forthcoming), Long-term growth scenarios, Working Party No. 1 on
Macroeconomic Policy and Structural Policy Analysis, OECD, Paris.

[——2012c, Main science and technology indicators, vol. 2012/1, OECD, Paris, www.oecd.org.](http://www.oecd.org/)
——2012d, Mapping global value chains, working paper TAD/TC/WP(2012)6, Working Party of
the Trade Committee, OECD, Paris.

Papademetriou MK 2000, Rice production in the Asia–Pacific region: issues and perspectives,
[Food and Agriculture Organization, Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, www.fao.org.](http://www.fao.org/)

Pellegrini A 2011, ‘A new approach to urbanization’, in H Kohli, A Sharma & A Sood (eds),
_Asia 2050: realizing the Asian century, Sage Publications, New Delhi._

Pongsaparn R & Unteroberdoerster O 2011, Financial integration and rebalancing in Asia,
International Monetary Fund (IMF) Working Paper Series, WP/11/243, IMF,
Washington, DC.

Port Jackson Partners 2011, ‘Earth, fire, wind and water: economic opportunities and the
Australian commodities cycle’, in ANZ insight, Issue 1, report commissioned by ANZ,
[Melbourne, http://phx.corporate-ir.net.](http://phx.corporate-ir.net/)

Prime Minister’s Taskforce on Manufacturing 2012, Smarter manufacturing for a smarter
_Australia: report of the non-government members, Canberra._

Productivity Commission 2005, Review of National Competition Policy reforms, inquiry report
[no. 33, Productivity Commission, Canberra, www.pc.gov.au.](http://www.pc.gov.au/)

[——2008, Annual report 2007–08, Productivity Commission, Canberra, www.pc.gov.au.](http://www.pc.gov.au/)

306


-----

——2011a, Australia’s urban water sector, report no. 55, final inquiry report, Productivity
[Commission, Canberra, www.pc.gov.au.](http://www.pc.gov.au/)

——2011b, Economic structure and performance of the Australian retail industry, report
[no. 56, final inquiry report, Productivity Commission, Canberra, www.pc.gov.au.](http://www.pc.gov.au/)

——2011c, Identifying and evaluating regulation reforms, research report, Productivity
[Commission, Canberra, www.pc.gov.au.](http://www.pc.gov.au/)

——2012a, Impacts of COAG reforms: business regulation and VET, Productivity Commission,
[Canberra, www.pc.gov.au.](http://www.pc.gov.au/)

——2012b, Trade and assistance review 2010–11, Annual Report Series, Productivity
[Commission, Canberra, www.pc.gov.au.](http://www.pc.gov.au/)

PwC (PricewaterhouseCoopers) 2011, Disability expectations: investing in a better life, a
_[stronger Australia, PwC, www.pwc.com.au.](http://www.pwc.com.au/)_

Qian Y 2003, ‘How reform worked in China’, in D Rodrik (ed.), In search of prosperity: analytic
_narratives on economic growth, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ._

Quilty M & Goldsworthy D 2003, ‘Social and cultural engagement’, in P Edwards &
D Goldsworthy (eds), Facing north: a century of Australian engagement with Asia, Volume
_2: 1970s to 2000, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and Melbourne University_
Press, Melbourne.

RBA (Reserve Bank of Australia) 1997, Australian economic statistics: 1949–1950 to
_1996–1997, occasional paper no. 8, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney._

——2012, Index—real trade weighted—real exchange rate indices—Quarterly, RBA Statistical
[Tables, RBA, Sydney, www.rba.gov.au.](http://www.rba.gov.au/)

RBC (Robert Bean Consulting) 2012, Submission 82 to the Australia in the Asian Century White
[Paper, www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.](http://www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au/)

Reputation Institute 2011, Country RepTrak Report, Reputation Institute.
Riad N, Errico L, Henn C, Saborowski C, Saito M & Turunen J 2011, ‘Changing patterns of global
[trade’, presentation, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC, www.imf.org.](http://www.imf.org/)

Richardson D 2011, ‘DFAT: Who are we and what do we do?’, speech to the Lowy Institute,
[www.dfat.gov.au.](http://www.dfat.gov.au/)

Rodrik D 2005, ‘Growth strategies’, in P Aghion & S Durlauf (eds), Handbook of economic
_growth, Volume 1A, Handbooks in Economics series, Elsevier, Amsterdam._

Sen K 2012, Submission 134 to the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper, Australasian
[Council of Deans of Arts, Social Sciences and Humanities, www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.](http://www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au/)

Senate Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade 2007, Australia’s public
_diplomacy: building our image, Senate Printing Unit, Parliament House, Canberra._

Sheng A 2011, ‘Transforming finance’, in H Kohli, A Sharma, A Sood & H Kuroda (eds), Asia
_2050: realizing the Asian century, Sage Publications, New Delhi._

Shomos A 2010, Links between literacy and numeracy skills and labour market outcomes,
[Productivity Commission Staff Working Paper, Melbourne, www.pc.gov.au.](http://www.pc.gov.au/)

Singh S, Bassignana-Khadka I, Singh Karky B & Sharma E 2011, Climate change in the Hindu
_Kush-Himalayas: the state of current knowledge, International Centre for Integrated_
Mountain Development, Kathmandu.

Smith K, Fordelone TY & Zimmermann F 2010, Beyond the DAC: the welcome role of other
_providers of development co-operation, OECD Development Co-operation_
[Directorate, www.oecd.org.](http://www.oecd.org/)

307


-----

Song L 2010, China’s rapid growth and development: an historical and international context,
paper presented at the 2010 Paftad Conference, Peking University.

Speller W, Thwaites G & Wright M 2011, The future of international capital flows, Financial
[Stability Paper no. 12, Bank of England, London, www.bankofengland.co.uk.](http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/)

Spence M 2011, ‘The impact of globalization on income and employment’, Foreign Affairs,
90(4): 28–41.

SSRP (Super System Review Panel) 2010, Super System Review: final report, Australian
[Government, Canberra, www.supersystemreview.gov.au.](http://www.supersystemreview.gov.au/)

State of the Environment Committee 2011, Australian state of the environment 2011,
independent report to the Minister for Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population
and Communities, Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and
[Communities, Canberra, www.environment.gov.au.](http://www.environment.gov.au/)

Stockholm International Peace Research Institute 2012, SIPRI yearbook 2012: armaments,
_disarmament and international security, Oxford University Press._

Stokes G 2004, ‘The “Australian Settlement” and Australian political thought’, Australian
_Journal of Political Science, 39(1): 5–22._

Subramanian A 2011, Eclipse: living in the shadow of China’s economic dominance, Peterson
Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC.

Tedesco L & Haseltine C 2010, An economic survey of companies in the Australian mining
_technology services and equipment sector, 2006–07 to 2008–09, ABARE–BRS research_
[report 10.07, Canberra, http://adl.brs.gov.au.](http://adl.brs.gov.au/)

Tennis Australia 2012, Submission 126 to the Australia in the Asian Century White
[Paper, www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.](http://www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au/)

Thomson Reuters 2011a, Web of Science report, June.
——2011b, InCites global comparisons report, December.
——2012, InCites global comparisons report, September.
Thorbecke, W 2011, The effect of exchange rate changes on trade in East Asia, Asian
[Development Bank Institute (ADBI) working paper no. 263, ADBI, Tokyo, www.adbi.org.](http://www.adbi.org/)

Tilak J 2002, Building human capital in east Asia: what others can learn, National Institute of
Education Planning and Administration, New Delhi.

TRA (Tourism Research Australia) 2012a, Forecast 2012, Issue 1, Department of Resources,
[Energy and Tourism, Canberra, www.ret.gov.au.](http://www.ret.gov.au/)

——2012b, Tourism industry facts & figures at a glance, Department of Resources, Energy and
[Tourism, Canberra, www.ret.gov.au.](http://www.ret.gov.au/)

UGM Consulting 2012, Submission 140 to the Australia in the Asian Century White
[Paper, www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.](http://www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au/)

UN (United Nations) 2009, Report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate
_aftermath of conflict,_ report A/63/881–S/2009/304, UN, New York.

——2011a, National Accounts Main Aggregates Database, data file, UN Statistical Division,
[New York, www.unstats.un.org.](http://www.unstats.un.org/)

——2011b, World population prospects: the 2011 revision, Department of Economic and Social
Affairs, Population Division, New York.

——2012a, Report of the Secretary-General on Human Security, report A/66/763, UN,
New York.

308


-----

——2012b, World urbanization prospects: the 2011 revision, CD-ROM edn, UN Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, New York.

UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme) 2012, Global trends in renewable energy
_investment 2012, Frankfurt School of Finance & Management GmbH,_
[www.fs-unep-centre.org.](http://www.fs-unep-centre.org/)

University of Melbourne 2012, Submission 197 to the Australia in the Asian Century White
[Paper, www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.](http://www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au/)

University of Sydney 2012, Submission 159 to the Australia in the Asian Century White
[Paper, www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.](http://www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au/)

UNWTO (UN World Tourism Organization) 2011, Tourism towards 2030, UNWTO, Madrid.
——2012, Compendium of Tourism Statistics, UNWTO, Madrid.
UWA (University of Western Australia) 2012a, In the zone, UWA,
[Perth, www.uwainthezone.com.au.](http://www.uwainthezone.com.au/)

——2012b, Submission 249 to the Australia in the Asian Century White
[Paper, www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.](http://www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au/)

Water Resources Group 2009, Charting our water future: economic frameworks to inform
_[decision making, www.2030waterresourcesgroup.com.](http://www.2030waterresourcesgroup.com/)_

Wei Z & Hao R 2012, ‘China’s demographic transition and economic growth’, in Bureau of
Resources and Energy Economics (BREE) & Tourism Research Australia, Resources, energy
_[and tourism: China review, BREE, Canberra, www.bree.gov.au.](http://www.bree.gov.au/)_

Wilson D, Kamakshya T, Carlson S & Ursua J 2011, The BRICS 10 years on: halfway through the
_great transformation, Global Economics Paper no. 208, Goldman Sachs Global Economics,_
[Commodities and Strategy Research, www.theloadstar.co.uk.](http://www.theloadstar.co.uk/)

World Bank 2006, Critical discussion on education, Working Paper Series no. 2007-2,
Washington, DC.

——2009, Commodities at the crossroads: key findings from Global Economic Prospects 2009,
[World Bank, Washington, DC, www.worldbank.org.](http://www.worldbank.org/)

——2011, World development report 2011: conflict, security and development, World Bank,
[Washington, DC, www.worldbank.org.](http://www.worldbank.org/)

——2012a, ‘The persistence of gender inequality’, in World development report 2012, World
[Bank, Washington, DC, www.worldbank.org.](http://www.worldbank.org/)

——2012b, PovcalNet: the on-line tool for poverty measurement, Development Research
Group of the World Bank,
[Washington, DC, www.iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/index.htm.](http://www.iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/index.htm)

——2012c, World Bank and education in Indonesia, World Bank,
Washington, DC, [www.worldbank.org.](http://www.worldbank.org/)

——2012d, World Development Indicators, database, World Bank, Washington, DC, July
[2012, www.data.worldbank.org/.](http://www.data.worldbank.org/)

World Bank & DRC (Development Research Center of the State Council, People’s Republic of
China) 2012, China 2030: building a modern, harmonious, and creative high-income
_[society, World Bank, Washington, DC, www.worldbank.org.](http://www.worldbank.org/)_

WTO (World Trade Organization) & IDE-JETRO (Institute of Developing Economies, Japan
External Trade Organization) 2011, Trade patterns and global value chains in East Asia:
_from trade in goods to trade in tasks, WTO Secretariat, Geneva._

309


-----

WTO (World Trade Organization) 2012, Report on G-20 trade measures (mid-October 2011 to
_mid-May 2012), WTO, Geneva._

Yudhoyono S 2012, speech to the 67th Anniversary of Proclamation of Independence at Home
Joint Session of the DPR and DPD RI,
www.presidensby.info/index.php/pidato/2012/08/16/1930.html.

Zhuang J, de Dios E & Lagman-Martin A 2010, ‘Governance and institutional quality and the
links with growth and inequality: how Asia fares’, in J Zhuang (ed.), Poverty, inequality,
_and inclusive growth in Asia, Asian Development Bank, Manila._

310


-----

## List of figures, charts and tables

### Figures

Figure 1: Setting the context for the Asian century 4

Figure 2: Roadmap to navigate the Asian century 5

Figure 2.1: Asia to become the centre of global economic activity 59

Figure 2.2: Growing consumer markets of Asia 63

Figure 2.3: Major economic powers in the Asia–Pacific region 73

Figure 6.1: Building capabilities for the Asian century 163

Figure C.1: Australia’s agriculture and food sector in the Asian century 213

Figure 8.1: Asia’s natural hazard and exposure index 247

Figure 9.1: Scientific links between Australia and Asian nations 267

### Charts

Chart 1: Asia’s economic resurgence is set to continue 6

Chart 1.1: Asia’s rising 30

Chart 1.2: Asia’s demographic dividend 32

Chart 1.3: Average years of formal schooling 34

Chart 1.4: Increasing investment in physical capital 36

Chart 1.5: Asia’s manufacturing output 41

Chart 1.6: Energy and metals consumption per person, selected countries 44

Chart 2.1: Asia’s economic resurgence is set to continue 50

Chart 2.2: Share of world output growth 51

Chart 2.3: World output shares 52

Chart 2.4: Takeover points of absolute output levels 53

Chart 2.5: Asia’s population and productivity 54

Chart 2.6: Output per person 55

Chart 2.7: Asia growth scenarios 57

Chart 2.8: Long-term GDP growth projections for China and India 58

Chart 2.9: Asia’s share of world merchandise trade 60

Chart 2.10: Services shares of output increases with income 61

Chart 2.11: Asia’s continuing urbanisation 65

Chart 2.12: Share of total saving in the Group of Twenty 67

Chart 3.1: Australia’s slide in comparative income has been reversed 82

Chart 3.2: Australia’s output per worker is higher than many in the region 84

Chart 3.3: Australia’s real income 85

Chart 3.4: Fall in average effective rates of industry assistance 86

311


-----

Chart 3.5: Correlations between Australian, United States and Chinese
output growth 89

Chart 3.6: Globalisation of Asia has been good for consumers 90

Chart 3.7: Australia’s penetration into Asia’s resource markets 93

Chart 3.8: Services have been the major source of employment growth 96

Chart 3.9: Australia’s agricultural exports to Asia have risen 96

Chart 3.10: More Australians have been travelling to Asia 103

Chart 4.1: Australian gross national income per person 108

Chart 4.2: Proportion of Australia’s population of working age 113

Chart 4.3: Australian real GDP and industry composition 116

Chart 4.4: Composition of Australia’s exports, by industry 118

Chart 4.5: Outlook for Australian commodity exports 121

Chart 4.6: Outlook for Australian agrifood production and exports 125

Chart 4.7: Growth in international student enrolments in Australia 127

Chart 4.8: Visitor arrivals in Australia 128

Chart 5.1: Projected flows of people and goods to and from Australia 142

Chart 5.2: Australia’s barriers to entrepreneurship are falling, but so are
other countries’ 151

Chart 7.1: Australia’s trade links 188

Chart C.1: Demand for food will grow 214

Chart 8.1: Regional defence expenditure 226

Chart 8.2: Official development assistance to Asia 249

Chart 9.1: DFAT staff posted overseas 254

Chart 9.2: Diplomatic posts in Asia 255

Chart A.1: Rising Asian income per person 273

Chart A.2: Rising Asian economic output 274

Chart A.3: Asia’s three waves of income take-off 275

Chart A.4: Asia’s three waves of productivity growth 275

### Tables

Table 2.1: Projected average annual economic growth rates in Asia, 2012–25 51

Table 4.1: International rankings of GDP per person in 2017 111

Table B.1: Evolution of Australia’s relations with the region 278

Table B.2: Australian-based representation at Australian missions in Asia 280

Table B.3: Bilateral architecture in major relationships 282

312


-----

-----

© Commonwealth of Australia 2012

ISBN 978-1-921739-92-7 (print)
978-1-921739-93-4 (PDF)

978-1-921739-94-1 (HTML)

**Ownership of intellectual property rights in this publication**

Unless otherwise noted, copyright (and any other intellectual property rights, if any) in this publication is
owned by the Commonwealth of Australia (referred to below as the Commonwealth).

**Creative Commons licence**

With the exception of the Coat of Arms; photographs; charts 1, 1.1, 1.3, 1.4, 1.6–2.8, 2.10, 2.12–3.2, 3.5,
A.1–A.4; figures 2.1 and 2.2; and Box 4.3, this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 Australia Licence.

Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Australia Licence is a standard form license agreement that allows you
to copy, distribute, transmit and adapt this publication provided that you attribute the work. A summary
of the licence terms is available from http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/au/deed.en. The full
licence terms are available from http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/au/legalcode.

The Commonwealth’s preference is that you attribute this publication (and any material sourced from it)
using the following wording:

_Source: Licensed from the Commonwealth of Australia under a Creative Commons_ _Attribution_
_3.0 Australia Licence._

_The Commonwealth of Australia does not necessarily endorse the content of this publication._

**Use of the Coat of Arms**

The terms under which the Coat of Arms can be used are set out on the Department of the Prime
[Minister and Cabinet website (see www.dpmc.gov.au/guidelines).](http://www.dpmc.gov.au/guidelines)

**Contact us**
Inquiries regarding the licence and requests to use material in this document are welcome at:

Australia in the Asian Century Implementation Task Force
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
PO Box 6500
Canberra ACT 2600
[Email: asiancentury@pmc.gov.au](mailto:asiancentury@pmc.gov.au)


-----

