## Defence 2000


## Our Future Defence Force


-----

© Commonwealth of Australia 2000

ISBN 0 642 29544 1


-----

# Contents

**MINISTER’S INTRODUCTION** **V**

**EXECUTIVE SUMMARY** **VII**

**SECTION ONE - FOUNDATIONS**

**CHAPTER ONE - MAKING DECISIONS ABOUT DEFENCE** **3**

The Purpose of the White Paper **3**

Why Now? **5**

Looking Ahead - Strategic Risk Management **6**

The Bigger Picture **7**

**CHAPTER TWO - SECURITY AND THE ROLE OF**
AUSTRALIA’S ARMED FORCES **9**

Force in International Affairs **9**

New Military Tasks **10**

Non-Military Security Issues **12**

**CHAPTER THREE - AUSTRALIA’S STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENT** **15**

Our Strategic Setting **15**

An Attack on Australia? **23**

The Development of Military Capabilities **24**

**SECTION TWO - STRATEGY**

**CHAPTER FOUR - AUSTRALIA’S STRATEGIC INTERESTS**
AND OBJECTIVES **29**

Ensure the Defence of Australia and its Direct Approaches **30**

Foster the Security of our Immediate Neighbourhood **30**

Promote Stability and Cooperation in Southeast Asia **31**

Support Strategic Stability in the Wider Asia Pacific Region **31**

Support Global Security **31**

**CHAPTER FIVE - AUSTRALIA’S INTERNATIONAL**
STRATEGIC RELATIONSHIPS **33**

The US Alliance **34**

Relationships in the Wider Asia Pacific Region **36**

Relationships in Southeast Asia **39**

Our Nearest Neighbours **41**

Strategic Relationships Beyond the Asia Pacific Region **44**

**CHAPTER SIX - AUSTRALIA’S MILITARY STRATEGY** **46**

Strategic Tasks for the ADF **46**

Capability Priorities for the ADF **53**

Capability Development Principles **54**


-----

**SECTION THREE - PEOPLE**

**CHAPTER SEVEN - PEOPLE IN DEFENCE** **61**

People are Capability **61**

The Dimensions of the Challenge **62**

Leadership **63**

Retention **63**

Recruitment **66**

Education and Training **68**

Reserves **69**

Cadets **72**

**SECTION FOUR - CAPABILITY**

**CHAPTER EIGHT - THE DEFENCE CAPABILITY PLAN** **77**

A New Approach to Capability Planning **77**

Land Forces **78**

Air Combat **84**

Maritime Forces **87**

Strike **91**

Information Capability **94**

**CHAPTER NINE - INDUSTRY** **98**

The Role of Industry in our Defence **98**

The Importance of Australian Defence Industry **99**

Our Current Industrial Scene **101**

Strengthening Our Defence Industry Capability **102**

**CHAPTER TEN - SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY** **107**

Technology Trends and the Revolution in Military Affairs **107**

Exploiting the Opportunities **109**

Being a Skilled User of Technology **111**

DSTO - Its Role **112**

**SECTION FIVE - FUNDING**

**CHAPTER ELEVEN - DEFENCE FUNDING** **117**

A New Approach to Defence Funding **118**

Why Do We Need to Spend More? **119**

Future Reform and Efficiency Savings **121**

IV AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

# Minister’s Introduction

Six months ago, when the Prime Minister and I
launched the Public Discussion Paper on Defence, we
said that the Government would be making important
decisions about the future of Australia’s defence force
towards the end of the year. Those decisions have now
been made and are presented and explained in this
White Paper.

The review of our defence needs has been one of
the Government’s top priorities in 2000 and
remains so. We have spent a lot of time on Defence
this year because tough decisions were needed. As
we said in the Public Discussion Paper, Defence
had reached the point where we could not
maintain our present range of capabilities at our
present levels of spending. We needed to make a
choice to spend more on Defence or expect
Defence to do less.

After reviewing Australia’s regional environment,
and our strategic interests and objectives, it was
clear that the Government could not responsibly
consider cutbacks in Australia’s military
capabilities. But we also recognised that just
promising more money would not fix the problem.
We needed to take a new approach to defence planning.

This White Paper is set apart from its predecessors in
three key ways.

The first is the degree of ministerial involvement in the
development of this policy. Over the past year my
colleagues in the National Security Committee of
Cabinet have spent many hours in discussion about all
aspects of defence policy. This has resulted in the most
comprehensive process of ministerial-level decisionmaking about Australia’s defence policy for many years.

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY V


-----

The second is the Government’s decision

-  announced in this White Paper - to lay
down the most specific long-term
defence funding commitment given by
any Australian Government in over 25
years. This commitment is important
because of the unique demands on
Defence for long-term funding clarity
and reflects the special priority we give
to Defence as a core responsibility of
Government. However, before we could
make that commitment, it was
necessary to embark on a series of
reforms to Defence’s administration and
management. We needed to
demonstrate to taxpayers that any
additional funding provided to Defence
would be managed wisely. But having
made that funding commitment does
not mean that there are no further
efficiencies to be made. The Government
remains strongly committed to
continuing improvement in Defence.

The third is a clear statement of the
Government’s requirements of its
Defence Organisation. The decisions in
this White Paper provide
Defence with a plan - the
Defence Capability Plan - for the
development of Australia’s
armed forces over the next
decade. The Plan has been
developed by the Government as
the most cost-effective way to
meet Australia’s strategic
objectives. The job for Defence is
now to implement that Plan.

Together, the Government’s
development of the White Paper,


the Defence Capability Plan and the
long-term funding commitments in
this White Paper establish an historic
benchmark for the development
of Australia’s defence force. They
are what make this White Paper
so different.

We are very proud of this achievement.
We would like to pay particular tribute
to the work of the people of Defence military and civilian - in developing this
White Paper. Their contribution has
been outstanding.

John Moore, MP
Minister for Defence

The National Security
Committee of Cabinet


VI AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

# Executive Summary

### Foundations

**Making Decisions about Defence**

Following the last federal election, the Government
made a commitment to publish a Defence White Paper
in this term of parliament. That decision reflected a
recognition that the Defence Force was under real
pressure to meet an increasingly complex and diverse
range of tasks within a budget that had remained
relatively constant in real terms over the past 15 years. The
Government had become concerned that a mismatch had
arisen between our strategic objectives, our defence
capabilities and our levels of defence funding.

In response to those concerns the Government has
produced in this White Paper - the first since 1994 - the
most specific and detailed defence plan in more than
25 years. It announces and explains the Government’s
decisions about Australia’s strategic policy over the next
decade, and it outlines the Government’s plan for the
development of our armed forces, matched by a
commitment to provide the funds required. It is the
culmination of a year of intensive government review
of Australia’s defence needs. This review included an
extensive community consultation program, led by The
Hon. Andrew Peacock, AC. In a parallel activity, the
views of the people in Defence were also sought by a
Defence Consultation Team.

The defence of our country and our community from
armed attack is one of our highest national priorities.
But we need to be sure that the defence budget is spent
wisely and that we are not spending more than is
necessary. Defence decisions therefore need to balance
two of the most powerful imperatives on government security and fiscal responsibility - and these decisions
need to bear in mind competing priorities for
government expenditure and the Government’s overall
fiscal strategy.

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY VII


-----

There is another perspective. Our armed
forces are not simply a service provided
by the Government. The Australian
Defence Force (ADF) reflects the kind of
country we are, the role we seek to play
in the world, and the way we see
ourselves. The sense of security that our
armed forces give us underpins our
optimistic outlook and the confidence
with which we engage the region.

**Security and the Role of**
**Australia’s Armed Forces**

Armed force will remain a key factor
in international affairs. While resort
to force will continue to be
constrained by many aspects of the
international system, governments
cannot dismiss the possibility of major
conflict between states. That risk is as
high in the Asia Pacific region as it is
elsewhere in the world.

At the same time, military operations
other than conventional war are
becoming more common. Since the end
of the Cold War, there has been a
worldwide upsurge in intra-state
conflicts. These disputes have placed
new demands on the armed forces of
many countries, including for
humanitarian relief, evacuations,
peacekeeping and peace-enforcement.
The Government believes this is an
important and lasting trend with
significant implications for our Defence
Force. Over the next 10 years the ADF
will continue to undertake a range of
operations other than conventional war,


both in our region and beyond. Many of
these operations will be at the lower end
of the spectrum, but often they will be
more demanding. The boundary
between a benign situation and open
conflict can become blurred.

Australia also faces many non-military
threats to our national life, such as cyber
attack, organised crime, terrorism,
illegal immigration, the drug trade,
illegal fishing, piracy and quarantine
infringement. The ADF will continue to
have a major part to play in coastal
surveillance and enforcement activities.
Our patrol boats, maritime surveillance
aircraft and intelligence capabilities are
fully engaged in the day to day
monitoring and policing of our
maritime approaches, and their efforts
are closely integrated with other
agencies. Our approach is to draw on the
expertise of the ADF where it is most
appropriate to do so, but not to allow
these roles - important as they are - to
detract from the ADF’s core function of
defending Australia from armed attack.

**Australia’s Strategic**
**Environment**

At the global level, two interrelated
trends seem likely to shape our strategic
environment most strongly - 
globalisation and US strategic primacy.
These factors will help strengthen global
security and promote economic, social
and political developments that align
with Australia’s interests and values.
Increasingly, the United Nations has


VIII AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

been responding to a growing sense in
the international community that crises
causing avoidable human suffering
cannot be ignored just because they
happen within the borders of a
sovereign state. The trend to a more
active and effective UN security role is
also welcome.

The most critical issue for the security
of the Asia Pacific region is the nature of
the relationships
between the
region’s major
powers - China,
Japan, India,
Russia and the
United States.
These countries
are important to
A u s t r a l i a ’ s
security because
they are the ones
with the power actual or potential

-  to influence events throughout the Asia
Pacific region. Their relationships will set
the tone for the whole region. Overall, the
prospects for those relationships are
good; however, there remains a small but
significant possibility of confrontation.

Generally, Southeast Asia remains an
area of great promise. Political and social
evolution is strengthening the
robustness, legitimacy and resilience of
the political systems in many countries.
ASEAN continues to provide a focus for
the sense of shared interests and
common goals which has been so


important to Southeast Asia over the
past several decades. There remain,
however, a number of security issues
in Southeast Asia that will need to
be handled carefully if regional
security is to be maintained. Countries
in our immediate neighbourhood Indonesia, East Timor, Papua New
Guinea, and the island states of the
Southwest Pacific - face large economic
and structural challenges.

Notwithstanding
the complexity of
our regional
e n v i r o n m e n t,
Australia today is
a secure country,
thanks to our
geography, good
relations with
neighbours, a
region where the
prospect of interstate conflict is
low, our strong armed forces and a close
alliance with the United States. A direct
military attack on Australia is unlikely.

A key factor in the evolution of
Australia’s strategic environment is the
development of military capabilities in
the Asia Pacific region. In recent times
the region has seen the fastest growth of
military capabilities in the world, and
this will continue over the next decade
in ways which are important for
Australia’s defence planning. The most
significant trends are likely to be
continued growth in fighter aircraft


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY IX


-----

with beyond-visual-range targeting
capability, more highly capable antiship missiles, and increasingly
sophisticated strike and land forces.

### Strategy

**Australia’s Strategic**
**Interests and Objectives**

Highest priority is accorded to our
interests and objectives closest to
Australia. In some circumstances a
major crisis far from Australia may be
more important to our future security
than a minor problem close at hand. But
in general, the closer a crisis or problem
is to Australia, the greater the likelihood
that it would be important to our
security and the greater the likelihood
that we would be able to help to do
something about it.

Australia’s most important long-term
strategic objective is to ensure the defence
of Australia and its direct approaches.
Our second strategic objective is to foster
the security of our immediate
neighbourhood. We would be concerned
about internal challenges to the stability
and cohesion of neighbouring countries
and concerned about any threat of
external aggression against them. Our
third strategic objective is to work with
others to promote stability and
cooperation in Southeast Asia. Our key
strategic interest in Southeast Asia is to
maintain a resilient regional community
that can cooperate to prevent the
intrusion of potentially hostile external
powers and resolve peacefully any


problems that may arise between
countries in the region.

Our fourth strategic objective is to
contribute in appropriate ways to
maintaining strategic stability in the
wider Asia Pacific region. We would want
to avoid the emergence in the Asia Pacific
region of a security environment
dominated by any powers whose strategic
interests might be inimical to Australia’s
and to avoid destabilising competition
between the region’s major powers. Our
fifth strategic objective is to contribute to the
efforts of the international community,
especially the United Nations, to uphold
global security. We will continue to
support the United States in the major role
it plays in maintaining and strengthening
the global security order. Australia also
has a strong interest in non-proliferation
regimes that prevent the spread of
weapons of mass destruction.

**Australia’s International**
**Strategic Relationships**

Most of the time, Australia pursues its
strategic objectives in close cooperation
with its allies, neighbours and regional
partners. Our strong alliance with the
United States, in particular, is a key
strategic asset that will support our
bilateral, regional and global interests
over the next decade and beyond.

In the wider Asia Pacific region,
Australia will pursue its objective of
supporting strategic stability by
developing bilateral dialogues with key
countries in the region and contributing


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

to the development of multilateral
security forums. In Southeast Asia,
we will maintain and develop strategic
relationships to encourage regional
cooperation and help, where we can,
in the development of appropriate
military capabilities.

In our immediate neighbourhood, the
Government is committed to working
with the Indonesian Government to
establish, over time, a new defence
relationship that will serve our enduring
shared strategic interests. Consistent
with our goal of developing a network
of defence relationships with regional
countries, Australia will also seek to
build a defence relationship with East
Timor. New Zealand will remain a very
valued defence partner. Australia will
seek to remain Papua New Guinea’s
primary defence partner, offering
substantial support to PNG defence
reforms. Likewise, the Government seeks
to maintain our position as the key
strategic partner in the Southwest
Pacific and will continue to remain
active in this region.

Beyond the Asia Pacific, Australia values
its relationships with the United
Kingdom, Canada and a number of
European countries.

**Australia’s Military**
**Strategy**

The priority task for the ADF is the
defence of Australia. Our approach is
shaped by three principles. First, we
must be able to defend Australia without


relying on the combat forces of other
countries - self-reliance. Second,
Australia needs to be able to control the
air and sea approaches to our continent

-  a maritime strategy. Third, although
Australia’s strategic posture is defensive,
we would seek to attack hostile forces as
far from our shores as possible - proactive operations.

The second priority for the ADF is
contributing to the security of our
immediate neighbourhood. In the
highly unlikely event of unprovoked
armed aggression against any of our
immediate neighbours, Australia
would want to be in a position, if
asked, to help our neighbours defend
themselves. The capability to provide
such help would be drawn from the
forces we have developed for the
defence of Australia. Lower level
operations, such as evacuations,
disaster relief and peacekeeping
operations of different sorts, are the
most likely types of operation that we
might need to undertake in our
immediate neighbourhood. In general,
the capabilities we develop in the ADF
for defending Australia provide forces
appropriate for these tasks, but some
important enhancements might be
needed to meet unique demands.

The third priority for Australia’s forces
is supporting Australia’s wider
interests and objectives by being able to
contribute effectively to international
coalitions of forces to meet crises beyond
our immediate neighbourhood. We would
do this by contributing to international


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY XI


-----

coalitions, drawing on the forces we
develop for higher priority tasks.

In addition to these core tasks in support
of Australia’s strategic objectives, the ADF
will also be called upon to undertake a
number of regular or occasional tasks in
support of peacetime national tasks. This
includes specific and ongoing
commitments to coastal surveillance and
emergency management, as well as ad hoc
support to wider community needs.

To achieve these key tasks, the ADF will
maintain and further develop an
integrated and balanced joint force that
can provide capabilities appropriate to
the two highest tasks identified above.
First, Australia will maintain maritime
capabilities - mostly air and naval forces

-  that can defend Australia by denying
our air and sea approaches to any
credible hostile forces. Second, Australia
will maintain land forces - including the
air and naval assets needed to deploy and
protect them - that can operate as part
of a joint force to control the approaches
to Australia and respond effectively to
any armed incursion onto Australian
soil. Both those sets of capabilities would
also be able to support the security of our
immediate neighbourhood and
contribute to coalition operations.

### People

**People in Defence**

The key to maintaining the ADF as a
first-class military force is having the
right people, with the skills and


experience they need to succeed in
complex military operations.

The enhanced force structure outlined
in this White Paper requires the
current strength of the ADF of 51,500
to be increased to about 54,000 full time
personnel by 2010. The composition of
that force will need to adapt to meet
evolving needs. Recruiting and retaining
sufficient skilled and experienced people
will be one of the most significant
challenges in building the ADF of the
twenty-first century.

To meet this challenge, Defence will
need high quality leadership. The
Government will explore tailored
remuneration packages to meet
specific needs of various categories of
personnel and measures to address
career development and location
stability issues. As well, recruitment
processes are being redesigned, and a
pilot scheme implemented to
evaluate the advantages of a
commercial service provider. As part
of its strategy to attract and retain
high quality people, Defence is
investing in modern, effective and
efficient education and training.
This is a critical investment in
future capability.

The strategic role for the Reserves has
changed from mobilisation to meet
remote threats to that of supporting and
sustaining the types of contemporary
military operations in which the
ADF may be engaged. Increasingly, the


XII AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

Reserves will provide those skills not
held within the permanent forces or held
only in small numbers. The
contribution of the Reserves will be
essential to the maintenance of the ADF’s
operational capabilities. The Government
has proposed amendments to
C o m m o n we a l t h
legislation to extend
the options available
for the use of
the Reserves.

Also, the Government
is committed to
expanding the
participation of
young Australians in the Cadet Scheme
and to providing the resources needed to
achieve that. This includes a commitment
to widening the range of institutions
offering participation in the cadets and to
ensuring that units are properly
resourced. The Government will
increase annual funding for the Cadet
Scheme to $30 million by 2002 and
provide ongoing funding as necessary to
ensure these objectives are met.

### Capability

**The Defence**
**Capability Plan**

The Government has launched a new
approach to capability planning by
preparing a detailed, costed plan for our
Defence Force over the next 10 years. The
aim is to provide the ADF with clear
long-term goals for its development, and


the funding needed to achieve these
goals. This is an important element of
the Government’s program of
continuous improvement in defence
management and the plan will also
provide a firm basis to develop and
monitor further efficiency reforms in
the delivery of
capability.

The Plan has been
developed on the
basis of through-life
costing estimates for
the different types of
capability the
Government believes
the ADF should have, covering not only
the initial capital investment required,
but also personnel, operating, support
and upgrade costs. It will be revised
annually, within the 10 year budget
constraint, to take account of changing
strategic circumstances, new
technologies and changed priorities.
Individual projects will need to be
considered and approved by
government before proceeding.
Nevertheless, the Defence Capability
Plan will provide a clear basis for
defence capability decisions now and
into the future.

The emphasis will be on a professional,
well-trained, well-equipped force that is
available for operations at short notice,
and one that can be sustained on
deployment over extended periods. This
type of force will provide the flexibility
to deal with operations other than


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY XIII


-----

conventional war, and contribute to
coalition operations.

The Army will be structured and
resourced to ensure that we will be able
to sustain a brigade on operations for
extended periods, and at the same time
maintain at least a battalion group
available for deployment elsewhere.
Increased attention will be paid to
sustainment of deployed forces, with the
Reserves given a key new role
following changes to legislation to allow
easier call-out and better compensation.
There will be substantial new
investment in combat weight, logistics,
transport and other enhancements to
land force capability.

Overall spending on the maintenance of
current land force capabilities is planned
to average around $5.9 billion per year
over the decade. The estimated capital
expenditure needed for the capability
enhancements will total around $3.9
billion over the decade. Additional
personnel and operating costs amount to
around $1.1 billion over the decade.

We will maintain air-combat forces that
are at least comparable qualitatively to
any in the region. The Government has
decided to continue the upgrade
program for the F/A-18, to proceed now
with the acquisition of four Airborne
Early Warning & Control aircraft, to
replace and upgrade our air-to-air
refuelling capability, and to make major
provision for the acquisition of a new
combat aircraft to follow the F/A-18,


and potentially the F-111. Overall
spending on the maintenance of current
air combat capability is planned to
average around $1.3 billion per year over
the decade. The estimated capital
expenditure needed for the capability
enhancements will total around $5.3
billion over the decade. Additional
personnel and operating costs will
amount to about $300 million over
the decade.

The Government’s primary goal for our
maritime forces is to maintain an assured
capability to detect and attack any major
surface ships, and to impose substantial
constraints on hostile submarine
operations, in our extended maritime
approaches. We also intend to maintain
the ability to support Australian forces
deployed offshore, to contribute to
maritime security in our wider region, to
protect Australian ports from sea mines,
and to support civil law enforcement and
coastal-surveillance operations.

The ANZAC class frigate will be
provided with a reasonable level of antiship missile defence and other
enhancements. A new class of at least
three air-defence capable ships will
replace the guided missile frigates at
the end of their service life. HMAS
_Westralia and Success will be replaced_
by specialist ships when they pay off.
The Collins class submarines will be
brought to a high level of capability by
major improvements to the platform
and combat systems. Overall spending
on the maintenance of current


XIV AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

maritime capability is planned to
average around $3.5 billion per year over
the decade. The expected capital
expenditure needed for the capability
enhancements will total around $1.8
billion over the decade. Additional
personnel and operating costs will
amount to about $300 million.

Our strike capability will be upgraded
with improvements to the F-111’s
electronic warfare self-protection
systems and by the acquisition of
additional types of stand-off weapons.
The F-111 fleet is expected to leave
service between 2015 and 2020 and, for
planning purposes, provision has been
made for the acquisition of up to 25
aircraft of the same type as the follow-on
for the F/A-18. Overall spending on the
maintenance of current strike capability
is planned to average $500 million per
year over the decade. The expected capital
expenditure needed for capability
enhancements will total around $800
million over the decade, with no
additional personnel and operating costs.

Effective use of information is at the
heart of Australia’s defence capability.
Accordingly, the Government plans
substantial enhancements to
intelligence, surveillance and
communications capabilities; and
command, logistics and business
systems. Overall spending on the
maintenance of information capabilities
is planned to average around $1.3 billion
per year over the decade. The expected


capital expenditure needed for the
capability enhancements will total
around $1.9 billion over the decade.
Additional personnel and operating
costs amount to about $630 million.

**Industry**

Industry is a vital component of defence
capability. A combination of
government policy and market
pressures has brought significant
improvement in the capability of
Australian defence industry. In many
areas, it is now highly cost-competitive.
Major projects, when well managed, can
introduce new technologies and skills
into Australian industry.

The Government’s objective is to have a
sustainable and competitive defence
industry base, with efficient, innovative
and durable industries, able to support a
technologically advanced ADF. This will
require a close partnership between
Defence and those industries. The
Government’s approach will be to
capitalise on, and foster, industry’s
innovative use of advanced
technologies. Improved linkages
between industry and the Defence
Science and Technology Organisation
will be a high priority.

The program of capability
enhancements outlined in this White
Paper provides a solid basis for longterm planning by Australian industry.
There are significant opportunities for
many industry sectors. They will


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY XV


-----

engage the existing strengths of
Australian industry and have the
potential to introduce new skills and
capacities. These include essential
systems engineering and integration
skills in the modernisation of aircraft,
ships and vehicles; the construction of
new ships; the development of Airborne
Early Warning & Control aircraft
systems; and a range of
communications, command and
control, and information systems.

Initiatives that are part of the
acquisition reform program in the new
Defence Materiel Organisation will
lead to improved defence-industry
relations. Defence will issue an annual
report on progress with partnering
arrangements to the Defence and
Industry Advisory Council.

**Science and Technology**

Australia’s future defence capability, as
set out in the Defence Capability Plan,
will require access to advanced
technology - for both equipment
and training.

The Defence Science and Technology
Organisation is undertaking key
cooperative research and development
programs, including with our allies, to
ensure that we are well placed to make
informed choices in the selection of
technology and its applications. This


will be critical if Australia is to retain its
‘knowledge edge’ and if we are to invest
wisely in future capability.

Defence, in collaboration with others,
will continue to lead a research and
development program in technologies
related to theRevolution in Military
Affairs to ensure that Australia is
prepared for the adoption of new
technologies as they mature. As well, the
Office of the Revolution in Military
Affairs has been established to identify
those aspects of technological change
that are most likely to affect major longterm capabilities. The ability to identify
and incorporate those technologies that
sustain the capability of the ADF will be
guided by simulation and modelling,
through both qualitative and
quantitative war games.

The Defence Science and Technology
Organisation has an important role to
play in supporting and upgrading,
through life, those platforms unique to
Australia. The organisation will
continue to work closely with industry
and universities to ensure that we are
able to maintain and exploit current
technology and emerging opportunities
in a timely and cost-effective manner.
Improved linkages with industry will be
important in transferring knowledge
and fostering innovation, particularly in
small to medium enterprises.


XVI AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

### Funding

**Defence Funding**

The Government estimates that
defence spending will need to grow
by an average of about three percent
per annum in real terms over the decade
and has directed Defence to plan within
that budget. Funding for 2001-02
and 2002-03 is
programmed to
increase by $500
million and $1,000
million respectively
in order to provide
substantial funding
for a number of key
initiatives. By the end
of the decade, defence
spending in cash
terms will stand at approximately $16
billion per year in today’s dollars,
compared with $12.2 billion this year.
In all, defence spending over the
decade is expected to increase by a
total of $23.5 billion.

The defence spending figures provided
in this White Paper are the most specific
long-term defence funding projections
provided by any Australian government
in more than 25 years, and mark a new


approach to defence funding. This
approach will provide an improved
basis for accountability by Defence to
government and the public for the
efficient and effective use of defence
funds. The Government has introduced
a defence planning and budgeting
process, built around a new, annual
Defence Financial and Management
Plan. The first of these will be produced
this year as part of
the 2001-02 budget
cycle. In this new
process, Defence will
move to outputbased budgeting
arrangements within
the constraints of the
10 year overall
budget.

The Government is committed to
pursuing substantial efficiency savings
in areas that include property disposal,
contracting out, improved information
technology management and reduced
personnel overheads. Any further
savings achieved, and that the
Government decides will be retained in
Defence, will be offset
from the projected funding guidance
for Defence.


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY XVII


-----

XVIII AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

## Section One | Foundations

THE GOVERNMENT’S DEFENCE POLICY 1


-----

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

# 1 – Making Decisions About Defence

**The Purpose of the White Paper**

1.1 This Defence White Paper announces and explains
the Government’s decisions about Australia’s strategic
policy over the next decade. It sets out a plan for the
development of our armed forces, and makes a
commitment to provide the funds required.

1.2 These decisions are the culmination of a year of
intensive government review of Australia’s defence
needs. The Government has examined the
fundamentals of our strategic policy, including
Australia’s strategic environment, our national interests
and objectives and the role of our alliances and regional
strategic relationships. Based on this examination, we
have reviewed the changing roles of armed forces,
Australia’s military strategy, the capabilities we have
today - including the vital role of the serving men and
women of the Australian Defence Force - and broader
budget and value for money considerations, including
the ongoing requirement for efficient management
of Defence.

1.3 We have also considered the opportunities and
challenges of science and technology and the important
role of Australian industry. All of these issues are
addressed in the White Paper.

1.4 We have listened to the views of the Australian
people. The Government’s Community Consultation
Program, led by The Hon. Andrew Peacock, AC, has been
the most extensive and successful effort in many years
to engage Australians in decisions about defence policy.

1.5 The Public Discussion Paper, published in June this
year, posed the key questions about our future defence
needs. The Community Consultation Team held 28
public meetings around Australia, as well as many

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 3


-----

meetings with State and local 1.9 It is also important to provide our
governments, interest groups, business Defence Force with a clear statement
and industry associations. The Team of what the Government and the
received over 1,100 written people of Australia expect of its
submissions. members. The decisions set out in this

White Paper provide

1.6 The Team’s report,

the direction they

received by the

need to do their job,

Government in The Community Consultation and underline the
October, provides a Team undertook to consult G o v e r n m e n t ’ s
unique snapshot of extensively and widely... Our

commitment to

the views that were consultations extended over nine

ensuring the Defence

put forward. In a weeks, running from 6 July 2000 to

Force will be an

parallel activity, the 7 September 2000, and included 28

attractive career for

views of people public meetings, plus meetings with

young Australians.

within Defence were State and local governments,

The decisions will

interest groups, business and

sought by a Defence

industry associations in capital also help the

Consultation Team.

cities and numerous regional efficient manage
The key findings of

centres. Throughout the process, a ment of Defence,

the Community

website provided on-line access to by setting out

Consultation Report,

the discussion paper and other exactly what the

and many of those of information, as well as telephone, Government expects
the Defence Consult- facsimile and e-mail contact details from it.
ation Team Report, for comments and submissions.
are highlighted in **Report of the Community** 1.10 Finally, this
boxes throughout the **Consultation Team** White Paper explains
White Paper. our defence and

strategic policies to

1.7 The result of this

Australia’s allies,

process of review and consultation is the

friends and neighbours. Australia has

most specific and detailed defence plan

long been an advocate of transparency

produced by any Australian

between countries in our region about

government in more than 25 years.

national policies on strategic issues,

1.8 We believe it is important to provide including the basis of force
Australians with a comprehensive development. By understanding better
account of our strategic policy. The the foundations of one another’s
Community Consultation Process has strategic policies, countries find it
confirmed the deep interest many easier to work together and avoid
Australians have in the foundations of misunderstandings. This has been
our national security. recognised by many countries in our


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

region in recent years, with a
growing number of governments
now publishing detailed defence
policy statements.

**Why Now?**

1.11 This is the first Defence White
Paper since 1994, and only the fourth
since 1976. Following the last federal
election, the Government made a
commitment to publish a Defence
White Paper in this term of parliament.
We believed the Defence Force was
under real pressure in trying to meet a
complex and diverse range of tasks
within a budget that had remained
relatively constant in real terms over
the past 15 years.

1.12 In 1997 the Government reviewed
its strategic policy, and concluded that,
with the end of the Cold War and with
dynamic economic growth in Asia,


Australia’s strategic circumstances
had become more demanding and the
potential demands on our armed forces
had grown. We said that Australia
would need progressively to upgrade
its forces to assure our future capacity
to defend our territory, and to enhance
our capacity to contribute to the
security of the region.

1.13 At the same time, following the
Defence Efficiency Review, the
Government undertook major reforms
to the management of Defence,
designed to improve efficiency and
maximise the capability that could be
delivered from the defence budget.
Further reforms are now being
undertaken, especially in the
acquisition and financial management
areas. These reforms are a critical part
of the Government’s new approach to
defence planning.


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

1.14 Nonetheless significant questions
have remained about the ability of the
ADF to sustain the full range of its
capabilities at appropriate levels of
sophistication and readiness from
within its present resources. The
Government has been concerned for
some time that a mismatch had
developed between our strategic
objectives, our defence capabilities and
our levels of defence funding.

1.15 These questions were highlighted
by the deployment of INTERFET to
East Timor last year. This was the
largest and most demanding military
operation undertaken by the ADF
in a generation. It was a major
achievement, reflecting great credit on
the men and women of the Australian
Defence Organisation, and on the
overall quality of their training,
equipment and preparation. But
INTERFET also provided an
invaluable opportunity to test and
evaluate many aspects of our military
capabilities, and to learn important
lessons about how we could do things
better. The Government has drawn on
these lessons in this White Paper.

**Looking Ahead -**
**Strategic Risk**
**Management**

1.16 Defence is a difficult area of public
policy. The defence of our country and
our community from armed attack is
one of our highest national priorities.
The Government has a responsibility


to make sure that Australia has the
armed forces we need to protect our
country if it is threatened. But our
Defence Force is also one of our largest
national expenses, costing around 1.9
per cent of our gross domestic product.
We need to be sure that we are
spending enough on defence, but we
also need to be sure that the defence
budget is spent wisely and that we are
not spending more than is necessary.

1.17 Defence decisions therefore need to
balance two of the most powerful
imperatives on government - security
and fiscal responsibility - and these
decisions need to bear in mind
competing priorities for government
expenditure and the Government’s
overall fiscal strategy.

1.18 Striking that balance is made
harder by the environment of
uncertainty in which defence
decisions must be made. We cannot
predict with certainty when or where
Australia might need to use its armed
forces. Today we are among the more
secure countries in the world. But our
defence policy must take account of
the possibility that changes in the
international situation, especially in
the dynamic Asia Pacific region, could
produce a more unstable and
threatening strategic situation. The
end of the Cold War showed how major
changes in our strategic environment
can happen, and we need to look a long
way ahead. Decisions about the
development of our armed forces can


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

have time frames of 20 years or more.
Our defence decisions today therefore
need to consider the strategic
environment we might face after 2010.
We must take account of the
possibility of major changes over that
time, including for the worse.


1.21 Our armed forces are not simply a
service provided by government. They
are part of our national identity. The
ADF reflects the kind of country we
are, the role we seek to play in the
world, and the way we see ourselves.


1.22 This is particularly the case in

1.19 Of course we cannot guard against

rural and regional Australia, where

all possibilities or eliminate strategic

many local communities have a close

risks. We have looked for the most cost
affinity with the local ADF base or

effective ways to minimise such risks,

Reserve unit. Some of these comm
taking account not only of the

unities, such as Darwin, Cairns and

likelihood of a

Townsville, derive

particular threat but

s i g n i f i c a n t

also of how serious

economic benefits

it would be for It was clear to us as we travelled the

from the defence

country that the ADF is held in high

Australia if it

presence, while in

regard. The achievements, traditions

materialised.

and culture of the Defence Force other areas the
form an important part of the fabric capacity of local

**The Bigger** of Australian life. The pride that industry to support
**Picture** Australians have in the Defence defence projects

Force, as displayed at ANZAC is often seen as

1.20 Making

ceremonies and more recently in critical to efforts to

decisions about our relation to our troops in East Timor,

attract new work.

armed forces involves was evident to us in towns and cities

In making decisions

a lot of detailed across our country.

about the future

analysis: regional **Report of the Community**

of Defence, the

trends and scenarios, **Consultation Team**

Government will

risks and probab
The presence of Defence in regional focus not just on

ilities, interests and

Australia provides considerable what it can do to

obligations, cost
economic and industrial benefit to improve the ADF,

effective force options

the local region. but also on what

and new technologies.

There are very strong links between Defence and the

But there are, in

many local communities and the ADF can do for

addition, other

ADF bases.

local communities,

important factors that

**Report of the Community** and the respon
we need to keep in

**Consultation Team: Key findings** sibilities Defence

mind. There is a

has as an employer

bigger picture.

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 7


-----

and contributor to local and
regional economies.

1.23 These factors are not only
important to us in times of crisis. The
sense of security that our armed forces
give us underpins our optimistic
outlook and the confidence with


which we engage the region. Our
defence capability and our commitment
to shared interests help to strengthen
regional security. In the final resort,
Australia’s defence forces serve as the
decisive deterrent to any country
contemplating armed action against us.


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

# 2 – Security and The Role of Australia’s Armed Forces

**Force in International Affairs**

2.1 The Government has considered the future role of
force in international affairs, including the argument
that changes in the structure of the international system
will reduce the importance of force in relations between
nations over coming years.

2.2 The Government does not dismiss
these views, and indeed it places a high
priority on working with others, at both
the regional and global level, to further
minimise, and if possible to eliminate, the
risk of war. The continuing threat of
proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction makes those efforts all the
more important.

2.3 Resort to force will continue to be
constrained by many aspects of the
international system, and armed conflict
between states will remain less common
than in earlier centuries. But there remains
a risk that circumstances may still arise
in which these constraints are not
effective. That risk is as high in the Asia
Pacific region as it is elsewhere in the
world. It is best minimised by realism
about the challenges still to be faced in
strengthening peace in our region, and a
commitment to work with others, both
locally and globally, to build a more
robust and resilient international system.

2.4 This requires strategic policy which is integrated
with wider diplomatic and political policies. The ways
in which we do that are described in Section Two of this
White Paper. But it also means we need to maintain a

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 9


-----

capable defence force, that is trained in Irian Jaya) and East Timor in our
and equipped to meet the demands of nearer region. In these places, the ADF
conventional wars between states. has undertaken tasks from famine and

disaster relief to peacekeeping and
humanitarian assistance.

**New Military Tasks**

2.5 Australia has been engaged in only 2.8 The Government believes that
one conventional conflict since the this is an important and lasting
Vietnam War, and that was the Gulf trend, with significant implications
War of 1990-91. But our armed forces for our Defence Force. Over the next 10
have been busier over years the ADF will
the last decade, and continue to undertake
especially the past a range of operations

Participation in peacekeeping

two years, than at any operations, particularly in the other than
time since our region, is strongly supported as conventional war,
involvement in being in Australia’s interest. both in our own
Vietnam. This reflects **Report of the Community** region and beyond.
a worldwide trend. **Consultation Team: Key finding** Preparing the ADF

for such operations

2.6 It is clear that

will therefore take a

various forms of

more prominent

military operations other than

place in our defence planning than it has

conventional war are becoming more

in the past.

common. Since the end of the Cold
War, there has been a worldwide 2.9 In many cases, especially at the
upsurge in intra-state conflicts. These lower end of the spectrum of intensity,
disputes have accounted for the vast we are likely to need to deploy quickly
majority of armed conflicts, and have and operate effectively in dangerous
placed new demands on the armed and uncertain situations that may not
forces of many countries, including for necessarily require the use of force. Our
humanitarian relief, evacuations, tasks might include distribution of
peacekeeping and peace-enforcement. relief supplies, evacuation of civilians,

providing medical help or monitoring

2.7 The ADF is no exception. Over the

a peace agreement.

past decade we have deployed the ADF
to places as diverse as Namibia, Somalia, 2.10 But often these operations will
Western Sahara and Rwanda in Africa; be more demanding. The boundary
the Gulf and elsewhere in the Middle between a benign situation and open
East; and Cambodia, the Solomon conflict, either against local irregulars
Islands, Papua New Guinea or more capable armed forces, can
(Bougainville), Indonesia (drought relief become blurred.

10 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 11


-----

2.11 Even in benign situations, an
evident capability to use force can
help to keep things peaceful. When
trouble starts, the ability to respond
promptly with a clear predominance
of force will often restore peace
quickly, which is important not just
for achieving the mission, but also for
protecting our servicemen and
servicewomen.


and onto our territory, constitute an
on-going problem for Australia. Given
the size of our maritime jurisdiction,
this is a significant challenge.


2.15 The Government has recently

of force will often restore peace
quickly, which is important not just undertaken a major review of our
for achieving the mission, but also for coastal surveillance and enforcement
protecting our servicemen and activities, including the significant
servicewomen. contribution made

by Defence to these

2.12 This means that

efforts. That review

Most people believe the ADF should

the capabilities we

proposed important

be structured to maintain a war
need for these types of

fighting capability for the defence of e n h a n c e m e n t s,

operations will have a

Australia and its interests. including improved

lot in common with

s u r v e i l l a n c e

those we develop for They argued that such a force could

capacity through

more conventional readily be adapted for other roles,

the acquisition of

conflicts. such as peacekeeping, but the

two extra aircraft,

reverse is not true.

and the establishment

**Report of the Community**

**Non-Military** of an integrated

**Consultation Team: Key findings**

**Security** surveillance centre.
**Issues** The Government

has allocated $124

2.13 Australia faces

million over four years to fund these

many security concerns other than
those involving military force. These and other measures.
include the potential for non-military

2.16 The ADF will continue to have a

threats, such as cyber attack, organised

major part to play in these activities.

crime and terrorism. They also include

Our patrol boats, maritime

concerns over illegal immigration, the

surveillance aircraft and intelligence

drug trade, illegal fishing, piracy and

capabilities are fully engaged in the

quarantine infringements.

day to day monitoring and policing of

2.14 Many of these problems, such as our maritime approaches, and their
illegal immigration, involve the efforts are closely integrated with
challenge of effective surveillance, other agencies. These capabilities will
patrolling and policing of our be maintained and enhanced. A senior
maritime approaches. Illegal naval officer has been placed in charge
incursions into our Exclusive of the integrated surveillance centre as
Economic Zone and territorial waters, Director-General Coastwatch.


12 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

2.17 New defence capabilities have efforts to develop responses to cyber
the potential to make an even bigger attack on Australia’s critical
contribution to coastal surveillance information infrastructure. This new
in the future. Within a few years, the security challenge is being taken
ADF’s wide area surveillance system seriously by the Government, and a
will provide the potential for comprehensive national approach is
continuous real-time coverage of our currently being developed.
northern air and sea approaches.
This system will be fully integrated 2.20 The ADF can and will play an
with other national coastal increasing role in helping to address
surveillance capabilities, to provide a a wide range of these non-military
c o m p r e h e n s i ve security concerns.
coverage of ships and But the rise of these
aircraft approaching new types of

Many participants argued that the

our shores. The security problems

most immediate threats are non
Government is giving has not made the

military, namely illegal immigration,

high priority to this drug smuggling, attacks on old kinds of threats
capability and to information systems and terrorism. less important. And
ensuring that it using the ADF 
Some communities were concerned

c o n t r i b u t e s trained and

that our sea and air borders may be

effectively to our equipped for armed

being breached and would welcome

p e a c e t i m e conflict - is not

an increased ADF presence across

surveillance needs. necessarily the most

the north.

cost-effective way

2.18 The ADF **Report of the Community**

to address new non
maintains counter- **Consultation Team: Key findings**

military security

terrorist capabilities

concerns. Civilian

for resolving situa
responses may be

tions that are beyond

more appropriate. Our approach

the capacity of our police forces. It also

is to draw on the expertise of the

helps in sea search and rescue and special

Defence Force where it is most

circumstances such as the Olympics,

appropriate to do so, but not to allow

bushfire fighting, and in responding to

these roles - important as they are 
other types of natural disaster.

to detract from the ADF’s core

2.19 Defence will also be among the function of defending Australia from
key contributors to the Government’s armed attack.

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 13


-----

14 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

# 3 – Australia’s Strategic Environment

3.1 This Chapter outlines those aspects of Australia’s
strategic environment that will influence the overall
direction of our strategic policy and force development
over the next 10 to 20 years. Section Two of the White
Paper will describe how our strategic policy will seek
to influence this environment.

**Our Strategic Setting**

**The Global Context**

3.2 At the global level, two interrelated trends are likely
to shape our strategic environment - globalisation and
the primacy of the United States. The trends of
globalisation especially in trade, investment and
communications are increasing cross-border
integration and interdependence around the world. This
is changing the ways countries work and - especially
in economic fields - is powerfully shaping the options
available to governments. Overall, globalisation looks
likely to be good for security because it strengthens
the stake that governments and people have in the
smooth working of the international system. For
example, increased international flows of trade,
investment and technology increase the benefits
of a stable international environment and the costs of
any disruption.

3.3 However, the security benefits of globalisation are
limited by countervailing pressures. First, nation-states
remain the most important strategic actors. Moreover,
nationalism in various forms remains potent and in
some areas is an increasingly powerful motivator.
Second, globalising trends are being accompanied by
growing regionalism, especially in the field of security,
where the end of the Cold War has moved attention

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 15


-----

from the global power balance to a
series of regional strategic systems including the Asia Pacific. Third, the
integrative trends of globalisation
themselves are not irreversible and
could be especially vulnerable to a
deteriorating security environment.

3.4 The United States today has a
preponderance of military capability
and strategic influence that is unique
in modern history. That
preponderance supports a generally
stable global strategic environment.
The primacy of the United States is
built on the strength of its economy,
the quality of its technology, the
willingness of US governments and
voters to accept the costs and burdens
of global power, and the
acknowledgement by most countries
that US primacy serves their interests.
All these factors are likely to endure.
The Government believes this will
serve the strategic interests of the Asia
Pacific region including Australia, and


will promote economic, social and
political developments that align with
our interests and values.

3.5 However, we should be careful not
to take US primacy for granted. Over
the coming years the US global role
may come under pressure, both from
within the United States and from
other countries.

3.6 Domestically, the United States will
continue to accept the human and
material costs of supporting causes
that directly touch its vital interests.
But the willingness of the United
States to bear the burden of its global
role where its interests are less direct
could be eroded, especially if it faces
protracted commitments, heavy
casualties or international criticism.

3.7 Abroad, no country in the world
will have the military or economic
power to challenge US global primacy
over the next few decades. But the
United States could be obstructed and


16 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

frustrated at the regional level. With
adroit diplomacy, the United States
should be able to minimise such
regional challenges. The key will be
to show that US primacy can work in
the interests of less powerful countries.

3.8 A third significant global trend has
been the evolution of the United
Nations. Over the past decade the UN
has become more active and effective.
In doing so it has broadened the range
of its activities and responsibilities in
the security area. The UN has grappled
with internal problems and crises from
the Balkans to Rwanda, Cambodia and
East Timor, responding to a
widespread recognition that
international security can be affected
by problems within, as well as
between, states.

3.9 The United Nations has also been
responding to a growing sense in the
international community that crises
causing avoidable human suffering
cannot be ignored just because they
happen within the borders of a
sovereign state. It is too early to say
whether a new principle of
humanitarian intervention is being
established. If so, it would need to be
applied with caution as well as
compassion. But the trend to a more
active and effective UN security role
is welcome.

3.10 Outside the Asia Pacific region,
strategic problems continue to be most
likely in the Middle East, and
potentially also in Central Asia.


European security problems, such as
those in the Balkans, will be managed
primarily by NATO and European
security structures. Russia’s future
place in the European and global
strategic environment remains
unclear. Security and stability in
Europe will continue to depend on the
maintenance of an effective working
relationship between Russia, and the
United States and its European allies.
Africa will continue to suffer from
crises which may require international
engagement to minimise suffering and
help towards solutions.

**The Asia Pacific Region**

3.11 Although there remains a risk of
localised or more widespread
economic downturn from time to time,
the Asia Pacific is set to be the most
dynamic region in the world over the
next few decades. Economic growth
should help build stability. But it will
also put strains on old relationships,
raise new expectations and perhaps
offer new temptations.

3.12 The most critical issue for the
security of the entire region is the
nature of the relationships between the
region’s major powers - China, Japan,
India, Russia and the United States.
These countries are important to
Australia’s security because they have
the power - actual or potential - to
influence events throughout the Asia
Pacific region. Their relationships will
set the tone for the whole region.


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 17


-----

3.13 The United States is central to the
Asia Pacific security system, and its role
will be critical in maintaining security
over the coming decades. It will be in
Asia that the United States is likely to
face the toughest issues in shaping its
future strategic role - especially in its
relationship with China.

3.14 The trilateral relationship
between China, Japan and the United
States will define the East Asian
strategic framework. Both Beijing and
Washington clearly understand the
importance of managing the US-China
relationship effectively, and recognise
the costs to both of
them - and to the rest
of the region - if they
fail to do so. The
benefits of a stable and
cooperative relationship would be very
great. Important steps have been made,
for example in progress towards
China’s accession to the World Trade
Organisation. But significant
problems remain in the relationship especially concerning the issue of
Taiwan. It is therefore possible that USChina relations may be a significant
source of tension in the region in
coming years. This could be important
to Australia’s security.

3.15 The US-Japan relationship is the
key pillar of US strategic engagement
in Asia. The strength of US security
commitments to Japan, and the scale
of US military deployments in


Northeast Asia, which the US-Japan
relationship facilitates, is critical to
maintaining strategic stability in the
whole region. The US-Japan
relationship has great depth and
resilience, and both sides have worked
effectively in recent years to overcome
problems and adapt to new conditions.
This has provided a welcome
framework in which Japan has been able
to take a larger role in regional and
global security issues. Without the
reassurance provided by the US
relationship, Japan would face difficult
strategic choices with security
consequences for other
countries in the region.

3.16 The Korean
Peninsula is clearly a key
dynamic factor in the
Northeast Asian strategic
balance. Reconciliation
between North and South Korea,
leading to a reduced level of military
confrontation, seems closer now than
for many years. But it could also
introduce new pressures - including
over the future of US forces in Korea which would need careful
management.

3.17 Russia has significant interests in
the Asia Pacific region, particularly in
Northeast Asia. It has moved to
improve its relationships with China
and India, partly to try to
counterbalance US strategic influence
in the region. The way those
relationships develop will be


18 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

important to the of Asia over the next
future strategic It was also clear that there was a 20 years, and their
dynamics of the Asia widespread appreciation that relationships may
Pacific region. important changes were underway change significantly.

in our region. Many people were There is a small but

3.18 India’s economic

concerned that these changes had still significant

growth is enhancing

heightened instability in the region possibility of

its strategic potential

and introduced a new measure of growing and

and influence in the unpredictability about Australia’s s u s t a i n e d
region. Its nuclear strategic outlook.

c o n f r o n t a t i o n

tests, and the **Report of the Community** between the major
development of an **Consultation Team**

powers in Asia, and

operational nuclear

even of outright

capability, have

conflict. Australia’s

made the regional

interests could be deeply engaged in

nuclear balance more complex. There

such a conflict, especially if it involved

are elements of strategic competition

the United States, or if it intruded into

between China and India that have

our nearer region.

been amplified by the development of
India’s nuclear capability. The future
of this relationship will be important **The Nearer Region and**
for the security of the whole region. **Immediate Neighbourhood**
The risk of war - and even of nuclear 3.20 The security of the nearer region
war - between India and Pakistan -  Southeast Asia and the Southwest
remains significant and disturbing, Pacific - could be affected directly by
but it is India’s growing role in the instability and conflict among the
wider Asia Pacific strategic system region’s major powers, but countries of
that will have more influence on the nearer region also face major
Australia’s security. challenges of their own.

3.19 In general, we believe the forces for 3.21 Overall, Southeast Asia remains
peace and stability in the Asia Pacific an area of great promise. Economic
region are strong, helped by the liberalisation and institutional
growth of regional multilateral reform provide hope that in many
structures and frameworks. The countries a return to high growth
likelihood is that over the coming rates can be sustained over the
decades the region will enjoy growing longer term. Political and social
economic integration and political evolution is strengthening the
cooperation. But there will inevitably robustness, legitimacy and resilience
be tensions between the major powers of the political systems in many


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 19


-----

countries. And despite the strains of
economic crisis and rapid
enlargement of its membership,
ASEAN continues to provide a focus
for the sense of shared interests and
common goals which has been so
important to Southeast Asia over
recent decades. There remain a
number of security issues, such as
conflicting claims in the South
China Sea, which will need to be
handled carefully if regional
security is to be maintained.

3.22 The countries of our immediate
neighbourhood - Indonesia, East
Timor, Papua New Guinea, and
the island states of the Southwest
Pacific - face large economic and
structural challenges.

**Indonesia**

3.23 Indonesia is at a critical point in
its history. The political evolution of
the past few years has seen a vibrant
democracy emerge with unexpected
speed. The successful conduct of
elections throughout the country in
June 1999 and the subsequent
installation of a democratic
government have been an historic
achievement for the people of
Indonesia. Since May 1998, they have
shown a determination to make
democracy work. This is a major cause
for optimism about Indonesia’s future.

3.24 But at the same time there are
challenges ahead. Three issues in
particular stand out. The first is the
challenge of political evolution


through democratisation and
decentralisation. The second is the
need for wide-ranging economic
reforms to put Indonesia back on the
path to sustainable growth. The third
is the resolution of religious, separatist
and other challenges to the cohesion
and stability of Indonesia.

3.25 The Government believes the
interests of Indonesia’s neighbours,
and of the Indonesian people
themselves, will best be served by a
country that is united, stable and
democratic; well-governed and
prosperous; cohesive and peaceful at
home; and responsible and
respected abroad.

3.26 But it is not for Australia, or other
outsiders, to tell Indonesia how these
goals can best be achieved. It is
important that we convey effectively
our understanding of the problems
that Indonesia faces, our respect for the
efforts they are making, and our deep
support for Indonesia’s national
cohesion and territorial integrity. In
particular, we should continue to
affirm the strength of the strategic
interests we share in the security of our
two countries.

3.27 Indonesia’s size, its huge
potential, and its traditional
leadership role in Southeast Asia
mean that adverse developments
there could affect the security of the
whole of our nearer region, and
beyond. While not regarding
developments of such seriousness as


20 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

3.29 There is a significant risk of
continued security challenges from
armed militias opposed to
independence. It is clearly important
that East Timor should be allowed to
develop in peace, without the threat of
intimidation or violence. The prospect
of continued insecurity is therefore
disturbing. That insecurity could
also pose problems for relations
between Indonesia and East Timor.
Australia will look to the Indonesian
Government to continue to work to
prevent militia activity in East
Timor from being supported from
West Timor.

3.30 East Timor, for its part, will need
to establish a national approach to
security and defence issues that serves


likely, Australia needs to recognise
the possibility that, were they to
occur, Australia’s security could
be affected.

**East Timor**

3.28 East Timor’s emergence as an
independent state is a new factor in our
security environment. The
willingness of Presidents Habibie and
Wahid to facilitate East Timor’s
transition, and to build a friendly
bilateral relationship between
Indonesia and East Timor, are most
welcome. But important security
issues remain, which may not be
resolved by the time the UNsponsored transition to independence
is completed, probably by the
end of 2001.


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 21


-----

its interests and
matches its resources.
This will be important
both for the security of
East Timor and for the stability of
our near neighbourhood. A positive
approach to relations with Indonesia
will play a major role in achieving
this stability.

**Papua New Guinea**

3.31 Twenty-five years after
independence from Australia, Papua
New Guinea has maintained many of
the key foundations of progress and
prosperity, including an active
democracy, free press, and an
independent judiciary. Its economic
potential is exemplified by abundant
mineral resources.

3.32 But as its leaders have
acknowledged, Papua New Guinea has
made little progress over the past few
years, and in important respects has
slipped backwards. Economic growth
has been slow, corruption has afflicted
public life, social progress in areas like
education and health has been limited,
and law and order have deteriorated.
Many of these problems can be traced
to weaknesses in its parliamentary,
governmental and administrative
arrangements. Prime Minister
Morauta has taken important steps to
address these issues. Nonetheless
Papua New Guinea faces a long and
uncertain road to prosperity and
stability. Without progress, important
problems that have significance for


security and stability
beyond its borders will
remain. One is the threat
to national cohesion
from secession movements, most
particularly in Bougainville. Another
is the potential for threats to the
security of legitimate government
from unlawful and violent challenge,
including by elements within the
armed forces.

3.33 More broadly, if Papua New
Guinea’s problems continue, its ability
to handle future challenges will be
hampered, and its viability as an
effective state could come into question.

**Southwest Pacific**

3.34 Australia, New Zealand and
Papua New Guinea share the
Southwest Pacific with 13 other
countries. They are all unique, with
different histories, cultures,
institutions, opportunities and
problems, but they have some things in
common. These include the inherent
problems of national development for
small and isolated nations, many with
an unsustainable relationship between
population and resources.

3.35 Current problems in Fiji and
the Solomon Islands provide
important evidence of deep-seated
ethnic and political problems that pose
threats to law and order, legitimate
government and even national
cohesion in some Pacific Island states.
In others, such as the small states of


22 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

Polynesia and
Micronesia, economic
and environmental
challenges are
uppermost.

3.36 Pacific Island
leaders are well aware
of many of these
problems, and are
taking steps to different
degrees to address
them. Even so, the
stability, cohesion and
viability of some of
these nations will
remain under
significant pressure
over the years ahead. Their resulting
vulnerability will continue to be a
strategic concern for Australia.

**An Attack on Australia?**

3.37 Australia today is a secure country,
thanks to our geography, good relations
with neighbours, a region where the
prospect of inter-state conflict is low, our
strong armed forces and a close alliance
with the United States. Of these positive
factors, only the benefits of our strategic
geography are immutable. But the
chances of an attack on Australia
remain low.

3.38 _A full-scale invasion of Australia,_
aimed at the seizure of our country and
the erasure or subjugation of our
national polity, is the least likely
military contingency Australia might
face. No country has either the intent


or the ability to
undertake such a
massive task. The
region’s major powers
could conceivably
develop the capabilities to undertake
an invasion of the
continent, but none
has anything like that
level of capability at
present, and it would
take many years of
major effort to
develop. They would
also need to establish
major bases near
Australia. Such developments are
not credible unless there were to be
major changes in the region’s security
environment.

3.39 A major attack on Australia, aimed
at seizing and holding Australian
territory, or inflicting major damage on
our population, infrastructure or
economy, remains only a remote
possibility. The capabilities to
undertake such an attack would be
easier to develop than those needed for
an invasion, especially if bases near
Australia were accessible. Such
developments are highly unlikely in our
current strategic environment, but our
defence planning cannot altogether
dismiss the possibility that they might
occur. Some countries have weapons of
mass destruction - nuclear, biological or
chemical weapons - which, delivered by
long-range ballistic missiles, could


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 23


-----

reach Australia. But it is very unlikely capability needs. In recent times the
that any of those countries would see Asia Pacific has seen the fastest growth
advantage in attacking Australia with of military capabilities in the world.
such weapons, not least because of our There have been four factors
alliance with the United States. underpinning that trend: economic

growth, development of managerial

3.40 Minor attacks on Australia, aimed at

and technical skills, changing

harassing or embarrassing Australia, or

strategic perceptions and priorities,

putting pressure on our policies, would

and access to technology. All of these

be possible with the sorts of capabilities

factors seem likely to

already in service or

endure over the next

being developed by

two decades. Our

many regional

Most people argued that currently

defence planning

countries. But such no country in the region either had

therefore needs to

attacks would the capability to attack Australia

take account of the

become credible only successfully or had shown any

likelihood that

if there were a major hostile intentions towards us.

capabilities in our

dispute. Even then, it Importantly though, few were
would be most prepared to discount totally the region will continue
unlikely that another possibility of another country using to show substantial
government would military force at some time to and sustained

threaten Australia or its interests. growth, in ways

miscalculate so badly
as to think that it **Report of the Community** which are important

**Consultation Team** to Australia’s

would gain by

military situation.

attempts at military
i n t i m i d a t i o n .
Nonetheless such miscalculations

**Air Combat Capabilities**

do occur, and sometimes with

3.42 Over the last 10 to 15 years, a

little warning.

number of regional defence forces have
begun to develop sophisticated air

**The Development of** combat capabilities. They have
**Military Capabilities** introduced new-generation fighters

3.41 A key factor in the evolution of with the weapons and sensor systems
Australia’s strategic environment is for Beyond Visual Range air combat the development of military which means the ability to detect and
capabilities in the Asia Pacific region. attack hostile aircraft from ranges of
This will influence the relationships up to 60 or 70 nautical miles. Until the
between countries in the region, and it mid-1990s Australia was one of very
is a critical issue to consider in few countries in the Asia Pacific region
deciding Australia’s own future with BVR capabilities. By 2005, at least


24 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

nine regional countries, apart from the
United States and Australia, will have
developed these capabilities, and some
will have built up substantial
numbers of BVR-capable fighter
aircraft.

3.43 In a parallel development, some
countries in the region are expected to
acquire Airborne Early Warning and
Control aircraft over the coming
decade. These aircraft provide a key
edge in air combat, because they allow
earlier detection of hostile forces, and
more effective deployment of aircraft
in action. They also contribute
critically to maritime and strike
operations. By 2010, some seven
regional countries apart from the
United States and Australia are
expected to have acquired various
levels of AEW&C capability.

3.44 These developments, and others
including air-to-air refuelling and
relatively low-cost stealth
modifications to make aircraft harder
to detect, will mean that
across the region - including
in some countries of
Southeast Asia - there are
likely to be significant
increases in air-combat
capability over the coming
decade.

**Naval Forces**

3.45 Naval forces will
become more capable over
the coming decade as a


result of a number of well established
trends. One is the proliferation of
high-capability anti-ship missiles
such as Harpoon, Exocet and their
Russian equivalents. Over the past
decade a number of regional countries
have acquired more sophisticated antiship missiles with longer range, better
guidance, and more capable systems
which allow several missiles to be
launched at a target simultaneously
from different directions. The number
of types of platform that can launch
these missiles has also increased to
include not just ships but submarines
and several types of aircraft. These
trends are expected to continue over
the current decade. For example we
expect to see supersonic anti-ship
missiles enter service in several
countries in the region over that time
and the capability to target ships at
long range will improve. Regional
navies will also deploy improved
defences against these missiles on

3.46 Another key development is the expansion of
submarine capability in the
region. Over the coming
decade it is likely that the
capabilities of submarines
being operated by regional
navies will improve significantly, and a number of
navies will acquire submarines for the first time.
Anti-submarine warfare capabilites will also improve.


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 25


-----

**Strike Forces**

3.47 Strike capabilities will continue to
improve in the region with the
introduction of more capable aircraft,
supported by air-to-air refuelling in
some cases, and able to be fitted with
longer range stand-off weapons. Ships
and submarines in some regional navies
may also develop enhanced strike
capabilities, as they acquire long-range
cruise missiles and shorter range standoff weapons. Such weapons will carry
increasingly sophisticated guidance
systems and warheads and will be
supported by more advanced
reconnaissance and targeting systems.

3.48 Defences against strike will also
improve, with better air combat capabilities and more advanced surface-to-air
missiles coming into service in the region.

**Land Forces**

3.49 Most land forces throughout the
region already have a numerical
advantage in troop numbers over
Australia’s. Land forces in the region will
become more sophisticated, with the
wider introduction of important
technologies such as night-vision
equipment, unmanned aerial vehicles
for reconnaissance and improved
communications. Firepower and
mobility will be enhanced in many
armies by acquisition of more
helicopters, including reconnaissance
and fire-support helicopters, and new
types of armoured vehicles.

3.50 At lower levels of technology, but
still very important in many types of


operation, we expect to see a wide
range of non-state actors, including
criminals and insurgents, continuing
to gain access to modern, sophisticated
weaponry. The proliferation of light
guided weapons such as shoulderfired anti-aircraft missiles is likely
to continue.

**Information Capabilities**

3.51 Developments in information
technology, and the rapid changes
they are bringing to the nature of
warfare, will enhance the operational
effectiveness of armed forces over the
coming decade. Intelligence,
surveillance, communications,
command and control capabilities,
and the whole spectrum of
information warfare, will expand
significantly. To take one example, the
increased availability of high-quality
satellite imagery from commercial
sources will significantly enhance the
information-gathering capabilities of
many countries.

**Weapons of Mass Destruction**

3.52 Weapons of mass destruction
remain a concern for the region’s
strategic stability. Nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons, and their chief
means of delivery - ballistic missiles are all aspects of weapons of mass
destruction over which we need to
remain vigilant. The trend towards
proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction globally will require our
continued focus.


26 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

## Section Two | Strategy

THE GOVERNMENT’S DEFENCE POLICY 27


-----

28 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

# 4 – Australia’s Strategic Interests and Objectives

4.1 This Chapter explains the Government’s decisions
about Australia’s broad strategic policy: our strategic
interests, objectives and priorities.

4.2 At its most basic, Australia’s strategic policy aims
to prevent or defeat any armed attack on Australia. This
is the bedrock of our security, and the most
fundamental responsibility of government. But there
is more we can do to prevent attack on our territory than
building armed forces, and our armed forces need to be
able to do more than simply defend our coastline. We
have strategic interests and objectives at the global and
regional levels. Australia is an outward looking country.
We are engaged in many different ways - economic,
cultural and personal - with the region around us and
the world beyond. We are a major trading nation, with
our prosperity dependent on our engagement with
other countries.

4.3 Australia therefore cannot be secure in an insecure
region, and as a middle-size power, there is much we
can and should do to help to keep our region secure,
and support global stability. Working with others we
can do a lot more than we can do by ourselves.

4.4 At the same time we must be realistic about the
scope of our power and influence and the limits to our
resources. We need to allocate our effort carefully. To
do that we need to define and prioritise our strategic
interests and objectives. We do that in the following
paragraphs, listing our interests and objectives in
priority order.

4.5 We have given highest priority to the interests and
objectives closest to Australia. In some circumstances a
major crisis far from Australia may be more important

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 29


-----

to our future other countries’
security than a Most people believe that the first and sovereignty and
minor problem foremost task for the ADF is the territorial integrity.
close at hand. But in defence of Australia.
general, the closer a

An integral part of this belief is an **Ensure the**

crisis or problem to

expectation that the ADF, alone or **Defence of**

Australia, the more

with coalition partners, should be **Australia and**

important it would

able to undertake significant **its Direct**

probably be to our
security and the operations within the region,particularly in our nearer region. **Approaches**
more likely we 4.7 Australia’s most

**Report of the Community**

would be able to important long-term

**Consultation Team: Key findings**

help to do strategic objective is
something about it. to be able to defend

our territory from

4.6 The existence of strategic interests

direct military attack. We therefore

in a situation does not determine how have an overriding strategic interest in
Australia would respond in the event being able to protect our direct
of a crisis which challenged those maritime approaches from intrusion
interests. Australia would always have by hostile forces. As outlined in
a range of options, and the Chapter Three, a major attack on
government of the day would need to Australia is not at all likely in current
determine how best to respond. In circumstances, and even minor attacks
particular, careful consideration are improbable. But we do not rule out
would always need to be given before the possibility, especially over the
the serious step of deploying forces longer term, that circumstances might
was taken. That consideration would change in ways that make the prospect
need to balance the Australian interest less unlikely. Even if the risk of an
at stake with the human, financial, attack on Australia is low, the
political and diplomatic, and wider consequences would be so serious that
costs of committing military forces. it must be addressed.
Nevertheless, our defence planning
recognises that the Government may
decide that such a commitment could **Foster the Security of**
be warranted in some circumstances. **our Immediate**
It is of course intrinsic to Australia’s **Neighbourhood**
approach to regional affairs that such 4.8 Our second strategic objective is to
commitments would be undertaken help foster the stability, integrity and
in collaboration with regional friends cohesion of our immediate
and allies, and with full respect for neighbourhood, which we share with


30 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

**Support Strategic**
**Stability in the Wider**
**Asia Pacific Region**

4.10 Our fourth strategic objective is to
contribute in appropriate ways to
maintaining strategic stability in the
Asia Pacific region as a whole, and to
help contribute to building a stronger
sense of shared strategic interests.
Australia has a direct interest in the
stability of the Asia Pacific region as a
whole, and especially in the relations
between the major powers. We would
want to avoid the
emergence in the
Asia Pacific region
of a security
e n v i r o n m e n t
dominated by any
powers whose
strategic interests
might be inimical
to Australia’s. We
would also want to avoid destabilising
strategic competition between the
region’s major powers, and preserve a
security environment in which the
region’s economic development can
proceed unhindered by threats to trade.

**Support Global Security**

4.11 Our fifth strategic objective is to
contribute to the efforts of the
international community, especially
the United Nations, to uphold global
security. The success of the UN in
nurturing the principle that armed
aggression by one state against another


Indonesia, New Zealand, Papua New
Guinea, East Timor and the island
countries of the Southwest Pacific. We
would be concerned about major
internal challenges that threatened the
stability and cohesion of any of these
countries. We would also be concerned
about any threat of outside aggression
against them. We have a key interest in
helping to prevent the positioning in
neighbouring states of foreign forces
that might be used to attack Australia.

**Promote**
**Stability**
**and**
**Cooperation**
**in Southeast**
**Asia**

4.9 Our third
strategic objective is
to work with others
in Southeast Asia to
preserve the stability and cooperation
which has been such a notable
achievement over the past few decades.
Our key strategic interest is to maintain
a resilient regional community that can
cooperate to prevent the intrusion of
potentially hostile external powers and
resolve peacefully any problems that
may arise between countries in the
region. We would be concerned about
any major external threat to the
territorial integrity of the nations in our
nearer region, especially in maritime
Southeast Asia, whether that threat
came from outside or inside
the region.


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 31


-----

is not to be tolerated, and the
effectiveness of its mechanisms in
marshalling an international response
when the principle is flouted, are
important Australian strategic interests.
That is a key reason why Australia is
among the UN’s most consistent
supporters. We will also continue to
support the United States in the major
role it plays in maintaining and
strengthening the global security order.

4.12 Australia also has an interest
in preventing the spread of weapons


of mass destruction (WMD). This
interest has both a humanitarian
and a strategic aspect. We have an
interest in helping to ensure that noone should experience the horrors of
nuclear, chemical or biological
warfare. We have a strategic interest
in minimising the risk that
WMD might one day be used or
threatened against us. Effective
global non-proliferation regimes are
vital to limit the spread of WMD in
our region.


32 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

## 5 – Australia’s International Strategic Relationships

5.1 This Chapter explains how Australia works with
other countries to achieve our strategic objectives. That
cooperative work is possible because Australia’s
strategic interests are compatible with the interests of
so many other regional countries. This is important to
Australia’s security, because we do not have the power
or reach to protect many of our interests on our own.

5.2 We work through the growing range of multilateral
security forums and arrangements in our region, as well
as a network of bilateral defence and security
relationships, including Australia’s most important
single strategic relationship - our alliance with the
United States.

5.3 This work is integral to Australia’s foreign policy, which
places the highest priority on supporting our strategic
interests. Australia has a highly professional and capable
diplomatic service, which works continually in Australia,
at missions abroad and in international organisations to
help build the kind of security environment we want and
to maximise Australia’s influence on events to Australia’s
advantage. Assistance provided to other countries under
our aid program is also important in advancing
Australian interests.

5.4 Australia’s strategic objectives are also supported by
the efforts of Australians outside Government.
Australian companies build important economic
linkages, our schools and universities help establish
enduring bonds of understanding and affection
through the education they provide to individuals all
through the region, and some Non-Governmental
Organisations contribute by helping to solve major
problems of human welfare that could erode
regional stability.

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 33


-----

5.5 Our armed forces complement and
support the frontline work of our
diplomats. Australia’s influence on
security issues in our region and
beyond is, to a significant degree,
dependent on our willingness and
ability to commit forces to operations
when necessary. The quality and
capability of the ADF is therefore an
essential underpinning to the day to
day diplomacy that shapes our
strategic environment.

**The US**
**Alliance**

5.6 In 2001,
A u s t r al i a ’s
f o r m a l
alliance with
the United
States will
reach 50 years
of age with
the anniversary of the signing of the
ANZUS Treaty in September 1951. Our
strategic links of course go back
further than that, to 1941 and the start
of the Pacific War. But for the past 50
years ANZUS has given the
relationship shape, depth and weight.
The Treaty remains today the
foundation of a relationship that is one
of our great national assets.

5.7 Since the end of the Cold War the
United States and its allies have
refashioned and reaffirmed their
alliances to meet contemporary needs.
As the Asia Pacific region has emerged


as a focus of global security in the
coming decades, so the US-Australia
alliance is as important to both parties
today as it has ever been.

5.8 The renewed vigour of the USAustralia alliance is founded on
enduring shared values, interests and
outlook, as well as common sacrifices
that extend back almost a century. It
also reflects our awareness of the
challenges that we face in the region
over the
coming years
and the
benefits we
stand to
gain by cooperation. For
A u s t r a l i a,
continued US
engagement
will support
our defence
capabilities and play a critical role in
maintaining strategic stability in the
region as a whole. For the United States,
Australia is an important ally, a key
partner in regional security efforts and
a significant potential contributor to
coalitions.

5.9 The US-Australia alliance works at
three closely connected levels. First,
there is a vast array of bilateral
cooperation in the practical business
of defence and security. Training and
exercising opportunities allow our
defence personnel to stay equal to the
best. New arrangements established


34 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

this year give Australia even better
access to US military technology,
including in highly critical and
sensitive areas that could give us a vital
edge in combat. The kind of ADF that
we need is not achievable without the
technology access provided by the US
alliance. Intelligence cooperation and
sharing play a central role in
enhancing our understanding of the
world around us.


network of Asia Pacific bilateral
alliances that also includes Japan,
Korea, Thailand and the Philippines, as
well as close defence relationships with
other important regional powers such
as Singapore. This network of alliances
and close strategic relationships is at
the heart of the US strategic posture in
Asia, and is thus central to regional
stability. This serves key Australian
interests and objectives.


5.12 Our strong

5.10 The Government

support for US

expects that these

engagement in the

forms of practical There is strong support for the US
cooperation will alliance and the majority view is region complements
continue to grow that we should strive for as much and reinforces our
over coming years. self-reliance as possible within the commitment to an

context of the alliance. inclusive and

Technology offers
new opportunities to **Report of the Community** c o o p e r a t i v e
work together, and to **Consultation Team: Key finding** approach to regional

security. Our

deepen cooperation

participation in the

in many areas. It also

network of alliances is about regional

provides new imperatives to achieve

security. It is not about constraining

closer integration and interoperability

other countries from pursuing their

of capabilities and systems. In an era

legitimate objectives and interests.

of high technology warfare, effective
alliances will need systems that can

5.13 Third, the US-Australia alliance

operate at a level of detail in real time.

will continue to be founded on our

Those systems will need to be built in

mutual undertakings to support each

peacetime if they are to be of value in

other in time of need. These

a crisis.

undertakings are stated clearly in the
ANZUS Treaty, which does not commit

5.11 Second, our alliance works at the

either of us in advance to specific types

regional level. One of the main benefits

of action, but which does provide clear

we seek from the alliance is the

expectations of support.

support it gives to sustained US
engagement in the Asia Pacific region. 5.14 The Government views these
The alliance is important to the United undertakings very seriously. We
States as one of the key elements of its believe that, if Australia were attacked,

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 35


-----

the United States would provide
substantial help, including with armed
force. We would seek and welcome
such help. But we will not depend on
it to the extent of assuming that US
combat forces would be provided to
make up for any deficiencies in our
capabilities to defend our territory. A
healthy alliance should not be a
relationship of dependency, but of
mutual help. In the long run,
dependency would weaken the
alliance, both in the eyes of Australians
and in the eyes of Americans. For that
reason, self-reliance will remain an
inherent part of our alliance policy.

5.15 There is one important exception
to this principle of self-reliance.
Australia relies on the extended
deterrence provided by US nuclear
forces to deter the remote possibility of
any nuclear attack on Australia.

5.16 Australia’s undertakings in the
ANZUS Treaty to support the United
States are as important as US
undertakings to support Australia.
Those undertakings reflect Australia’s
own strong interests in sustaining a
strong US strategic presence in the Asia
Pacific region.

5.17 Over the next decade and beyond,
our alliance with the United States will
help us to pursue all of the strategic
objectives that we set out in the
preceding part of this White Paper. It
is the breadth of benefit we receive
from the alliance, as well as its depth,
which makes it such an important


element of our overall strategic policy.
But we should not take the health of
our alliance for granted. We will need
to work hard with the United States to
ensure its continuing viability and
relevance in a period of change.

5.18 Australia’s alliance with the
United States works as a two-way
relationship. We are a dynamic,
independent-thinking and, on
occasion, constructively critical
partner of the United States. The
alliance provides excellent access to
and significant influence on US
thinking and policy on the Asia Pacific,
and we provide a distinctly regional
perspective in our contribution. At
times, of course, the United States and
Australia will differ in our approaches
to issues, or on the priority we give
them. When that happens, it is
important that Australia has an ability
to pursue our interests independently.

**Relationships in the**
**Wider Asia Pacific**
**Region**

5.19 Australia pursues its objective of
supporting strategic stability in the
wider Asia Pacific region by
developing bilateral strategic
dialogues with countries in the region,
and contributing to the development
of multilateral security forums
and mechanisms.

5.20 Over the past few years Australia
has made a major effort to establish
regular exchanges with regional


36 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

countries on strategic issues. These
have covered the regional security
situation, the management of sources
of tension and ways to enhance shared
strategic interests.

5.21 These discussions have broken
new ground in the evolution of
Australia’s strategic policy, as we have
sought to project our views and
perspectives more directly to regional
countries. We have recognised in
particular that more fluid and
complex strategic relationships are
evolving among the major powers, and
that Australia’s interests could be
deeply engaged in them. The
Government therefore believes it is
important that Australia take a longterm approach to building up our
access to those countries’ strategic
thinking, and our influence in their
decision making.

5.22 Our aims are realistic. We seek first
simply to ensure that countries in the
region understand Australia’s
approaches to key issues, and that we
understand theirs. We also hope to be
able to explore ways to narrow any
differences and build on common
perceptions. Over the
longer term we hope
there will be
opportunities to
deepen our discussions
to the point that we can
establish clear
common agendas and
pursue common goals.


5.23 Our strategic dialogue with Japan
is well developed and longstanding. As
a country of great power and potential,
it is an important partner. Over the past
50 years, Australia and Japan have
built a close and multifaceted bilateral
relationship, based not only on a major
trading relationship, but also on
people-to-people linkages, and an
increasing sense of shared values,
interests and objectives.

5.24 We share with Japan a
commitment to a strong and enduring
US role in regional security and a
willingness through our respective
alliances to work hard to support US
engagement. We also share a wide
range of other strategic interests and
objectives, including freedom and
security of navigation and trade, and
strong support for the UN’s role in
global security. We have already worked
together on key security issues
including non-proliferation, Cambodia
and East Timor - where Japan provided
INTERFET with generous help.

5.25 China, as the country with the
fastest growing security influence in
the region, is an increasingly
important strategic
interlocutor for
Australia. The
Government places a
high priority on
working with China to
deepen and develop
our dialogue on
strategic issues.


be
to

our


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 37


-----

5.26 All countries in the region have
an interest in finding approaches
to regional security issues which
serve shared interests in a stable
and cooperative international
environment. Nonetheless, some hard
issues will need to be addressed
frankly, such as different perceptions
of the value and importance of the US
role in the region. Our strategic
dialogue with China provides an
opportunity to contribute to that
process.

5.27 In 1998 we established strategic
dialogue with Russia. Russia has
influence and expertise in many Asian
security issues, especially in Northeast
Asia. We have therefore welcomed the
opportunity to compare notes on a
range of topics and hope to deepen
our dialogue.

5.28 India is increasingly important to
the wider regional strategic balance.
This has not only increased Australia’s
interest in building contact on security
issues with India; it has also made India
more interested in Australia’s
distinctive approach and outlook on
regional security affairs. The
Government hopes that early
progress can be made in setting up the
kind of dialogue that will allow us to
explore and better understand one
another’s perspectives.

5.29 Finally, we are seeking to
strengthen our strategic relationship


with South Korea. It seems likely that
South Korea will continue to become a
more important and influential element
of the Northeast Asian security
community, especially if the current
promise of improved relations with the
North bears fruit. Whatever happens,
the Korean Peninsula will continue to
be a key focus for Northeast Asian
security concerns for many years and
thus important to the security of the
whole region. We are therefore keen to
develop our strategic dialogue with
South Korea, both to improve our
understanding of events on the
Peninsula itself, and to benefit from
Korean perspectives on wider regional
security issues. We also welcome South
Korea’s increased engagement in
regional affairs, as reflected for example
in its important support for INTERFET
and UNTAET.

5.30 In all of these relationships the key
focus has been, and is expected to continue
to be, strategic dialogue. But in many of
them, to different degrees, we will also seek
to build a greater sense of transparency
and familiarity by undertaking programs
of contact between our armed forces and
defence organisations. Activities such
as ship visits and naval passage
exercises, staff-college and officer-cadet
exchanges and visits, and technical
exchanges on issues of mutual interest,
will provide valuable opportunities for
further deepening our strategic
relationships with these key countries.


38 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

**Relationships in**
**Southeast Asia**

5.31 Australia’s aim is to promote our
strategic objectives in Southeast Asia
by helping to shape and support a
network of multilateral and bilateral
relationships that enables countries to
work together to manage any
differences and which could, if
necessary, help in responding to
challenges to shared interests.

5.32 Our policy has been to emphasise
the close alignment of our strategic
interests with those of our Southeast
Asian neighbours, to encourage
regional cooperation among the
Southeast Asian states, and to help
where we can in the development of
appropriate regional military
capabilities.

5.33 In pursuing
these policies over
the past 30 to 40
years, Australia has
built up strong
bilateral defence
relationships with
almost every
country in
Southeast Asia.
Overall there is
probably no
country, either
within the region or
outside it, that has
greater range and
depth of defence
contact with the


countries of Southeast Asia than
Australia. This effort is underpinned
by a substantial and sustained pattern
of deployments by all kinds of ADF
units to Southeast Asia. This provides
helpful benchmarks for the pace of
activity we should aim to sustain if we
are to continue to achieve our strategic
objectives in Southeast Asia.

5.34 Each of our defence relationships
in Southeast Asia is unique, with its
own history, context, approaches and
goals. In each of them, in different ways
and to different degrees, we work with
our partners by training together,
undertaking combined exercises,
technical cooperation, and the
exchange of staff college students and
other personnel. In addition we aim to
build substantive
dialogue on key
strategic issues.

5.35 The economic
crisis of the late
1990s slowed the
momentum of
development in a
number of our defence
relationships as
resource constraints
limited some types of
activity. But it also
stimulated significant
management reform
in many defence
organisations and
we have been able to
contribute usefully


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 39


-----

to this process by drawing on our own
reform experience. We expect the pace
of development to pick up again as
defence budgets return to sustained
growth.

5.36 Australia’s close defence
relationship with Singapore is
characterised by shared strategic
perceptions, and includes extensive
exercises and training by the Singapore
Armed Forces in Australia. As
Singapore’s forces are the most capable
in Southeast Asia, exercising with
them provides important benefits to
the ADF.

5.37 Australia and Malaysia have a long
history of military cooperation,
demonstrated over the years by
Australia’s support for the territorial
integrity of Malaysia in earlier crises
and through the ongoing ADF
presence at Butterworth. A wide range
of practical bilateral cooperation
underlines the durability of our shared
interests in regional security.

5.38 Australia’s membership of the
Five Power Defence Arrangements
(FPDA) commits Australia, along with
New Zealand and the United
Kingdom, to assist Malaysia and
Singapore against external aggression.
Membership of the FPDA serves
enduring Australian interests in the
security of maritime Southeast Asia,
and complements our bilateral
relationships in the region. The FPDA
is changing in response to increasing
complexity in the regional environment


and to meet the demands of modern
warfare. The FPDA Ministers’ Meeting
in 2000 reaffirmed the basic purpose of
the Arrangements, and recognised
their likely evolution from mainly air
defence to a combined and joint
operational focus.

5.39 Australia and the Philippines also
have a long-standing defence
relationship. The Philippines’ support
for regional security was recently
demonstrated through its
commitment to INTERFET and
UNTAET. Australia is seeking to build
on the relationship by enhancing
dialogue and extending cooperation in
defence reform and modernisation.

5.40 Thailand’s provision of important
support and leadership in East Timor
in 1999 and 2000 demonstrated its
willingness to act cooperatively with
Australia and others in support of
regional security. Australia is seeking
to consolidate and broaden the defence
relationship and deepen our strategic
dialogue with Thailand through an
expanding program of cooperative
activities including maritime
surveillance cooperation, further
cooperation on financial and
management reform, and science and
technological cooperation.

5.41 Our strategic relationship with
Vietnam is in its early stages. We have
conducted a regular dialogue on
regional security issues since 1998 and
are seeking to establish a broad-based


40 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

strategic relationship that would diplomacy mechanisms. This might
include regular visits and training include contributing to the
exchange programs. development of regional norms of

conduct aimed at avoiding conflict and

5.42 Australia is also maintaining and

settling disputes without resort to the

developing modest defence

threat or use of force.

relationships with other countries in
Southeast Asia, notably Cambodia
and Brunei. **Our Nearest Neighbours**

**Indonesia**

5.43 In addition to our bilateral relation
5.44 Our biggest and most important

ships with Northeast and Southeast

near neighbour is

Asian countries,

Indonesia. Over the

Australia has also

past 30 years, both

been an active Quite a number of people urged

Australia and

supporter of the Australia to show regional
ASEAN Regional leadership through activities such Indonesia have

as the development of collective worked hard to

Forum (ARF). The

security arrangements in the Asia- establish and nurture

ARF is the key forum

Pacific region. a close defence

for multilateral

relationship based on

dialogue on security ... there was notable support for a

a strong sense of

issues in the Asia sound relationship with Indonesia.

shared strategic

Pacific region. For Indonesia’s moves towards

interests. We have

Australia, the Forum democracy were raised as

something Australia should seek made significant

c o m p l e m e n t s

to support, through increased progress despite

bilateral security

people-to-people links, trade and differences in

arrangements in

military ties. approach to some

p r o m o t i n g

**Report of the Community** issues - for example

transparency and

**Consultation Team** the role of the

contributing to

military in society.

confidence and trust
among regional 5.45 Indonesia’s
countries. Participation in the Forum democratic transition, and its decision
raises the profile of Australia in the to allow East Timor a referendum on
region and enables us to contribute to its future, have in many ways removed
shaping the regional security some of the earlier constraints on the
environment. It would be in Australia’s development of a deeper strategic
interests to see the ARF play a greater relationship. But the tumultuous
role in regional security through its events following the East Timor ballot
development and use of preventive last year, culminating in the


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 41


-----

deployment of INTERFET, caused
understandable tensions between
Australia and Indonesia, which
resulted in the suspension of most
areas of defence contact.

5.46 Lingering misunderstandings in
Indonesia about Australia’s recent role
in East Timor have so far made it hard
to build on the opportunities offered by
Indonesia’s democratising achievements to establish the foundations of a
new defence relationship. But
Australia’s fundamental interests and
objectives in having a good defence
relationship with Indonesia remain as
important as ever. The Government is
committed to working with the
Indonesian Government to establish
over time a new defence relationship
that will serve our enduring shared
strategic interests.

**New Zealand**

5.47 Like other aspects of the transTasman connection, our defence
relationship with New Zealand shows
the imprint both of our strong
similarities and of the sometimes
surprising differences between us.

5.48 The similarities start with our
strategic interests, which are closely
aligned. We both assume that as a
matter of course we would come to
each other’s help in time of trouble.
That assumption is given formal
expression in the undertakings of
the ANZUS Treaty, which remains in


force between Australia and New
Zealand, notwithstanding the
suspension of its United States-New
Zealand element.

5.49 But New Zealand’s strategic
perceptions and outlook differ from
Australia’s in significant ways.
New Zealand’s view that its strategic
circumstances may not require the
maintenance of capable air and
naval forces differs from Australia’s
view of our own needs. We would
regret any decision by New Zealand
not to maintain at least some capable
air and naval combat capabilities.
Such forces would allow a more
significant contribution to be made
to protecting our shared strategic
interests, especially in view of the
essentially maritime nature of our
strategic environment.

5.50 On the other hand the high quality
of New Zealand’s forces is beyond
question. They made an outstanding
contribution to INTERFET, and
Australia is grateful for the speed and
generosity with which they were
committed and supported. We
appreciate New Zealand’s recent
decisions to ensure that its land forces
will be equipped adequately for a range
of more likely contingencies, and we
know that the men and women of the
New Zealand Defence Force will
continue to constitute a highly
professional force. New Zealand will
remain a very valued defence partner
for Australia.


42 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

**Papua New Guinea** recently, endemic funding and

5.51 As our closest neighbour and a administrative problems, and
country with which we have deep concern over the political role of the
historical associations, Papua New PNGDF, have confirmed that it is in
Guinea will always be an important need of reform.
factor in Australia’s strategic

5.53 The Morauta Government has

thinking. Australia’s enduring

stated a clear commitment to pursue

strategic interests in the security and

comprehensive reform of the PNGDF

stability of Papua New Guinea are

and it has signalled that it will

evident from our history, and they

welcome external assistance in the

are embodied in the undertakings

reform process. Australia will

contained in the PNG-Australia Joint

continue to offer substantial support

Declaration of Principles signed in

to PNG defence reform. Australian

1987. This reflects the expectation that

assistance to help

Australia would be

stabilise the PNGDF

prepared to commit

in the short-term

forces to resist A number of people suggested
external aggression Australia needed to pay more will be linked to
against Papua New attention to the South Pacific, long-term reform of

especially given recent the force. We share

Guinea. Over the 25

developments. the Morauta

years since
i n d e p e n d e n c e, **Report of the Community** g o v e r n m e n t ’ s

**Consultation Team** assessment that a

Australia has

key aspect of

maintained a

defence reform will

substantial defence

be restructuring the PNGDF so that it

relationship with Papua New Guinea

can perform effectively within the

and has provided significant levels

necessarily limited resources available

of support to the Papua New Guinea

to it. Recent events elsewhere in the

Defence Force (PNGDF). We want to

South Pacific have underlined the

remain Papua New Guinea’s primary

importance of a PNGDF that is loyal

defence partner and to maintain a
defence relationship based on and responsive to political control.
mutual benefit and reciprocity.


**Southwest Pacific**

5.54 In the Southwest Pacific, as in
Papua New Guinea, our aim is to
maintain our position as the key
strategic partner. Australian interests


5.52 Events over the last decade,
including the Bougainville conflict
and the Sandline affair, have placed
enormous pressure on the unity and
effectiveness of the PNGDF. More


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 43


-----

**East Timor**

5.57 Within a short time East Timor
will pass from UN authority to full
independence. Australia will seek to
develop an effective defence
relationship with East Timor, as we
have with all of our near neighbours.
East Timor faces formidable security
challenges. Our aim will be to provide,
with others, an appropriate level of
help and support for East Timor as it
builds the capabilities and national
institutions that it will need to ensure
its security and thereby contribute to
the security of its neighbourhood.

**Strategic Relationships**
**Beyond the**
**Asia Pacific Region**

5.58 Australia values a number of
defence and strategic relationships
with countries outside the Asia Pacific
region. With the United Kingdom we
have important traditional and
practical links, with shared strategic
perceptions and values, and important
day to day activities involving highly
valued intelligence, training
and technological cooperation. We have a similar
relationship with Canada and
benefit from the significant
common perspectives which flow
from our similarity in size.

5.59 We have valued defence
relations with a number of
European countries, including
Germany, Italy and France, with


in a stable and secure Southwest Pacific
are matched by significant
responsibilities as leader and regional
power. We would be very likely to
provide substantial support in the
unlikely event that any country in the
Southwest Pacific faced substantial
external aggression.

5.55 Recent developments in the Pacific
underscore the changing dynamics of
the region and the need for continued,
focused engagement. Instability in
Fiji and the Solomon Islands has
brought a downscaling of our
activities in those countries. But we
will retain Defence Attaches and
appropriate, cooperative programs.

5.56 The Pacific Patrol Boat Project,
which provides assistance for patrol
and protection of the large maritime
zones of Pacific Islands, is at the core
of our Defence Cooperation Program in
the South Pacific. The Pacific Patrol
Boat Project will continue, with the
Government having recently
announced the decision to extend it for
a further 15 years. Through the Pacific
Patrol Boat project and other programs,
some 70 ADF advisers are
posted to Pacific island
states, and about 400
members of Pacific security
forces receive military, trade,
technical, and professional
training in Australia each year.
We are also active in the
Southwest Pacific in providing
help in appropriate ways to their
police forces.


44 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

involvement by them in Australia’s
defence industry and access to their
defence technology. Finally, the
nature of these relations was
forcefully demonstrated by their
support to INTERFET. This was a
timely reminder that we can benefit
in direct and specific ways from
defence relations with countries far
from our shores.


all of whom we share global
perceptions and some challenges in
capability development. Our links
with France are reinforced by our
common interest in developments in
the Southwest Pacific, where France
remains an important power.

5.60 With all of these countries
we have developed valuable defence
industry relations. We welcome


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 45


-----

# 6 – Australia’s Military Strategy

6.1 This Chapter explains the tasks of Australia’s armed
forces in achieving our strategic objectives, the
consequent priorities for the development of our
military capabilities and the principles underpinning
our force-development priorities.

**Strategic Tasks for the ADF**

**Defending Australia**

6.2 The Government has reaffirmed that the primary
priority for the ADF is to maintain the capability to
defend Australian territory from any credible attack,
without relying on help from the combat forces of any
other country. An attack on Australia would be the most
serious and demanding military contingency we could
face. We would want a range of options to respond
effectively. This provides a clear basis for our defence
planning, which is clearly understood both by
Australians and our neighbours. And we are confident
that forces built primarily to defend Australia will be
able to undertake a range of operations to promote our
wider strategic objectives.

6.3 The Government’s approach to this task is shaped
by the following principles.

**Self-Reliance**

6.4 Our armed forces need to be able to defend Australia
without relying on the combat forces of other countries.
This principle of self-reliance reflects, fundamentally,
our sense of ourselves as a nation. As we made clear in
discussing our US alliance in Chapter Five, the
Government’s commitment to self-reliance does not
reflect any lack of confidence in our allies. Nor does it
suggest that we would not seek and expect help from

46 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

our allies and
friends in
time of need.
It simply
means that
we should not
rely on others
having either
the capacity
or the willingness to
defend our
c o u n t r y,
especially if
we have not taken the effort to provide
effectively for our own defence.

6.5 Moreover, self-reliance does
not preclude us from planning on a
significant degree of support in
non-combat areas including
intelligence and surveillance, resupply and logistics.

**A Maritime Strategy**

6.6 The key to defending Australia is
to control the air and sea approaches
to our continent, so as to deny them to
hostile ships and aircraft, and provide
maximum freedom of action for our
forces. That means we need a
fundamentally maritime strategy. Our
strategic geography, our relatively
small population and our comparative
advantage in a range of technologies
all dictate that our defence should
focus on our air and sea approaches.

6.7 The nature of our air and sea
approaches is such that a maritime
strategy includes a vital and central


role for land
forces. They
would assist
air and naval
forces to
control those
approaches
and would be
needed to
defeat any
i n c u rs i o n s
onto our
territory. A
key role
would be to ensure the security of the
bases from which our air and naval
forces operate. They provide the
foundations for a maritime defence
posture. The scale of our land forces
also dictates the strength of forces
needed for any hostile lodgment in our
approaches or on Australian soil. The
larger those forces need to be, the more
support they would need - and the
more vulnerable they would be to our
air and naval forces.

**Proactive Operations**

6.8 Australia’s strategic posture is
defensive in the most fundamental
sense. We would not initiate the threat
or the use of force, and our objectives
in conflict would be to terminate
hostile operations against us as quickly
as possible, and to our maximum
benefit, at minimum cost in lives and
resources. But that does not mean that
our approach would be operationally
defensive. On the contrary, if attacked,
Australia would take a highly


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 47


-----

proactive approach help evacuate
in order to secure a Many people are worried that the Australians and
rapid and favourable capabilities of all three Services others from regional
end to hostilities. have been cut to the point where troublespots. We

they are inadequate for effective and should be prepared

6.9 We would be

sustained deployment in the region. to be the largest force

concerned to ensure

**Report of the Community** contributor to such

that hostilities were

**Consultation Team: Key finding** operations. Our

concluded swiftly

planning needs to

and decisively,

acknowledge that we

without harming

could be called upon to undertake

unnecessarily the prospects for future

several operations simultaneously, as

relations with the adversary. However,

we are at present in East Timor,

we would aim to minimise Australian

Bougainville and the Solomon Islands.

casualties and damage. We would
therefore seek to attack hostile forces **Resisting Aggression**
as far from our shores as possible,

6.11 In the highly unlikely event of

including in their home bases, forward

unprovoked armed aggression against

operating bases and in transit. We

any of our immediate neighbours,

would aim to seize the initiative and

Australia would want to be in a

dictate the pace, location and intensity

position, if asked and if we concluded

of operations.

that the scale of our interests and the
seriousness of the situation warranted

**Contributing to the Security** such action, to help our neighbours
**of our Immediate** defend themselves.
**Neighbourhood**

6.10 Our second priority is to have 6.12 The capability to provide such
defence forces able to make a major help would be drawn from the forces
contribution to the security of our we have developed for the defence of
immediate neighbourhood. Australia Australia. Fortunately the strategic
needs to be able to work with our geography of our neighbourhood
neighbours to respond in the very makes this feasible. All of our
unlikely event of armed aggression immediate neighbours are island and
against them. We also need to be able archipelagic states. Their defences
to join UN-sanctioned international against external aggression would operations to help them manage other like Australia’s - rely heavily on the
challenges to their stability. This might ability to control their air and sea
require the ADF to contribute to approaches and prevent hostile forces
regional peacekeeping and from approaching their shores. The air
humanitarian relief operations and and naval capabilities we develop for


48 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

the defence of Australia would be able
to make a valuable contribution to this
task. Land forces would also be
important for securing bases, and
providing specific contributions such
as special forces.

6.13 We would provide such support
only at the request of a neighbouring
government, and would expect to be
able to operate from bases in its
territory. We would also expect that
other regional countries would provide
support, most probably in the form of
a coalition operating
under a UN or
i n t e r n a t i o n a l
mandate.

**L o w e r - L e v e l**
**Operations**

6.14 Lower-level
operations, such as
evacuations, disaster
relief and peacekeeping operations
of different sorts, are
the most likely types
of operation that we
might need to
undertake in our immediate
neighbourhood. The ADF needs to be
prepared and equipped to undertake
such operations should it be required
to do so.

6.15 In general, the capabilities we
develop in the ADF for defending
Australia provide forces appropriate
for these tasks. However, the
experiences of East Timor,


Bougainville, Cambodia and elsewhere
have taught us important lessons
about the use of forces in lower level
contingencies. Such operations have
specific characteristics that place
strong demands on some elements of
the ADF, especially our land forces,
logistics capacity and deployment
capabilities. Key lessons and their
implications for our forces include the
following.

-  _Training. Operations like INTERFET_
and the Peace Monitoring Group on
Bougainville place
great demands on the
training and personal
quality of the men
and women of the
ADF. In sometimes
dangerous and ambiguous situations,
they can be called
upon to make snap
judgments that can
have life and death
significance. Often
these decisions must
be made on the spot
by junior personnel
who must have the training,
preparation and personal qualities
to handle such situations.

-  _Readiness and Sustainment. The need_
for operations such as evacuations
or support for a legitimate
government can arise quickly and
with little warning, so forces need to
be available at high levels of


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 49


-----

readiness. Some kinds of operations,
such as peacekeeping, can require a
relatively large presence on the
ground, so significant numbers of
personnel might need to be
deployed and supported. And while
some types of operations such as
evacuations are over quickly, others,
such as some types of peacekeeping,
can last for months or even years. So
it is important that forces are sized
and structured to allow sustainment
and rotation.

_Deployment and Support. Forces may_
need to be inserted, and evacuees
extracted, sometimes in dangerous
circumstances, so substantial
military air and sealift must be
available. Forces must be supported
and provided with a wide range of
services in difficult conditions.
There is often a need to provide
relief services to local populations
as well. We therefore need adequate
logistics and support capabilities,
including deployable medical
facilities, cargo-handling systems,
water and fuel supply facilities, and
engineering capabilities.

_Firepower and mobility. Success in_
pacifying an unstable situation
often depends on a demonstrated
ability and willingness to use
preponderant force swiftly in
response to any violence, so forces
need to have ample firepower. While
such operations might typically
involve lightly-armed adversaries,
there can be potential for escalation


by intervention of well-armed
conventional forces. We need to have
capabilities available to deter or, if
need be, respond to such escalation.
This would often involve not just
land force capabilities but also air
and naval forces to protect force
elements as they deploy, maintain
lines of supply and provide
additional firepower.

-  _Command and Communications. The_
task of leading such operations
places additional demands on
the ADF for command,
communications, intelligence and
other facilities.

6.16 The Government intends that,
within the capabilities we develop for
the defence of Australia, we will make
sure that we have sufficient forces to
meet these demands, so that we are
well prepared to respond to credible
contingencies in our immediate
neighbourhood.

6.17 At the same time, it is important
that we recognise the limits to
Australia’s ability to influence and
help in major crises, even in our
immediate neighbourhood. Relatively
small crisis situations can require very
high levels of resources to manage and
control. For example, even if we had
had much larger forces than we have
today, Australia could not have
undertaken to restore peace and
security in East Timor under
INTERFET except with the help of a
large number of coalition partners


50 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

**Supporting Wider Interests**

6.19 The third priority for Australia’s
forces is to be able to contribute
effectively to international coalitions
of forces to meet crises beyond our
immediate neighbourhood where our
interests are engaged. Such coalitions
might involve operations ranging from
peacekeeping and disaster relief to
relatively high-intensity conflict. In
general, the closer a crisis to Australia,
the larger the contribution we would
want to be able to provide.

6.20 We do not envisage that Australia
would commit forces to operations
beyond our immediate neighbourhood
except as part of a multinational
coalition. The scale of our contribution
would depend on a wide range of
factors, but in general we would expect
to make a greater contribution to
coalition operations closer to home,
where our interests and
responsibilities are greater. In
Southeast Asia we would want to be
able to make a substantial contribution
to any regional coalition that we
decided to support - especially if it
involved our undertakings under the
FPDA. In the wider Asia Pacific region
we would want to have the capacity to
make a significant contribution to any
coalition we thought it appropriate to
join. In most cases the United States
would lead such a coalition, and we
would expect our forces to operate
closely with US forces. Beyond the
Asia Pacific region we would normally


and the cooperation of the Indonesian
authorities. Australia would
contemplate contributing with armed
forces to an international response in
our immediate region only if it had the
support of our neighbours, and of
other countries from the region
and beyond.

6.18 More broadly, our approach to
lower level regional crises needs to
recognise that the use of armed forces
is not always a useful or practical
response to a crisis. The Government
has developed a set of guidelines for
commitment of the ADF to lower level
operations. These conditions include:

-  the nature and extent of Australia’s
interests, including strategic, political,
humanitarian and alliance issues;

-  whether the mission has a clear
mandate, goals and end-point;

-  whether the mission’s goals are
achievable in all the circumstances
and with the resources available;

-  the extent of international support
for the mission;

-  costs of Australian participation,
including the effect on the ADF’s
capacity to perform other tasks;

-  training and other benefits to
the ADF;

-  risks to personnel involved; and

-  consequences for Australia’s wider
interests and international
relationships.


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 51


-----

consider only a relatively modest
contribution to any wider UN or
US-led coalition, proportionate to our
interests and the commitments of
contributors from elsewhere in
the world.

6.21 We would be most unlikely to
contemplate the leadership of any
coalition operations that were focused
beyond Southeast Asia or the
South Pacific.

6.22 We would apply similar criteria to
those outlined above in paragraph 6.18
to deciding whether or not to commit
forces in particular circumstances. The
Government would always place high
priority on force protection
arrangements for Australian
contingents to ensure that no
unnecessary risks were taken with
Australian lives.

6.23 We would expect to be able to
provide the forces needed to contribute
to coalition operations from within the
capabilities we develop for the defence
of Australia and for operations within
our immediate region. The key
requirements of such forces would be
that they should be able to succeed
with an acceptable level of risk in the
operational environment expected,
taking into account the levels of
adversary forces and capabilities that
they might encounter. They should
also be capable of operating adequately
with the other coalition members.

6.24 In broad terms, these conditions
suggest that a major Australian


contribution to a coalition for higher
intensity operations would more likely
involve air or naval forces than land
forces. The air and naval forces we
develop for the defence of Australia
will provide the Government with a
range of options to contribute to
coalitions in higher intensity
operations against well-armed
adversaries. Our land forces would be
ideally suited to provide contributions
to lower intensity operations including
peace-enforcement, peacekeeping and
many types of humanitarian
operations. Such operations are much
more likely than high intensity
operations and would emphasise
mobility and the levels of protection
and firepower appropriate for our own
environment, rather than the kinds of
heavy armoured capabilities needed
for high intensity continental warfare.

**Peacetime National Tasks**

6.25 In addition to these core tasks in
support of Australia’s strategic
objectives, the ADF will also be called
upon to undertake a number of regular
or occasional tasks in support of wider
national interests. These include
specific and ongoing commitments to
coastal surveillance and emergency
management, as well as ad hoc support
to wider community needs.

6.26 One of the most important of
these is the critical contribution that
the ADF makes to the security of our
coastline from illegal immigration,
smuggling, quarantine evasion and


52 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

other intrusions on our sovereignty.
This contribution has been described
in Chapter Two.

6.27 Other peacetime national tasks
include counter-terrorist response,
maritime search and rescue, and
natural disaster relief.


make a major contribution to
disaster relief in Australia and our
immediate neighbourhood.


6.27 Other peacetime national tasks 6.28 The procedures to be followed in
include counter-terrorist response,

using the ADF to support domestic

maritime search and rescue, and

law enforcement and the rights and

natural disaster relief.

responsibilities of ADF members on

ADF Special Forces maintain a such duties have recently been
highly respected clarified and made
capacity for more workable with
counter-terrorist the passage of new

Most people argued for a better

operations which legislation.

resourced Defence Force and that a

is among the most

properly equipped and balanced

sophisticated in

force structure provides the best **Capability**

the world; way of coping with all eventualities.

**Priorities for**

E m e r g e n c y **Report of the Community** **the ADF**
M a n a g e m e n t **Consultation Team: Key finding**
Australia provides 6.29 The Government
training, national There was a firm belief that while has determined that
policy coordination the defence of Australia should be in order to achieve

the first and foremost priority, it

and coordinated these strategic tasks,

should not be the exclusive option.

responses for civil the ADF will maintain

Instead, in structuring a balanced

emergencies; and further develop

force for mid-intensity conflict the

an integrated and

the ADF’s long- ADF can adapt to undertake

balanced joint force

range air and operations other than war during
naval capabilities peacetime. that can provide two

key sets of capabilities.

assist maritime **Report** **of** **the** **Defence**
search and rescue, **Consultation Team**

6.30 First, Australia

u n d e r t a k e

will maintain

navigational and

maritime capabilities 
hydrographic work, and also

mostly air and naval forces - that can

support fisheries management;

defend Australia by denying our air

major contributions are made to

and sea approaches to any credible

other events, such as the Sydney

hostile forces. These forces will also

2000 Olympic Games and the

have the ability to support Australian

coming Centenary of Federation

forces deployed in our region and

celebrations; and

support the security of our immediate

ADF units, including Reserve units, neighbourhood, as well as contribute


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 53


-----

to coalition operations in higher
intensity conflicts.

6.31 Second, Australia will maintain
land forces - including the air and
naval assets needed to deploy and
protect them - that can operate as part
of a joint force to control the
approaches to Australia and respond
effectively to any armed incursion on
to Australian territory. These forces
will also have the capability to
contribute substantially to supporting
the security of our immediate
neighbourhood, and to contribute to
coalition operations further afield, in
lower intensity operations.

**Capability Development**
**Principles**

6.32 The priorities set out in the
preceding paragraphs are the basis on
which the Government has taken
decisions about the development
of the ADF’s capabilities. Those
decisions have been guided by the
following principles.

**Operational Flexibility**

6.33 Nothing can remove the element
of the unexpected from our military
affairs. Over the next decade, we can
be reasonably sure that governments
will consider using the ADF in
circumstances that we have not
envisaged. So our defence planning
should not leave us with a set of
capabilities that is too narrowly


focussed on specific scenarios. Our
aim is to provide Australia with a set
of capabilities that will be flexible
enough to provide governments with
a range of military options across a
spectrum of credible situations
within the priorities set out in this
Chapter.

**Integrated Capability**

6.34 Capability is much more than
just a piece of equipment. It includes
everything that contributes to the
ADF’s ability to achieve a particular
result at a particular time. That
means it encompasses personnel and
their training, support and
maintenance, logistics, intelligence,
doctrine, and many other
contributing elements. It draws on
the wider national infrastructure,
including the key role of industry. It
also means that different types of
capability themselves need to work
together to achieve larger results.
The ways in which different
elements of capability, and different
capabilities themselves, work
together are critical to the effective
conduct of operations. We have
therefore sought to consider how the
elements of the ADF can best work
together to provide an integrated set
of capabilities.

**Interoperability**

6.35 The same factors place a premium
on interoperability between our forces


54 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

and those of our allies and other
countries with whom we might want
to operate in coalition. The
development of interoperability within limits of cost and other factors

-  is an important issue in capability
development.

**Fully Developed Capability**

6.36 We need to be realistic about the
amount of warning we might receive
of the need to use our armed forces.
Crises do not usually occur without
some indication, so we do not need to
keep our forces constantly at the
highest pitch of readiness for
operations. That would be very
expensive, and it would erode our
capabilities because forces held at very
high readiness cannot undertake the
full range of training and exercising.

6.37 But - except in the case of a major
attack on Australia - we cannot assume
that we would receive enough warning
of a crisis to allow us to build major
new capabilities, or significantly
expand or enhance existing ones. It
would take several years at least to
replace or upgrade our key platforms
and systems, and to train the people to
operate and support them.

6.38 The Government therefore
believes that Australia should
maintain in a fully developed form the
capabilities that would be necessary to
achieve key tasks. Our aim is to
establish a sustained long-term
program to develop and upgrade our


forces progressively so they retain the
required level of capability without the
need for crash programs.

**Capability Edge**

6.39 The Government believes that
Australia’s defence planning should
aim to provide our forces with a clear
margin of superiority against any
credible adversary. We will plan to
give our forces a high chance of
success and survival. To achieve that
we need to ensure that, working
together, our forces have an overall
capability edge in key roles. We have
taken account of the expected trend
of capability developments in the
region over the next 10 years and
beyond, and have planned for sustained
improvements in our capabilities to
meet those expected trends. We have not
based our planning on the forces or
capabilities of any particular country
or set of countries, but have looked at
capability trends throughout our
wider region.

6.40 Maintaining a capability edge
will not be easy. In future we will no
longer be able to rely, as we have in
the past, on an assumption that either
our technology or our trained people
will be decisively better than those of
other regional forces. Our focus, even
more than at present, will be on the
advantages we can achieve by
combining well-trained people with
the effective use of technology - what
we have called the ‘knowledge edge’.


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 55


-----

Our capability edge will also come
from the innovative ways in which we
develop our doctrine, organisation
and logistics.

**Operational Concurrency**

6.41 Problems often come together, so
it is important that our Defence Force
should be able to do more than one
thing at a time. But Australia cannot
maintain forces that would allow us to
do all the things we might want to be
able to do concurrently in different
locations. We therefore do not plan on
the ability to undertake major
operations simultaneously in more
than one theatre of operations.
However, within a theatre of operation,
especially in the defence of Australia,
we would need forces large enough to
undertake some types of operation
simultaneously in widely separated
locations. And in our
immediate region, we
may need to be able to
sustain one major
deployment and
undertake a lesser
deployment at the
same time.

**Sustainment**

6.42 We must be able
to sustain our forces
once deployed. A
sustainable force calls
for different things: the
ability to replace


combat units in sufficient time and the
capacity to supply and support forces
operating at high tempos. It therefore
needs an effective long-term approach
to recruiting and retaining our people,
and it needs a capable industry base to
draw on for support.

**Technology Focus**

6.43 The Defence Capability Plan
places a high priority on maximising
the opportunities offered by the
information technology revolution to
make our forces more effective.
Information capabilities have been
highlighted in a separate capability
grouping to ensure that they receive
proper attention and prominence, but
in reality information systems will be
profoundly important in the
development of all our capabilities. For
Australia, effective exploitation of
i n f o r m a t i o n
capabilities will be
critical to maintaining
our edge.

6.44 More broadly, we
have given close
attention to the
potential for
revolutionary changes
in the nature of warfare
and the composition of
armed forces flowing
from current and
prospective technological innovations.
We have balanced two


56 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

imperatives - on the one hand, to keep
open opportunities to take advantage of
major redirections in technology as they
emerge and, on the other hand, to
sustain the pace of development of our
forces to take advantage of technologies
already available.

6.45 Our guiding principle has been to
plan to exploit technologies that are
now under active development, but not
to defer investment where no new
alternative is now in prospect. Where
possible, we have sought to allow time
for new technologies to evolve before
committing ourselves. More discussion
of our approach to the future of
technology in our capabilities is
provided in Chapter Ten.

6.46 The Government has also taken
account of the lessons of the Collins
submarine project for the approach we
should take, in conjunction with
Australian industry, to the
development of high-technology
capabilities. The difficulties with the
Collins project should not deter us
from developing high-technology
capabilities, because they are essential
to our ability to defend Australia. But
they should caution us against taking
unnecessary technical risks in
developing new systems where


existing ones may be adequate, and to
ensure that risks are better understood
and managed in future projects. These
lessons are being applied in the reform
of our acquisition processes that is now
under way. This reform program and
our approach to effective partnering
with industry are described in
Chapter Nine.

**Cost-Effectiveness**

6.47 The Government has sought at all
times to provide the maximum
capability at the lowest possible cost by
seeking the most cost-effective
solutions available. For example, we are
looking for ways to minimise the
number of different types of platforms
and systems that the ADF operates, in
order to save training, operating and
support costs. This has had an
important impact on our approach to
the planning of some types of
capability. While we have provided
specific, costed proposals for new and
enhanced capabilities in the Defence
Capability Plan, any alternative, more
cost-effective means of achieving the
desired capability result will be
considered before final government
approval for specific projects.


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 57


-----

58 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

## Section Three | People

THE GOVERNMENT’S DEFENCE POLICY 59


-----

60 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

# 7 – People in Defence

**People are Capability**

7.1 On the basis of the key strategic directions set out in
Section Two, the Government has
undertaken a thorough review of
Australia’s military capability needs. Our
first consideration has been to ensure that
the ADF will have the right people, with
the right skills and experience to create
the capabilities we need to undertake
complex military operations.

7.2 The strength of Australia’s military forces has always
been the quality of its people. Since Federation,
Australia’s armed forces have earned an enviable
reputation for toughness, resilience and resourcefulness.
This has been demonstrated in two world wars and
countless other deployments. In recent years, ADF
personnel have made an essential contribution to
stability in the nearer region and around the globe.

7.3 The key requirement for meeting the wide and
essentially unpredictable range of contingencies that
could arise is a substantial pool of highly
competent professionals - especially at the
mid-levels of the Defence Force. More

People should not be regarded as a

specifically, the potential of the

cost but valued for what they
provide -  the competitive enhancements outlined in Chapter Eight
advantage. will be realised only if they are partnered

**Report** **of** **the** **Defence** with effective personnel policies. Recruiting,
**Consultation Team** developing and retaining high quality

people for our Navy, Army and Air Force is
essential to turning weapons, equipment
and systems into world class capabilities.


7.4 One of the most important things the Government
can do to recruit and retain high quality people is to
provide clear strategic direction for the development of

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 61


-----

the Defence Force and the resources to
fund the planned enhancements. This
White Paper makes clear the
Government’s intention to maintain
the ADF as a first-class military force,
able to fight and win.

7.5 In return, the Government demands
that resources, including people, are
managed efficiently to ensure that our
uniformed personnel, especially in
operational and supporting units,
are properly trained, equipped and
looked after.


also recognises that this level of
achievement is unsustainable within
current resources. Recruiting and
retaining sufficient numbers of people
with the right qualities and levels of
experience will be one of the most
significant challenges in building the
ADF of the twenty-first century.

**The Dimensions of the**
**Challenge**

7.8 The enhanced force structure
outlined in this White Paper requires
the current strength of the ADF of
51,500 to be increased to about 54,000
full-time personnel by 2010. The
composition of that force will need to
adapt to meet
evolving needs.


7.6 The recent high tempo of the current strength of the ADF of
operations, coupled with the 51,500 to be increased to about 54,000
continuing drive for efficiency through full-time personnel by 2010. The
outsourcing, restructuring and composition of that force will need to
reductions, has adapt to meet
placed considerable evolving needs.
pressures on many

There is a broad view that the 7.9 Recruiting the

ADF personnel.

Defence organisation is not giving right sort of people

These pressures have

sufficient attention to personnel for our Defence Force

been particularly

issues.

will not be easy. In

evident in operational

**Report of the Community** the last financial

and operational
**Consultation Team: Key finding**

year, the number of

support units. But

people recruited into

the high operational

the ADF fell short of

tempo and the drive

the target figure by 25 per cent - more

for efficiency have been necessary to

than 1,300 people. Figures for the

protect our strategic interests and

current financial year do not indicate

enhance our capability at a time of

a marked turn around.

financial stringency.


7.7 The fact that the high operational
tempo has been achieved within a
tight defence budget is a tribute to the
commitment and dedication of
Defence personnel, but the Government


7.10 Retaining the right people is also
difficult and, when separation rates
from the three Services are higher than
normal, the recruiting problem is
greatly exacerbated.


62 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

7.11 Clearly, the Navy, Army and Air
Force should not be trying to retain all
their people - a flow of new talent and
fresh ideas is necessary. But annual
separation rates from the three services
are presently running at between 11
per cent and 13 per cent, up from 9 per
cent in the early 1990s. The problem is
compounded by the fact that many of
those leaving are doing so at the very
time in their career when they have the
most to contribute.

7.12 If the separation and recruitment
rates of the last two years were to
continue, over the coming decade, the
strength of the ADF in 2010 would be
about 12,000 below the target figure of
54,000. The Government will take
firm action to ensure that does not
happen.

7.13 To provide the people we need,
bureaucratic inefficiencies need to be
eliminated and the ADF must change
its culture and approach to ensure its
people feel valued. More specifically,
Defence must:

-  demonstrate high quality leadership;

-  retain more skilled and experienced
people;

-  recruit effectively; and

-  offer high-quality education and
training programs.

**Leadership**

7.14 To ensure success in military
operations and foster a first-class work
environment, Defence must have


effective leaders at all levels. Good
leaders focus their efforts on
supporting their people, and on
building up commitment, skills and
teamwork to achieve results.

7.15 The day to day behaviour of senior
leaders, both civilian and military, can
either support or undermine attempts
to make Defence a more rewarding
place to work. The ADF has
consistently demonstrated the quality
of its leadership in military operations,
particularly at the tactical level.
However, new leadership challenges
have emerged. These include a mixed
military, civilian and commercial
workforce and a greater emphasis on
ensuring Defence resources are used
efficiently, as well as effectively.

7.16 Defence is implementing a range
of senior leadership development
initiatives. In coming years, these
initiatives will be embedded in
personnel policies, and education and
training systems. The aim is to ensure
that an effective ‘leadership culture’ is
in place, not a ‘bureaucratic culture’.
Improving leadership will remain one
of Defence’s highest priorities.

**Retention**

7.17 To be a ‘knowledge organisation’
Defence must retain skilled and
experienced people. Ensuring that
people do not leave the ADF when they
are of most value is a priority concern
for the Government.


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 63


-----

7.18 Defence will use retention to themselves at risk. This is the starting
shape its future workforce. This point for the Government’s
requires a sophisticated approach that development of a long-term personnel
identifies the experience profile strategy.
needed and then
actively manages to

**Job Satisfaction**

achieve that profile. There is strong public support for

7.20 The Government

Mechanisms are the Government to treat

is committed to

needed to encourage employment in the Services as a

providing the

turnover in those unique vocation or way of life, not

resources, training

parts of the Services as just another job.

and equipment

where it is necessary

**Report of the Community** necessary to ensure

and to retain the **Consultation Team: Key finding**

that the ADF is a

numbers and skill
Service in the ADF is now seen as first-class military

sets we need in other

‘just a job’ [but] the ADF is not like force - the essential

areas. The Govern
any other business. foundation for

ment’s policies will

**Report** **of** **the** **Defence** a high degree of job

address:

**Consultation Team** satisfaction within

-  the unique

the ADF. The

characteristics of

initiatives outlined

Service life;

in this White Paper

-  job satisfaction; will ensure Defence is focused on

-  remuneration, superannuation achieving its goals and that its people
and compensation; are provided with the ways and means

of achieving these goals. Leaders at all

-  health and safety; and

levels will be judged not only on the

-  career and lifestyle issues.

readiness and capability of those they
command and their management of

**Unique Characteristics of** resources, but also on the morale of the
**Service Life** people they lead.

7.19 The Government recognises the
unique requirements of service life and **Remuneration,**
that being part of the ADF is more than **Superannuation and**
just another job. People who serve in **Compensation**
the Navy, Army and Air Force are not 7.21 There is a need to tailor
civilians in uniform. The Government remuneration packages to meet the
recognises that the members of the specific needs of the different
Profession of Arms are different; they categories of personnel in the Defence
are required for example to place Force. These include both young,

64 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

operationally-oriented personnel who rank, and taking more account of
seek a short-term career in the ADF and wider labour-market forces;
more experienced members who have

-  the establishment of more specialist

the skills and knowledge to train and

trade structures within Defence;

lead the force. The Government also

-  putting in place employment

recognises the need to adopt a long-term

conditions that recognise different

care approach that embraces

career and work expectations of

superannuation, compensation and

ADF people across their careers; and

transitioning to veterans’ entitlements.

-  the possibility of providing more

7.22 The Government has initiated a flexible superannuation benefits for
review of ADF remuneration ADF personnel through specifically
arrangements to look at methods of designed arrangements.
providing a more effective, efficient and
flexible framework. The focus of the

**Health and Safety**

review is to provide options that
improve the attractiveness of the total 7.24 A key element of retention must
remuneration package within overall be an increased focus on the health,
Defence budget safety and wellconstraints, while being of ADF
taking into account personnel. This will

Retention issues need to be

the specific addressed before tackling other also maximise their
circumstances faced capability issues. contribution, and
by ADF personnel. hence ADF

**Report** **of** **the** **Defence**

capability. The cost

**Consultation Team**

7.23 Options for

of work-related

more effective Many serving members are injury and disease,
r e m u n e r a t i o n frustrated by inadequate training both in human and
arrangements could opportunities and conditions of

financial terms, is

include: service, leading to low morale and

substantial and

poor retention rates.

-  a restructured increasing; military
ADF pay system There is significant concern about compensation costs
that recognises ADF personnel leaving at the point have more than

in their career at which they have

different skills and doubled over the last

the knowledge and experience the

market values, and five years. As we

organisation needs.

provides better strive to maintain a

**Report of the Community**

transparency and high state of

**Consultation** **Team:** **Key**

greater choice; readiness, introduce

**findings**

-  packages based on complex new
skills as well as technologies and


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 65


-----

rely more on contractors and industry, increase the options for back-toDefence needs to redouble its efforts to back postings;
meet its duty of care.

-  build closer relations with industry,
particularly in engineering and

**Career and Lifestyle** technical trades areas, to develop

shared career structures;

7.25 Various factors cause experienced
ADF members to leave the ADF. -  make it easier for individuals who
These include frequent postings to have left to pursue career
different areas, which make it difficult opportunities within industry to
for the member to accommodate return to Defence, either on a full or
family and personal considerations part-time basis; and
such as spouse or partner employment, -  encourage home-ownership for
continuity of education for children, ADF personnel.
disabilities and home ownership.
Furthermore, the impact of the

**Recruitment**

commercial support program on some

7.27 Improved retention will ease the

trade and professional structures has

recruitment task significantly. But

restricted opportunities for career

c h a n g i n g

development, respite

demographics will

postings and

still present many

locational stability. Many submissions argued that the

challenges.

outsourcing of support functions for

7.26 In order to

the Defence Force has been a major 7.28 Over the next

counter the impact

contributor to de-skilling and low decade, the rate of

of these influences

morale within the Defence growth in the

on retention the

workforce.

Australian labour

Government will:

**Report of the Community** force is likely to slow

-  ensure that the **Consultation Team: Key finding**

and its age profile

impact on

increase. There is also

families, in terms

likely to be a general

of spouse or

decrease in the

partner employment opportunities,

participation rate for men and an

education and special needs, will be

increase in the participation rate for

an important consideration in

women, a move from full-time to part
posting decisions and when locating

time employment, more women

all new capabilities and

having their first child at a later age

establishments;

and then re-entering the workforce,

-  ensure that, wherever practical, and young people spending longer
establishments are collocated to periods in education. All of these

66 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

trends will make it harder to attract
people to serve in the ADF.

7.29 Australia’s healthy economy also
presents challenges for ADF
recruitment. The labour market is
competitive, unemployment is falling
and more young people are
undertaking higher education. These
conditions make it very much an
employees’ market with an
unprecedented level of choice.

7.30 In light of these factors, it is clear
that Defence must broaden its appeal
as a career for young Australians. If the
ADF is to become the employer of
choice for more people, its culture and
approach will need to change - and be
seen to change.

7.31 Market research undertaken by
Defence in 1998 found that only four
per cent of those aged between 18 and
35 would ‘definitely consider’ a career in
the Defence Force and a further seven


per cent would ‘consider’ such a
career. However, preliminary
findings from Defence’s most recent
research suggest those figures are
increasing. This is very significant.
An increase of even one per cent to
the 1998 figures would add about
51,000 potential recruits to the pool

-  or about the number of full-time
personnel currently in the
Defence Force.

7.32 The Defence Force recruiting
process is also being redesigned. A pilot
scheme is under way in Victoria and
Tasmania to evaluate a commercial
service-provider. If the pilot scheme is
successful and the new system then
implemented across Australia, the
number of recruitment offices
would increase from 16 to 90.

7.33 Better use of technology, including
call centres, will enhance access for
those making inquiries. It will also


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 67


-----

deliver information more rapidly and
allow faster, more efficient processing
of applications.

7.34 Defence will reinforce these
initiatives by continuing to maintain
a strong ADF involvement in the
recruiting function.

**Education**
**and**
**Training**

7.35 The fourth
element of
D e f e n c e ’ s
p e r s o n n e l
strategy is
m o d e r n,
effective and
efficient education and training.
Education and training is a critical
investment in future capability.

7.36 A better education and training
program will help Defence to attract and
retain high quality people and new
training will be needed as capabilities
are enhanced.

7.37 In recent years, Defence’s
delivery of education and training
has changed significantly. Central to
these changes has been a continuing
shift towards a more integrated
approach covering the common
needs of both military and civilian
personnel, including through the
rationalisation of existing institutions
and courses. The result has been
greater effectiveness and efficiency.


7.38 Defence education and training
has also been aligned more closely
with the National Training
Framework. This will continue.
Defence people are able to gain
nationally recognised qualifications
under the Framework. This is an
i m p o r t a n t
recruitment
incentive and
will also help
to retain
people. In
addition, it
will allow the
development
of more
e f f e c t i v e
partnerships
with industry in the key areas of
capability development, engineering
management, maintenance and
modification.

7.39 The integration of education
and training can be taken further to
include logistics, intelligence and
information, and communication
technologies. The creation of the
Defence Materiel Organisation
provides an excellent opportunity for
the rationalisation of logistics
education and training.
Improvements to military postgraduate education and educational
services at the Australian Defence
Force Academy will also follow a
high-level review, due to be completed
in mid-2001.


68 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

7.40 Innovation will also play a key
role in improving Defence education
and training. More use will be made
of flexible learning techniques,
featuring enhanced information
systems. Simulators will play a
greater role in providing costeffective and realistic training.


permanent forces or held only in
small numbers.


7.44 Traditionally, the Reserves have

of flexible learning techniques,

been viewed as a mobilisation base for

featuring enhanced information

the ADF in time of major conflict. But

systems. Simulators will play a

recent military operations have

greater role in providing cost
highlighted the importance of the

effective and realistic training.

Reserves in meeting the requirements

7.41 These initiatives will complement of contemporary military operations.
the ADF’s existing To illustrate this
operational training point, in the past two
regimes. In training years the ADF has
their people for ...the Reserves are an important link utilised more
operations, the with the Australian community Reservists on fullServices are also and ...could be a valuable force for time service than
embracing leading- sustainment purposes [but] they are since the end of

greatly under-utilised...

edge practices and World War II.
systems that give our **Report** **of** **the** **Defence** Reserves have
forces a crucial edge. **Consultation Team** contributed to short
notice operations in
their initial phases,

**Reserves**

helped to sustain

7.42 In addition to the issues addressed those operations, and provided surge
in the preceding part of this Chapter, capacity to support peak periods of
there are a number of issues that relate operational training and demand.
specifically to the Reserves.

7.45 As a result, the strategic role for the

7.43 A more effective Reserve component Reserves has now changed from
is needed to meet the changing mobilisation to meet remote threats to
demands posed by Australia’s that of supporting and sustaining the
strategic environment. Today, Reserves types of contemporary military
comprise about 42 per cent of the total operations in which the ADF may be
ADF. Over the next decade, Reserves will increasingly engaged.
become a more important element of
the ADF’s capability. Given the 7.46 A number of supporting policy
likelihood of frequent and concurrent initiatives are under way or being
operations, the Reserves will be the most developed. These include:
efficient way of providing sustainment -  new legislative provisions
and surge capacity. Moreover, they can governing the use and employment
provide skills not available within the of the Reserves;


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 69


-----

-  measures to strengthen the linkages as a whole or in part for a wide range
with the community; of operations, including combat,

-  improved training; and defence emergency, peace
enforcement, peacekeeping, civil and

-  better recruitment and retention

humanitarian aid, and disaster relief.

strategies for the Reserves.

The Government is very conscious of

7.47 The decisions the Government

its responsibility to use these increased

has taken this year to enhance

powers only when necessary.

the contribution of the Reserves to
ADF capability are of fundamental 7.49 Importantly, the changes will
importance and will profoundly provide the framework to introduce
change the Reserves. They provide new categories of Reserve service, to
greater options for the employment allow for some units and individual
of the Reserves, while demonstrating Reservists to be held at higher levels
to the Reservists themselves, and the of readiness.
community from which they are
drawn, that measures are being 7.50 Other legislative amendments
put in place to support them in will also incorporate appropriate
their service. measures to protect the jobs of

Reservists, and support their families
and employers. Employer support for

**Legislative Changes**

the Reserve is crucial. The legislative

7.48 Of the Government’s initiatives to

amendments will allow the

enhance the

payment of financial

Reserves, changes to

incentives to assist

the legislation
governing the use The public strongly supports the employers and self
concept of Reserve forces being full employed Reservists

and employment of

partners in the ADF, particularly to defray the costs of

Reserves will have

help sustain operations. Most supporting and

the greatest impact.

people believe there are too many releasing employee
The Government

impediments at present for Reserve Reservists for

has proposed

forces to meet that objective.

extended periods of

amendments to
legislation to extend The public expressed strong training and
the options available support for measures that would o p e r a t i o n a l
for the use of the make it easier to deploy Reserves, deployment. These

and deploy them quickly. initiatives are

Reserves. The
changes will enable **Report of the Community** estimated to cost
the Government to **Consultation Team: Key findings** around $20 million
call out the Reserves per year.

70 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

**Strengthening** stakeholder groups
**the Linkages**

on matters affecting

**with the** Greater incentives for reservists and

Reserves’ availability

**Community** their employers are also strongly

and to act as an

supported.

7.51 The Reserves

interface between the

enjoy a special and Regional Australia has great pride community and both
unique relationship in our Defence Force and identifies

the Government and

with the local and strongly with the local Reserve

the ADF.

regional comm- units.
unities from where **Report of the Community**
they are recruited and **Consultation Team: Key findings** **Improved**
supported, and in **Training**
which they serve.

7.54 An improved

Reservists are a

Reserve capability

bridge between the ADF and the

will require adequate resources and

civilian community. They bring

equipment to be allocated to

welcome diversity to the ADF and can

ensure that Reservists are trained

help influence and shape the military

and equipped to meet operational

culture in terms of the prevailing

requirements.

community demographics, values
and attitudes. 7.55 While the training will be driven

by military requirements, many of the

7.52 Given the greater contribution

competencies gained will be directly

being asked of Reservists and, in turn,

transferable to the civilian workplace at

the communities from which they are

no direct cost to employers. To better

drawn, the Government has

demonstrate the value of military and

recognised the need to engage an even

skills training to Reservists and

broader range of stakeholder groups. A

employers alike, the existing Defence

major public awareness and

program, which is seeking to have its

communication strategy will inform

training accredited within the national

and educate the community and

training framework, has been

employers about the Government’s

accelerated.

Reserves enhancement program,
while promoting the Reserves and the

7.56 Reservists will have nationally

value of the Reserves’ contribution to

recognised evidence of their

Australia’s defence capability.

attainments and employers will have

7.53 The Defence Reserves Support online access to a database of
Council (DRSC) has also been competencies gained through their
augmented. It has been given a wide- employee-Reservists’ participation in
ranging charter to liaise with military service.

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 71


-----

7.57 To realise those benefits, reciprocal
commitments will be required from
Reservists and their employers.
Reservists, particularly those required
to maintain high levels of individual
readiness, will be asked to commit
significantly more time to training to
achieve higher levels of military
competencies, and to maintain them
over time.

7.58 This increased commitment will
impact on the Reservists, their families
and communities, and their employers.
Defence will develop a range of
measures to manage those impacts,
including:

-  changes to conditions of service;

-  innovative ways of delivering
training, such as breaking down
training into modules and phases;
and

-  continuing consultation with the
Reserves’ stakeholder community to
facilitate Reservists’ leave for
training.

7.59 As a major employer of Reservists,
the Government will show the way by
having leave policies and employment
practices that support the release of
Reservists for peacetime training
and deployment.

**Better Recruitment and**
**Retention**

7.60 The Government will continue to
address the issues of Reserve
recruitment and retention by


redirecting the focus back to the
communities from which Reservists
are drawn. Community support is
important to the overall process of
recruitment and local Reserve units
will play a greater role in attracting and
fostering recruits. This, in concert with
the national Reserves recruitment
program, should result in improved
recruiting results. The financial
incentive package for employers will
also directly support recruiting.

7.61 The legislative changes will also
allow the ADF to adopt more flexible
recruiting and management strategies.
These will enhance retention of
military experience by offering
incentives to full-time members to
continue serving in the Reserves,
rather than leave the ADF completely.
Permanent force members will be able
to transfer to the Reserves, and
Reservists to lower levels of readiness.
This will help to retain trained people
in the ADF.

**Cadets**

7.62 The Australian Services Cadet
Scheme (ASCS) comprises the Naval
Reserve Cadets, Australian Army
Cadet Corps and the Air Training
Corps. 25,000 cadets in 417 units are
established in communities
throughout Australia, providing youth
development programs within a
military context in schools and in
wider community settings. This


72 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

provides a tangible link for the ADF to
the Australian community at large.

7.63 An association between our
young people and the Australian
Defence Force has long been valued
and strongly supported by the
Australian community. The
Government’s vision for the ASCS is
for it to provide opportunities for all
young Australians to obtain
comprehensive personal challenges
and growth, enhanced self-esteem and
self-discipline, and adventurous
enjoyment in a military setting.

7.64 Also, the Government is
committed to expanding the
participation of young Australians in
the Cadet Scheme and to providing the
resources needed to achieve that. This
includes a commitment to widening
the range of institutions offering
participation in the cadets and to
ensuring that units are properly
resourced. The Government will
increase annual funding for the Cadet
Scheme to $30
million by 2002
and provide
ongoing funding as
necessary to ensure
these objectives
are met.

7.65 The Government

There is support for a cadet scheme,
funded and controlled by Defence.

**Report of the Community**
**Consultation Team: Key finding**

will ensure cadets
have a more cohesive framework and
support base within the ADF. This will
allow the ASCS to build further upon its
success as a key youth development


organisation and as a source of future
recruits for the ADF. For many cadets,
participation in such a scheme is the
first, voluntary step towards
recruitment into the Defence Force
either on a full-time or part-time basis.
The 1999 ADF census showed that 22%
of full time ADF personnel and 25% of
Reservists were once cadets. As well,
former cadets remain in the services for
comparatively longer periods and a
high proportion reach senior rank.

7.66 In addition, a first class Cadet
Scheme presents our regional and rural
communities with the opportunity to
build links with the Defence Force,
which would not be available in any
other way. Cadets engender
community involvement, and support
for the ADF. This is reinforced by cadets
directly participating in ceremonies of
national significance like ANZAC Day.
Moreover, participation in cadets gives
opportunities for young people to
develop their skills in a youth training
environment. Defence will pursue the
formal accreditation
of the cadet activity
programs within the
national training
framework to build on
the tangible outcomes
of cadet participation.

7.67 The Government
acknowledges the
valuable work that many people have
devoted to the ASCS to date, at state
and local levels. Several state
governments have also established


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 73


-----

cadet-style programs in recent years.
Defence will continue to work
collaboratively with these emerging
programs by establishing ASCS units
within the state frameworks and by
sharing its extensive experience in
fostering cadet and youth activities.


7.68 Through the enhancements
planned over the next three years the
Government is confident that cadets
will have a proper place in the
Australian community and all
Australians who participate as cadets
will have a rewarding experience.


74 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

## Section Four | Capability

THE GOVERNMENT’S DEFENCE POLICY 75


-----

76 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

# 8 – The Defence Capability Plan

**A New Approach To**
**Capability Planning**

8.1 To ensure that Australia will have the forces needed
to achieve the tasks outlined in Chapter Six, the
Government has formulated a detailed, costed plan for
Australia’s military capabilities over the next 10 years,
with broad guidance on major issues over the following
10 years. In doing this we have developed a new
approach to defence capability planning. Our aim is to
provide the Defence Force with clear, long-term goals
for the development of our armed forces, and the
funding needed to achieve those goals. We have called
this the Defence Capability Plan.

8.2 The Defence Capability Plan will not remain
immutable over the next decade. It will be reviewed
annually to take account of changing strategic
circumstances, new technologies and changed
priorities. Individual projects will need to be considered
and approved by government before proceeding.
Nevertheless, the Capability Plan will provide a clear
basis for decisions now and into the future.

8.3 The key to this new approach is the Government’s
decision to provide, for the first time, Defence funding
commitments covering the whole of the coming decade
matched to a planned set of capability enhancements.
This will allow development of robust plans for the
future shape of our Defence Force, with a clear
understanding of what will be affordable. It also allows
the Government to set firm financial constraints for
Defence, and benchmarks against which the
organisation’s performance will be measured. This will
be done on an annual basis through the introduction
of a new yearly Defence Financial and Management
Plan, which is described in Chapter Eleven.

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 77


-----

8.4 The Defence
Capability Plan has
been developed on
the basis of
through-life costing
estimates of the
different types of
capability in the
ADF, covering not
only the initial
capital investment
required but also
p e r s o n n e l,
operating, support
and upgrade costs
over a 20 year
period.


evaluate better the
performance of
Defence in the
delivery of capability
against the Plan. It
will also provide a
firm basis to develop
and monitor further
efficiency reforms in
the delivery of
capability.

8.7 This approach
will also allow the
Government to look
more systematically
at our Defence
industry needs and
opportunities, and
find ways to manage
procurement and
support in ways
which are more to the
benefit of both
Defence and industry.


Most participants supported the

been developed on Defence in the

need for a highly capable ADF.

the basis of delivery of capability

Specifically, there was notable

through-life costing support for: against the Plan. It
estimates of the -  the Army being able to sustain will also provide a
different types of combat operations in two firm basis to develop
capability in the separate locations; and monitor further
ADF, covering not -  the Navy retaining a blue water efficiency reforms in
only the initial capability based on surface the delivery of
capital investment combatants and submarines; capability.
required but also -  replacing and expanding the

8.7 This approach

p e r s o n n e l, patrol boat fleet;

will also allow the

operating, support -  maintaining highly capable

Government to look

and upgrade costs combat aircraft;

more systematically

over a 20 year -  a capacity for long-range strike

at our Defence

period. operations; and

industry needs and

-  maintaining a capability edge in

8.5 With these long- key areas, including intelligence, opportunities, and
term costing estimates, surveillance and reconnaissance find ways to manage
the Government has capabilities. procurement and
been able to make **Report of the Community** support in ways
informed judgments **Consultation Team: Key finding** which are more to the
about the relative benefit of both
cost-effectiveness of Defence and industry.
different types of capability in

8.8 This Chapter sets out the

achieving Australia’s strategic

Government’s Defence Capability Plan

objectives. On the basis of those

under five broad capability groupings.

judgments we have set out capability
development paths for each of our key
areas of capability over the next 20 **Land Forces**
years, and specific, costed development

8.9 The land force capability grouping

plans for each major type of capability

includes all elements of the Army, and

for the coming decade.

those elements of Navy and Air Force

8.6 The Defence Capability Plan is an whose principle task is to deploy them.
important element of the

**Capability Goal**

Government’s program of continuous
improvement in Defence management. 8.10 The Government’s aim is to
It will allow the Government to provide land forces that can respond


78 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

swiftly and effectively to any
credible armed lodgment on
Australian territory and provide
forces for more likely types of
operations in our immediate
neighbourhood. We have therefore
decided that it is no longer a priority
to provide the basis for the rapid
expansion of the Army to a size
required for major
continental-scale
operations. Rather,
we place emphasis
on providing a
professional, welltrained, wellequipped force
that is available for
operations at short
notice, and one
that can be
sustained over extended periods.
This type of force will have the
flexibility to deal with operations
other than conventional war, and
contribute to coalitions.

8.11 In view of the issues raised in
earlier chapters of this White Paper,
the development of our land forces
needs to reflect a new balance
between the demands of operations
on Australian territory and the
demands of deployments offshore,
especially in our immediate
neighbourhood. While still giving
priority to the defence of Australia
in our overall strategic and force
planning, the development of our


land forces will take fuller account
of the demands of possible shortnotice operations in our immediate
neighbourhood. For much of the
last two decades, land force planning
has been dominated by a focus on
preparations to meet lower level
contingencies on Australian territory.
That focus will now be broadened to
meet a wider range
of possible
contingencies, both
on Australian
territory and beyond.

8.12 We have,
however, decided
against the
development of
heavy armoured
forces suitable for
contributions to coalition forces in
high intensity conflicts. These forces
would be expensive, and are most
unlikely to be needed in defence of
Australia or in our immediate region.
But in accordance with the principles
we have set out, our land forces will
have the combat weight they need to
achieve their missions without
undue risk.

8.13 The Government has considered
the implementation of these broad
goals under four headings: Ready
Frontline Forces; Sustainment and
Rotation; Combat Weight; and
Deployment, Support and Command,
Control, Communication and
Intelligence (C3I).


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 79


-----

**Ready Frontline Forces** brigades, each of around 3,000

8.14 The Government plans to personnel, will include, in addition to
structure the Army to ensure that we the infantry battalions, a range
will be able to sustain a brigade of specialised combat units such
deployed on operations for extended as armour, artillery, aviation,
periods, and at the same time maintain combat engineers, and logistics and
at least a battalion group available for support units.
deployment elsewhere. To achieve this,

8.17 The Third Brigade, based in

the Government plans to retain on a

Townsville, will continue to provide

permanent basis the increased

light, air-mobile forces available for

numbers of land force units that have

immediate deployment. The First

been brought to high readiness over

Brigade, based in Darwin, will provide

the last two years. This is an expansion

light mechanised and light armoured

in the number of

forces to provide

infantry battalions at

added combat power

high readiness from

Efforts should be made to improve and weight for more

four to six. Recent

community awareness of the d e m a n d i n g

enhancements to the

activities of Coastwatch and their contingencies. The

Air Force Combat

linkage with the Regional Force Seventh Brigade,

Support Groups for

Surveillance Units.

deployed operations based in Brisbane,
will also be **Report of the Community** will provide a

**Consultation Team: Key finding**

maintained. motorised formation

comprised of both

8.15 Under this plan full-time and
six battalion groups, each of around Reserve units. It provides depth to the
1,000 personnel, will be held at no

other two brigades by providing a

more than 90 days notice to move, and

range of highly mobile forces. Task

most at 30 days or less. They include a forces for particular contingencies
parachute battalion, two light infantry would be assembled from these ready
air-mobile battalions, a motorised forces to meet the specific needs of
battalion, a mechanised battalion, and each operation.
a commando battalion. In addition, we

8.18 The Special Operations Group,

will maintain the current SAS

comprising the SAS Regiment, a high

Regiment of around 700 personnel at

readiness commando battalion and a

high readiness.

Reserve or part-time commando

8.16 These forces will be organised in battalion, supports a range of Special
three brigades and the Special Forces roles. In addition to providing
Operations Group as at present. The long-range reconnaissance capabilities,

80 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

these units are capable of conducting
strike and water-borne operations. The
SAS Regiment will continue to provide
a counter-terrorist capability.

8.19 The Army will also continue to
provide three Regional Force
Surveillance Units.
These units, based
in north Western
Australia, the
Northern Territory
and far north
Q u e e n s l a n d,
conduct ongoing
reconnaissance
and surveillance
operations in
support of the
n a t i o n a l
surveillance effort.

**Sustainment**
**and Rotation**

8.20 The
Government has
paid special
attention to the
capacity of our land forces to sustain
operations once deployed. This has
been a significant weakness of our
land forces in the
past. The Government believes that
service personnel should not be
required to serve on operations
for longer than six to 12 months
at a time, and that they should be given
a substantial period of recuperation
before being deployed again. As we


have seen in East Timor, that places real
demands on our personnel structures.

8.21 One of our three higher-readiness
brigades, the Seventh Brigade, in
addition to providing capabilities for
immediate deployment where
necessary, will
provide rotation
forces and
replacements for
deployed forces.

8.22 In order to
better train and
prepare our forces
for combat, the
G o v e r n m e n t
plans to invest in a
Combat Training
Centre to be based
in Townsville.
This facility will
ensure that
our combat units
can be trained
and tested to the
highest levels as
quickly as
possible. On current planning, this
centre would begin operating around
2006.

8.23 The key to our sustainment
capability in future will come from our
Reserve forces. In line with the new
emphasis on a small, high-readiness
army ready for deployment, the role of
our Reserve forces will undergo a major
transition. In the past, Reserve forces


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 81


-----

have been intended primarily to
provide a partially-trained basis to
expand the Army for major land
operations in some future crisis.

8.24 The Government believes that
these roles do not meet Australia’s
strategic needs, and that they do not
take proper advantage of the skills
available in the Reserves. Therefore, as
explained in Chapter Seven it is
planned to reorient
them. Henceforth
their clear priority
will be to provide
fu l l y - t r a i n e d
personnel to our
ready frontline
forces deployed on
operations. This
will greatly enhance
our capacity to
sustain forces on
operations for
extended periods.

8.25 This will also change the nature
of Reserve service. In the past,
Reservists had very little prospect of
being required to deploy on active
service, though some volunteered to do
so. But if the pattern of operations for
our forces remains as busy in future as
it has been over the past decade, many
Reservists are likely to be called on.
Reserve service will therefore be a
more serious commitment than it has
been in the past, but also a more
rewarding one.


8.26 Some important changes, also
outlined in Chapter Seven, will need to
be made to legislation affecting
Reserve service and to the
organisation, training and
administration of Reserves to realise
fully their new role.

**Combat Weight**

8.27 The Government believes that our
land forces should
have sufficient
f i r e p o w e r,
protection and
mobility to
provide clear
advantage in any
likely operations
in defence of
Australia or in our
immediate region.
It therefore aims to
introduce a
program of rapid
enhancement of a
range of combat capabilities for our
land forces. The key elements of this
program are as follows.

-  Two squadrons (around 20-24
aircraft) of Armed Reconnaissance
Helicopters planned to enter service
from 2004-05. These will constitute
a major new capability for Army,
providing deployable, flexible, highprecision, and highly mobile
firepower and reconnaissance.

-  An additional squadron (about 12
aircraft) of troop-lift helicopters to


82 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

provide extra
mobility for forces
on operations. In
particular, these
helicopters will
enhance our
capability to
operate off our
newly acquired
troop ships, HMAS
_Manoora and Kanimbla._
These helicopters are
planned to enter service
around 2007.

.

Major upgrade of 350 of our M113
Armoured Personnel Carrier fleet,
with the upgraded vehicles planned
to enter service from around 2005.

A new shoulder-fired guided weapon
for key elements of the force to attack
armoured vehicles, bunkers and
buildings. This weapon is planned to
enter service around 2005.

Improved body armour, weapons,
night vision equipment and
communications systems for all
soldiers in deployable land forces.
New equipment should begin to
enter service from around 2003.

New air defence missile systems to
supplement the existing RBS-70 and
replace the existing Rapier systems,
giving comprehensive groundbased air defence coverage to
deployed forces. These systems are
planned to enter service from
around 2005 and 2009 respectively.

Twenty new 120mm mortar systems
mounted in light armoured vehicles


to improve mobile
firepower planned to
enter service in 2006.

-  A new thermal
surveillance system and
tactical uninhabited aerial
vehicle (UAV) to provide
surveillance for deployed
forces, planned to enter
service from around 2003
and 2007 respectively.

8.28 In addition, sustained
investment will be made in
maintaining or enhancing
current land force capabilities such as
our 105mm and 155mm field artillery.

8.29 Taken together with major
investments made in recent years,
including the acquisition of additional
light armoured vehicles and Bushranger
infantry mobility vehicles, these decisions
constitute the most significant
enhancements to Army’s combat power in
many years.

**Deployment, Support and C3I**

8.30 The Government has paid
attention to the lessons of the
INTERFET operation, and has given
high priority to improving the ADF’s
capacity to deploy forces on operations
and support them while deployed.

8.31 Australia’s amphibious lift
capability is being substantially
increased by the introduction into
service of amphibious support ships,
HMAS Manoora and Kanimbla, after the


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 83


-----

lease of the catamaran HMAS Jervis Bay
expires. The Government has decided
to plan on replacement of the Landing
Ship HMAS Tobruk when it reaches the
end of its service life in 2010, and to
program the replacement of _Manoora_
and Kanimbla in 2015. The result is that
Australia’s recently expanded
amphibious lift capability will be
retained at its present level of three
major ships. In addition, we plan to
replace the fleet of 15 medium landing
craft and six heavy landing craft, and
study options to retain access to the
unique capabilities of catamarans such
as Jervis Bay.

8.32 Our airlift capabilities will be
enhanced by the acquisition of new
aircraft to replace the Caribou from
2010, and by the refurbishment of our
12 C130H aircraft by about 2008. We
plan to undertake a major program to
provide better electronic warfare selfprotection of our transport aircraft
and helicopters from missiles by
around 2004.

8.33 We plan to increase the capacity
to supply deployed forces by a series of
investments in logistics units and
systems. The Logistics Support Force
will be enhanced by increasing the
preparedness of individual units - this
will provide improved support to
deployed forces and an enhanced
ability to rotate forces. We plan to
enhance our specialist transport and
petroleum supply units, and invest in
new water and fuel supply systems,
including new desalination systems.


These enhancements are planned to
enter service by 2005. Logistics
capacity will also be enhanced by a
number of important programs
including a major replacement
program for Army’s fleet of trucks,
scheduled to start by 2008.

8.34 Medical services to deployed
forces are planned to be improved by
investment in enhanced deployable
medical facilities, planned to enter
service in 2006. Improved bridging
capabilities will be provided for Army’s
engineers, entering service in 2005.

8.35 We plan to undertake a major
program of investment in improved
intelligence support, communications
and command systems specifically for
deployed forces over the next few years.

**Costs**

8.36 Under the Defence Capability
Plan, the Government anticipates that
spending on the maintenance of
current land force capabilities will
average around $5.9 billion per year
over the decade. The estimated capital
expenditure needed for the capability
enhancements outlined here will total
around $3.9 billion over the decade.
Additional personnel and operating
costs amount to around $1.1 billion
over the decade.

**Air Combat**

8.37 Air combat is the most important
single capability for the defence of
Australia, because control of the air


84 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

over our territory and maritime
approaches is critical to all other
types of operation in the defence
of Australia.

8.38 Australia’s air-combat capability
is based on our fleet of 71 F/A-18
aircraft with their sensor systems
and missiles, supported by other
systems including air-to-air
refuelling (AAR), and an integrated
command and communications
system, including surveillance
and battlespace management systems
in the Air Defence Ground
Environment. It relies heavily on
intelligence and surveillance systems
that are covered in the Information
Capability grouping.

**Capability Goal**

8.39 The Government believes that
Australia must have the ability to
protect itself from air attack, and control
our air approaches to ensure that we can
operate effectively against any hostile
forces approaching Australia. The
Government’s aim is to maintain the aircombat capability at a level at least
comparable qualitatively to any in the
region, and with a sufficient margin of
superiority to provide an acceptable
likelihood of success in combat. These
forces should be large enough to provide
a high level of confidence that we could
defeat any credible air attack on
Australia or in our approaches, and
capable enough to provide options to
deploy an air-combat capability to


support a regional coalition. They will
also have the capacity to provide airdefence and support for deployed
ground and maritime forces in our
immediate region.

**Major Challenges**

8.40 The ADF faces three major
challenges in meeting this capability
goal over the next decade.

8.41 First, as described in Chapter
Three, the air-combat capabilities of a
number of defence forces throughout
the region have grown steadily in
recent years, and are expected to
continue to do so. The effect of all these
changes is that, increasingly over the
coming decade, the capabilities of our
F/A-18 aircraft will be outclassed by a
number of regional airforces. That
means that our aircraft could be
detected and attacked before they
could respond. We therefore
need to address this set of emerging
deficiencies in our basic aircombat capabilities.

8.42 Second, our AAR aircraft - four
Boeing 707 aircraft - are close to the
end of their effective life. Over the next
few years they will need to be
substantially refurbished or replaced if
we are to retain an AAR capability.
AAR is important to our air-combat
force because it extends the range and
endurance of our fighters. This is
critical for covering our extended air
approaches, including offshore


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 85


-----

territories such as the Christmas and
Cocos (Keeling) Islands, and for
providing air support to surface ship
deployments including amphibious
task forces and land forces deployed in
our immediate neighbourhood. We
therefore need to address the future of
our AAR capability.

8.43 Third, we need
to address the future
of our air-combat
capability after the
F/A-18 aircraft
reach the end of
their service life
between 2012 and
2015. It is important
to start to address
this issue now.

**Key Decisions**

8.44 The Government’s current
plans involve four
major steps to
address these
challenges.

8.45 First, we plan to continue the
upgrade program for the F/A-18
aircraft. Significant phases are already
under way, including the installation
of a new and significantly improved
radar, and the acquisition of new
advanced air-to-air missiles.
Additional phases have now been
scheduled to provide the fighter force
with a range of upgrades. This


programme of upgrades is planned
to be completed by 2007 and
includes:

-  advanced tactical data links to
allow our aircraft to exchange
combat information instantly
with other units, allowing better
cooperative tactics;

-  a new helmet-mounted missile
cueing system to
get the best out of
our new shortrange air-to-air
missiles;

- structural improvements to extend
the life of the
airframe and
reduce its detectability by enemy
radars; and

-  some initial
improvements to
electronic warfare
self-protection.

8.46 Second, we
will proceed now to
acquire four Airborne Early Warning
and Control (AEW&C) aircraft, with
the possibility of acquiring a further
three aircraft later in the decade. The
AEW&C will make a major
contribution to many aspects of air
combat capability, significantly
multiplying the combat power of the
upgraded F/A-18 fleet. They will
improve command and control,
improve capacity for air defence of


86 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

surface ships, and enhance our strike
capability. The aircraft are planned to
start entering service around 2006.

8.47 Third, we have scheduled a major
project to replace and upgrade our
AAR capability. This project will
acquire up to five new-generation AAR
aircraft, which would have the
capacity to refuel not only our F/A-18
aircraft but also our F-111 and
AEW&C aircraft over a wide area of
operations. These aircraft will also
provide a substantial air cargo
capability, and are planned to enter
service around 2006.

8.48 Fourth, the Government will
examine options for acquiring new
combat aircraft to follow the F/A-18,
and potentially also the F-111.
Provision has been made in the
Defence Capability Plan for a project to
acquire up to 100 new combat aircraft
to replace both the F/A-18 and F-111
fleets. Acquisition is planned to start in
2006-07, with the first aircraft
entering service in 2012. The
Government has specifically made
financial provision to allow
acquisition of high-performance
aircraft to provide the basis for the
maintenance of Australia’s critical
air-combat edge well into the
twenty-first century. Much work
remains to be done over the next few
years to define and refine our
requirements, and to establish the
optimum balance between
capability and numbers. That time


will also allow better evaluation of
a number of competing aircraft
types.

8.49 In addition to these major projects,
the Government plans to continue
significant investments in other key
elements of air-combat capability. This
includes the Air Defence Ground
Environment, which integrates key
air defence assets including groundbased radar and command systems,
and AEW&C aircraft and provides
a comprehensive picture of activity
in the area of operations to
commanders. The Government plans
also to continue to invest in training
systems, which will ensure that our
personnel retain the critical edge
in skills.

**Costs**

8.50 Under the Defence Capability
Plan, the Government anticipates
spending an average of $1.3 billion per
year on maintenance of current air
combat capability over the decade. The
estimated capital expenditure needed for
the capability enhancements outlined
above totals around $5.3 billion over the
decade, and additional personnel and
operating costs amount to about $300
million over the decade.

**Maritime Forces**

8.51 Australia’s forces for maritime
operations give us the ability to deny


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 87


-----

**Capability Goal**

8.53 The Government’s primary goal
for our maritime forces is to maintain
an assured capability to detect and
attack any major surface ships, and to
impose substantial constraints on
hostile submarine
operations, in our
extended maritime
approaches. It also
intends to
maintain the
ability to support
Australian forces
deployed offshore,
to contribute to
maritime security
in our wider region,
to protect
Australian ports
from sea mines, and
to support civil law
enforcement and
coastal surveillance
operations.

8.54 The Government’s aim is
therefore to maintain, in addition to
a highly capable air-based maritimestrike capability in the F/A-18 and
F-111 fleets, a capable surface fleet
able to operate in a wide range of
circumstances throughout our
maritime approaches and beyond.
Our ships should be able to operate
effectively with those of the United
States, and to contribute to regional
coalition operations. Our
submarines should be able to operate
effectively in high capability


an opponent the use of our maritime
approaches, and allow us the freedom
to operate at sea ourselves. In our
maritime strategic environment, the
ability to operate freely in our
surrounding oceans, and to deny them
to others, is critical
to the defence of
Australia, and to
our capacity to
c o n t r i b u t e
effectively to the
security of our
i m m e d i a t e
neighbourhood.
Capable maritime
forces also provide
important options
for contributing to
regional coalitions
in support of our
wider strategic
interests and
objectives.

8.52 Australia’s maritime forces
consist of our surface fleet - including
major combatants, helicopters and
support ships; submarines; maritime
patrol aircraft; mine hunters; and
patrol boats. They also draw on
the capabilities of our F/A-18 and
F-111 aircraft - which have a potent
anti-shipping strike capacity - and
on the intelligence and surveillance
capabilities falling under the
Information Capabilities grouping.
They will also draw in the future
on our AEW&C aircraft for
surveillance.


88 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

operational environments
in the Asia Pacific region.
Our maritime patrol
aircraft should have the
capacity to operate
throughout our region,
with high-quality sensors
and weapons for attacks on
surface ships and
submarines. Our patrol
boats should be able to
make a cost-effective and
sustained contribution to civil

and

coastal enforcement and
surveillance operations.

**Major Issues**

**Surface Fleet**

8.55 By the end of next year, when the
last of the guided missile destroyers
(DDGs) is decommissioned, Australia’s
surface fleet will consist of two classes
of major warship. The first of those is
the six guided missile frigates (FFGs)
that entered service between 1980 and
1993. The second class is the ANZAC
ships, two of which have now been
delivered, with another six scheduled to
enter service by 2006. Three key
questions about the future shape of the
fleet have been considered in developing
the Defence Capability Plan.

8.56 The first is the adequacy of ships’
defences against the more capable antiship missiles that are proliferating in
our region. Without adequate defences,
our ships would be limited in their
ability to operate against capable


regional navies and within
range of hostile air forces.
A project now under way
will provide such defences
for the FFGs, but the
ANZACs do not have
adequate defences and
have other significant
deficiencies in their
combat capabilities.

8.57 The second is the
requirement for a longrange air-defence capacity in the fleet.
Without such capability, our ships
would be more vulnerable to air attack,
less capable of defending forces
deployed offshore and less capable of
contributing effectively to coalition
naval operations.

8.58 Third, we have considered the
future provision of support ships,
which can increase our maritime
capability by keeping ships at sea
longer and at greater ranges from port.
One of our support ships — HMAS
_Westralia — pays off in 2009 and the_
other in 2015. Our 10 year plan
therefore needs to address the
replacement of these ships.

8.59 In relation to these issues, the
Government’s planning is as follows.
First, the ANZAC ships are planned
to be upgraded to provide a
reasonable level of anti-ship missile
defences and other enhancements of
their combat capabilities, including
the fitting of Harpoon anti-ship
missiles. This project is scheduled to


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 89


-----

start in 2001 with upgraded ships in
service by 2007.

8.60 Second, the FFGs are planned to
be replaced when they are
decommissioned from 2013 by a new
class of at least three air-defence
capable ships. It is expected that
these ships will be significantly
larger and more capable than the
FFGs. The project is scheduled to
commence in 2005-06. The
G o v e r n m e n t ’s
strong preference is
to build these ships
in Australia, which
will provide
significant work for
Australia’s shipbuilding industry.

8.61 Third, the
Government plans
to replace HMAS
_Westralia, which_
is a converted
commercial tanker,
with a purposebuilt support ship
when it pays off in
2009. We also plan
to replace our
second support
ship, HMAS Success, with another ship
of the same class when it pays off in
2015. The Government’s strong
preference is to build these ships in
Australia. The project to replace HMAS
_Westralia is planned to start around_
2004-05.


8.62 Our Seahawk and Super Seasprite
helicopters provide an important and
integral part of the surface fleet
surveillance, anti-submarine and antisurface warfare capabilities. The
Government plans a major mid-life
upgrade of the Seahawk commencing
around 2003.

**Submarines**

8.63 The Government plans to bring all
six Collins class
submarines to a
high level of
capability by major
improvements to
both the platform
and combat systems.
M o d i f i c a t i o n s
already under way
to some boats have
resulted in major
improvements in
the acoustic
performance of the
boats and in the
reliability of a
number of the ship
systems. Interim
modifications to
the combat system
have improved
performance. All boats will now be
modified for better acoustic
performance and reliability and a new
combat system will be fitted, with
work starting next year. The first boat
with the new combat system is
planned to be available in 2005-06. A


90 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

program of ongoing upgrades will also
be established.

8.64 In addition, a project is also
scheduled to replace our current
heavyweight torpedo with a new and
more capable weapon beginning in
2002-03. The first new torpedoes are
planned to enter service
around 2006.

**Maritime Patrol Aircraft**

8.65 Australia’s fleet of 19 P-3C Orion
maritime patrol aircraft are
undergoing a major upgrade which
will provide an excellent capability
over coming years. Two additional
enhancements have been planned: the
fitting of new electro-optical sensors to
improve capacity to detect ships under
difficult circumstances, starting
around 2004-05, and the acquisition of
a new lightweight torpedo to improve
the P-3C’s critical submarine-killing
capabilities, starting around 2002. A
remaining shortfall is self-protection
for the aircraft from missiles if they
were to be deployed in medium or
high threat environments.

8.66 The P-3Cs will reach the end of
their current planned life in around
2015. Unless new technology emerges
which offers more cost-effective ways
to perform the P-3C’s roles, the
Government would intend to retain
the maritime patrol aircraft capability
past that date. The Defence Capability
Plan therefore provides for a major
refurbishment or replacement of the


P-3C fleet starting around 2007.

**Patrol Boats**

8.67 The 15 Fremantle class Patrol
Boats are close to the end of their
service life. These boats make a critical
contribution to coastal surveillance
and enforcement, and are accorded a
high priority by the Government. On
current planning a project will start
next year to provide a new class of
patrol boat to replace the Fremantles
as they are decommissioned. The new
boats will preferably be built in
Australia and are expected to enter
service from 2004-05.

**Costs**

8.68 Under the Defence Capability
Plan the Government anticipates
spending an average of $3.5 billion per
year on maintenance of current
maritime capability over the decade.
The expected capital expenditure
needed for the capability
enhancements outlined above totals
around $1.8 billion over the decade,
and additional personnel and
operating costs amount to about
$300 million.

**Strike**

8.69 The strike capability grouping
covers the forces that enable Australia
to attack hostile forces in the territory
of an adversary, in forward operating
bases, and in transit to Australia. The
Government believes that this


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 91


-----

capability is an important element of
Australia’s military posture because it
provides us with the flexibility to
destroy hostile forces before they are
launched towards Australia and when
they may be most vulnerable. Strike
capability allows Australia more scope
to determine the pace and location of
hostilities, and would impose major
defensive costs on an adversary
contemplating hostile action against
us. Strike forces can provide excellent
support to Australian forces deployed
abroad, and may also offer a valuable
option for contributing to
regional coalitions.

8.70 Strike operations could be
conducted by F/A-18s and potentially
also by P-3C aircraft, ships and
submarines, if they were provided
with appropriate weapons. Special
forces can also perform strike
operations. But Australia’s strike
capability consists primarily of our
fleet of F-111 long-range bombers.
They are the focus of this section.

**Capability Goal**

8.71 The Government’s aim in the
development of our strike capability is
to ensure that we have the capability
to contribute to the defence of
Australia by attacking military targets
within a wide radius of Australia,
against credible levels of air defences,
at an acceptably low level of risk to
aircraft and crew. We do not intend to
seek a strike capability large enough to


conduct sustained attack on an
adversary’s wider civil infrastructure;
our capability would be focussed on an
ability to attack those militarily
significant targets that might be used
to mount or support an attack on
Australia. We do, however, want to
have the capacity to mount sustained
strike campaigns against a significant
number of such targets. We also want
the capacity to strike targets with
sufficient accuracy to minimise risk of
collateral damage.

8.72 The Government expects that the
strike capabilities developed for the
defence of Australia would provide
options to contribute to regional
coalitions against more capable
adversaries at acceptable levels of risk
to crew and aircraft.

**Major Issues**

8.73 The Defence Capability Plan has
considered three key issues in relation
to the future of our F-111 strike
capability.

8.74 First, the capacity of the F-111s to
overcome improving air defences has
been enhanced recently by
improvements to their electronic
warfare self-protection (EWSP)
systems, and by the acquisition of standoff weapons which allow aircraft to
launch attacks from outside the range
of some air defence systems. But over the
coming decade further improvements
will be required in both areas. The


92 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

Government has therefore decided to
undertake further EWSP upgrades and
acquire additional types of stand-off
weapons with longer range, and with
different guidance and targeting
systems to provide more alternative
attack options and better capability
against hardened
and area targets.
These projects are
planned to start
around 2004. The
first enhancements
from this program
are expected to
enter service
around 2008-09.

8.75 Second, the
G o v e r n m e n t ’ s
decisions to acquire
AEW&C aircraft
and enhance our
AAR capability,
outlined in the
paragraphs above on Air Combat, will
also substantially contribute to our
strike capability. For the first time we
will be able to refuel our F-111s in the air,
which will increase their range, payload
and tactical options. The expansion of
our AAR capability will also enhance
the capacity of the F/A-18s to undertake
strike missions at longer range, with
greater weapons loads. AEW&C
aircraft will help the strike force
penetrate air defences and avoid hostile
forces. Inflight refuelling for our
AEW&C aircraft will increase their
capacity to support strike missions.


8.76 Third, the Government has
considered the future of our
strike capability after the F-111
leaves service, expected to be
between 2015 and 2020. It is
unlikely that there will be any
c o m p a r a b l e
specialised strike
aircraft suited to
our needs available at that time.
A range of
alternatives may be
available by then,
including the
much greater use of
long-range missiles
fired from large
transport aircraft,
naval platforms, or
even unmanned
combat aerial
v e h i c l e s .
Alternatively, the best option may be
specialised strike variants of aircombat aircraft. This would allow the
replacement of the F-111 by the same
type of aircraft as we buy to follow the
F/A-18, which would result in large
savings in operating costs. The
Government does not believe it is
appropriate to attempt to resolve the
future of our strike capability any time
soon. However for planning purposes
it has made provision for the
acquisition of up to 25 aircraft of the
same type as the follow-on for the
F/A-18, in addition to up to 75 new


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 93


-----

aircraft programmed for the aircombat role.

**Costs**

8.77 Under the Defence Capability
Plan, the Government anticipates
that over the decade it will spend an
average of $500 million per year on
maintenance of current strike
capability. The expected capital
expenditure needed for the
capability enhancements totals
around $800 million over the decade,
with no additional personnel and
operating costs.

**Information Capability**

8.78 Effective use of information is at
the heart of Australia’s defence
capability. In part this is a reflection of
a worldwide trend, as information
technology is transforming the ways in
which armed forces operate at every
level. All forms of capability are being
transformed by the innovative use of
information technology. But this trend
is more significant to Australia than to
many other countries. Our strategic
circumstances mean that innovative
applications of different aspects of
information technology offer Australia
unique advantages.

8.79 Major advances in surveillance
technology will allow us to detect
hostile forces far from our shores with
a speed and certainty that would have


been unthinkable even a few years ago.
Faster secure communications and
data links between tactical units - for
example aircraft and ships - will allow
them to cooperate in combat with
unprecedented speed and ease. This
will multiply their effectiveness
significantly, allowing us to do more
with our relatively small forces. And
better management, logistics and
command systems will improve our
ability to apply our forces better to
maximum effect.

8.80 Moreover, the application and
exploitation of information
technology is an area in which
Australia has a significant national
advantage. Our workforce - including
both ADF personnel and industry - are
highly educated and skilled in the use
of information technology. We have
access to excellent software and
integration skills. So this is an aspect
of military capability in which we can
and should aim to make a difference.
Together with our traditional
emphasis on high levels of training
and expertise in our people, this
advantage will constitute the
‘knowledge edge’, which will be the
foundation of our military capability
over the coming decades.

8.81 For this reason, the Defence
Capability Plan has focussed on
information capabilities as a separate
capability grouping, to ensure that
these developments receive the focus
and priority they deserve.


94 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

8.82 This grouping covers intelligence
and surveillance capabilities,
communications, information warfare,
command and headquarters systems,
and logistics and business
applications. Many other aspects of
information capability are embedded
in the platforms and systems covered
by the other groupings.

**Capability Goal**

8.83 The Government’s aims for
Information Capabilities are to
position the ADF to harness advances
in information
technology in ways
that ensure that
the ADF has
timely, accurate
and secure
information to
exploit fully
individual and
unit combat
capabilities, and
allow their
employment in
more flexible ways. Our specific
objectives include:

-  maintaining first-rate intelligence
capabilities;

-  developing a comprehensive
surveillance system providing
continuous coverage of our
extended air and sea approaches;

-  developing an integrated command
system covering operations at all
levels and in all environments;



-  providing communication
capabilities that can support
Australian operations throughout
our territory and our immediate
region, with increased capacity to
support a range of new information
systems;

-  maximising the efficiency and
effectiveness of our logistics systems
and management processes by costeffective investment in information
technology applications; and

-  ensuring these systems are
managed effectively, secure against
i n f o r m a t i o n
warfare attack and
able to achieve a
high level of
interoperability
with our allies and
partners.

**Major Issues**

**Intelligence**

8.84 Good
intelligence will
remain critical to Australia’s strategic
posture in a complex and fluid
environment. We need to have the
capacity to monitor comprehensively
several crises at the same time and
provide effective operational support
to deployed forces. New technologies
offer new opportunities for collection,
analysis and distribution of
intelligence. If effectively exploited,
these can help provide a war-winning
edge to forces in the field, as well as


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 95


-----

give decision-makers at the strategic
level a better understanding of the
complex crises they need to manage.
But new technologies also erode our
intelligence capabilities by making it
easier for intelligence targets to protect
information. The Defence Capability
Plan therefore incorporates substantial
and sustained investment in enhanced
intelligence capabilities, including:

-  enhanced signals intelligence and
imagery collection capabilities;

-  enhanced geospatial information
systems;

-  improved intelligence processing
and dissemination systems; and

-  deeper levels of cooperation with the
United States in some key systems.

**Surveillance**

8.85 Technology developments are
expanding significantly the potential
for sustained, 24-hour surveillance of
our northern approaches, particularly
by the Jindalee Operational Radar
Network (JORN) and other systems.
The Government plans to exploit these
developments by undertaking a
sustained program of enhancement to
the JORN over the horizon radar
system once it enters service in 2002.
We also plan to improve our ability to
fuse data from JORN and other sensor
systems to provide an integrated
national surveillance picture.

**Communications**

8.86 Sustained investment in
communications capability will be


necessary to support the application of
information technology innovations,
especially for deployed forces. Key
enhancements planned include the
fixed network within Australia, longrange communications to deployed
forces, networked communications
systems throughout an area of
operations, tactical communications for
combat units, and improved
communications network management
systems. Specific projects will
include higher capacity satellite
communications based on a commercial
provider, enhanced broadband
communications with ships at sea, and
improved battlespace communications for
air and land force elements.

**Command, Logistics and**
**Business Systems**

8.87 Investment in systems to improve
the efficiency and effectiveness of
command and management functions
in the ADF is a high priority. Improved
command arrangements and systems
are essential to our ability to deploy
and operate effectively in complex
environments at short notice. Better
logistics and business systems will
increase combat power in the field and
save money. The key investments
planned over the coming decade are
the establishment of a single collocated
Theatre Headquarters, and the
development of two deployable
headquarters to provide on the spot
command for two deployed forces
simultaneously; a single integrated
command support system linking all


96 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

ADF elements; and an integrated
personnel, logistics and financial
system based on e-business principles.

**Costs**

8.88 Under the Defence Capability
Plan the Government anticipates that
over the decade it will spend an


average of $1.3 billion per year on
maintenance of information
capabilities. The expected capital
expenditure needed for the capability
enhancements totals around $1.9
billion over the decade, and additional
personnel and operating costs amount
to about $600 million.


**Capability Enhancements**
**Summary of Costs 2001-02 to 2010-11**

**Capability** **Capital** **Personnel and** **Total**

**Grouping** **Expenditure** **Operating Costs**

Land Forces $3.9 billion $1.1 billion $5.0 billion

Air Combat $5.3 billion $0.3 billion $5.6 billion

Maritime Forces $1.8 billion $0.3 billion $2.1 billion

Strike $0.8 billion $0 billion $0.8 billion

$1.9 billion $0.6 billion

$13.7 billion $2.3 billion


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 97


-----

# 9 – Industry

9.1 Australian industry is a vital component of Defence
capability, both through its direct contribution to the
development and acquisition of new capabilities and
through its role in the national support base. So a strong
industry base benefits Defence. We must take a strategic
approach to our defence industry base, and not regard
its capabilities as simply a by-product of procurement
decisions. The Government recognises that it has an
important role to play in outlining clear long-term
directions for the development of the ADF to provide a
more predictable and sustainable basis on which
industry can plan.

**The Role of Industry in our Defence**

9.2 Traditionally, the ADF has relied on industry for the
provision of military equipment, even though some of
this was provided by government-owned
factories and dockyards in Australia. With
the privatisation of government defence

There is strong public support for a
sound, competitive domestic industries and the continuing outsourcing
industrial base as a key element of of defence support functions, the
the national defence effort. dependence on industry, and more generally

**Report of the Community** the private sector, has grown dramatically.
**Consultation Team: Key finding** Support for combat capabilities, such as

maintenance and repair of aircraft,
increasingly resides in industry.

9.3 This trend of increasing reliance on industry will
continue. Australia’s future defence capability will
require access to advanced technology - for both
equipment and training. The development, provision
and support of that technology is largely the domain
of industry, although the Defence Science and
Technology Organisation (DSTO) can also play a

98 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

significant role alongside industry,
particularly in the early stages of
technology development.

9.4 For all of these reasons, the
Government’s defence industry policy
proceeds from the
recognition that
industry, both
manufacturing and
service, will continue
to be an integral part
of Australia’s defence
capability.

Industry groups see themselves as a
fourth arm of defence capability.

**Report of the Community**
**Consultation Team: Key finding**


**The Importance of**
**Australian Defence**
**Industry**

**What We Need...**

9.5 The Government’s overall objective
for Australian defence industry was set
out in the 1998 publication entitled
_Defence And Industry - Strategic Policy_
_Statement. In summary, we want a_
sustainable and competitive defence
industry base, able to support a
technologically-advanced ADF. This
calls for efficient, innovative and
durable industries - and a close
partnership between Defence and
those industries.

9.6 Australia needs a specifically
targeted set of capacities in our
national industry and support base.
With our national defence expenditure
accounting for only one per cent of
world military expenditure, it is
unrealistic to aspire to complete
industrial self-sufficiency. Nor is


complete self-sufficiency necessary,
given our ability to access and acquire
many important technologies
from overseas.

9.7 Rather than self-sufficiency,
Australia needs
support in-country for
repair, maintenance,
modification and
provisioning - 
especially in wartime
when the ADF would
need urgent and
assured supply.
However, for provision of some highcost items, such as guided weapons, it
will be more effective to stockpile key
supplies than to replicate foreign
production facilities with high start up
costs and low production rates.
Australian defence industry, possibly
working in association with DSTO and
other research and development
agencies, also needs to have a capacity
to develop new solutions for the ADF’s
capabilities needs. This is particularly
the case in those niche areas where we
have needs unique to our environment

-  and when it is cost-effective for us to
seek innovative solutions.

9.8 Within that framework, the areas
that attract the highest priority for
support from Australian defence
industry are:

-  combat and systems software and
support;

-  data management and signal
processing, including for information
gathering and surveillance;


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 99


-----

-  command, control and
communications systems;

-  systems integration;

-  repair, maintenance and upgrades
of major weapons and surveillance
platforms; and

-  provision of services to support the
peacetime and operational
requirements of the ADF.

**...And How to Achieve It**

9.9 To meet those needs, the
Government’s approach will be a
strategic one that seeks to capitalise on
areas where Australia’s industry base
demonstrates particular strengths. In
those areas, our
defence industry
policy will
recognise and foster
A u s t r a l i a n
i n d u s t r y ’ s
innovative use of
a d v a n c e d
technologies. This
includes building
better linkages
between industry and DSTO to
capitalise on Australia’s strengths in
information capabilities, as it is
particularly important that industry
has the ability to provide high quality
support in such areas as command and
control systems, electronic warfare
capabilities, surveillance and sensors.

9.10 There are a number of areas where
the capacity for high technology
software support has been


successfully introduced into
Australian industry via defence
projects, such as those relating to
upgrades and integration of systems
on aircraft and command support
systems. This provides Australia with
the opportunity to generate a
capability edge through the innovative
use of that technology.

9.11 Significant parts of the Defence
Capability Plan call for technologically
innovative solutions. The Government
will seek to capitalise on the potential
of Australian industry to offer such
solutions by continuing to initiate and
pursue high-technology projects. We
will, however, give much greater
emphasis to
managing risk
effectively in those
projects. Moreover,
important parts of
our technology
development effort
will remain based
on existing, proven
technology designs,
as were the ANZAC
and Minehunter Coastal ships.

9.12 The Government will also seek to
make greater use of off-the-shelf
purchases, especially where the
additional capability from Australianspecific modifications does not justify
the increased cost and risk. However,
total reliance on off-the-shelf
purchases is neither achievable nor
desirable. It would risk our forces
having inferior technology in key areas


100 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

**Our Current**
**Industrial Scene**

9.15 Industry undertakes a wide range
of tasks for the ADF. It:

-  repairs and maintains much of the
ADF’s equipment;

-  fuels its aircraft, ships and vehicles;

-  provides munitions;

-  feeds, clothes, houses and
accommodates its people;

-  transports those people and their
stores;

-  fits and tests new weapons and
sensors to ADF platforms;

-  builds and adapts new weapons to
suit our unique needs; and

-  helps to train the men and
women serving in the Army, Navy
and Air Force.

9.16 To undertake these tasks,
Australia’s defence contractors have a
wide range of high level skills and
capabilities - from heavy engineering
to modern electronics and software
engineering and provision of basic
services.


such as combat systems, and place the
ADF at a serious disadvantage if local
industry were unable to repair or
modify critical equipment in wartime.

9.13 Defence industry will not flourish
within the Australian defence market
alone, with its finite and uneven level
of demand. Rather, sales to Defence
should be the basis for capturing
broader markets, here and overseas. In
short, Australian defence industry
needs to be competitive on an
international basis. Defence will assist
through export facilitation - consistent
with Australia’s international
obligations and foreign policy and
strategic interests - and will
increasingly look at the potential for
international collaboration when
considering its own procurements.


9.14 Ultimately, however, the ability to
develop a prosperous and effective
Australian defence industry rests
with industry itself. The Government
will shape the environment in which
industry makes its
decisions, but will not
intervene and shape
the market through There is widespread concern about
subsidies and the decline in Australia’s
p r e c o n c e i v e d manufacturing capability, the desolutions. We will not skilling of Australia’s workforce,

including the ADF, and about

limit ourselves to

industry’s capacity to support and

purchases from

sustain ADF deployments.

Australian industry,

**Report of the Community**

nor pay an unduly

**Consultation Team: Key finding**

high premium
for them.


9.17 A combination
of government
policy and market
pressures has
brought significant
improvement in the
capability of
Australian defence
industry. In many
areas, it is now
highly cost

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 101


-----

competitive. Major projects, when well acquisitions in the defence sector have
managed can introduce new consisted of larger companies
technologies and skills in Australian absorbing smaller ones, rather than a
industry. consolidation among the larger

companies themselves.

9.18 Australian industry generally now
has the capacity to maintain all of the
ADF’s equipment, but sometimes with **Strengthening Our**
a high level of dependence on overseas **Defence Industry**
supply of spare parts, specialised **Capability**
munitions and advice on technology. 9.22 The Government is committed to

strengthening the defence industry base

9.19 Australia’s defence industry has

-  without encouraging

limitations in

inefficiency or

design and

dependence. As set out

m a n u fa c t u r i n g

Defence industry is worried by the in the _Defence and_

capabilities. Many

increasing gap between stated

_Industry - Strategic_

companies in most policy toward industry and its

_Policy Statement the_

defence sectors practice.

Government is

remain dependent **Report of the Community**

pursuing six specific

on Australian **Consultation Team: Key finding**

objectives. They are to:

Defence orders, with

-  integrate industry

i n f o r m a t i o n

into capability

technology being a

development;

notable exception. Defence exports are
small and diversification into civil -  enhance industry’s contribution to
markets has been patchy, with most the nation’s capability edge;
success being in the aerospace sector. -  reform procurement;

-  establish new ways to involve

9.20 The ability to develop new

Australian industry in defence

technology is strong in some specialist

business;

areas - such as underwater systems but lacks a broad base. Much of the -  increase Australian exports and
research and development base in materiel cooperation; and
Australia resides in smaller -  commit to cultural change and
companies. improved communication.

9.21 Industry consolidation has 9.23 In 1998, as part of the defence
occurred, but not yet on the scales of industry policy statement, the
North America and Europe. Many of Government announced 49
the Australian mergers and initiatives. Nearly all of these


102 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

initiatives are now in place, but we sectors in the program. They will
need to build on these steps. The focus engage the existing strengths of
will be on providing better guidance Australian industry and have the
to industry, developing better business potential to introduce new skills and
practices within Defence, and capacities. These include essential
building better relationships between systems engineering and integration
Defence and industry. skills in the modernisation of aircraft,

ships and vehicles; the construction of
new ships; the development of

**Better Guidance**

AEW&C aircraft systems; and a range

9.24 A sustainable Australian defence

of communications, command and

industry needs a predictable basis on

control, and information systems.

which to plan. Importantly, the
program of capability enhancements

9.27 The AEW&C

outlined in Chapter

project will use and

Eight provides that

develop key

solid basis for long- Defence industry wants to see a industry skills and
term planning by strong industry aspect in the new capabilities in
Australian industry. forthcoming Defence Policy

systems integration

Statement that includes a clear

and advanced

9.25 Through the

articulation of the longer-term

electronics. These

Defence Capability requirements of both Government

new skills will be

Plan, the Govern- and industry.

critical to effective

ment has set out

Defence industry wants

support of the new

development paths predictability and direction to allow

aircraft over their

in each of the key it to plan in a sustainable manner.

life, and will

capability areas over **Report of the Community**

contribute to the

the next 20 years. **Consultation Team: Key findings**

c o n t i n u i n g

This will improve

development of

Defence’s ability

skills needed for

to assess more

other Defence

systematically and better manage the

capabilities. These include the longer

industry capacity associated with each

term commitment to acquisition of

major Defence capability area.

advanced combat and strike aircraft

9.26 The Government wants and systems to replace F/A-18 and Fappropriate, strong Australian 111 aircraft. In addition, the AEW&C
industry involvement in pursuing the project offers particular opportunities
program of enhancements outlined in to access overseas markets and
this White Paper. There are significant augment skills and technology
opportunities for many industry through international collaboration.

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 103


-----

9.28 Australian shipbuilders now have
guidance on the Government’s naval
shipbuilding program for a decade and
beyond. In particular, the Government
has foreshadowed a major surface
combatant program to follow the
ANZAC project, which is nearing
completion.

9.29 Until that new
c o n s t r u c t i o n
program gets under
way, the upgrade of
the ANZAC
frigates, planned to
start in 2001 and
finish in 2007, will
help naval
shipbuilders retain
their physical
infrastructure and some of their
existing workforce skills. The
construction of new patrol boats and
two new support vessels provides
opportunities for industry, although
utilising different skills and
infrastructure from that required for
large combatant vessels.

9.30 The Government is also
committed to developing and
sustaining the engineering and design
capabilities needed to support the land
forces. In particular, Australian
industry will have a high level of
participation in the upgrade of the
M113 armoured vehicles, which will
complement the program already
announced for additional light
armoured vehicles.


9.31 The information technology and
electronics sectors will also benefit
from the Government’s program.
Australian industry has built up a
substantial skill base in the high
priority areas of surveillance and
reconnaissance, imagery, intelligence
systems, communications, command
and control, information management,
and information
security systems.
High priority
capabilities now
being developed
within industry
include data fusion
and electronic
warfare systems.
The Government
is keen to maintain this skill-base
through involving industry in
the range of new command,
control communications,
intelligence capabilities and similar
systems identified in the Defence
Capability Plan.

9.32 Developing a sustainable industry
base also means encouraging research
and development opportunities and
export activities. As part of our overall
industry and technology policy, the
Government is finalising an
Innovation Action Plan, which will
outline measures to foster new ideas,
encourage commercialisation of
research into new technologies and
support such research. Consistent with
this approach, future solicitations for
major defence projects will encourage


104 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

bidders to offer a broader range of
research and development and export
proposals as part of their Australian
Industry Involvement program. We
will look for industry proposals that
offer gains to Defence and commercial
benefit to the company.

**Better Business Practices —**
**Defence Acquisition Reform**

9.33 On coming to office the
Government was concerned that the
organisation it inherited did not have
sufficient flexibility, capacity and the
necessary governance arrangements to
properly manage complex Defence
projects and maintain capability. The
Government has introduced a series of
changes to address these problems most recently and importantly
through the establishment of a single
area of accountability and
management headed by the Under
Secretary Defence Materiel. This
amalgamation of the Defence
Acquisition Organisation and Support
Command Australia to form a single
Defence Materiel Organisation will
enable an effective whole-of-life
approach to be taken to defence
materiel and simplifies Defence’s
interaction with industry.

9.34 To be fully effective, the new
Defence Materiel Organisation requires
organisational and in some cases
cultural reorientation away from
Canberra towards its operating base in
the operational units. As part of this, the


Government will improve support of its
materiel personnel through a range of
initiatives including improved
conditions of service in keeping with
changed mobility requirements, a
stronger focus on selecting for and
developing individual competencies,
and improved usage of military
personnel. Changes will go hand in
hand with the clarification of personal
responsibilities and accountabilities.
Such improvements will facilitate a
smarter and more focused use of
external professionals and industry.
Industry will also be engaged earlier,
through simplified processes, which in
combination with other measures will
lead to reduction in unnecessary
industry cost and improved project
turn-around times. There will also be
more effective use of past performance
evaluations for assessing contractors
and their proposals. Importantly, the
Materiel organisation will adopt
commercial best practice as its norm
and assess its performance against
industry benchmarks.

**Better Relationships**

9.35 Difficulties in past Defence projects
have sometimes corresponded with
poor relationships between the
contractor and Defence. The need for
better management of the
relationships was identified in the 1998
Strategic Policy Statement, and the
Government is undertaking a range of
reforms in this area.


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 105


-----

9.36 Part of the acquisition reform
program in the new Defence Materiel
Organisation will involve earlier and
more frequent involvement of
industry in development of projects,
facilitated by better funding of
investigatory phases of projects.
More informative briefings on a oneto-one basis will be used and cost
estimates will be made visible to
industry.

9.37 Partnering arrangements will
become commonplace for significant


Defence procurements. Defence has
now set up a unit tasked with
promoting and monitoring Defence
industry relationships, and will issue
an annual report card on its progress
with partnering to the Defence and
Industry Advisory Council.

9.38 Many of these initiatives are
already under way. By mid-2001,
Defence will present an
implementation report to the Defence
and Industry Advisory Council. This
report will be made public.


106 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

# 10 – Science and Technology

10.1 An important part of maintaining our capability
edge is to harness people and technology. This White
Paper is being prepared at a time when technology is
changing rapidly and Australia must be in a position
to embrace and adapt to these changes. In some areas,
improvements in technology are likely to affect military
capabilities and operations significantly. For example,
the vast and far-reaching changes in information
technology combined with innovative design of
platforms may lead to ‘mission convergence’ - that is,
complex systems that can undertake more than one
primary mission.


10.2 On the other hand, we must be careful
not to be oversold on technology change. The
capabilities that are planned in the context
of this White Paper will be with us for a long
time, notwithstanding that they may be
upgraded several times during their lifetime.
As such, those capabilities will be a major
and enduring determinant of our future
force structure.


There was widespread agreement
that Australia should maintain the
knowledge edge in intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance
capabilities.

**Report of the Community**
**Consultation Team**


10.3 This Chapter describes the key trends
in defence-related technologies and how the
Government plans to exploit technological
opportunities to enhance ADF capability.

**Technology Trends and the**
**Revolution in Military Affairs**

10.4 The Government has considered the trends in
defence technology in developing the Defence
Capability Plan set out in this White Paper. We have
been concerned to exploit the new opportunities in a

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 107


-----

sensible and structured way. We have
attempted to identify those aspects of
technological change that are most
likely to affect major long-term
capabilities and thus where
investments will need to be made in
coming years.

10.5 The most important development
changing the conduct of warfare is the
ability to increase vastly the speed and
capacity to collect, organise, store,
process, tailor and distribute
information. This development is
driven primarily by information
technologies to meet civil and
commercial needs.


program in RMA-related technologies
to ensure that Australia was prepared
for the adoption of new technologies as
concepts matured. This research
program will continue to be led by
DSTO in collaboration with
universities, other research
organisations and industries.

10.7 Characteristics of the RMA
include:

-  integration of military forces for
joint operations;

-  individual systems and capabilities
networked together to achieve
whole-of-force effects;

-  technology changes and changes to
military operations and doctrine;

-  increased tempo of operations; and

-  asymmetric threats.


10.6 The uptake of information military operations and doctrine;
technology by the military, pioneered

-  increased tempo of operations; and

in the United States, is having such a

-  asymmetric threats.

profound effect that
it has led to what is 10.8 The RMA also
generally known as places a high
the Revolution in The recognition of the advantages

premium on new

Military Affairs of the information age was echoed

personnel skills,

(RMA). The in a number of submissions, and

training approaches

G o v e r n m e n t was characterised by the

and organisational

acknowledgment of the ‘Revolution

recognised the

structure.

in Military Affairs’ and the need for

o p p o r t u n i t i e s

Australia to capitalise on the

presented by the 10.9 RMA

opportunities this presented.

RMA and has technologies impart
established an Office **Report of the Community** the ability to know

**Consultation Team**

of the Revolution in more than one’s
Military Affairs. This adversary in
office is focussed on relevant areas. This
exploring opportunities and can result in a decisive military
developing our RMA partnerships advantage when linked with
with other nations, particularly the appropriate weapons and concepts of
United States. The Government also operation. Indeed, this will most
supported a research and development probably be one of the decisive factors


108 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

in warfare over the coming decades. As
explained in Chapter Eight, our
information capability is particularly
significant in Australia’s strategic
circumstances. We must ensure that
we have the skills and infrastructure to
absorb and adapt the technologies
involved to our needs. We have
programmed major investments in
this area, including
i m p o r t a n t
c o o p e r a t i v e
programs with the
United States. These
cover not only
i n f o r m a t i o n
technology per se,
but also incorporate
the emerging use of
s p a c e - b a s e d
systems. These
investments will be supported by
enhanced research and development
programs in DSTO where Australian
research is an important component in
our international cooperation.

**Exploiting the**
**Opportunities**

**Precision Effects**

10.10 Information technology in the
military domain is not limited to
battlespace situational awareness issues.
It is also an important contributor to
other significant trends in warfare improved command systems, ‘just in
time’ logistics and achieving precision
effects at long range.


10.11 In the latter case,
improvements in guidance and
targeting systems, enabled by
information technology and
electronics generally, will be
complemented by improvements
in other areas of weapons
technologies that will improve
range and reduce collateral damage.
As technology advances, weapons will
become more
adaptable and
tailored through
increased use of
software-control
systems. We must
ensure that we
have the skills to
exploit this
emerging ability
to tailor weapons
to our specific needs. At the same
time we need to maintain awareness
of emerging weapon concepts that
have the potential to have a major
impact on the future battlespace.
Leading edge research and
development programs in DSTO,
working closely with industry, will
be fundamental for building these
key capabilities in Australia.

**Platforms and Networks**

10.12 In platform technologies,
information technology again has the
potential to change the way we fight.
Current trends are not only to improve
the cooperation between all types of
platforms through sensor and


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 109


-----

networking developments but also,
through automation and remote
control, to greatly decrease the number
of personnel needed to operate the
platform, thus reducing both
personnel-related costs and risks. In
addition, platform effectiveness is
further advanced by developments in
stealth technologies and selfprotection systems - electronic and
physical - which are likely to improve
performance markedly against
targeting missiles. Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles and Unmanned Combat
Aerial Vehicles are emerging concepts
that offer Australia a great deal of
potential for surveillance,
reconnaissance, information gathering
and eventually the delivery of combat
power. To this end, Australia will
continue a cooperative project in a
major Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
program with the United States.

10.13 Increased reliance on networks in
military operations requires strong
assurance as to their availability and
security against potential adversary
actions (information operations).
DSTO has established a research and
development program in this area,
which will be enhanced as Defence
capabilities are fielded and in
response to increasing threats to
Defence networks.

10.14 Although information
technology and electronics-related
issues will be a major driver of the
capabilities of future platforms, there
are other important technology


developments that will greatly
influence how we acquire, generate
and maintain our fleets. For example,
electric propulsion for surface
warships has the potential to
revolutionise existing concepts for ship
design by freeing up hull space,
lowering purchase price, and reducing
operating and maintenance costs.
DSTO has initiated a research program,
with overseas cooperation, to
understand how these technologies
might change ship operations.

10.15 Advanced information and
integration technologies provide the
ability to upgrade combat capability
rapidly. This is particularly the case for
our aircraft and ships. Since we operate
some platforms that are unique to
Australia - such as the Collins class
submarines and F-111 aircraft - we
need to have available the science and
technology skills to support upgrades.
DSTO, working closely with industry
and overseas partners, has established
a centre of expertise in combat systems
in support of the Collins. This centre
will be expanded to include other
maritime and air combat systems with
an enhanced role for DSTO in support
of system upgrades.

10.16 This ability for rapid upgrades
will also drive a continued need to
keep the hull or airframe in service for
long periods. Australia has built up a
reputation as a world leader in
extending the service life of aircraft.
DSTO in collaboration with industry
needs to ensure that these skills are


110 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

maintained since some life extensions
can be very cost-effective and the
expertise is not available elsewhere. In
a more general sense, we need to
maintain basic skills across a wide
range of technologies in order to
deliver the in-service support and
enhancement of the combat
capabilities outlined for development
in this White Paper.

**Human Dimensions**

10.17 Wherever technology developments
lead us, in the final analysis, people
carry out military tasks so it is
important that we continue to attach
top priority to the human aspects of
technology in warfare. Nowhere is this
more evident than in the land
environment where the individual will
continue to be the primary warfighting
‘platform’. Developing technologies in
such areas as night vision, navigation
and micro-vehicles will enable the
soldier to move faster and see further,
conduct operations over 24 hours in all
terrains and have vastly improved
firepower at his or her fingertips. DSTO
has established a research program
aimed at better understanding and
supporting individual and small groups
of soldiers which will be developed
further as new technologies emerge.

10.18 In addition to the application of
science and technology directly to our
combat capabilities, the emerging
information-based technologies have
the potential to change the way we


train for operations. Advances in
computer-based simulation can
provide cost-effective planning and
training tools using virtual realitybased simulators.

**Being a Skilled User of**
**Technology**

10.19 Many, if not most, of the emerging
trends are underpinned by advances in
electronics, with information
technologies being the most pervasive.
However, these will be complemented
by new fields such as biological and
nano-technologies, and improvements
in materials and structures. All of these
technologies will be closely watched
over the coming years. The primary
challenge is to select and acquire
expertise and capability in those
technologies that offer the most
advantages in gaining and
maintaining the knowledge edge.

10.20 Most technologies will emerge
from the civil sector and the challenge
for military communities will be to
identify the potential and then commit
the time and resources to adapt them
into military tools and capabilities.
Australia must have the capability to
do this in selected niche areas.

10.21 The ability to identify effectively
and incorporate those technologies
that sustain the capability of the ADF
will be guided by simulation and
modelling, through both qualitative
and quantitative wargames. Defence


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 111


-----

will evaluate its current warfare
concepts and seek to capitalise on
opportunities and prevent or dominate
potential threats to our security.

10.22 A natural outcome of rapidly
emerging technology and its
increasing uptake by Defence is a
need to understand how best to use
it in the
environments
where we might
operate. For
instance, most
missiles are
designed to
operate in the
cool northern
hemisphere - far
different from
our hot humid
tropics. We can
expect science
and technology
to be of
i n c r e a s i n g
importance to
the ADF as we
move to the
future.

**DSTO - Its**
**Role**

10.23 To succeed in this dynamic
environment Defence, and
particularly DSTO, must remain
attuned to trends and be agile in
responding to them. This means that
DSTO must be a highly focussed and


expert science and technology
organisation that can interpret military
needs. It must be able to assess overseas
trends, develop new technologies where
appropriate, and build strong linkages
with industry to ensure that, where
appropriate, new technologies are
exploited to our advantage.

10.24 Besides
this, DSTO will
play its part in
meeting the
Government’s
reform agenda
for Defence and

-  consistent
with the
Government’s
for thcoming
I n n o v a t i o n
Action Plan - for
innovation in
the wider
research and
development
c o m m u n i t y
and industry.
DSTO is putting
in place
improved and
more transparent accountability arrangements that will allow
increased visibility and responsiveness
of its program of work to government
and to its stakeholders.

10.25 As well, DSTO will undertake a
fundamental review of its program of
work and its structures to ensure that


112 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

it is poised to take best advantage of the
emerging RMA, information and other
high technologies. However, it will
need to retain its more traditional but
vital science and technology expertise
in areas such as aircraft and ship
structures.

10.26 DSTO has a role to play in
supporting and upgrading, through
life, those platforms unique to
Australia. It must continue and widen
its liaison with industry and
universities to provide the national
support infrastructure for such
platforms and elsewhere where
appropriate. Improved linkages with
industry will be important in
transferring knowledge and fostering
innovation, particularly in small to
medium enterprises.

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 113


-----

114 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

## Section Five | Funding

THE GOVERNMENT’S DEFENCE POLICY 115


-----

116 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

# 11 – Defence Funding

11.1 To fund the program of development for Australia’s
armed forces that is set out in the Defence Capability
Plan, the Government estimates that defence spending
will need to grow by an average of about three per cent
per annum in real terms over the next decade. (Real
spending is measured by reference to the GDP deflator.)
The Government is committed to meeting this funding
requirement, and it has directed Defence to plan within
that budget. The Government intends that funding for
2001-02 and 2002-03 will increase by $500 million and
$1,000 million respectively, to provide substantial initial
funding for a number of key initiatives. Extra funding
will be additional to the supplementation, ranging from
$415 to $444 million per annum, that the Government
has already provided to generate the extra forces for
Australia’s involvement in INTERFET and UNTAET. In
later years, funding increases may fall below
three per cent, depending on budgetary and
defence requirements in a given year.

The public supports an increase in
defence funding. 11.2 Over the last decade defence funding

**Report of the Community** remained relatively constant in real terms.
**Consultation Team: Key finding** The proposed level of growth constitutes a

substantial increase in defence spending. By

We gained a strong sense that...the

the end of the decade, defence spending in

majority of the public viewed

cash terms will stand at approximately $16

increased investment in our
military capabilities as a prudent billion per year in today’s dollars, compared
insurance measure...There was a with $12.2 billion this year. In all, defence
very strong consensus that this is no spending over the decade is expected to
time for complacency about increase by a total of $23.5 billion in real
Australia’s national defence effort. terms, compared to total defence spending

**Report of the Community** had the defence budget been held flat in real
**Consultation Team** terms over the decade. While the majority

of this additional funding will pay for the
enhancements outlined in Chapter Eight,


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 117


-----

$7.5 billion of this guidance for Defence
funding has been because it recognises

A recurring theme during DCT

allocated to maintain the difficulty of

meetings was the fact that Defence

existing capabilities. planning and

must focus on spending which is

budgeting for the

cost-effective in the long-term, not

11.3 A long-term

just on short-term costs. development of

growth rate of three

defence capabilities

**Report** **of** **the** **Defence**

per cent per annum

without a clear

**Consultation Team**

is slightly below the

understanding of

average annual The public expects greater funding levels a
growth rate of discipline in defence expenditure. decade ahead, and
Australia’s economy **Report of the Community** even beyond. For
over the last two **Consultation Team: Key finding** example, our
decades. If our

decisions about the

economy grows on

future composition

average as fast over

of the Navy’s surface

the next decade as it has over the last

fleet need to take account of the costs

two decades, then the Government’s

of building new ships throughout this

defence funding projections will mean

decade and into the next.

that in 2010 we will be spending about
the same proportion of GDP on 11.6 The Government’s new approach
defence as we are today. That remains to capability planning and defence
1.9 per cent. We believe this level of funding will provide an improved
funding is justified within our overall basis for accountability by Defence to
national priorities and will ensure government and the public for the

efficient and effective use of defence

that we can achieve the strategic

funds. The Government has

objectives we have identified.

introduced a defence planning and
budgeting process, built around a new,

**A New Approach to** annual Defence Financial and
**Defence Funding** Management Plan. The first of these

11.4 The defence spending figures will be produced this year as part of the
provided in this White Paper are the 2001-02 budget cycle.
most specific long-term defence

11.7 In this new process, Defence will

funding projections provided by any

move to output-based budgeting

Australian government in more than

arrangements within the constraints

25 years.

of the 10 year overall budget.

11.5 The Government has taken the 11.8 Each year as part of the budget
important step of providing this process, Defence will present in the


118 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

Defence Financial and Management
Plan an annual program which will
detail those projects, measures and
activities required to implement the
Defence Capability Plan in that year. It
will also present and explain any
revisions of the Defence Capability
Plan that may be necessary.

11.9 A key element of that process will
be the setting of annual targets for the
delivery of capability that Defence will
be held accountable for meeting.
Government will also consider for
approval all major capability
development proposals. This includes
the details of each new major
investment project, and significant
changes to force structure and
preparedness levels.

11.10 Other improvements in financial
and budgetary management in
Defence have also been implemented,


including the refinement of business
structures to separate output
management from enabling and owner
support streams; the appointment of a
Chief Finance Officer to improve
organisational and financial
accountability and performance
information; and the establishment of a
Defence Improvement Committee,
chaired by the Minister for Defence, to
oversee continuous improvements at all
levels of Defence in management and
accountability.

**Why Do We Need to**
**Spend More?**

11.11 Four key cost pressures have
affected the defence budget in recent
years and have resulted in the need to
plan on a sustained increase in defence
funding. These are personnel
costs, operating costs, investment in


AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 119


-----

new capability and increased
readiness costs.

**Personnel Costs**

11.12 Defence per capita personnel costs
have risen by an average of 4.9 per cent
per annum over the last decade. That
is faster than the increase in average
personnel costs in the community as a
whole. That margin can be attributed
to the significant rise in average skill
levels in both the ADF and Defence’s
civilian workforce, as the size of that
workforce has fallen sharply. Over the
past fifteen years, the number of
permanent uniformed personnel has
fallen by 27 per cent from 70,000 to
51,000, and numbers of civilian
employees have fallen by 60 per cent
from 40,000 to 16,000.

11.13 These decreases reflect
substantial efficiency gains through a
combination of commercialisation,
outsourcing and increasing labour
productivity, which have been
important factors in limiting defence
cost increases. The Government will
continue to look for further
opportunities to increase labour
productivity within Defence, while
being mindful of the constraints
associated with our required force
structure and associated preparedness
levels. In recognition of those
constraints, the Government has
factored into the projected defence
funding increases provided for in this
White Paper an allowance for 2 per
cent per annum growth in Defence’s


real per-capita personnel costs. In
addition, separate provisions have
been made for the additional personnel
costs associated with specific
capability enhancements.

**Operating Costs**

11.14 Operating cost pressures have
increased in recent years. Over the
coming decade it is expected that these
pressures can be offset by further
efficiencies, and by capital investment
in new and refurbished systems with
lower operating costs. The funding
projections are therefore based on an
estimate that operating costs will not
grow in real terms over the decade,
except for the additional operating
costs of new enhanced capability,
which are specifically provided for.

**Investment in Capability**

11.15 The third key factor driving the
need for defence funding increases is
the need to undertake substantial
investment in new capabilities and to
maintain existing capabilities over the
next decade. These pressures have been
amplified especially by the need to
make provision for the replacement of
the F/A-18 fleet. Although the F/A-18
will still be in service for another 15
years, significant funding for its
replacement will need to be provided
from about 2007.

**Increased Readiness**

11.16 Defence funding has been
pressured by the need to increase
significantly the readiness of many


120 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

elements of the ADF over recent years. **Future Reform and**
As we have explained in earlier chapters, **Efficiency Savings**
the past decade has seen a steadily

11.17 Defence has undertaken major

accelerating increase in the demands on

reforms over the past decade, and has

the ADF for the conduct of active and

produced efficiency savings of the order

often highly demanding operations. For

of $30 million in 1991-92 to more than

the past four years the

$1200 million in 2000
ADF has been

01. Further efficiency

continually deployed

Increased expenditure on defence measures are under

in significant

was not just viewed as an way, which are

numbers to

investment in weapons systems, but expected to deliver

operations within also as an investment in the future additional savings of
our own immediate of Australia. The ADF had a social at least $200 million
neighbourhood, as contract with Australian society in

per year by 2003-04.

well as to a range of that it provided job security,

These savings have

smaller operations training and direction for the youth

been included in the

further afield. The of Australia.

funding projections

defence budget is nor- **Report of the Community**

in this White Paper.

mally supplemented **Consultation Team**

11.18 The Govern
for the specific

Apart from business groups, many

additional costs of ment’s decision to

people considered that the

undertaking each project sustained

outsourcing of support functions

operation, as it is had been taken too far and was increases in defence
difficult to budget in impacting negatively on the funding over the
advance for the operational capabilities of the coming decade does
i n h e r e n t l y Defence Force. not indicate that we
u n p r e d i c t a b l e **Report of the Community** believe there are no
occurrence of such **Consultation Team: Key finding** further efficiency
costs. But the savings to be
increased costs of achieved in Defence.
maintaining forces at On the contrary,
higher levels of readiness for such there are clearly important areas in
operations is reflected in the defence which substantial efficiency savings
budget, and imposes significant can be made. The Government is
pressures on it. The Government has committed to pursuing these savings
concluded that it is important to vigorously in areas including
maintain the current higher levels of property disposal, greater use of
readiness over coming years, with contracting-out, improved IT
associated costs to the defence budget. management and reduced personnel

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY 121


-----

overheads. Any further savings
achieved and that the Government
decides will be retained in Defence, will
be offset from the projected funding
guidance for Defence.

11.19 The Government places
particular priority on ensuring that
savings measures do not adversely
affect the fundamentals of the
profession of arms, or the ADF’s ability
to respond effectively to the unique
demands of military operations. Reform


measures that are entirely appropriate
in the civilian sector, including in
civilian areas of Defence, may be less
appropriate in the military context. We
are very conscious of the unique nature
of military service, and of the need to
ensure that reform measures do not
detract from it. At the same time the
Government is strongly committed to
continuing improvement and the need
to ensure that money spent on defence
is managed wisely.


**Defence Funding - Total Estimated Cost by Five Broad Capability Groups**
```
18

```
```
16
14
12
10
 8
 6
 4
 2
 0

```
122 AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


**Capability Groupings**

Land Forces
Air Combat
Maritime Forces
Strike
Information Capability

1 In constant 2000-01 prices.


-----

**Australian War Memorial images**

Pages 3 and 23
ART22494 - Private A.E. (‘Curley’) Irwin
Drawing by Ivor Hele, 1943 - coloured crayons and
charcoal on brown paper

Page 5
ART21055 - Compass platform, HMAS Hobart
Drawing by Norton, Frank, 1941 - carbon pencil
heightened with white crayon

Page 9
ART21930 - Pilot Sergeant, Port Pirie
Drawing by Ivor Hele, 1942 - pen and ink with wash

Page 16
ART40626 - Diggers embarking on Chinook
helicopter
Drawing by Ken McFadyen, 1967-1968 - charcoal

Page 21
ART22739 - Barge landing, Oro Bay, New Guinea
Painting by Roy Hodgkinson, 1942 - black and
sanguine crayon with coloured washes

AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE POLICY


-----

-----

