-----

Publishing information

_Media owner, publisher, editor:_

Federal Chancellery of the Republic of Austria,

Department IV – Coordination

Division IV/6 – Security Policy Affairs

Ballhausplatz 2, 1014 Vienna

_Graphic design: Federal Chancellery | ARGE Grafik_

_Printed by: Digitalprintcenter BM.I and Heeresdruckzentrum_

Vienna, July 2013


-----

## Austrian Security Strategy

##### Security in a new decade—
 Shaping security

###### Vienna, 2013


-----

###### Contents

**1 Security policy in the 21st century** **4**

**2 The security situation in Austria** **5**

2.1 Situational analysis 5

2.1.1 Developments in Europe and at international level 5

2.1.2 Challenges, risks and threats  7

2.1.3 Opportunities and possibilities of shaping security policy 7

2.2 Analysis of the situation in Austria 8

**3 Austrian security policy in**
**the new decade** **9**

3.1 Security values, interests and objectives 9

3.2 Security policy at national level 10

3.2.1 Comprehensive Security Provision 10

3.2.2 Internal security 10

3.2.3 Defence policy 11

3.2.4 Civil-military cooperation 12

3.2.5 Diplomacy and Austria’s policy of hosting international organisations 12

3.3 Austrian security policy within the context of the EU 12

3.3.1 Justice and home affairs 13

3.3.2 Common Foreign and Security Policy 13

3.3.3 Council of Europe 14

3.4 Austrian security policy in the international context 14

3.4.1 Internal security 14

3.4.2 External security 14

2


-----

**4 The Austrian National Council Resolution of 3 July 2013**
**(on a new security strategy for Austria)** **16**

4.1 General recommendations 16

4.2 Internal security 17

4.3 Foreign policy aspects of security policy 19

4.4 Defence policy 20

3


-----

#### 1 Security policy in the 21st century

Concerning the security of Austria and the EU, there are fundamental differences between the
general circumstances in the second half of the 20th century and those of the present and the
foreseeable future. The security agenda is no longer determined by the consequences of the
former conflict between the East and the West. Consequently, and due to the collective European process of integration and cooperation, the European States now have the opportunity,
for the first time in history, to achieve a self-determined, lasting collective future in an area in
which peace, freedom, security and justice prevail.

At the same time, the security situation in Europe is now marked by new challenges, risks and
threats, which have a greater level of complexity, interconnectedness and unpredictability than
before and relate to internal and external security. In this age of globalisation, regional events
can have global repercussions, and aspects of individual security are becoming increasingly
important. The fundamental human rights and the needs of human beings are thus at the heart
of all considerations relating to security.

Modern security policy has become a cross-cutting issue which has to be taken into account
in almost every sphere of life and policy. It must be based on a comprehensive and integrated
approach, allow for active participation and be implemented in the spirit of solidarity.

Comprehensive security policy means that external and internal aspects of security are inextricably interlinked, as are civil and military aspects. It extends beyond the purview of the
ministries and departments traditionally in charge of security and encompasses instruments
from policy areas, like economy and social affairs, integration, development, environment,
agriculture, finance, transport and infrastructure, education, information and communication,
as well as health. Integrated security policy must be based on a cooperative approach between
governmental and non-governmental actors; security must be understood as a “comprehensive
package”, as it were. Proactive security policy means working towards preventing threats from
emerging in the first place or at least taking steps to mitigate their negative impact (shaping
security). Security policy based on solidarity takes into account that the security of neutral
Austria is now largely interconnected with the security of the EU as a whole.

In the 21st century, Austria’s security policy, therefore, encompasses all of the measures at
national, European and international levels intended to achieve the following objectives:

**••** actively working towards shaping a situation that is conducive to the security of Austria,
its population and the European Union (EU) as a whole;

**••** preventing threats from emerging or taking effect;

**••** protecting against and coping with threats.

4


-----

#### 2 The security situation in Austria

###### 2.1 Situational analysis

2.1.1 Developments in Europe and at international level
The developments in security policy within Europe are increasingly determined by the work
of international organisations, particularly the European Union (EU). The EU has become an
established player in the fields of justice and home affairs as well as in foreign and security
policy—areas in which it has developed an increasing capacity to act. The EU is a model of
political stability, security and prosperity; however, the shortcomings in stability and prosperity in the peripheral areas of the continent negatively affect its security.

Today, due to their complexity, security issues can only be resolved through international
cooperation. The role of international organisations and forums is thus becoming ever more
important, as is their collaboration in a “comprehensive approach”. At the same time, the
role of individual states is generally diminishing in relative terms. However, certain emerging
powers are set to gain substantial importance with regard to the economy and security. The
fact that some of these emerging powers do not adequately represent the values of democracy,
human rights and the rule of law presents a further challenge.

The EU intends to make increasing efforts to tackle the new security policy tasks. It will need
to respond flexibly to new kinds of challenges in the future and develop new instruments and
mechanisms in order to confront the security implications of regional crises, environmental
disasters, migration or climate change. The EU’s activities in other larger policy areas also
increasingly encompass elements of security, for instance in the stabilisation and association
process of the countries in the Western Balkans, the European Neighbourhood Policy, cooperation with the countries of the Mediterranean, the EU Strategy for the Danube Region and
development cooperation.

Rapid progress is being made in the field of internal security in terms of creating an area of
freedom, security and justice in Europe. The main priorities here are promoting the citizens’
rights, ensuring that Europe offers protection, dealing with migration and asylum issues and
strengthening the external aspects of freedom, security and justice. Furthermore, the EU
Internal Security Strategy, adopted in 2010, defines a “European Security Model”. Its aim
is to combat not only the effects but also the causes of insecurity, prioritise prevention and
anticipation, involve all of the relevant political, economic and social sectors concerned with
the protection of the people, and establish stronger links between internal and external security. The EU Internal Security Strategy places particular emphasis on the “Salzburg Forum”, a
Central European security partnership initiated by Austria, which consists of eight countries.

The EU has significantly enhanced its potential as a player in crisis management by creating the
Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) and the Common Security and Defence Policy
(CSDP) and by deepening these policy areas with the Lisbon Treaty. The so-called “Battlegroups” and “Civilian Response Teams” were thus established to provide rapidly deployable
EU forces, and the scope of the relevant “Petersberg tasks”[1] was extended accordingly.

1 Article 43(2) TEU

5


-----

Global CSDP operations cover a wide range of crisis management missions, ranging from
traditional peacekeeping and civil-military deployments to complex civilian missions aimed
at establishing a comprehensive system of the rule of law. Under the Lisbon Treaty, Member
States shall undertake progressively to improve their military capabilities and shall make civilian and military capabilities available to the Union for the implementation of the common
security and defence.[2] Furthermore, a mutual assistance obligation in the event of an armed
aggression was introduced, which shall not prejudice the specific character of the security and
defence policy of certain Member States[3] as well as a solidarity clause stipulating the obligation
to provide aid in the spirit of solidarity in case of a terrorist attack or disaster.[4]

Almost all of the European States now belong to the Council of Europe, an institution of
central importance in ensuring the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms as
well as the rule of law and democracy. All Member States have undertaken to comply with
the European Convention on Human Rights, the provisions of which are enforceable at the
European Court of Human Rights. The Council of Europe also directly plays a role in security
policy through its activities in crisis prevention and post-crisis rehabilitation.
As a global organisation, the United Nations (UN) is dedicated to all aspects of security in
a comprehensive way, both through the work of its own institutions and that of specialist
organisations. In addition to pursuing its main objective of maintaining peace and international security, the UN promotes friendly relationships between the nations and fosters
international cooperation in the economic, social, cultural and humanitarian spheres. The
increasing interdependency between security and development is taken into account in the Millennium Development Goals for a sustainable and long-term improvement of global security,
in particular, eliminating, as far as possible, the structural causes of conflict, such as poverty,
education deficits and discrimination against individual communities. The UN ranks highest
in terms of legitimacy in international law and has the most extensive experience in traditional
peacekeeping. While the latter will remain the UN’s most important area of activity in security
policy for the foreseeable future, the organisation also intends to increase its efforts in other
areas of crisis management, particularly in conflict prevention and peace-building.

According to the new Strategic Concept adopted in 2010, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) will continue to perform its traditional function as a defence alliance,[5] but it also
intends to play a larger role throughout the whole spectrum of international crisis management activities. At the same time, NATO is working closely with its partners in the spirit of
cooperative security, whereby the importance of the various partnerships—the Partnership for
Peace (PfP), the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC), partnerships with the EU, the UN,
Russia and other global partners—has been further increased in the new Strategic Concept.

NATO also intends to address new security policy challenges and tasks in a strengthened way
and to play a more significant role in international politics in general, intensifying the involvement of its partners by becoming a forum for international security consultations, whilst also
working towards disarmament.

The Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has a traditional role within
the politico-military sphere, working particularly in the areas of conventional disarmament,
conflict prevention, confidence-building measures, support for police and border management,

2 Article 42(3) TEU

3 Article 42(7) TEU

4 Article 222 TFEU

5 Article 5 North Atlantic Treaty

6


-----

economic development and the human dimension, which includes human and minority rights,
democracy and the rule of law. The OSCE traditionally applies a comprehensive concept of
security.

2.1.2 Challenges, risks and threats
Conventional attacks against Austria have become unlikely for the foreseeable future. Instead,
both Austria and the EU are all the more affected by new challenges, risks and threats.

These include first and foremost: international terrorism; the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (also amongst non-state actors); domestic and regional conflicts or turmoil that
affect Europe or have global repercussions; “state failure”; natural or man-made disasters;
attacks against the security of IT systems (“cyber attacks”); threats to the strategic infrastructure; transnational organised crime; drug trafficking, crime, corruption, illegal migration;
unsuccessful integration; the scarcity of resources (energy, food, water), climate change,
environmental damage and pandemics; piracy and threats to the transport routes, and the
repercussions of the international financial and economic crisis on security.

In light of continuously increasing political, economic and social linkages, it has to be expected
that the challenges facing Austria’s security will become progressively more international in
scope.

The importance of cooperation of the international stakeholders in accordance with the
principle of a division of labour for comparative advantage (“comprehensive approach”) is
constantly growing. This cooperation must prioritise aspects of coordination, complementarities and coherence, as required in the “Vienna 3C Appeal” which was adopted, following an
Austrian initiative.

2.1.3 Opportunities and possibilities of shaping security policy
Security policy must be considered an opportunity for active planning; merely reacting to
threats would fall short of what is required. In view of Austria’s geographical position, its
cultural and political ties, and its traditional, internationally recognised active approach to
foreign and security policy, Austria avails itself of special opportunities to shape internal and
external security, both bilaterally and within the framework of international organisations.
This applies not only to the conceptual area, but also to crisis management operations. Austria benefits from the existence of efficient, strong, solidarity-based communities and is also
required to contribute adequately to their operational and functional capacity.

Austria will craft its security policy predominantly within the UN, the EU, the OSCE, in its
partnerships with NATO and within the Council of Europe. Moreover, it collaborates with
regional partners and other stakeholders where appropriate. Austria’s foreign deployments,
which have been conducted since 1960, and its active role in international crisis management,
constitute pivotal instruments in security policy operations. One of the positive side effects
of Austria’s involvement in international civil and military crisis management is that the
Austrian Armed Forces, the Austrian police forces, the judicial system and other experts are
incorporated into an international network and compete internationally. This means that they
are subjected to an ongoing process of transformation and modernisation, which is pivotal
in ensuring that the Austrian forces always satisfy the highest and up-to-date of standards.

Regional initiatives, such as the ones Austria undertook for the Danube region and the Black
Sea region, open up further opportunities for shaping security and exerting influence.

7


-----

###### 2.2 Analysis of the situation in Austria

Austria is a democratic state governed by the rule of law. It maintains high standards with
regard to fundamental rights and is a member of the EU on the constitutional basis of its
permanent neutrality. Austria is also an active member of other security-relevant international
organisations.

Austria is surrounded by stable democratic states; nevertheless, it is geographically closer than
other EU Member States to potential crisis regions on the peripheries of Europe and is thus
more strongly confronted with instability originating from these regions.

Due to its topography, Austria is also vulnerable to specific natural disaster risks.

Austria enjoys high esteem as one of the UN host countries, as host country of the OSCE and
other international organisations dealing with security and disarmament issues, as venue of
a number of pertinent conferences, and for its traditional role as a mediator. This raises its
importance in security policy. It also means, however, that Austria has a greater responsibility
towards these institutions and their members and, therefore, a greater need to exercise additional protective functions for them.

Austria is characterised by social peace and high standards in the area of internal security. This
reputation favours Austria’s popularity as a tourist destination but also entails the challenge
of ensuring the security of visitors to the country. As a Schengen Member State,Austria is also
required to make an active contribution to ensure security and freedom of movement within
the Schengen area.

The relatively high proportion of individuals with migration background living in Austria
entails additional expertise which can also be used in the interests of security. At the same
time, it also brings about specific challenges concerning internal security.

8


-----

#### 3 Austrian security policy in  the new decade

###### 3.1 Security values, interests and objectives

The Republic of Austria is founded on strong values. These fundamental values constitute the
basis of its political actions and of its security policy.

Among these fundamental values are the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
as well as the commitment to the principles of a pluralistic democracy, the rule of law and the
separation of powers. The Republic of Austria professes the values of tolerance and respect
towards all human beings, irrespective of their origin, religion or ideology, and protects their
dignity. It respects the constitutional rights of national minorities. The Republic of Austria,
therefore, protects the freedom and rights of all its inhabitants and safeguards the security of
the country. It promotes prosperity through economic freedom and social justice as well as
the identity and cultural diversity of the country, which is built upon federalist structures. It
ensures that all of its citizens are granted equal opportunities and advocates the sustainable
preservation of natural resources as well as the protection of a peaceful and just international
order.

Austria is committed to a policy of peace. It forms an integral part of the EU community of
laws and values. Austria is also committed to the objectives of the UN.

Austria pursues the following interests and strategic political objectives:

**••** Comprehensive protection of the population of Austria.

**••** Ensuring the country’s territorial integrity, its self-determination and the freedom of action of the Republic.

**••** Protecting the rule of law, the democratic constitutional order, and fundamental rights
and freedoms.

**••** Promoting the common good and protecting human dignity and personality.

**••** Maintaining social peace and social cohesion in Austria and promoting a good and safe
coexistence.

**••** Strengthening the democratic society vis-à-vis extremism and fundamentalist tendencies
and influences.

**••** Ensuring the availability of vital resources.

**••** Enhancing the resilience of the public and private sector when faced with natural or manmade disruptions and disasters.

**••** Maintaining an efficient national economy and taking precautions for the eventuality of
crisis-related economic disruptions, safeguarding the supply of vital goods to the population, and protecting critical infrastructure.

**••** Maintaining a liveable environment as part of comprehensive environmental protection
and minimising the negative effects of natural or technological disasters.

**••** Reinforcing and extending national and international humanitarian aid and disaster relief policies.

**••** Establishing and expanding efficient civil and military capabilities and structures in con
9


-----

formity with international standards in order to perform security policy tasks.

**••** Strengthening the European area of freedom, security and justice and reinforcing partnerships with countries from security-relevant areas surrounding the EU.

**••** Making a contribution to security and the freedom to travel within the Schengen area.

**••** Promoting stability and comprehensive security throughout the area surrounding Austria
and preventing the rise and the escalation of conflicts.

**••** Combating international terrorism, organised crime and corruption.

**••** Curbing illegal migration and combating the trafficking of human beings.

**••** Supporting international efforts to ensure early crisis detection, conflict prevention, crisis
management and post-crisis rehabilitation.

**••** Supporting measures to protect the civilian population, especially women and children,
in armed conflicts.

**••** Strengthening the capability of international organisations to act.

**••** Regional and global disarmament and arms control, security sector reform and preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

**••** Instrumentality in development cooperation.

**••** Ensuring the provision of consular assistance to Austrian citizens abroad.

**••** Promoting a broad awareness of security amongst the population.

###### 3.2 Security policy at national level

3.2.1 Comprehensive Security Provision
Austria implements its security policy within the framework of the “Comprehensive Security
Provision”, which aims to bring about systematic cooperation between different policy areas,
based on an overall strategy and the relevant partial strategies. Security decisions at both
national and international level must be based on a comprehensive assessment of the situation
by all of the stakeholders and a common understanding of the situation derived from this information. In doing so, efforts must be made to establish security synergies within the context
of a collective national “security cluster”.

3.2.2 Internal security
The objective of Austria’s security policy is to make Austria the safest country with the highest quality of life. Social peace is to be strengthened and people in Austria are to be enabled
to live a life in security and freedom. This is why the country is pursuing the following goals,
which are also to be taken into account when shaping policies both at the European and the
international level:

**••** Effectively tackling crime: the face of crime is constantly changing, hence the need for
flexible counter-strategies. Alongside the traditional challenges of volume crime, physical
violence and property offences, other forms, such as network and computer crime and
economic crime have to be combated persistently.

**••** New preventive measures: in view of the increasing challenges, there is a greater need for
prevention, which has to be collectively approached by society as a whole. This means
innovative partnerships with the civil society and the involvement of citizens in combating and preventing crimes.

**••** Ensuring asylum: granting human beings protection against persecution is a humanitarian obligation in accordance with Austria’s tradition.

**••** Combating illegal migration: effectively combating asylum abuse, illegal migration and
the trafficking of human beings facilitates the process of granting refugees asylum.

10


-----

**••** Controlling migration: migration will be controlled in a targeted manner as befits Austria’s requirements.

**••** Promoting and encouraging integration: integration improves social peace and increases
economic success. Internal security is also reinforced by good quality of coexistence between all of the individuals living in Austria. Integration is the task and responsibility of
each individual. In order to achieve integration, all of the necessary framework conditions must be in place and all of the relevant stakeholders coordinated.

**••** Utilising and protecting data: there is scarcely any other area of life that develops at the
speed at which technology progresses. Crime must be combated using the most state-ofthe-art means available. The importance of data protection is constantly growing in an
increasingly digitalised world.

The internal security authorities, in particular the police, must be capable of performing national and international operations. This also extends to the provision of a sufficient number
of suitable, adequately trained police officers, judges, prosecutors and other experts for the
purpose of participating in international crisis management operations.

Despite the existing mutual support obligations within the EU, natural and technological disasters must first and foremost be confronted by domestic precautions and measures. Cooperation
between state actors and NGOs is of particular importance in the Austrian and international
disaster relief systems. The Austrian Armed Forces continue to be an indispensable instrument
in this area.

Cyber-crime, cyber-attacks, the misuse of the internet for extremist purposes and network
security are serious new challenges for all stakeholders and require wide-reaching cooperation
as part of a comprehensive policy.

3.2.3 Defence policy
Austria’s defence policy is an integral component of its national Comprehensive Security Provision. It works in cooperation with foreign policy and internal security policy in order to (1)
guarantee full state sovereignty and integrity, (2) protect the constitutional institutions and the
critical infrastructure, (3) protect the population, also in the area of disaster relief, (4) support
the national capacity to act in strategic crisis situations, (5) contribute to the management
of crises as an expression of solidarity and (6) make a military contribution to EU security
endeavours in the spirit of solidarity.

The management of sub-conventional threats or new risks resulting from cyber-attacks may
open up a new area of military activity. One of the tasks of the military is to ensure that it is
able to act competently in evacuation operations.

The Austrian Armed Forces also play an important role in maintaining internal security.
They must be able to cope with any request for assistance by the civil authorities, including
assistance in supporting policing operations, providing aid in the event of natural disasters or
protecting critical infrastructures.

Contributing to international crisis management is an important area of responsibility for the
Austrian Armed Forces. They make an internationally recognised contribution in the spirit
of solidarity with their involvement abroad, thereby preventing negative repercussions of
international security problems on Austria. The participation of the Austrian Armed Forces
in international crisis management operations, therefore, has, to be continued on a high level.

11


-----

The Austrian Armed Forces will strengthen their contribution to the collective national assessment of the situation, as an instrument of early political and military warning, and support
efforts to improve the nation’s leadership capability.

The capabilities of the Austrian Armed Forces must be permanently developed in light of
national and international developments. The ability to expand the forces to suit a given situation must be ensured.

3.2.4 Civil-military cooperation
The ability to intensify cooperation between the civil and military sectors is key to accomplishing relevant tasks in Austria and abroad and is to be further increased. Efficient cooperation
between the domestic civil and military sectors is a fundamental prerequisite for successful
cooperation at the international level. Civil-military cooperation in the international context
is based on the objectives defined in the Strategic Guidelines on Security and Development.

3.2.5 Diplomacy and Austria’s policy of hosting international organisations
Through its network of Embassies and Permanent Missions and its involvement with international organisations and conferences, the Austrian diplomatic service helps to ensure that
Austrian interests are being incorporated in the international security debate. Opportunities
opening up must be recognised and international crisis management must be further developed, also in line with Austrian interests. The diplomatic service has a representative, informative and evaluative function for the national authorities.

Austria has proved its ability to act as a mediator in international conflict situations and will,
therefore, continue to actively offer its good offices, by pointing out its comparative advantages
and by seizing the relevant opportunities for mediation. Austria will also continue to do everything in its power to support the work of the Vienna-based organisations and arms control
instruments,[6] endeavouring to promote their objectives.

Austria will make efforts to provide headquarters for additional organisations and agencies
as well as organise conferences. Vienna’s role in housing international organisations and as a
hub of international security policy is to be further expanded.

###### 3.3 Austrian security policy within the context of the EU

The EU, as a comprehensive community of peace, security and solidarity, provides the central
framework of action for Austria’s security policy. Austria will be involved in every dimension
of EU security policy. Austria supports the pre-accession process of additional states, aiming
at the adoption of EU standards.

The EU offers a strong foundation from which to establish a successful network of priorities
pertaining to, both domestic and foreign policy.

6 Vienna Center for Disarmament and Non-Proliferation (VCDNP), International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO),
Executive Secretariat of the Hague Code of Conduct, Secretariat of the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export
Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies, Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG),
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), International Centre for Migration Policy Development
(ICMPD) and the Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO), which deals with the interaction between
development and security.

12


-----

3.3.1 Justice and home affairs
Austria will play an active role in implementing and further developing EU policy in the field of
justice and home affairs. In doing so, it will work in close collaboration with its partners in the
“Salzburg Forum” in order to facilitate the process of protecting the security interests of Austria
and Central Europe. The objective of the “Salzburg Forum Vision 2020” resolution, adopted in
2010, is to achieve collaboration within the EU and regional cooperation in order to create a Central
European security cluster within the EU. It also aims at making a collective contribution to the
implementation of the EU strategy for external action, particularly in the Western Balkans and in
the eastern neighbourhood.

Other basic objectives of the Austrian EU policy include ensuring the protection of fundamental
rights and freedoms, developing a common security policy culture, strengthening cross-border
cooperation among police forces and developing a comprehensive model for the exchange of information. The policy also aims at developing and implementing a comprehensive approach towards
the issues of asylum, migration, integration and border management as well as combating illegal
migration, smuggling and trafficking in human beings and promoting inter-cultural dialogue.

The overall aim, as part of an active security policy, is to gradually create and actively shape an
“architecture of internal security” within the EU. This objective is to be pursued on the basis of
cooperation between the various authorities in the Member States and the European institutions.[7 ]

An important innovation contained in the Lisbon Treaty is the obligation to act jointly in a
spirit of solidarity if a Member State is the object of a terrorist attack or the victim of a natural
or man-made disaster. Steps must be made to expedite the establishment of a network of capabilities from the civil and military sectors, which Austria can also use to make its contributions
within this context.

3.3.2 Common Foreign and Security Policy
As a member of the EU, Austria will play an active role in shaping CFSP. It will also continue
to participate in the entire spectrum of CSDP activities referred to in the TEU,[8] including the
EU Battlegroups, within the scope of its capabilities.

Austria will play an active role in planning, crafting and developing CSDP and will take
measures to promptly assess and secure opportunities to be instrumental. The same applies to
the stipulation contained in the Treaty of Lisbon regarding a common defence policy, which
may potentially lead to a common defence;[9] it also applies to the establishment of permanent
structured cooperation,[10] as well as to the country’s involvement in a strengthened European
Defence Agency in order to enable it to benefit from synergies in technological developments,
procurement and sales.[11]

The EU and its Member States are expected to make stronger efforts to organise the use of
resources for CSDP in a more economic, target-oriented and efficient manner. This will result

7 The European Police Office (EUROPOL), the European Union’s Judicial Cooperation Unit (EUROJUST), the
European Agency for the Management of Operational Coordination at the External Borders of the Member
States of the European Union (FRONTEX), the European Police College (CEPOL), the European Union’s Joint
Situation Centre (SITCEN), the European Asylum Support Office (EASO) and the Vienna-based European
Union Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA) represent important elements here.

8 Article 43(1) TEU

9 Article 42(2) TEU

10 Article 42(6) TEU

11 Article 45 TEU

13


-----

in greater cooperation, division of labour and burden sharing, even beyond the bounds of
individual organisations. In addition, it will bring about an increasing level of specialisation.
Cooperation between the EU and NATO is expected to be intensified.

Austria will make the best possible use of the possibilities offered by the European External
Action Service (EEAS).

Invitations to suitable third countries to participate in CSDP activities are also supported by
Austria.

3.3.3 Council of Europe
Austria strongly supports all efforts to bring the new Member States of the Council of Europe
in the east of the European continent closer to the high standards of this organisation.

###### 3.4 Austrian security policy in the international context

3.4.1 Internal security
All of the important challenges facing the internal security of Austria possess an international
dimension. Austrian security policy, therefore, aims at making a pro-active contribution to the
stability and security of problematic countries of origin and transit, which are relevant to the
security of Austria and the EU. This involves the following objectives, in particular:

**••** Supporting the countries in the Western Balkans and South-East Europe, as they are
brought into line with EU security standards and working together with partners from
the “Salzburg Forum”, where possible.

**••** Needs-based cooperation, primarily with countries in the eastern neighbourhood but
also in the southern EU neighbourhood (preferably working together with partners wherever possible).

**••** Targeted cooperation with the USA and Russia as the EU’s strategic partners in the field
of internal security as well as with countries in the directly relevant regions surrounding
Austria.

An essential objective from the perspective of internal security is ensuring that the opportunities for cooperation within the UN are exploited to a greater extent. In doing so, particular
consideration must be given to the International Anti-Corruption Academy (IACA) initiated
by Austria. It is also in the interest of Austria’s internal security to utilise the OSCE to a greater
extent.

3.4.2 External security

3.4.2.1 United Nations
In light of its traditional policy and recognised expertise, Austria will be instrumental in the
UN’s efforts to promote peace and stability, especially in the UN’s work across the whole
spectrum of crisis management. Within the scope of its possibilities, Austria will play an active
role in decision-making, planning and developing the UN’s work in crisis management. This
also applies to the development of potentially new areas of security activities of the UN and
its special organisations.

Austria will continue to bid for membership in the relevant bodies of the UN and utilise these
memberships accordingly. Furthermore, Austria will play a committed role with regard to the

14


-----

implementation and further development of the concept contained in Security Council Resolution 1894 (2009), which was initiated by Austria and concerns the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts. This also applies to the issue of women and children in armed conflicts.

Austria will continue its active military contributions within the framework of the UN, and
maintain and develop its particular commitment to peacekeeping and peace-building operations. In the future, the forces deployed in UN peacekeeping operations will meet with increasing demands concerning robustness, power, equipment and training.

3.4.2.2 As a NATO partner
It is in the interests of Austria’s security to play a role in the development of security policies,
both through its involvement in NATO PfP and as a member of the EAPC. The evolution of
new instruments for dealing with the new challenges within the framework of NATO will be
constantly monitored as well as assessed and Austria will seize the opportunities to participate
in suitable activities open to partners.

Austria will continue to take part in non-Article 5 operations which are open to partners and
fall within Austria’s foreign and security interests.

3.4.2.3 OSCE
Being the host state of the OSCE, Austria will do its best to promote the OSCE’s continued
development as a multi-dimensional security organisation. Austria will continue to be actively
involved in all of the OSCE’s consultations and field missions. It will also support efforts to
enhance its profile in security issues “in the area from Vancouver to Vladivostok”. This also
extends to the “Corfu Process”, the common European security architecture, and the organisation’s efforts to enhance its role as a platform for exchange with other security organisations.

3.4.2.4 Participation in missions
The following are the primary criteria for participation in the international organisations’
missions and operations in accordance with Article 23j of the Federal Constitutional Law of
Austria and the Federal Constitutional Law of Austria on Cooperation and Solidarity in the
Deployment of Units and Individuals Abroad

**••** the extent to which the particular situation affects the security of Austria;

**••** European solidarity and the importance of the respective activity for the security of the
EU or Europe;

**••** international solidarity and the importance of the respective activity for global security;

**••** the impact participation will have in terms of Austria’s position in the organisation in
question;

**••** the geographical location of the mission in question;

**••** the availability of suitable Austrian forces in the civil and military sectors;

**••** the financial burdens resulting from participation.

Due to its geo-political position and the degree to which its security is affected and in light
of its expertise and networks, Austrian priorities will continue to lie first and foremost with
missions in South-East and Eastern Europe as well as in the Middle East. In line with international developments, activities in these areas must be adapted and, if necessary, extended: for
example from the Balkans to the Danube and Black Sea regions, or from the Golan Heights
to other parts of the Middle East or North Africa.

15


-----

#### 4 The Austrian National Council  Resolution of 3 July 2013 (on a new  security strategy for Austria)

The Austrian Federal Government is asked to shape its security policy so as to reflect the following principles:

###### 4.1 General recommendations

Austria’s security policy shall be shaped according to the following general principles:
1. The Comprehensive Security Provision concept shall be implemented in a coordinated
manner and further developed so as to take into account particularly current developments. Partial strategies shall be evaluated and adapted on an ongoing basis. The assessment of the security situation also needs to be continually updated and developed on the
basis of a collective national process of security analysis and planning.

2. Drawing up a collective national plan for the enhancement of Austria’s resilience (restoring the proper functioning of the state and society in the aftermath of crises) and the
protection of Austria’s critical infrastructures.

3. Threats from state and non-state actors, both in and from cyber space, are constantly
rising. Since the importance of cyber security is increasing, measures aimed at improving
the security of computer systems and the internet shall, therefore, be intensified. The
Austrian Cyber Security Strategy, adopted on 20 March 2013, must be implemented and
updated regularly in light of the developments.

4. Taking into account the interaction between security and development and the implementation of the Strategic Guidelines on Security and Development, which recommend
a collective national approach to conflict prevention, crisis management, peace-building
and establishing national structures in order to achieve comprehensive human security
within the framework of sustainable local structures and institutions.

5. In order to ensure that the cooperation between civil and military elements is improved
and that resources are used efficiently and that the effectiveness and visibility of Austria’s
contributions abroad are increased as well as in order to implement Austria’s strategic
interests abroad, the elaboration and implementation of a national Foreign Deployment
Concept shall be expedited.

6. Existing coordination structures and processes shall be brought up to date and adapted
to ensure their functioning with a view to a comprehensive approach to security (“whole
of government”, “whole of nation”).

7. Multi-agency national exercises must be carried out at regular intervals, so as to evaluate
and develop existing concepts, procedures, institutions and instruments. The level of interministerial participation in international crisis management exercises shall be intensified.

8. The level of cooperation and coordination between the ministries in planning, implementing and assessing security-relevant measures, both in Austria and abroad, on the
basis of a collective national assessment of the situation, shall be increased with a view
to networked security structures

9. The cooperation among all security policy actors in analysing and evaluating securityrelevant situations and implementing the resulting measures, both in Austria and abroad,

16


-----

including an active contribution to European cooperation in the exchange of information
among intelligence services, shall be enhanced.

10. Effective combating intelligence activities which are detrimental to Austria.
11. Appropriate participation in international crisis management measures, missions and

operations in accordance with the stipulated criteria for participating in such missions
and operations.

12. Establishing a pool of capabilities from the civil and military sectors, which Austria can

also use in order to make contributions in the context of international crisis management
and European solidarity.

13. Austria shall make more use of opportunities for cooperation in regional security with

neighbouring countries and other interested states and expand the formats of security
policy coordination required.

14. The availability of vital resources and the protection of strategic infrastructures shall

be ensured (rapid completion and implementation of the Austrian Program for Critical
Infrastructure Protection).

15. Coordinated contribution to combating the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,

their precursors and systems of delivery.

16. An integrated and coordinated training programme which builds on existing training

institutions from the civil and military sectors (Austrian Training Network) shall be established in order to improve the level of interoperability between the national and international aid and emergency organisations. A special Austrian profile shall be developed
during training in order to create a common culture of security.

17. Participation in humanitarian and disaster relief operations shall be intensified. Austria

possesses special, internationally recognised civil-military expertise and experience in this
area and should demonstrate its special commitment at the European and international
level in this regard. Through cooperation among the relevant ministries, federal states and
organisations, the resources necessary for this task shall be augmented and the capacity
to act shall be further strengthened.

18. Efforts to establish a regional Central European civil-military disaster relief unit shall be

continued.

19. The area of security research must be further expanded. To this end, efforts must be

made towards close cooperation and networking between the relevant organisations and
institutions in Austria and abroad. Non-university research on security policy shall be
evaluated and re-structured.

20. The implementation of the Austrian Security Strategy shall be subject to periodic re
evaluation and discussed by the National Security Council. A process shall be established
to evaluate the achievement of objectives.

21. The population of Austria shall be continually provided with comprehensive information

on the security situation in Austria and abroad. For this purpose, a security policy information plan shall be developed and concrete measures set forth, within the framework of
the Austrian “Civic Education” instruction principle.

###### 4.2 Internal security

Austria’s internal security policy shall be based on the following principles:
1. Contributing to actively shaping a situation which is advantageous for Austria and its
population; prevention of the emergence or taking effect of threats to internal security
and measures for the protection against them and the management of threats by implementing and further developing the internal security strategy and the partial strategies

17


-----

building on it, in particular, the crime strategy, the national protection strategy, the 2020
National Crisis and Disaster Protection Management Strategy, the aliens police strategy
and the international strategy of the Austrian Ministry of the Interior.

2. Contributing to strengthening social peace in Austria by implementing concrete, mutually coordinated initiatives in the areas of pro-active security policy; objective security
and subjective perception of security, combating crime and terrorism; migration management; coordinating integration; international networking; citizen-oriented action; research/knowledge management networking; personal responsibility of citizens; information, transparency and public relations; anti-violence.

3. Setting operative priorities in order to achieve the following goals: effectively combating
crime; new methods in prevention; ensuring asylum and preventing abuse; combating illegal migration; controlling migration; supporting and promoting integration; utilising
and protecting data; guaranteeing basic rights, the right to freedom, human rights, security and order.

4. Enhancing the security of computer systems and the internet through the implementation
of Austria’s Cyber Security Strategy, establishing a centre of excellence for cyber-crime
and contributing actively to the shaping of EU policies for a better protection of the citizens and companies in cyberspace.

5. Promoting good and secure coexistence and strengthening democratic society vis-à-vis
extremist and fundamentalist movements and their influence by implementing and further developing the State Protection Strategy and the National Action Plan for Integration, whereby particular attention must be paid to the dialogue between cultures and religions, as well as by raising awareness of the importance of fundamental rights and freedoms in day-to-day coexistence.

6. Contributing to strengthening the resilience of the public and private sectors against natural or man-made disruptions and disasters by contributing to the development and implementation of a collective national plan designed to increase Austria’s resilience and
protect its critical infrastructures.

7. Coordinating governmental crisis and disaster relief management in order to ensure cooperation and coordinated actions of all competent bodies of the Federal Republic of
Austria, the civil protection authorities of the individual federal states and the emergency
organisations.

8. Improving capabilities for collaborating with the Austrian Armed Forces for the collective completion of tasks arising from the Austrian Federal Constitutional Law.

9. Strengthening internal security in the neighbourhood areas, in particular by implementing and further developing the state treaties for police cooperation and the “Salzburg Forum Vision 2020” and by reinforcing the Central European operative network, developing it into a Central European security cluster. In so doing, special attention must be paid
to protecting fundamental rights.

10. Making an active contribution to implementing and further developing the EU’s Internal

Security Strategy, strengthening operative cooperation within the EU (for instance when
developing regional police strategies and combating organised crime, corruption, illegal migration and international terrorism), developing a European architecture of internal security, improving the level of consideration given to the protection of fundamental
rights and freedoms, determining and implementing the solidarity clause contained in the
Treaty of Lisbon, in particular through active involvement in the corresponding work of
the Standing Committee on Internal Security (COSI).

11. The Austrian Ministry of the Interior must be capable of contributing to the pool of civil
military capabilities for implementing the EU Solidarity Clause.

12. Targeted cooperation in order to strengthen Austria’s collaboration with countries in the

eastern and southern EU neighbourhoods.

18


-----

13. Actively contributing to strengthening the EU’s civil capabilities for conflict prevention

and crisis management and participating in international measures which serve this aim.

14. Provision, preparation, training and deployment of civil experts for international civil

crisis management, using examples from similar states as a basis. This includes experts
from the areas of the police force, the rule of law, administrative services, civil protection, ambulance services and fire departments as well as other civil experts, as an active
contribution to achieving the EU Civilian Headline Goal; ensuring that the preconditions
for the deployment of these experts are met.

15. Improved information on civil protection and self-protection measures for the popula
tion of Austria.

16. Optimising the warning systems and providing support for improving safety measures in

private households.

17. Improving the capabilities within the area of internal security in order to support political

and military anticipation and leadership capabilities and the collective national assessment of the situation, and to provide the relevant advisory services and raise awareness.

###### 4.3 Foreign policy aspects of security policy

In terms of security policy, Austria’s foreign policy shall be based on the following principles:

1. Consistent advocacy of the defined values, interests and objectives at bilateral, European
and international levels.

2. Intensively utilizing and increasing the efficiency of the diplomatic apparatus for gathering and analysing information on events and developments throughout the world which
are relevant to security and which are integrated into the collective national assessment
of the situation.

3. Austria playing an active role as a mediator in international conflicts and seizing suitable
opportunities for mediation resulting from Austria’s status as, both an EU Member State
and a neutral country.

4. Strengthening the security of international organisations and agencies with security policy mandates based in Austria; actively endeavouring to house further such institutions;
complying with the associated protection tasks.

5. Consistent advocacy of global respect for human rights.

6. Strong support for peaceful resolution of conflicts and crises, especially in the Balkans,
the Middle East and North Africa as well as in sub-Saharan Africa. Promoting international cooperation in these areas, both at bilateral and multilateral levels. Furthermore,
enhanced foreign policy commitments in the Danube, Black Sea and Caucasus regions.

7. Further developing Austria’s and the EU’s cooperation with strategic partners, such as
the USA, Russia and the emerging powers, taking European values into account and asserting the rights and fundamental freedoms with self-confidence, also with regard to the
efforts made to find sustainable solutions to problems in international regions of crisis.

8. Commitment to and strengthening of the EU with regard to its role in international crisis management.

9. Pro-actively contributing to the development of the CFSP, so as to achieve the objectives
of the European Security Strategy and fully implement EU security interests.

10. Active and solidarity-oriented participation in the CSDP, in establishing the necessary

specialised crisis management capabilities of the European civil and military sectors, and
increasing the EU’s ability to act independently in security matters.

19


-----

11. Bringing European third states closer in line with EU standards.
12. Expansion and intensification of relationships with EU neighbours (eastern dimension,

southern neighbouring states) and further development of special partnerships.

13. Strong advocacy of an active and effective role of the OSCE as an indispensable factor

in pan-European security; as well as intensive utilization of the OSCE for a comprehensive European security dialogue, conventional arms control and confidence and security
building.

14. Active involvement in NATO crisis management activities, open to its partners; exploit
ing opportunities for cooperation and dialogue offered within the corresponding partnership frameworks.

15. Active involvement in and strengthening of the UN as an instrument for managing the

global challenges of the 21st century.

16. Active involvement in international efforts in arms control and disarmament, and press
ing forward with initiatives which aim to ban further weapons with indiscriminate effects
or which cause excessive suffering.

17. Using the resources of the Austrian development cooperation in order to achieve the ob
jectives of the Strategic Guidelines on Security and Development.

18. Working towards strengthening and advancing the standards of international law, par
ticularly in the area of international humanitarian law, and supporting the implementation of these standards.

19. Promoting comprehensive and improved cooperation between all of the international or
ganisations working in the field of security and continuing Austria’s traditional involvement in multilateral institutions.

20. Strong commitment to ensuring coordinated, complementary and coherent cooperation

among international actors.

###### 4.4 Defence policy

Austria’s defence policy shall be based on the following principles:

1. The Austrian Armed Forces must align its conception, structure, equipment and training
with the tasks defined in the analysis section, on the basis of the Austrian Federal Constitution and thus also on general conscription. The Austrian Armed Forces’ planning must
be specified in detail accordingly, as part of the partial strategy for defence policy which
must build upon these plans. The Austrian Armed Forces must ensure that they possess
the personnel and qualitative response capacities in order to be able to fulfil their role as
a strategic reserve for the Republic of Austria.

2. The training and routine management of conscripts must be designed and further developed in a manner which is consistent with the changes in the general security conditions. It must also take into account the capabilities and the interests of young citizens,
for whom it should have a meaningful and motivating effect. This must occur in a way
which allows conscripts to make a greater contribution to the security of Austria during
their period of military service and to derive personal benefits for their lives from their
time in the Austrian Armed Forces. Conscripts should also be specifically motivated to
assume functions in the active reserve.

3. In their training, particular attention must be paid to military national defence, foreign
commitments, disaster relief, protecting critical infrastructures, border surveillance, support for maintaining public order and security in Austria, according to Article 79 of the
Constitutional Law of Austria, and cyber security.

20


-----

4. A dual/multiple use of emergency forces for, both national operations and international
deployments, must be ensured.

National defence
5. For this Security Strategy, independent military national defence is an indispensable precondition for protecting Austria’s sovereignty and integrity. This means, in particular,
ensuring or restoring its ability to function and survive in the event of attacks against
the state, the society and the livelihood of the people. As situations can escalate unexpectedly, the ability to mobilise forces rapidly and flexibly must be ensured. The ability
to make the transition from protective assistance operations to independent military operations must be guaranteed. In order to achieve this, the Austrian Armed Forces must,
therefore, avail of adequate, robust and sustainable forces.

6. Forces must be capable of being built up as appropriate to the situation, depending on
the combined arms combat capability which is to be enhanced. An important precondition for this is the capability for early recognition of strategic changes of the situation,
incorporating the results into the collective national assessment of the situation. Furthermore, the ability of flexible personnel mobilization must be ensured. Additionally, the
preservation and creation of military competences, which are adequate to the collective
European stability requirements and future challenges, for example in the area of technological developments, must be ensured and correspond to the anticipated risk profile
for the next decade.

7. From the current perspective, 55,000 soldiers with varying levels of readiness are required for the forces as a whole, including short-term deployments in humanitarian aid
operations.

8. Airspace sovereignty and surveillance as well as air support must be ensured.

9. The protection of military institutions against cyber threats must be improved, also by
cooperating with competent partners. The military capabilities developed for this purpose must also be incorporated into the Austrian Cyber Crisis Management

10. The Austrian Armed Forces’ ability to support the political and military capabilities of

anticipation and leadership and the collective national assessment of the situation is to
be enhanced.

Assistance tasks and military disaster relief
11. The Austrian Armed Forces must continue to be equipped for assistance tasks.
12. In particular, the capabilities to provide support for ensuring leadership and nationwide

communication, for,special pioneer operations and transport tasks, for search and rescue and the protection of the population, for instance in the event of NBC hazards, accidents in nuclear power stations or in the health sector, for protecting critical infrastructures, including high-technology components, for developing expertise and capabilities
for cyber security and for providing specialised infantry units must be further developed.

13. The Austrian Armed Forces’ contribution to national and international humanitarian aid

and disaster relief must be improved and provisions must be made for the presence of at
least 12,500 soldiers to be deployed in the event of domestic disaster relief operations.

14. The Austrian Armed Forces’ contribution to facility protection, protecting critical infra
structures, cyber space protection, dealing with possible challenges in the area of border
security, supporting the maintenance of public order and internal security, according to
Article 79 of the Constitutional Law of Austria, must be improved, taking into consideration the possibility of simultaneous requirements. The capabilities and manpower required for such operations must be determined in a collective national planning process
in cooperation with the authorities requiring assistance and updated on a regular basis.
Provisions must be made for joint exercises.

21


-----

International crisis management
15. The Austrian Armed Forces shall make the following contributions to the full spectrum

of the EU’s Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP):

a. The Austrian Armed Forces must maintain and develop their special capabilities in order
to contribute to international peacekeeping and international stabilisation tasks.

b. They shall also possess robust and sufficiently sustainable capabilities to deal with demanding mission scenarios; these capabilities can either be incorporated into the Battlegroup
or used within another multi-national context.

c. Participation in the EU Battlegroups must be continued and further developed. The adoption of a leadership role within a regional Battlegroup must be examined.

d. Furthermore, the capability to take over leadership tasks in CSDP missions up to the
operative level should be ensured and expanded.

16. The Austrian Armed Forces must be able to contribute to the pool of civil-military capa
bilities for the implementation of the EU Solidarity Clause.

17. Furthermore, the capabilities of the Austrian Armed Forces must be maintained and or
ganised to make a solidarity-based contribution within a potentially developing common
European defence, taking into account the “Irish Clause”.

18. The special commitment to UN peacekeeping and peace-building missions should be con
tinued. Contributions within the politico-military dimension of the OSCE, to field missions and in the context of confidence and security building shall be expanded.

19. Austria must also continue to make its contributions within PfP in order to maintain its

relevance as a participant in PfP and sustain its corresponding level of usefulness in terms
of security. The country’s commitment to PfP shall thus be continued, so as to ensure
military interoperability, participation in operations, and the utilisation of cooperation
opportunities offered, in accordance with Austria’s interests and requirements. Cooperation with other competent PfP states (particularly the WEP 5 group) shall be intensified.

20. In the context of international crisis management, a special Austrian profile shall be de
veloped. It will represent Austria’s interests, in line with international demands as well as
Austria’s competence with regard to security policy.

21. A pool of around 100 experts (also making use of the potential in the active reserve) is to

be established by way of inter-ministerial coordination in order to support the Strategic
Guidelines on Security and Development and for the purposes of reforming the security
sector and contributing to military advisory tasks as well as for conflict prevention and
post-crisis rehabilitation measures.

22. Depending on the particular situation, the Austrian Armed Forces will ensure that at least

1,100 soldiers are deployed on a permanent basis to international operations. Austria’s
participation in short-term deployments of the Battlegroups or operative reserve forces
is independent of this. All of the forces deployed by the Austrian Armed Forces must, in
principle, be designed for dual use in, both national and international operations.

23. Deployments are conducted on the basis of the Federal Constitutional Law of Austria on

Cooperation and Solidarity in the Deployment of Units and Individuals Abroad) and the
catalogue of criteria in point 3.4.2.4 of the analysis section is to be taken into account.

24. Targeted preparation must be made to enable some parts of the Austrian Armed Forces

to cooperate in operations with the European Gendarmerie Force.

25. In order to create synergies and optimise costs in military capacity development, the co
operation with partner states is to be intensified, particularly within the regional context.

26. All procurement plans must be oriented towards the designated tasks, whereby efforts to

ensure the maximum level of protection for the health and lives of soldiers must be given
top priority. Opportunities for international cooperation, particularly with the European
Defence Agency, and primarily in the areas of research, procurement, training and capacity development, must be seized.

22


-----

27. The issues of recruitment and personnel development are of great importance in the Aus
trian Armed Forces. In view of the importance of the active reserve for ensuring the sustainable long-term availability of forces and given their specific qualitative abilities, the
active reserve must be put to the best possible use in, both national and international
missions, and be further developed.

28. The role of women in the Austrian Armed Forces must be strengthened and the equal
ity of opportunities and the development of career opportunities for women must be enhanced. Soldiers with a migration background represent a particular opportunity; their
special knowledge and abilities should be systematically utilised.

29. The necessary budget, personnel and infrastructure framework conditions must be pro
vided for the Austrian Armed Forces for the accomplishment of their designated national
and international tasks.

23


-----

24


-----

