## StroNg ANd Secure
#### A Strategy for Australia’s National Security


-----

**VISION**

|Countering terrorism, espionage and foreign interference|Deterring and defeating attacks on Australia and Australia’s interests|
|---|---|
|Preserving Australia’s border integrity|Preventing, detecting and disrupting serious and organised crime|
|Promoting a secure international environment conducive to advancing Australia’s interests|Strengthening the resilience of Australia’s people, assets, infrastructure and institutions|
|The Australia–United States Alliance|Understanding and being infl uential in the world, particularly the Asia-Pacifi c|


-----

**AUSTRAlIA’S NATIONAl SECURITY OUTlOOk**


**Economic uncertainty and global reordering**

- Ongoing global economic uncertainty and volatility



- Shift in economic and strategic weight, and trade flows towards the Asia-Pacific
region creating new risks and opportunities for Australia

- Active middle powers increasingly influential in the region; but the
United States—China relationship will be the single most influential force
in shaping the strategic environment



- Multilateralism is becoming more important for regional security and at the
same time more difficult

**Continuing importance of non-state actors**



- Persistent threat from terrorism and increasingly sophisticated serious and
organised crime, aided by money laundering and corruption

- Technology enabling remote but pervasive threats—for example malicious
cyber activity

- Increasing influence of legitimate non-state actors such as private companies


**Fragility and conflict in at-risk areas**

- Low likelihood of major power war, but probable ongoing low-level instability
in Australia’s region



- Fragile states and instability in the Middle East and South Asia will remain
a challenge

- Possibility for strategic shocks or local conflicts



- High demand for international development assistance

**broader global challenges with national security implications**



- Resource security and scarcity

- Climate change



- Changing demographics

- Increasing urbanisation



- Increasing online engagement

- Resurgence of violent political groups



- Corruption


**FIvE YEAR PRIORITIES**



**•** **Enhanced regional engagement in support of security and prosperity in the Asian-Century**

**•** **Integrated cyber policy and operations to enhance the defence of our digital networks**



**•** **Effective partnerships to achieve innovative and efficient national security outcomes**


-----

### Foreword

In the 2008 National Security Statement, the Government committed to periodic reviews of
the state of Australia’s national security and the emerging challenges
that we face. The Statement recognised the fundamental change occurring in the global
order, resulting in both economic opportunities and potential security concerns for Australia.

In 2012, the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper explored the acceleration in the
dramatic economic and strategic change occuring in our region. It laid out a roadmap for
securing Australia’s prosperity and resilience in the region and the world.

Our national security settings are critical to this endeavour. Indeed, there is no higher
responsibility for a government than the security of the nation.

In recognition of this responsibility and to ensure Australia remains strong and secure in the
Asian Century, I commissioned this, Australia’s first National Security Strategy.

The Strategy surveys Australia’s national security outlook. It describes our national security
objectives and explains how we are achieving those objectives—the pillars of our national
security.

The business of national security requires constant effort against an array of largely known
risks. For example, espionage is an age-old challenge, but it is just as prevalent today in
our hyper-connected world as it was in the Cold War.

There are other threats and risks that can emerge with little warning, and which have the
capacity to shape the national security landscape.

The attacks of 11 September 2001 are the most influential national security event in our
recent history. The threat of global terrorism not only shaped the national security landscape
of the past decade, but also heralded a new era for national security across the globe. Since
then, much of our national security focus has been dedicated to guarding against such an
attack occurring on our own soil.

Some 12 years on, our strategic outlook is largely positive. We live in one of the safest and
most cohesive nations in the world. We have a strong economy. A major war is unlikely.
Our highly-effective national security capability is already focused on priority activities.
We have made considerable gains against global terrorism, and our alliance with the United
States is as strong as ever. We also have deepening relationships with a range of influential
countries in the region and across the world.

This positive strategic outlook is no excuse for complacency. As the global order shifts, our
capacity to shape institutions and forge consensus is more important than ever. We will
be required to persevere and innovate to achieve our national security objectives. In these
fiscally challenging times, we must actively manage our strategic risks and focus our efforts
on the areas requiring greatest attention. We are entering a new national security era, in
which the rapid economic and strategic change occurring in our region will be the most
significant influence on our national security environment and policies.

Against this backdrop, this Strategy serves a number of purposes.

First and foremost it communicates to the Australian community, and our friends and allies
abroad, how we perceive our security environment and how we are tackling the major
challenges to our national security.

It provides a framework to focus our national security efforts in this period of change.
Importantly, it also identifies three priorities that warrant further attention given our
expectations of the strategic environment.


-----

**Australia must strengthen its regional engagement to support security and prosperity**
**in the Asian Century. Enhancing our bilateral relationships will be vital. Forums such as**
the East Asia Summit will continue to evolve and offer more established and productive
avenues for resolving differences and advancing shared interests.

The digital age is central to Australia’s national security and economic prosperity. From
terrorism to organised crime to espionage, malicious cyber activity is a growing and ever
changing national security threat. **The Government will focus on delivering integrated**
**cyber policy and operations to deal with these developments in the context of its broader**
digital agenda. This will mean working even more closely with industry, the community and
international partners.

Across the board, the Strategy prioritises partnerships, not just among government
**agencies, but also between governments, business and the community to achieve**
**effective and innovative results. There are already good examples of better information**
sharing, coordinated planning and engagement with Australian business, and the community
more generally. Australia must further coordinate and prioritise efforts across government
and with our partners to build a resilient framework that protects and advances our interests.

My vision for our nation’s security is to have a unified national security system that
anticipates threats, protects the nation and shapes the world in Australia’s interest.
The National Security Strategy will help ensure that this vision is realised and that
Australia remains Strong and Secure in the Asian Century.

Julia Gillard

_Prime Minister of Australia_


-----

-----

### CoNTeNTS

**FOREWORD** **ii**

**ExECUTIvE SUmmARY** **vi**

##### Part I A FOUNDATION OF STRENGTH

**1.** **AUSTRAlIA’S NATIONAl SECURITY** **2**

Our vision and objectives for national security 4

**2.** **ThE EvOlUTION OF AUSTRAlIA’S STRATEGIC ENvIRONmENT** **6**

Australia’s place in the world 7

A transformative period for Australia’s national security 9

National security risks 10

National security opportunities 11

**3.** **PIllARS OF AUSTRAlIA’S NATIONAl SECURITY** **14**

Countering terrorism, espionage and foreign interference 16

Deterring and defeating attacks on Australia and Australia’s interests 17

Preserving Australia’s border integrity 18

Preventing, detecting and disrupting serious and organised crime 19

Promoting a secure international environment conducive to advancing Australia’s interests 20

Strengthening the resilience of Australia’s people, assets, infrastructure and institutions 21

The Australia–United States Alliance 22

Understanding and being influential in the world, particularly the Asia–Pacific 23

##### Part II BUILDING A SECURE FUTURE

**4.** **AUSTRAlIA’S NATIONAl SECURITY OUTlOOk** **26**

Economic uncertainty and the global reordering 27

The continuing importance of non-state actors 28

Fragility and conflict in at-risk areas 30

**5.** **AUSTRAlIA’S NATIONAl SECURITY FOCUS FOR ThE YEARS AhEAD** **32**

Responding to the strategic outlook 33

Near-term areas of focus: Afghanistan and the UNSC 36

Five year priorities 37

**CONClUSION** **44**

**AbbREvIATIONS AND ACRONYmS** **45**

**NOTES** **46**


-----

### exeCuTive Summary

###### auSTralia’S NaTioNal SeCuriTy STraTegy

This National Security Strategy (the Strategy) is Australia’s first. It provides an overarching
framework for our national security efforts, and sets priorities for the next five years. The
Strategy is an important next step following the 2008 National Security Statement, which
articulated Australia’s national security agenda and set in motion reforms to strengthen the
national security community.

The Strategy is in two parts:

   - Part I explains the national security framework—our vision and objectives, and the
activities we undertake to achieve these objectives.

   - Part II looks to the future—it examines the strategic outlook and sets priorities to
ensure Australia embraces the opportunities and confronts the challenges of the
Asian Century.

The Strategy lays out the pillars of Australia’s national security, and sets directions for the
next five years. It will aid in focusing the Government’s pursuit of policies and objectives
identified in the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper. The Strategy will help inform
prioritisation of our resources in a time of fiscal constraint.

Importantly, the Strategy also serves to inform the Australian public, industry and our
international partners of our approach to national security. The Strategy will be implemented
through enhanced annual planning and budgeting arrangements across national security
agencies. There will be a greater focus on partnerships that will see the strengthening of ties
with states, territories and business.

Building on the existing strong foundation, our vision for Australia’s national security is
for a unified system that anticipates threats, protects the nation, and shapes the world in
our interests.

Chapter One discusses Australia’s national security objectives: to ensure a safe and
resilient population; to protect and strengthen our sovereignty; to secure our assets,
infrastructure and institutions; and to promote a favourable international environment.
These objectives anchor decision-making and planning for the national security community.

Chapter Two explains the evolution of Australia’s strategic environment. Given our
geography and alliances, our approach to security has always emphasised the defence of
our nation and its borders. Naturally, there has been a focus on our own region. Our efforts
are reflected in our many regional partnerships. Importantly, our international engagement
is imbued with our commitment to liberal democratic values, such as the rule of law, human
rights, and equality of opportunity.

The events of the past decade were instrumental in shaping our approach to national
security. We have built our capacity to combat terrorism and transnational crime, including
through an expansion of our intelligence and law enforcement capability. We developed a
more integrated approach to supporting regional stability, for example through our assistance
to Timor-Leste and Solomon Islands. This experience also shaped our strong emphasis on
civil-military cooperation in Iraq and Afghanistan.

Chapter Two concludes with a summary of the important national security challenges that
Australia will continue to face, and the opportunities we must look to seize.

Chapter Three sets out Australia’s fundamental approach to national security and how this


-----

approach reflects the current national security environment. It describes the eight pillars of
our approach to national security:

   - Countering terrorism, espionage and foreign interference.

   - Deterring and defeating attacks on Australia and Australia’s interests.

   - Preserving our border integrity.

   - Preventing, detecting and disrupting serious and organised crime.

   - Promoting a secure international environment conducive to advancing
Australia’s interests.

   - Strengthening the resilience of Australia’s people, assets, infrastructure
and institutions.

   - The Australia–United States Alliance.

   - Understanding and being influential in the world, particularly the Asia-Pacific.

The second part of the Strategy looks to the future. In particular, Chapter Four examines
the strategic outlook to anticipate challenges and opportunities in the years ahead. Most
importantly, it examines the shifting geopolitical environment of the Asian Century. As the
_Australia in the Asian Century White Paper made clear, our approach to national security_
must make the most of the transformative economic and strategic changes occurring in Asia.

Asia’s economic growth will increase pressure on water resources and food and energy
supplies, with implications for global markets and stability. The growing economic and
political weight of China, India and other Asian powers, is also changing the established
strategic order, including as a result of their increased military spending.

Neither strategic competition nor the growth in defence capabilities of regional countries
makes conflict in the region inevitable or even more likely. Major regional powers understand
that a war would be catastrophic. Deepening relationships between states across the region
and the increasingly complex interdependencies that now underpin the Asia–Pacific also act
as strong stabilising forces.

But there is no room for complacency. The interdependencies that make conflict less likely
also make the potential consequences of even the most minor conflicts more far reaching.
The increasing capability of armed forces in the region likewise increases the potential for
minor clashes to have dangerous outcomes. A concerted effort will be required to shape a
peaceful and stable order. Trust and entrenched patterns of dialogue and cooperation will
be critical.

The threat posed by non-state actors is also likely to evolve and possibly expand—new
technology will be harnessed by criminals and terrorists, as they continue to augment their
tactics and approaches.

Chapter Five considers the implications of the strategic outlook for Australia’s national
security arrangements. It outlines three priorities for the next five years, to achieve our
vision for our national security:

   - **Enhanced engagement in support of regional security and prosperity in the**
Asian Century.

   - **Integrated cyber policy and operations to enhance the defence of our**
digital networks.

   - **Effective partnerships to achieve innovative and efficient national security**
outcomes.


-----

-----

### ParT i

###### a FouNdaTioN oF STreNgTH


-----

###### CHaPTer 1

### auSTralia’S NaTioNal SeCuriTy


-----

###### Australia is a safe and confident country. Australians
have the freedom and prosperity to enjoy our way of
life and the security to pursue our interests at home
and abroad. The security we enjoy has not come at
a cost to the fundamental openness of our culture and
society. As a harmonious and democratic nation we
understand well the importance of an open society,
new ideas and confident international engagement.
It has brought us prosperity. It has shaped the fabric
of our society. As we navigate the Asian Century, it
will stand us in good stead.

Being open to the world brings both risks and
opportunities. National security is concerned with
both. It is fundamentally about protecting Australia
from harm. At the same time, our national security
activities should identify and make the most of new
opportunities for our nation. As the Asian Century
unfolds, new possibilities abound.

The economic transformation of China, our largest
trading partner, is changing the economic and
strategic balance of the world; and Asia as a whole
is assuming ever greater global significance.
New partnerships are emerging in the region and
institutional frameworks are adapting to them.
As a mature regional power, Australia is participating
in these changes.

Such changes are not without challenges. There is
always a degree of uncertainty with any change.
An active and cooperative effort among major powers
will be required to ensure our changing strategic order
evolves peacefully.

There are also more immediate national security
challenges facing governments around the globe.
In particular, non-state actors such as criminal and
terrorist organisations pose an enduring challenge.
Organised crime is becoming more sophisticated.
Our systems, methods and tools for dealing with it
must keep pace—cyber-enabled crime in particular
requires innovative responses that protect both the
rights and security of citizens. Terrorism remains a
serious threat requiring vigilance through a proactive
intelligence effort, strong partnerships with states and
territories, across business, the Australian community
and our international counterparts.

Faced with emerging modern challenges, we
must be prepared to adapt and act. Australia’s
current national security arrangements provide a
sure foundation, with strong, connected footings in
diplomacy, defence, development, border protection,
law enforcement, and intelligence. Our arrangements
are broad based too, with the Government working
closely with the states and territories, business and
the community.


This Strategy sets out our national security objectives
(our ‘ends’). It then explains how Australia’s national
security activity (our ‘ways’) is organised to achieve
these ends. The Strategy then draws conclusions
from the strategic outlook to identify areas of focus
for the next five years. All this helps to inform
coordinated decisions about national security
resources (our ‘means’).


-----

**Our vision and objectives for national security**

As we navigate the coming century, our vision for
**Australia’s national security is for a unified national**
security system that works with partners to anticipate
threats, protects the nation and shapes the world in
Australia’s interest.

This Strategy defines our national security
**objectives—our ‘ends’—as follows:**

   - **To ensure a safe and resilient**
**population: the safety of the population**
as a whole.

   - **To protect and strengthen our**
**sovereignty: the independence of our**
decision-making, and authority over our
territory and resources.

   - **To secure our assets, infrastructure and**
**institutions: including physical facilities,**
supply chains, intellectual property,
information technologies, communication
networks and Australia’s natural wealth.

   - **To promote a favourable international**
**environment: to influence and shape our**
regional and global environment to be
conducive to advancing Australia’s interests
and values.

Our diplomatic, defence, development, law
enforcement, border security and intelligence
agencies pursue these objectives. These agencies
often work in close cooperation with non-national
security agencies, such as the Department of
Resources, Energy and Tourism or the Department of
Health and Ageing. Each organisation has a different
role in responding to national security challenges,
but they are united by the Government’s fundamental
responsibility for national security.

Working towards our national security objectives can
create opportunities to further our national interests
and support other goals of government. Perhaps
most notably, there is a mutually reinforcing link
between our national security and our economic
wellbeing. A healthy economy underpins our stability
and security, which in turn is conducive to the pursuit
of our personal and national economic goals.


##### ... THERE IS A MUTUALLy REINFORCING LINk BETWEEN OUR NATIONAL SECURITy AND OUR ECONOMIC WELLBEING.


-----

##### wHaT iS NaTioNal SeCuriTy?

The overall security of a nation is inextricably linked to economic stability, resource sufficiency, good
governance and social cohesion. The Australia in the Asian Century White Paper also recognises
that on an international scale, there needs to be consideration of the collective economic and political
security of the region, the human security of individuals in the region, the security of supply for food
and energy, and the security of the natural system. All of these factors are considered by government.

This Strategy focuses on one aspect of security: national security.

National security is a broad and evolving concept. It is concerned with how we shape the
environment, and how we prevent and prepare for threats to our sovereignty, people, assets,
infrastructure and institutions. National security is also concerned with how we respond to such
threats, and recover from any event which may occur.

In fulfilling its national security responsibilities, Australia draws primarily on its defence, intelligence,
diplomatic, development, law enforcement and border security capabilities. Commonwealth agencies
work in close partnership with the states and territories and, increasingly, business and the wider
community. For some national security threats—most notably terrorism—our state and territory law
enforcement and emergency services must play a critical frontline role.

Australia’s national security capabilities have often played an important part in responding to
other threats that could affect the safety and security of citizens. For example, our national crisis
management arrangements and Australian Defence Force (ADF) assets can be used to assist the
states and territories to respond to natural disasters.

Importantly, national security is not just about countering threats; it is also about making the most of
opportunities. In particular, Australia seeks to shape the international environment, both to prevent
the emergence of security threats, and to achieve broader benefits for Australia (such as trade and
economic benefits).


-----

###### CHaPTer 2

### THe evoluTioN oF auSTralia’S STraTegiC eNviroNmeNT


-----

**Australia’s place in the world**

Australia’s approach to national security reflects
who we are and where we have come from—our
values, our geography and our history. Our national
security approach has been influenced by our allies,
neighbours and international partners, as well as
by those who threaten our peace, prosperity and
sovereignty.

Australia is the world’s sixth largest country. We have
around 60,000 kilometres of mainland coastline.[1 ]

Our extensive ocean and seabed interests extend
well away from the shoreline and include important
interests in Antarctica. We also import and export
large volumes of commodities by sea.

Australia’s geography has always been a key
consideration for our national security. This
geography has been a driving imperative for the
maintenance of a strong, capable and independent
ADF. It has helped discourage attack. It has
motivated us to maintain strong partnerships.
Our geography has also required a strong focus on
border management to support legitimate travel and
trade, while preventing the illegal movement of people
and goods.

Of course, Australia’s national security interests
extend far beyond our borders. Indeed, they span
the globe. We engage extensively in Asia, the South
West Pacific, the Americas, Europe, the Eastern
Indian Ocean, the Middle East and Africa.


Australia is a liberal democracy with deeply held
values. We stand for human rights and equality of
opportunity at home and abroad. We uphold the
rule of law: the principle that everyone, from the
individual to the state itself, is accountable to laws
that are publicly promulgated, equally enforced and
independently adjudicated.

The rule of law provides the framework in which
government balances its responsibility to protect
Australia, its people and its interests while preserving
our civil liberties. These values influence our
foreign and defence policy. Our values underpin
our reputation as a responsible member of the
international community, committed to a rules-based
global order.

Our national security arrangements reflect the basic
tenets of who we are as a nation. But they also
reflect the threats and opportunities we face, some
of which have come into sharp relief over the
past decade.


##### OUR NATIONAL SECURITy ARRANGEMENTS REFLECT THE BASIC TENETS OF WHO WE ARE AS A NATION.


-----

**Figure 1: National security by numbers**


-----

**A transformative period for Australia’s**
**national security**

This period since 1999 has been transformative for
Australia’s national security. Beginning with our
involvement in East Timor (later to become
Timor-Leste), this period also witnessed the
catastrophic scenes of the September 2001 attacks
on the United States and the Bali Bombings in
2002 and 2005, our military involvement in Iraq and
Afghanistan, and the global financial crisis in 2008.

In the past decade, over 100 Australian lives have
been lost in terrorist attacks around the world.
The shocking terrorist events of this period
precipitated a significant growth in Australia’s national
security spending. New anti-terrorism laws were
introduced, and the combined budget for our national
intelligence effort more than tripled between 2000
[and 2012, growing to $1.5 billion.[14 ]](http:billion.14)

Australia’s defence capabilities have also evolved
in recent times to meet the challenges posed by
stabilisation and peacekeeping operations in
Timor-Leste and the Solomon Islands. The
intervention in Timor-Leste in 1999 signalled the
start of this shift, as Australia led the International
Forces East Timor (INTERFET) coalition to restore
peace and security in Timor-Leste, while facilitating
humanitarian assistance.

This model informed the establishment of the
successful Australian-led Regional Assistance
Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI), created in
2003 and still operating—a partnership between
the Solomon Islands Government and 15 Pacific
contributing countries.

In 2001, in the wake of the 11 September attacks,
Australia contributed a substantial combat element
to the multinational effort in Afghanistan—part of
the international campaign against terrorism. While
our Special Forces deployments of 2001 and 2005
were aimed at countering terrorism, the deployment
of diplomats, development advisers and Australian
Federal Police (AFP) to Afghanistan since then has
seen our contribution become a whole-of-government
effort in Uruzgan.

Under a United Nations (UN) mandate and at
the invitation of the Afghan government, we have
provided substantial security, governance and
development assistance through mentoring the
Afghan National Army and National Police, built
infrastructure, and helped improve the Afghan
government’s capacity to deliver core services to
its people. All of this has been done with the aim of
preventing Afghanistan from again becoming a haven
for terrorism, and in support of our ally the


In 2003, Australia contributed substantial combat
forces to the United States-led mission in Iraq.
Considerable civilian elements were also deployed to
assist first the Coalition Provisional Authority and later
to support the Government of Iraq.

A coordinated approach involving civilian, military and
law enforcement continues to inform our support for
disaster relief as well as for fragile states emerging
from conflict. Defence assets were an important part
of Australia’s humanitarian relief effort to Indonesia
following the 2004 Boxing Day Tsunami. Australia
also provided a leadership role in building the
international coalition that responded to the tsunami
in Thailand. The ADF works side by side with the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT),
the AFP, the Australian Agency for International
Development (AusAID) and other agencies to provide
this whole-of-government response.

Australia’s national security transformation has not
occurred in isolation. Enabled by sustained economic
growth, our regional partners similarly increased
their security focus and defence spending during
this period. The need to cooperate more broadly on
transnational threats affecting prosperity and security
was acknowledged, and a range of forums and ways
to cooperate now exist to counter such threats.

Over the past decade, this regional transformation
has been driven by strong economic growth across
Asia, led by China. Australia’s economic ties to
the region have grown dramatically, while trading
relationships within the region have become more
enmeshed through the evolution of integrated
supply chains.

The 2008 global financial crisis saw the largest and
sharpest drop in global economic activity in recent
decades. Our economy slowed, but did not fall into
recession, performing better during this period than
other advanced economies. The financial crisis
also affected the United States and Europe far more
than Asia, accelerating the long-term shift in global
economic weight from west to east.

In recent times, new and more complex national
security challenges have received greater global
attention. The growing number of malicious cyber
incidents has juxtaposed the dangers of a
hyper-connected world against the considerable
economic and social benefits afforded by the Internet.
Our national security and law enforcement agencies
are now focusing more urgently on how best to
combat cyber-based threats, but not at the expense
of Australians’ privacy and the broader benefits the
online environment brings.


-----

The events of the past decade changed the focus of risks that Australian national security agencies
our national security. They elevated terrorism as a must manage.
threat; prompted greater attention to the stability of
**Espionage and foreign interference: While not**
the region; and highlighted the link between national
always visible, espionage and foreign interference
security and economic concerns. In this decade,
are key national security risks that require constant
we also became aware of the potential future risks
vigilance. Australia’s standing in the world, our
of our increasing reliance on digital technology. We
technological and commercial strengths and
have adapted well to these changes. But many of the
close foreign relationships make us an attractive
underlying challenges will remain.
intelligence target. Acts of espionage or foreign
interference—whether covert or overt—can impinge
**National security risks**
upon our sovereignty, our political processes and our
Our strategic environment combines elements of commercial activities, and damage our international
continuity and change. Several challenges have reputation and economic wellbeing.
emerged in recent decades. Where these challenges
**Instability in developing and fragile states:**
directly affect our ability to achieve our national
Developing, fragile and conflict-affected states cannot
security objectives, they become strategic risks that
always provide basic services and security. This can
need to be mitigated. The following are the primary


##### aT a glaNCe: develoPmeNTS iN auSTralia’S NaTioNal SeCuriTy

In the four years since the 2008 National Security Statement, the Government has focused on building
a cohesive approach to national security.

##### Key aCTiviTieS

  - Focused the efforts of government across the spectrum of national security policy and
operations, through a comprehensive suite of White Papers, strategic plans and reviews
including: Cyber Security (2009),[15] Defence (2009),[16 ]Aviation (2009),[17] Counter Terrorism
(2010),[18] Organised Crime (2010),[19] Disaster Resilience (2011),[20 ]Aid (2011),[21] Intelligence
[(2011)[22] and Australia in the Asian Century (2012).[23 ]](http:2012).23)

  - Strengthened legal frameworks and powers to ensure Australia’s national security and law
enforcement agencies have the appropriate tools to fight terrorism and combat organised crime,
including through the National Security Legislation Amendment Act 2010.[24 ]

  - Appointed the Independent National Security Legislation Monitor in 2011 to ensure that national
security legislation is effective and proportionate to the level of threat, and to ensure it contains
appropriate safeguards for protecting the rights of individuals.

  - Better coordinated national intelligence capability and made legislative changes to remove
barriers to information sharing and interoperability.

  - Worked towards common goals in partnership with others, including by implementing
key initiatives such as the National Security Information Environment Roadmap,[25 ] _Critical_
_Infrastructure Resilience Strategy[26] and establishing the Cyber Security Operations Centre._

  - Appointed a National Security Adviser to improve strategic direction within the national
security community and support whole-of-government national security policy development,
implementation and crisis response.

  - Introduced better coordination of national security budgets to allow consideration of decisions
across all national security agencies.

  - Established the National Security College in 2010 to educate Australia’s current and future
national security leaders.

  - Established new national crisis management arrangements that have been tested regularly and
proven during recent floods, fires and overseas emergencies.


-----

render them vulnerable to transnational crime, inter­
communal violence fuelled by small arms and light
weapons proliferation and, in some cases, terrorism.
The resulting instability can cross borders, affecting
the security of neighbouring countries, the region,
and Australians and Australia’s interests.

**malicious cyber activity: Every day, Australian**
governments, businesses and individuals face a
range of cyber-related threats such as state-based
and commercial espionage, identity theft, and denial
and disruption of services. If left unchecked,
cyber-related threats have the potential to undermine
confidence in our social and economic stability and
our prosperity.

**Proliferation of weapons of mass destruction:**
While current key proliferation challenges involve
states some distance from Australia—North korea
and Iran in particular—the consequences of any
further expansion of nuclear arsenals around the
globe would run counter to our national security
objectives. The spread of weapons of mass
destruction creates tension and instability, and
erodes international norms. This is of particular
concern in parts of the world where tension is
already heightened.

**Serious and organised crime: Serious and**
organised crime can undermine our border integrity
and security. It can erode confidence in institutions
and law enforcement agencies, and damage our
economic prosperity and regional stability. It can
involve the procurement, distribution and use of illegal
weapons. This type of crime is highly adaptive and
may link to, or exacerbate, other significant issues
of national security, such as terrorism and malicious
cyber activity.

**State-based conflict and coercion significantly**
**affecting Australia’s interests: The current**
international environment is unlikely to see war
between major powers. However, it is characterised
by shifting power balances, strategic and economic
competition, and territorial disputes. This competition
brings a degree of uncertainty and complexity to
the relatively benign global landscape. It increases
the consequences of the ever present risk of
miscalculation. Minor clashes in areas of strategic
significance to Australia can also seriously affect our
interests. A more likely challenge to our interests than
armed conflict is the risk of another state seeking to
influence Australia or its regional and global partners
by economic, political or military pressure.

**Terrorism and violent extremism: Since 2001, four**
terrorist plots in Australia have been disrupted and 23
[individuals convicted of terrorism offences.[27]](http:offences.27) Other


potential terrorists have been thwarted, and regional
and global terrorist and insurgent networks have been
degraded. yet, despite our successes, enduring
vigilance is required to avert the possibility of an
attack on our soil or an attack affecting Australia’s
interests overseas.

**National security opportunities**

To focus only on dangers in the world would be to
neglect the opportunities to improve our security
environment and shape our strategic landscape.
It is as important to seize these opportunities as it is
to address threats. Australia’s approach to national
security connects all levels of government, business
and the community. Our approach looks outward for
areas of mutual interest and exchange, and positions
us well to take advantage of these opportunities. The
return on this effort is not always immediate, but it can
be significant in the longer term.

Over the years, Australia’s national security and
foreign policy efforts have created opportunities that
benefit our broader national interests. Many of these
have emerged as a consequence of the ongoing
pursuit of our national security objectives, such as
showcasing the quality of our defence industry on
operations and joint exercises.

Other activities, like our efforts to promote
international norms for cyberspace, see our
diplomats, international lawyers and policy specialists
working with industry, the not-for-profit sector and
foreign governments to shape a secure, open and
accessible online environment that directly benefits
our national security, societal safety and digital
economy.

Australian government departments such as DFAT
and our intelligence agencies play an important
role in identifying future trends and the factors that
drive them. Australia’s aid program helps fragile
countries become more stable—seven of the top ten
recipients of Australia’s aid are considered fragile.
Our diplomats, law enforcement, border security and
military personnel, development advisers and others
engage internationally to promote transparency,
stability, development and cooperation.

The resulting partnerships and trust established
contributes significantly to the pursuit of our national
security objectives. However, it also delivers benefits
far beyond the scope of our national security. Longer
term, it fosters favourable conditions in which our
economic and social interests can prosper. It can
also strengthen a culture of support and cooperation
whereby we can assist, and in turn be assisted by,
others during times of crisis and natural disaster.


-----

##### auSTralia’S SeCuriTy relaTioNSHiP wiTH iNdoNeSia

Australia and Indonesia enjoy an increasingly deep and productive relationship. The establishment
of annual Leaders’ Meetings in November 2011 is indicative of the importance both countries place
on our strategic partnership. It is a comprehensive relationship encompassing a broad bilateral and
global agenda. A strong plank of our partnership is the cooperation between Australia and Indonesia
on a wide range of security-related issues—from counter terrorism and counter proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction to the disruption of people smuggling. This cooperation benefits both
countries significantly.

Under President yudhoyono’s leadership, Indonesia has emerged as a leading economic and strategic
power in the region. As it has grown in stature, Indonesia has become even more important to
Australia’s national interests. This trend will continue. If economic growth of around six per cent per
annum continues, Indonesia is on track to become one of the top 10 economies globally in purchasing
power parity terms by the next decade. With its growing economic and political weight, and through
its membership of key multilateral bodies, including the Group of 20 (G20), Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation (APEC), the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the EAS, Indonesia is
already assuming a greater role in global decision making.

Australia and Indonesia have developed an extensive and cooperative counter terrorism relationship
in areas such as intelligence cooperation, law enforcement, border and transport security, legal
framework development, counter terrorism financing, defence, and countering violent extremism. Law
enforcement cooperation has contributed to Indonesia’s success in arresting around 800 terrorist
[suspects, about 600 of whom have been convicted.[28 ]](http:convicted.28) Australia and Indonesia jointly manage the
Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation. Widely regarded as a model of international law
enforcement cooperation, the Centre has provided training for more than 11,000 police officers from
[throughout the region.[29 ]](http:region.29)

Another important element of our security engagement with Indonesia is the further development
of our long-standing bilateral defence relationship. In September 2012, at the inaugural annual
Indonesia-Australia Defence Ministers’ Meeting, ministers signed a Defence Cooperation
Arrangement. This arrangement will take our defence cooperation forward into the next decade,
building on strengthened engagement under the 2006 Framework Agreement on Security Cooperation
(the Lombok Treaty). Enhanced defence cooperation initiatives will include joint education and
training, and participation in joint and regional exercises, with a focus on fostering close operational
and strategic cooperation across vital areas such as humanitarian assistance and disaster relief,
peacekeeping, counter terrorism and maritime security.

Our development program with Indonesia is Australia’s largest bilateral aid program ($505 million in
[2011–12).[30] Working in partnership, this program is helping to reduce poverty and support growing](http:2011Œ12).30)
economic prosperity. Diplomatic relations are also maturing and deepening. In March 2012, the
Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Defence of the two countries met in 2+2 format for the first time.

Our positive relationship with Indonesia contributes profoundly to Australia’s overall security.
Maintaining the positive trajectory of that relationship is a priority. This will require continued support
at the highest levels for our shared agenda, and a determination to work together to advance our
shared interests.


-----

-----

###### CHaPTer 3

### PillarS oF auSTralia’S NaTioNal SeCuriTy


-----

Australia’s national security activities combine to form
eight pillars that reflect the evolution of our national
security environment:

   - Countering terrorism, espionage and
foreign interference.

   - Deterring and defeating attacks on Australia
and Australia’s interests.

   - Preserving Australia’s border integrity.

   - Preventing, detecting and disrupting serious
and organised crime.

   - Promoting a secure international
environment conducive to advancing
Australia’s interests.

   - Strengthening the resilience of Australia’s
people, assets, infrastructure and
institutions.

   - The Australia–United States Alliance.

   - Understanding and being influential in the
world, particularly the Asia-Pacific.

In strategic terms, these pillars encapsulate our
activities—that is, what we are doing now to meet our

**Figure 2: National security and aid expenditure 2011–12**

So rce Department of Finance and Dereg lation


national security objectives. Australia has invested
substantially to build and maintain these pillars to
meet the challenges and requirements of the 21st
Century. National security expenditure has grown
from approximately $18,600 million in 2001–02 to
$33,546 million in 2011–12 (excluding aid).[31] While
expenditure is not currently measured by pillar,
Figure 2 provides a high-level breakdown of
Australian spending on national security and aid.

Defence dominates our national security expenditure,
representing 68 per cent or $26 billion of total
[spending in 2011–2012.[32 ]](http:2011Œ2012.32) This reflects both the
importance and cost of maintaining a strong defence
force. Homeland and border security accounts for
around nine per cent of the total spend, with law
enforcement and border security being the most
significant elements.

Each of the eight pillars typically involves a concerted
and coordinated effort across government, often with
involvement from states, territories, business and the
community. Together they help support our efforts
to achieve our national security objectives. We will
maintain our efforts across each of these pillars, as
they will continue to underpin our national security.


-----

###### CouNTeriNg TerroriSm, eSPioNage aNd ForeigN iNTerFereNCe


Terrorism, espionage and foreign interference
undermine our way of life and are transgressions
of our sovereignty. Unfortunately, they are also all
persistent threats. Terrorism is typically an overt
violent act which affects people, infrastructure,
governments or the economy. Espionage and foreign
interference can also cause serious harm to people,
infrastructure, governments and the economy, but by
contrast, are usually conducted covertly.

Over the past decade, highly effective efforts in
Australia and overseas have disrupted and degraded
terrorist networks. However, terrorist tactics and
techniques continue to evolve, and with them, the
nature of the threat. Events at home and overseas
have inspired some Australians to attempt acts of
terror here, while others may be drawn to participate


in overseas conflicts. More recently, the possibility
of attacks by ‘lone actors’ has emerged as a greater
concern globally. But state-sponsored terrorist
organisations such as Hezbollah also remain a
challenge that can emerge at short notice.

States have always used espionage as a tool to
pursue national interests. Today, our reliance on
cyberspace has increased our exposure to this threat.
Espionage and foreign interference activities against
Australia place a range of our national interests at
risk, including: classified government information;
commercial information with direct consequences for
business and the economy; intellectual property; and
the private information of our citizens.


##### Key FeaTureS oF our aPProaCH

  - Maintaining an intelligence-led approach focused on prevention and supported by better
coordination through the Counter Terrorism Control Centre.

  - Coordinating Australia’s counter terrorism investigations through Joint Counter Terrorism
Teams in each state and territory.

  - Cooperating with international partners to degrade terrorist networks in our region.

  - Maintaining effective border management arrangements to prevent the movement of people
who might wish to engage in terrorism, espionage or foreign interference.

  - Implementing the Countering Violent Extremism Strategy to discourage Australians from
[radicalising to violent extremism.[33]](http:extremism.33)

  - Contributing strongly to global efforts to cut off funding for terrorism, including through robust
implementation of targeted sanctions.

  - Engaging with more than 125 countries through our intelligence networks on counter espionage,
[cyber threats, legal matters, training and technical exchanges.[34 ]](http:exchanges.34)

  - Engaging with business, particularly by sharing information and providing protective security
advice to help defend against high-priority terrorism and espionage threats.

  - Implementing comprehensive cyber initiatives and strengthening cyber security partnerships
between governments and with industry.


-----

###### deTerriNg aNd deFeaTiNg aTTaCKS oN auSTralia aNd auSTralia’S iNTereSTS


Defending Australia and its interests against direct
attack is a first order responsibility of government.
Although the likelihood of a conventional armed
attack on our territory is remote, the consequence of
such an attack could be devastating.

This is not the only military contingency for which we
must prepare. For example, Australia has been a
regular contributor to UN operations. Beyond that,
it is possible a conflict affecting our strategic and
economic interests could break out in the Indo–Pacific
region (a region that spans the Indian Ocean to the
Western Pacific).

It is therefore essential that we maintain the
capacity to protect Australia’s sovereignty, assets,
infrastructure and institutions from conventional
armed attack, and to contribute to international
security efforts where appropriate. The ADF is an
essential part of our approach. Maintaining credible


high-end capabilities enables us to act decisively
when required, and deter would-be adversaries.
It strengthens our regional influence. Importantly it
contributes to the maintenance of a strong
Australia–United States Alliance—a relationship that
is critical to our ability to deter and defeat adversaries.

Australia’s defence capability is complemented by
our active foreign service, which builds influence
across the globe and contributes to a more stable
region. Strong bilateral relationships and preventative
diplomacy enables Australia to make the most of
opportunities in the global environment, and help to
progress the security and economic prosperity that
we seek with our regional partners.


##### Key FeaTureS oF our aPProaCH

  - Guided by successive White Papers, Australia is investing in core defence capabilities,
including Joint Strike Fighter aircraft and a future submarine capability.

  - Maintaining a strong Australia–United States Alliance and a growing network of strategic
relationships with neighbours and regional partners.

  - Deploying our army, navy and air force personnel in 14 Operations across the globe,
contributing to stability in our neighbourhood, combating terrorism and upholding a
rules-based global order.

  - Deepening security dialogues and combined defence activities with key partners across the
region to build greater understanding, trust and cooperation.

  - [Investing $1.5 billion (2011–12) in our intelligence efforts across government.[35 ]](http:government.35)

  - Marshalling expertise from across government during times of crisis overseas to deliver
the best possible assistance to protect Australia and Australia’s interests.


-----

###### PreServiNg auSTralia’S border iNTegriTy

The increasing connectedness of global markets and
the growing accessibility of air and sea travel have
increased the pressures on Australia’s borders. This
connectedness brings significant opportunities, but
also significant challenges to maintaining security and
efficient management of our borders. With around
60,000 kilometres of coastline, we have one of the
largest physical border environments in the world.

But protecting our border integrity begins well beyond
the physical border. Australia’s military, customs,
federal police, intelligence services, immigration,
quarantine inspection and diplomatic personnel
work cooperatively to maintain our border integrity.
Australia is investing in technologies and establishing
stronger links with regional and other governments to
enhance stability and detect and deter threats.


Australia has moved to an intelligence-led, risk-based
approach to assessing all passengers and cargo
entering the country. This approach enables border
agencies to identify and assess risks and conduct
timely interventions. This has resulted in an increase
in the seizure of illegal items, including drugs and
firearms.

Australia’s border integrity is also challenged by
irregular maritime migration facilitated by people
smuggling. Responding to people smuggling and
irregular maritime migration—including through
the implementation of the Expert Panel on Asylum
Seekers recommendations—remains an important
focus of the Government.


##### Key FeaTureS oF our aPProaCH

  - Protecting Australia’s border including (in 2011–12): processing of more than 31 million
international air and sea passengers, inspection of over 100,000 sea cargo containers,
surveillance of more than 140 million square nautical miles of Australian waters and coastlines;[36 ]

[and completion of 24,000 visa security assessments.[37 ]](http:assessments.37)

  - Enhancing the management of our borders, including through the Commonwealth Organised
_Crime Strategic Framework[38 ]_ and the Next Generation Border Security initiative.

  - [Implementing the recommendations of the Report of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers.[39 ]](http:Seekers.39)

  - Maintaining a world class Refugee and Humanitarian Program to protect refugees worldwide
and respond to their resettlement needs.

  - Adopting incentives that encourage asylum seekers to pursue safe pathways to protection,
including the establishment of regional processing arrangements for irregular maritime arrivals.

  - Promoting regional cooperation through the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in
Persons and Related Transnational Crime, to strengthen the capacity of member countries to
better respond to irregular migration.

  - Investing more than $1.6 billion since 2009 to build a sustainable biosecurity system that
[minimises threats to Australia’s primary production sectors, human health and environment.[40 ]](http:environment.40)

  - Identifying high risk foreign travellers through analysis of visa data and biometrics.

  - Adopting an intelligence-led model of cargo and passenger inspections, which enabled border
agencies to stop almost 250,000 weapons, including more than 1,100 guns and gun parts, from
entering Australia in 2012.[41 ]


-----

###### PreveNTiNg, deTeCTiNg aNd diSruPTiNg SeriouS aNd orgaNiSed Crime


Serious and organised crime impinges on our
prosperity, confidence and way of life. Australian
businesses, funds and citizens are highly attractive
targets for organised crime syndicates, reflecting our
relative prosperity and technological sophistication.
Contemporary criminal syndicates increasingly
operate as global enterprises, sometimes in
conjunction with state actors. They have the capacity
to inflict serious harm on our economy, businesses
and institutions. The annual cost of organised crime
[to Australia is conservatively estimated at $15 billion.[42 ]](http:billion.42)

Australia harnesses domestic and international
partnerships to combat serious and organised
criminal activities such as cybercrime, money
laundering, and the illegal movement of goods and
people across borders. A key focus is preventing
criminals from accessing the profits of their crimes


and from accessing funds to facilitate their criminal
activities. So too is building business and community
awareness of security and safety in the online
environment.


##### Key FeaTureS oF our aPProaCH

  - Implementing the National Criminal Intelligence Fusion Capability, which brings together
specialists from a wide range of agencies to better prevent, disrupt, investigate and prosecute
organised crime.

  - Working with the states and territories through the Commonwealth Organised Crime Strategic
_Framework and the National Organised Crime Response Plan to focus on key cross-_
jurisdictional threats.

  - Using multi-agency taskforces to combine and coordinate a broad range of Commonwealth,
state and territory capabilities, enabling more effective and sophisticated responses to organised
criminal activities.

  - Targeting the proceeds of crime through the Criminal Asset Confiscation Taskforce, and ongoing
prevention and detection of money laundering through comprehensive anti-money
laundering arrangements.

  - Working with industry to make Australia a harder target for organised crime.

  - Sharing intelligence and cooperating on formal criminal proceedings with international law
enforcement partners.

  - Assisting partner countries to strengthen legal, administrative and security institutions by
supporting their implementation of the UN Convention Against Corruption[43] and adoption of the
_[Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Anti-Bribery Convention.[44 ]](http:Convention.44)_

  - Supporting analytical work by the UN and others to better understand corruption and
transnational crime trends in East Asia and the Pacific.


-----

###### PromoTiNg a SeCure iNTerNaTioNal eNviroNmeNT CoNduCive To advaNCiNg auSTralia’S iNTereSTS


Australia’s national security and economic prosperity
are best served by an open, rules-based global order.
We have a fundamental interest in global rules and
institutions that prevent conflict, effectively manage
security threats and support the free flow of people,
goods, services, ideas, capital and principles. These
rules and institutions play a crucial role in establishing
norms, promoting stability and furthering collective
action on issues of concern.

Volatility in developing countries, some of which are
considered fragile, could disrupt regional stability and
prosperity, and damage Australia’s security interests.
For instance, weak governance and institutions in
some countries have been exploited by transnational
criminal networks and extremists.


Australia’s aid program supports stability through
poverty alleviation. Our program supports
governments to be more responsive in delivering
justice and services to their citizens. Our aid program
also promotes more resilient communities—able to
cope better with, and recover from, crises.


##### Key FeaTureS oF our aPProaCH

  - Supporting multilateral engagement as a member of organisations and forums including the UN,
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), World Trade Organization and EAS.

  - Working through the G20—including as host in 2014—to promote strong, sustainable and
balanced global growth by ensuring international economic rules, norms and institutions work
effectively.

  - Promoting the strength of arms control treaties and adoption of standards from the IAEA and the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.

  - Promoting international peace and security as a non-permanent member of the United Nations
Security Council (UNSC) for 2013–14 and through deployments to UN peacekeeping and peace
monitoring missions.

  - Through the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) mission in Afghanistan, helping to
prevent the country from again becoming a haven for global terrorists, provide security, and
contribute to a better future for the Afghan people.

  - Deploying around 380 AFP members to multi-and bilateral international missions in the AsiaPacific region and international hubs to promote the rule of law and build law enforcement
[capacity overseas.[45 ]](http:overseas.45)

  - Participating actively in the annual Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) and related regional dialogues,
including the annual PIF Regional Security Committee meeting.

  - Providing over half of Australia’s bilateral and regional aid to fragile and conflict affected
countries.


-----

###### STreNgTHeNiNg THe reSilieNCe oF auSTralia’S PeoPle, aSSeTS, iNFraSTruCTure aNd iNSTiTuTioNS

It is not possible to eliminate all risks to our national For example, the Government is:
security. If a major security incident occurs we must

                                       - preparing for pandemics and bio-threats by
be ready to respond and recover quickly.
stockpiling vaccines;
Australia’s ability to meet national security challenges

                                       - building community cohesion and resilience
is tied closely to our resilience. Our communities
to violent extremism;
must be resistant to extremist sentiment and
communal violence, and hostile to organised crime. - engaging with business to enhance the
Our key institutions and infrastructure must be resilience of our critical infrastructure and
protected against attack, and the ongoing value of mitigate vulnerabilities in the global supply
our assets must be assured. Should the worst occur, chain; and
our communities and institutions must work together

                                       - working collaboratively to build disaster
to help themselves and others. Together we must
resilient communities across Australia.
ensure the supply of essential services.
Enhancing resilience also involves engaging with
The Government works with the states and territories,
the community to build an understanding of national
the private and not-for-profit sectors and the broader
security risks and responses.
community to prepare for national security challenges
and enhance Australia’s resilience.


##### Key FeaTureS oF our aPProaCH

  - Building resilience across governments, the private sector and not-for-profit sectors and the
community, through the ongoing implementation of the Council of Australian Government
(COAG) National Strategy for Disaster Resilience.

  - Partnering with business and industry under the Critical Infrastructure Resilience Strategy, to
enhance resilience and ensure the continued provision of essential services in the face of all
hazards.

  - Sharing information on priority risks with key industry sectors via the Trusted Information
Sharing Network, the ASIO Business Liaison Unit and the Business Government Advisory
Group on National Security.

  - Providing consular assistance to Australians overseas.

  - Collaborating with state and territory governments in pandemic planning, including through the
_[2011 National Action Plan for Human Influenza Pandemic.[46 ]](http:Pandemic.46)_


-----

###### THe auSTralia–uNiTed STaTeS alliaNCe

The Australia–United States Alliance (the Alliance)
remains our most important security relationship.
It has formed the foundation of our defence and
security cooperation since shortly after the Second
World War. The Alliance has proved a critical enabler
for the development of our own military capability. It
remains an important anchor for peace and security in
our region.

The value of the Alliance lies not simply in its defence
aspects. It strengthens our prosperity as well as
our security. The United States is integral to global
economic growth and security, and provides the
critical underpinning to the rules-based order that
exists today.

Our Alliance has continuously evolved to maintain a
contemporary focus and address emerging threats.
It binds us to consult on mutual and complex threats,


and to act to meet common dangers. The Alliance
increases Australia’s ability to protect itself and its
interests by providing for:

   - regular dialogue;

   - joint training exercises;

   - intelligence-sharing;

   - access to defence technology;

   - scope for complementary diplomacy; and

   - research and development cooperation.

The Alliance allows us to work together on issues of
common concern and make a practical contribution to
regional and global security.


##### Key FeaTureS oF our aPProaCH

  - Strengthening the interoperability of Australian and United States defence forces,
including through:

‒ regular exercises, such as the biennial Exercise Talisman Sabre;

‒ implementation of the Defence Trade Cooperation Treaty; and

‒ acquiring interoperable and complementary capabilities, such as the E/A-18 G
“Growler” variant of the Super Hornet aircraft and the MH-60R Seahawk
“Romeo” helicopter.

  - Continuing regular ministerial dialogues, including the annual Australia United States Ministerial
Consultations (AUSMIN).

  - Cooperating on shared strategic and regional security interests including through the Australia–
Japan–United States Trilateral Strategic Dialogue.

  - Supporting activities flowing from the United States Force Posture Review, including rotations of
United States Marine Air Ground Task Force personnel through northern Australia.

  - Contributing to the international efforts in Afghanistan.

  - Addressing the growing challenge of cyber threats by including large scale cyber attack within
the scope of the Australia–United States Alliance.

  - Sustaining a robust intelligence relationship, including in the defence field.


-----

###### uNderSTaNdiNg aNd beiNg iNFlueNTial iN THe world, ParTiCularly THe aSia–PaCiFiC


Australia has global interests. Our international
relationships are wide-ranging, strong and mature.
However, as recognised in the Australia in the Asian
_Century White Paper, our security and prosperity are_
first and foremost linked to the Asia–Pacific region.
Strengthening our position as an influential regional
actor is therefore a focus of our foreign policy.

We maintain strong relationships with countries
in the region through strategic, economic and people­
to-people links. Our focus on these relationships
is often to build collective approaches to shared
challenges and opportunities.

This relationship-building is pursued not only by
foreign affairs officials, but also by our police,
intelligence, military and border protection officials,


through initiatives such as the Defence Cooperation
Program. Our focus on development also contributes
to these relationships, with the Asia–Pacific region
to receive 75 per cent of Australian aid by 2015–16.
While the diversity of our region means that we may
not always have the same perspectives as other
countries on all issues, cooperation is vital to our
region’s collective security.


##### Key FeaTureS oF our aPProaCH

  - Strengthening our relationships with regional partners, specifically through:

‒ annual Leaders’ Meetings with Indonesia;

‒ 2 + 2 Foreign and Defence Ministers’ Dialogues and other security cooperation with
Indonesia, Japan and South korea;

‒ foreign and security dialogue and military-to-military engagement with China;

‒ foreign and security policy dialogue with India within the framework of the
Australia–India Strategic Partnership;

‒ expanding our regional security cooperation, for example by establishing bilateral
strategic dialogues with Singapore, Vietnam and the Philippines; and

‒ deepening defence, diplomatic, development and law enforcement cooperation with
New Zealand and partners across the Pacific.

  - Fostering cooperation through multilateral regional forums, such as the EAS, and with ASEAN.

  - Sustaining a comprehensive network of relationships through 95 diplomatic posts in 77
[countries, including formal Defence representation in 30 diplomatic missions.[47]](http:missions.47)

  - Developing and implementing new comprehensive country strategies, beginning with China,
India, Indonesia, Japan and South korea, in accordance with the Australia in the Asian Century
_White Paper._

  - Improving our intelligence capabilities through strong coordination and prioritisation, and
effective sharing and collaboration with our close partners.


-----

-----

### ParT ii

###### buildiNg a SeCure FuTure


-----

###### CHaPTer 4

### auSTralia’S NaTioNal SeCuriTy ouTlooK


-----

###### An assessment of the strategic environment suggests
that the outlook for Australia’s national security over
the next decade is largely positive. Major conflict
is unlikely and we have a proactive, effective and
adaptive national security capability to respond to
challenges as they unfold.

However, there are already clear elements of
strategic competition at play in the region. For the
most part, tensions that have arisen have been
managed well. But miscalculation or escalation is
possible in contested areas, such as in the South
and East China Seas, and by countries of strategic
concern, such as North korea.

The threat of terrorism will require ongoing vigilance.
Some traditional threats will migrate online—and
new ones will emerge—as we embrace the digital
age and become more dependent on space-based
infrastructure.

To the extent that any such challenges directly involve
Australia, we are well placed to meet them with strong
and agile national security capabilities. The fact that
we will continue to be one of the world’s most stable,
resilient and cohesive nations will help us to deliver
the community-wide responses that some challenges
require.

Most of Australia’s future national security challenges
will come from beyond our borders. That means
we must comprehend global trends to inform our
domestic and international security policy settings.
Analysing trends does not eliminate uncertainty—
unexpected events will inevitably happen. Even if we
understand our environment well and predict most
major trends, shocks may still occur. Nonetheless,
the first priority for effective national security is
to understand the trends and drivers of most
significance to Australia.

For Australia over the next decade, the most
significant trends are likely to be:

   - uncertainty in the global economy;

   - a rebalancing of global power;

   - the continuing importance of
non-state actors; and

   - low-level conflict in high-risk areas.

**Economic uncertainty and the global reordering**

The financial crisis and associated downturn in the
United States and Europe have been dominant forces
in shaping domestic and international policy agendas
around the globe since 2008. Economic uncertainty
will continue to shape our strategic environment
and will affect national policy priorities the focus


companies in global developments. The relative
economic health and growth potential of Asia during
this time will also ensure countries and companies
place a higher priority on pursuing opportunities in our
immediate region.

But possibly the most significant factor for our
national security is the impact of shifts in the global
balance of power. The financial crisis of 2008
highlighted the global strategic reordering that had
been under way for some time. Now in 2013, the
reordering is well progressed and its significance for
Australia is becoming clearer.

Australia’s region is home to several major powers,
but our major ally the United States and our major
trading partner China will have the greatest influence
on the region. The United States has publicly
articulated its ‘rebalancing’ toward the Asia–Pacific
and remains the world’s most powerful strategic actor.
Commensurate with its size and interests, China is
playing an increasingly active role in regional affairs
and multilateral forums and is building a significant
military capability. India and Indonesia, among other
states, will be more economically and strategically
influential actors in the Asia–Pacific.

At times there have been tensions over issues such
as competing territorial claims and historical disputes.
By and large these have been well managed. All
countries in the region have benefited from the
resultant stability, economic growth and prosperity
that have characterised recent decades.

The United States and China, like Australia, have
clear economic interests in preserving the security
and stability of the region. Together with regional
partners, we expect that both the United States and
China will work hard to maximise the cooperative
aspects of their relationship and minimise the
competitive elements. The cooperation of all
countries in the region is fundamental to stability.

Further afield, countries including Brazil, South Africa
and Russia will play a more active and influential role
in their respective regions and on a global stage.
Australia is likely to increasingly engage, and have
the opportunity to work with, these and other nations
on a variety of security issues—a more immediate
prospect following our election as a non-permanent
member of the UNSC.

The global strategic reordering coupled with the
emergence of Asia as an economic and strategic
centre-of-gravity has created a vibrant arena of
middle power activity. More Asian countries will play
an increasingly active role in shaping the region.
Countries from Europe and South America will also
be seeking greater strategic and economic traction in


-----

On the whole, this global strategic reordering is
positive. But it brings with it challenges. On the one
hand it will enable Australia to reinvigorate traditional
relationships, such as those with the United kingdom,
France and other like-minded countries, in the pursuit
of common security interests on issues such as
cyber. It will also see confident and globally-minded
Asian nations seeking to enhance cooperation with
Australia. However, as we pursue closer relationships
with them, regional powers could seek to exercise
influence over our national decision making and use
of our resources. More active middle powers are also
likely to challenge established regional dynamics and
the degree of influence Australia currently possesses
with our closest regional partners.

The military modernisation occurring in many Asian
nations could also give rise to new tensions. As
recognised in the Australia in the Asian Century White
_Paper, this military modernisation is a natural by-_
product of the sustained economic growth across the
region over the past decade. However, emboldened
behaviour or a lack of transparency could create
uncertainty and nervousness.

The challenges and disputes likely to arise in
the region will increasingly demand multilateral
responses. In the Asia–Pacific, several overlapping
forums have emerged to address a variety of
security and economic developments over the last
half century. Multilateralism is inherently difficult
and requires perseverance in pursuit of sometimes
seemingly incremental development. Australia is
working with its partners to strengthen regional
forums—especially the EAS and the ASEAN Regional
Forum—so that they can better contribute to regional
stability. At the same time, we are developing
bilateral relations with our most important partners,
and providing support for smaller or ad hoc groupings
to gain traction on issues of shared concern.

**The continuing importance of non-state actors**

Both strategically and economically, non-state actors
will play an increased role in the world. This is due
to such trends as greater global interdependence,
the widespread adoption and rapid evolution of
technology, increasing cross-border traffic flows, and
a global focus on economic growth. Traditionally,
national security consideration of non-state actors has
focused on terrorist and organised criminal networks.
However, legitimate non-state actors, from private
companies to non-government organisations, will also
be more influential over the coming decade.

National and multinational companies are increasingly
important partners for the Government in achieving


our national security objectives. For example, the
partnerships established with major companies
to protect critical infrastructure in light of the
threat posed by terrorists are likely to take on a
greater importance in response to the threats and
opportunities of the digital age.

As countries continue to prioritise economic growth,
they will also need to protect the prospects of their
most valuable and vital sectors. This imperative will
not only influence economic policy, but also bilateral
relationships, interactions in multilateral forums and
the development of trade policy. Countries will need
to be conscious of this potential source of influence,
and to consider how best to partner with local and
international organisations to achieve common
objectives.

The actions of terrorist and criminal networks and
other non-state actors will continue to challenge
our national security and that of our regional
partners. Some of our smaller neighbours, with
fewer resources and hence less capability, may be
particularly vulnerable. Because their weakness
may have implications for our national security,
we cannot consider our response to terrorist and
criminal networks in isolation. Australia and our
regional partners’ shared understanding of the
threats posed by such networks is constantly
improving. Our individual and shared responses are
likewise increasingly well targeted and sophisticated.
However these threats will continue to evolve.
A separate but equally worrying development for all,
is the emergence of ‘self-radicalised and lone actor’
terrorists.

The Internet—while enabling many social and
economic opportunities into the future—is also
likely to be the source of other new national security
challenges, such as the activities of certain ‘hacktivist’
groups. The potential impact and rapid evolution of
non state based threats, particularly online, suggest
we must be vigilant and agile if we are to respond
effectively.

Issues and events here or overseas may inspire
some Australians to engage in politically motivated
violence or lead to instances of inter-communal
violence and possibly violent protest. Fortunately,
such violence is not a prominent feature of our
society. But when there are conflicts between
countries that have diaspora communities here, we
may occasionally experience tension or isolated
clashes. Ideologically motivated groups, such as
racist, nationalist or religious extremists, may also
seek to ignite communal violence.


-----

##### CHiNa’S role iN THe regioN

Within one generation, China’s rise has transformed the living standards of its own population and
done much to boost the economies of countries throughout the Asia-Pacific. In economic and political
terms, China is unquestionably already a global power. With the possible exception of the United
States, no other country is likely to have more influence on economic and strategic developments in
the Asia-Pacific region: China’s national objectives and how they are pursued will have far-reaching
effects on nations, economies and inter state relations.

Indeed, because China will be such an important player, its future role in the region and the nature
of its relations with the United States will necessarily feature prominently in any consideration of
contemporary geopolitics or regional dynamics.

As the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper made clear, China’s military growth is a natural,
legitimate outcome of its growing economy and broadening interests. The rapidity of that military
modernisation has given rise to a degree of uncertainty or even sensitivity. The series of maritime
territorial disputes between China and some of its neighbours have exacerbated sensitivities.

These disputes must be resolved peacefully and all parties should avoid miscalculations that would
jeopardise the stability and economic growth that has characterised the Asia-Pacific over recent
decades.

For Australia’s part, we will continue to encourage China to use its growing capabilities and influence
to contribute actively and positively to maintaining regional peace and stability. More active and open
engagement by China with the region, including through regional institutions, would help to assuage
any nervousness about the prospects of ongoing stability across the Asia-Pacific.

Australia will continue to engage in practical cooperation with China on issues of shared concern, and
will seek to encourage negotiated resolutions to any regional disputes. We will encourage China to
embrace openness and transparency to help build understanding and trust across the region.

As part of this, Australia would welcome China playing an increasingly active and constructive role in
multilateral forums, commensurate with its status as a global power. Bilaterally we will seek to build on
our robust economic relationship, our political and strategic dialogue, and our established defence ties
to develop a more comprehensive dialogue across the breadth of issues of shared interest.


-----

**Fragility and conflict in at-risk areas**

A major war is unlikely over the next decade.
However there are areas of instability which present
a risk to Australia’s interests, should conditions
deteriorate. Our immediate region is home to both
fragile and developing nations, some of which may be
more susceptible to the effects of natural disasters,
demographic and economic pressures, as well as
political tensions.

Importantly, in those countries where we and other
regional partners have played peacekeeping and
peace monitoring roles—Solomon Islands and
Timor-Leste—the immediate outlook for security and
stability is more positive. While both countries face
long-term development challenges, their improved
outlook is due, in part, to Australia’s commitment to
their stability and development. But with the path
to sustainable development being neither short nor
smooth, instability will continue to be a feature of our
immediate region.

Instability and the prospect of continuing heightened
tensions in South Asia and the Middle East have the
potential to affect Australia’s interests. Afghanistan,
particularly following transition in 2014, will require
ongoing support from the international community
if the development and security gains made over
recent years are to be consolidated under Afghan
leadership. The downstream impacts of the
upheavals sparked during the Arab Spring, and
concerns over Iran’s nuclear ambitions, could also
lead to heightened tensions and possibly further
conflict within and between states. In addition, the
possibility of further proliferation of weapons of mass


destruction in the region would have negative
longer-term implications for regional security.

Closer to home, the provocations and unacceptable
behaviour that have characterised North korea’s
foreign policy for the last half century will persist,
with its growing nuclear and missile ambitions and
capabilities presenting an added complication. In
other parts of Asia, tensions arising from territorial
disputes and shifting power balances could result in
isolated armed clashes or confrontations.

Overall, these trends and possibilities point to an
environment where:

   - strategic shocks and surprises are possible;

   - demand for international development,
humanitarian assistance and support for
displaced persons will remain high; and

   - local conflicts or heightened tensions may
emerge with little warning.


-----

-----

###### CHaPTer 5
### auSTralia’S NaTioNal SeCuriTy FoCuS For THe yearS aHead


-----

Australia must prepare for the most likely, and
most important, eventualities in the future strategic
environment. To the extent we can, we must seek to
influence that environment to our advantage. To this
end, we require the best possible understanding of
our strategic environment, clear objectives and the
most coordinated, effective and efficient application
of our effort and resources.


**Responding to the strategic outlook**

From the assessment of our national security outlook
set out in Chapter Four, certain judgements can
be formed about the specific strategic outlook for
the eight pillars of our national security. Figure 3
summarises these key judgements and indicates how
Australia will respond.


**Figure 3: key implications for Australia’s national security pillars**



- Implementing the recommendations
of the Report of the Expert Panel on
_Asylum Seekers_

|PIllARS|kEY JUDGEmENTS|RESPONSE|
|---|---|---|
||||
|PIllARS|kEY JUDGEmENTS|RESPONSE • Emphasising preventative|
|Countering Countering terrorism, terrorism, espionage and espionage and foreign interference foreign interference|• Terrorist networks are resilient and • Terrorist networks are resilient and will persist will persist • Potential for home-grown • Potential for home-grown radicalisation and violent extremism radicalisation and violent extremism • Foreign actors target government, • Foreign actors target government, industry and business to obtain industry and business to obtain advantage advantage • Increase in malicious cyber activity • Increase in malicious cyber activity|approaches at home and abroad • Emphasising preventative • Continuing to build capacity to approaches at home and abroad discover and degrade hostile foreign • Ccloanntdineusitninge t oa cbtuiviiltdie csa pacity to discover and degrade hostile foreign • Continuing to build partnerships with clandestine activities the business community • Continuing to build partnerships with • Encouraging strong security the business community procedures for government and • Einndcuosutrrya ging strong security procedures for government and • Ensuring intelligence legislation industry keeps pace with the changing security environment|
||||
|Deterring and Deterring and defeating attacks defeating attacks on Australia and on Australia and Australia’s interests Australia’s interests|• Traditional United States dominance • Traditional United States dominance increasingly contested in the region increasingly contested in the region • Increasing strategic competition: • Increasing strategic competition: low risk of conflict, but high low risk of conflict, but high consequences of miscalculation consequences of miscalculation • Military modernisation across Asia • Military modernisation across Asia • Instability and conflict in at-risk areas • Instability and conflict in at-risk areas|• Increasing military cooperation, joint exercises and diplomatic engagement • wInicthre caosuinngtr imesil iatacrryo scso oApseiara ttoio n, joint beuxieldrc gisreesa taenr dtr adnipslpoamraetnicc ye, nogpaegne ment cwoitmh mcouunnictariteiosn a, ccroonsfsid Aesniace t oa nd trust build greater transparency, open • Acquiring core ADF capabilities communication, confidence and trust • Undertaking comprehensive defence • Acquiring core ADF capabilities planning, including the 2013 Defence • WUnhditeer tPaakpinegr comprehensive defence planning, including the 2013 Defence • Ensuring intelligence legislation White Paper keeps pace with the changing security environment|
||• Increasing movement of people and goods to Australia • Increasing movement of people and • Growth in transnational crime goods to Australia • Ongoing irregular migration patterns • Growth in transnational crime • Ongoing irregular migration patterns|•• IInnccrreeaassiinngg uussee ooff rriisskk--bbaasseedd ssyysstteemmss ttoo ttaarrggeett tthhrreeaattss •• EEnnhhaanncciinngg ccooooppeerraattiioonn aaccrroossss bboorrddeerr sseeccuurriittyy,, llaaww eennffoorrcceemmeenntt aanndd iinntteelllliiggeennccee aaggeenncciieess •• CCooooppeerraattiinngg wwiitthh oouurr rreeggiioonnaall ppaarrttnneerrss ttoo ccoouunntteerr ppeeooppllee ssmmuugggglliinngg|
|||• Implementing the recommendations of the Report of the Expert Panel on|


-----

|PIllARS|kEY JUDGEmENTS|RESPONSE|
|---|---|---|
|Preventing, detecting and disrupting serious and organised crime|• Uptake of new technology by criminal organisations • Instability in the world economy driving illicit markets • Fragile states enabling trafficking and smuggling|• Ensuring that Australian legislation keeps pace with the changing nature of criminal activity • Expanding and deepening regional and global law enforcement connections • Enhancing collaboration with Australian and partner national security agencies • Building Australia’s cyber defences to become hostile to cyber crime|
|Promoting a secure international environment conducive to Australia’s interests|• Ongoing instability across Africa and the Middle East • Continuing risk of instability in fragile and developing states • Multilateralism is more important but also more difficult, so global consensus on shared issues will be challenging • Proliferation of weapons of mass destruction will continue to attract a concerted international effort • Competition over resource availability and environmental management creates further tension in the region|• Using global forums, including through our membership of the UNSC, to strengthen international partnerships, address shared issues and, in turn, strengthen global rules- based order • Supporting Afghanistan beyond the 2014 transition to Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) leadership • Providing development assistance to fragile and developing countries, particularly in the Asia-Pacific • Partnering with developing States in our region to manage the implications of climate change • Working with countries experiencing or emerging from natural disasters or conflict|



- Enhancing information sharing with
key industry sectors

- More effective integration of national
security, social and economic policy

- Working collaboratively across
governments, with private and not-forprofit sectors and the community to
prepare for potential shocks

- Strong horizon scanning

- Building partnerships with the national
critical infrastructure community

- Ensuring our national security crisis
management arrangements and
capabilities can deploy quickly and
effectively in support of state and
territory responses to natural disasters


**Strengthening**
**the resilience**
**of Australia’s**
**people, assets,**
**infrastructure and**
**institutions**



- Major shocks could occur with limited
warning

- Trans-border threats such as
pandemics remain a possibility in our
increasingly connected world

- Increasing importance of communities
and private sector in achieving
national resilience

- Global integration of supply chains

- As the climate continues to warm,
extreme weather events and natural
disasters will increase in frequency
and severity across the region


-----

|PIllARS|kEY JUDGEmENTS|RESPONSE|
|---|---|---|
|The Australia– United States Alliance|• The United States will have a greater focus on Asia • The United States remains the world’s most powerful strategic actor • The presence of the United States in the region is vital to maintaining confidence in the evolving strategic environment|• Cooperating on strategic issues of common interest, including regional security priorities • Deepening our defence, intelligence and security engagement with the United States|
|Understanding and being influential in the world, particularly the Asia-Pacific|• Ongoing shift of economic and strategic weight towards Asia • Increasing number of state and non-state actors on the international stage, potentially with competing interests • Greater competition for influence in Asia, both from countries in and beyond the region|• Working with regional partners to strengthen multilateral forums and in particular develop the EAS as a crucial regional institution • Developing a bilateral architecture with key regional nations, which includes regular meetings between leaders • Enhancing intelligence and information sharing with partners across the region • Broadening all linkages—cultural, social, economic, national security—with our regional partners to build confidence and trust • Developing our expertise on the Asia-Pacific|


-----

**Near-term areas of focus: Afghanistan and the**
**UNSC**

By the end of 2014, Afghanistan will have assumed
responsibility for its own security. In 2013 and 2014
Australia will sit on the UNSC for the first time since
1985-86. To ensure we meet our national security
objectives and fulfil our international obligations a
concerted, whole-of-government effort will be required
on both these fronts over the next two years.

**Afghanistan**

Australia’s mission in Afghanistan will change over the
next two years as security responsibility progressively
transitions to the ANSF. Transition began in Uruzgan
in July 2012 and is scheduled to be completed by the
end of 2013. Transition timelines are a significant
focus for Australia, for the Afghan government, and
indeed for all states comprising the ISAF.

Over the course of this year, our civilian and military
presence in Uruzgan will gradually wind down. Once
transition is complete, we will continue to support the
nation-wide transition strategy through institutional
training and advisory support for the ANSF.

At the end of 2014, when the transition across
Afghanistan concludes, Australia’s presence in
Afghanistan will be much different to what it is now.
But the end of a security transition will not mean
the end of our commitment. The ADF will continue
to provide specialised and targeted support to our
Afghan partners, potentially including a continuing
role for our Special Forces.

We will contribute to a new NATO-led mission to
train, advise and assist the ANSF after 2014. As
part of this contribution, the Government has
committed considerable resources to support the
ANSF financially. This will complement the strong
support we have provided for Afghan governance
and development including through: working with
international partners and the Afghan government
to strengthen governance, supporting Afghan-led
reconciliation and peace processes, improving
access to basic health and education services, and
supporting agricultural and rural development.

**United Nations Security Council**

Our membership of the UNSC gives Australia a more
influential hand in shaping world events that are of
importance to us. This is a major opportunity. As
a middle power with global interests, Australia has
long been a supporter of a rules-based international
order. The UNSC has a central place in that order.
It has primary responsibility for the maintenance


of international peace and security. To that end,
the UNSC is empowered to authorise a range of
measures, including sanctions and the use of force.

Through our membership for 2013-14, Australia will
engage actively across the breadth of the UNSC’s
agenda, working to ensure it discharges its mandate
effectively. Specifically, Australia will:

   - work closely on the Council’s consideration
of Afghanistan;

   - support the Council’s work to counter
terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, and piracy;

   - champion the Council’s efforts to compel
North korea and Iran to abide by UNSC
resolutions concerning their nuclear
activities;

   - contribute to the effective operation of the
Council’s sanction regimes;

   - support and encourage Council efforts to
prevent conflict and atrocities, and work to
ensure peacekeepers are empowered to
protect civilians;

   - support the Council’s efforts to ensure that
those who commit serious crimes are held
to account; and

   - encourage greater transparency in UNSC
work and closer engagement with regional
organisations.


-----

**Five year priorities**

The Government will continue to apply effort and
resources across all eight pillars of our national
security. They are all important. However, to achieve
our vision for national security and respond to the
strategic outlook, the Government has identified
three priorities to which national security agencies will
dedicate additional effort over the next five years:

**•** **Enhanced regional engagement in**
support of security and prosperity in the
Asian Century.

**•** **Integrated cyber policy and operations**
to enhance the defence of our digital
networks.

**•** **Effective partnerships to achieve**
innovative and efficient national security
outcomes.

Each of these three priorities will contribute to the
pursuit of our national security objectives.

The priority on enhanced regional engagement
advances our ability to support regional stability and
increase our influence in the region to our long term
advantage.

The integrated cyber policy and operations priority
reflects the burgeoning threat to Australia’s national
security associated with the rapid evolution of the
digital medium. There is now an imperative to bolster
our defences and, importantly, to bring the broader
community into a closer partnership with government


in understanding and organising an effective
approach to cyber defence.

Finally, prioritising effective partnerships recognises
the potential to better harness our domestic
capabilities to combat evolving threats, while
partnering regionally and globally to our mutual
advantage. The nature of modern national security
threats (transnational, multi-actor, or technologically
advanced) demands joined-up responses.

The critical activities supporting the eight pillars of
our national security will not be compromised as the
Government dedicates additional effort and focus to
these three priorities over the next five years. While
each priority is different, the enhanced effort in these
areas will strengthen our national security and have
longer-term benefits in the national interest.


##### wHole-oF-goverNmeNT ParTNerSHiP iN aFgHaNiSTaN

Australia’s mission in Afghanistan is to provide long term stability to prevent it from again becoming a
safe haven for terrorists. A strong and effective Afghan security force is critical to this task. However,
security alone will not create the conditions for prosperity and stability. Basic services including health
care and education will be critical in improving the long-term prospects of Afghanistan.

The ADF, along with the AFP, AusAID and DFAT, is working in partnership with the Uruzgan Provincial
Government through the Uruzgan Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) to help deliver these services
in Uruzgan Province.

The PRT recently completed construction of the 21-classroom Malalai Girls’ School at Tarin
kowt. Most of the construction work was done by local Afghan contractors under the direction of
ADF engineers. Several ISAF partners have also worked to ensure that the school has furniture,
bookshelves, laboratory benches and sports equipment.

The Malalai Girls’ school is equipped for up to 700 primary and secondary students, providing access
to education for hundreds of girls in the Uruzgan province, many for the first time in their lives. With
less than one per cent of Afghan women in Uruzgan able to read and write, the school is playing an
important role in improving levels of education and in contributing to stability in Uruzgan.


-----

**_Enhanced regional engagement in support of_**
_security and prosperity in the Asian Century_

Australia’s strategic and economic future is tied to
the Asia-Pacific region. The Australia in the Asian
_Century White Paper recognises we have a big stake_
in maintaining the relative peace and stability of
recent decades. Australia will therefore work actively
to promote trust and cooperation. When tensions
or disputes arise, we will be ready to help craft
resolutions that are peaceful, enduring and founded
on an open and inclusive, rules-based system.

Australia’s alliance with the United States is at the
core of our approach to national security and makes
a major contribution to regional security and stability.
We need to continue to build on this relationship.

The growing number of influential regional actors is
significant to Australia. This will bring new regional
dynamics and increase competition for influence.
These shifts need not be negative for Australia. But
we will need to place more emphasis on bolstering
our regional relationships over the next five years
if we are to remain an influential and positive
contributor to regional security and stability.

Australia has a long history of security cooperation
with nations across the Asia–Pacific—relationships
which have contributed substantially to regional


security and stability. Looking ahead, a few
partnerships will warrant particular focus. The
importance of a deepening of our relationship with
China cannot be overstated. Indonesia, already a
key partner, will continue to grow in strategic and
economic weight. We will seek to enhance bilateral
cooperation with those nations comprising ASEAN,
as well as Japan, South korea and India—nations
with which we share a widening range of security
interests. New Zealand will continue to be our most
important security partner in the South Pacific.

Beyond the region, we will look also for opportunities
to cooperate with other close partners, such as the
United kingdom, Canada and France. Through
existing groupings such as the Five Power Defence
Arrangements (involving Australia, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Singapore and the United kingdom),
Australia will look to build on important relationships
with our Southeast Asian neighbours.

Australia will continue to work with international
partners to improve the capacity of regional
institutions to address regional challenges, encourage
cooperation and promote agreed norms of behaviour.
Robust multilateral institutions are important to
the management of peace and stability, and are
of particular relevance to Australia’s security and
economic interests over coming decades.


##### THe PaCiFiC iSlaNdS regioN

Australia has an enduring interest in the security, stability and economic prosperity of the Pacific
Islands region. In some Pacific Island Countries, economic, gender, social, security and governance
issues continue to hamper sustainable development. If not addressed, these could undermine stability
in the region. These issues could also create conditions that could be exploited by malicious state and
non-state entities.

Australia will continue to work in partnership with Pacific Island Countries to address these challenges.
Our engagement spans the political, economic, development, environmental and military spheres.
It includes collaboration with our regional partners, non-government organisations and multilateral
organisations. We cooperate closely with New Zealand on our engagement in the region, including on
security, policing and supporting transparent and accountable development.

Coordinated closely with our Pacific partners, Australian aid is helping to build stronger and more
sustainable communities, including by helping people prepare for, and respond to disasters. The
Seasonal Worker Program is an example of the work Australia is undertaking to accelerate the
economic development of the Pacific Island Countries with Australia. Australia is also contributing
directly to the overall security of the region by enhancing the capacity of regional law enforcement
and security forces through the Pacific Transnational Crime Network and the Pacific Patrol Boat and
Defence Cooperation Programs.

Australia will continue to work with its partners to tackle future shared challenges, including through
Pacific regional organisations such as the PIF, the Secretariat of the Pacific Community and the
Forum Fisheries Agency. Looking ahead, key priorities will include supporting transition of RAMSI,
encouraging Fiji’s return to democracy and the rule of law, and working with Papua New Guinea to
secure development gains and to address common challenges.


-----

Regional multilateral institutions—most notably the cooperative security and confidence-building,
EAS, ASEAN, the ASEAN Regional Forum, the and collective problem-solving, in areas such as
ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM- environmental and energy security, and the rule of
Plus) and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation law.
(APEC) grouping—will be important in promoting


##### FuTure direCTioNS

  - Promote trust through cooperative arrangements among regional powers, fair representation
of Asian nations in key international organisations and the peaceful negotiation of disputes, in
accordance with international law.

  - Consistent with the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper, build stronger and more
comprehensive relationships with influential regional powers, especially with China, India,
Indonesia, Japan and South korea:

‒ Build on our established relationship with China to deepen our dialogue on priority
strategic issues and support China’s constructive participation in regional affairs.

‒ Continue to work with India to develop regional cooperation on the Indian Ocean rim,
especially through the Indian Ocean Rim-Association for Regional Cooperation.

‒ Expand and deepen our established partnership with Indonesia to enable further
cooperation on shared priorities and common interests.

‒ Continue to build a comprehensive and proactive strategic agenda with Japan,
including through our trilateral cooperation with Japan and the United States.

‒ Enhance our dialogues with Japan and South korea on areas of common security
interest, including through 2+2 Foreign and Defence Ministers’ dialogue processes.

  - Encourage and facilitate the United States to continue playing its role as a stabilising pillar
for regional security including by facilitating its rebalancing into the region and supporting the
Global Force Posture Review.

  - Promote the primacy and effectiveness of specific multilateral forums which encourage integrity
and rules-based order, with a particular emphasis on:

‒ Strengthening the EAS as a crucial regional institution for managing regional
challenges, fostering strategic dialogue and promoting cooperation.

‒ Using our seat on the UNSC to strengthen regional partnerships and maintain
peace and security, including compelling North korea to abide by UNSC resolutions
concerning their nuclear activities.

‒ Addressing gaps in regional frameworks, rules and norms that promote peace,
security and stability, where adherence and effective implementation are lacking.

‒ Strengthening engagement with ASEAN and its member nations, including by
appointing an Ambassador to ASEAN.

  - Working with likeminded regional middle powers to manage proactively the strategic implications
of shared global challenges, including climate change, and food and energy security.

  - Ensuring Australia’s national security engagement supports the objectives and priorities outlined
in our comprehensive country strategies, currently under development as part of the Australia in
_the Asian Century White Paper._

  - Working with key regional partners to implement the Bali Process Regional Cooperation
Framework, which will deliver regionally consistent approaches to combating people smuggling
and managing irregular migration.


-----

**_Integrated cyber policy and operations to enhance_**
_the defence of our digital networks_

Cyberspace is now a strategic asset for Australia as a
modern, digitally enabled nation. We are well placed
to be a global leader in the digital age. Greater
connectivity offers more opportunities to participate in
the global economy, especially for regional Australia.

The Internet’s openness and accessibility—the
characteristics that underpin the benefits of the digital
age—also bring risks of malicious activity. Foreign
intelligence services and criminal organisations can
use the Internet to infiltrate systems, extremists can
more easily coordinate, communicate and radicalise,
and the Internet can be a means to promote hate and
division among community groups.

If Australia is to take full advantage of the
opportunities of the online environment, we need
to maintain the most effective policy settings,
coordination mechanisms and capabilities to minimise
the associated risks and build enduring trust and
confidence in the online environment.

Malicious cyber actors are adaptive and agile.
We require similarly responsive approaches and
capabilities to deter, defeat and limit their activities. In
some cases this will demand the use of sophisticated
defensive capabilities; in others, industry outreach or
targeted awareness-raising campaigns will be most


effective in preventing harm. The core of Australia’s
approach to national cyber resilience is the ongoing
development of integrated national cyber security
operations capabilities.

To do this, the Government is establishing the
Australian Cyber Security Centre to improve
partnerships between governments and with
industry. By the end of 2013, the Government’s most
sophisticated cyber security capabilities—from across
the national security community—will be located
in one facility. This will enable a more complete
understanding of the cyber threat and facilitate
faster and more effective responses to serious cyber
incidents. It will see more seamless interaction with
international and industry partners. Importantly, it
will also make Australia a harder target for malicious
cyber activities.


##### eSTabliSHiNg THe auSTraliaN Cyber SeCuriTy CeNTre

The Australian Cyber Security Centre will bring together Defence’s Cyber Security Operations Centre,
the Attorney-General’s Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) Australia, ASIO’s Cyber
Espionage Branch, elements of the AFP’s High-Tech Crime Operations capability and all-source­
assessment analysts from the Australian Crime Commission. The Centre will be responsible for:

  - developing sophisticated capabilities to maximise Australia’s strategic capacity and reach in
cyberspace, giving the Government the ability to detect, deter and deny offshore malicious cyber
actors targeting Australia;

  - developing a comprehensive understanding of the threat to Australian Government networks and
systems of national interest;

  - responding to and assisting in the mitigation of cyber incidents affecting both government and
private sector networks;

  - working with critical infrastructure sectors and key industry partners to limit the threat to our
nation’s most valuable networks and systems; and

  - providing key policy agencies, including the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet,
Attorney General’s Department, Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital
Economy, DFAT and Department of Defence, with advice and support for their efforts to develop
proactive strategies to counter cyber threats.


-----

##### FuTure direCTioNS

  - Strengthen government and private networks by establishing a single cyber security operations
facility with a focus on enhancing partnerships with industry.

  - To ensure that the Internet remains an open, dynamic and secure environment, Australia will:

‒ cooperate with allies and partners to promote international norms in cyberspace,
through both established multilateral institutions (such as UN bodies, APEC and G20)
and multi-stakeholder processes (such as the Seoul Conference on Cyberspace);

‒ actively promote the applicability of existing international law for cyberspace;

‒ deliver capacity building initiatives to promote greater trust and confidence in
cyberspace across the region; and

‒ support confidence building measures to create greater understanding across states.

  - Promote international cooperation in the investigation of cybercrime offences, including through
our accession to the Council of Europe’s Convention on Cybercrime.


-----

**_Effective partnerships to achieve innovative and_** across all sectors to share knowledge and integrate

_efficient national security outcomes_ data, while prioritising our own efforts.


The contemporary national security environment
requires creative responses that combine the
expertise and authority of various government
departments, foreign governments and nongovernment partners.

However, a variety of trends and developments—from
the growing sophistication of serious and organised
crime to the increasingly diffuse nature of terrorist
threats—suggest that governments everywhere will
need to continuously consider how best to achieve
priority national security outcomes.

Fiscal constraints will continue to be an important
consideration in our approach, and in that of our
international partners. Budget realities, and the
complexities posed by these trends, cannot be
ignored. Our national security arrangements must
adapt and respond. Our approaches must be
inventive. They must also be targeted to achieve the
highest priority outcomes.

Effective partnerships are essential to delivering
innovation and efficiency across the national
security system. Our focus must be on harnessing
information, ideas and capabilities from all sources to
ensure our responses are effective and efficient. We
must work with domestic and international partners


National security agencies must be able to manage
and share information securely and quickly with
domestic and international partner agencies.
More information sharing is also needed between
government and business to create a common
national risk picture and focus our collective efforts.
We must continue to link our economic, social and
national security policies to build resilience and deal
with emerging threats.

Greater collaboration will require effective
coordination and clear priorities. This will be
addressed through the regular delivery of a National
Security Strategy every five years and ongoing
improvements to the coordinated national security
budget process. A more systematic approach for
analysing national security risks annually is being
developed to inform budget and planning decisions.
A national security capability plan is also being
developed to complement the Defence Capability
_Plan._


##### ParTNerSHiP aNd iNNovaTioN iN border SeCuriTy

Travel to Australia is on the increase—it is expected that over 50 million persons will cross Australia’s
border in 2020.[48] Passengers are coming from many more countries than was traditionally the case,
and there has been a considerable rise in small-budget airlines operating out of the region.

Pinpointing those few passengers who pose a security risk is a challenge. But collaboration among
Australia’s immigration, law enforcement and border agencies is developing innovative approaches to
do just that.

Australia’s universal visa system for all non-citizens is one such approach—the border risk scoring
system. It works in real time, 24 hours a day to identify and prioritise passengers requiring additional
scrutiny by border officials. At the same time, the system allows low risk travellers to easily enter
Australia. It achieves that by sorting passengers into risk tiers, including through biometric checks
and linking visa data with a range of other information held by the Department of Immigration and
Citizenship. The system is capable of very rapid and sophisticated data matching and network
analysis, and brings to the surface for investigation links that once would have been hidden. Australia
is also partnering with other countries to build systems to detect high-risk visa applicants before they
travel.

This is the first step in developing effective, integrated and innovative approaches to securing
our borders.


-----

##### FuTure direCTioNS

  - Improve information sharing arrangements, and where necessary legislative frameworks, across
Commonwealth agencies, and with states and territories, international partners and Australian
business.

  - Implement an effective information sharing regime for national security departments and
agencies through the Commonwealth’s National Security Information Environment Roadmap:
_2020 Vision, to ensure the right people can access the right information quickly, securely and_
appropriately.

  - Continue to implement strategies outlined in the Commonwealth Organised Crime Strategic
_Framework and the National Organised Crime Response Plan, with a focus on delivering_
cross-jurisdictional responses.

  - Encourage ongoing regional efforts to combat corruption, people smuggling and transnational
organised crime based on better understanding the phenomena.

  - Build on relationships established through the Australia–New Zealand Counter Terrorism
Committee (ANZCTC), Australia–New Zealand Emergency Management Committee and Trusted
Information Sharing Network to work more closely in government–industry partnerships on
emerging national security challenges.

  - Enlist governments, the private sector and the community to make Australia a hard target for
serious and organised crime.

  - Focus whole-of-government efforts on how best to prevent the emergence of violent extremist
sentiment and counter the continuously evolving terrorist threat.

  - Enhance our comprehensive approach to border security through the release of the Australian
Border Management Strategy, to more effectively and efficiently protect against threats including
the illegal movement of goods.

  - Continue to invest in new technologies such as biometrics to enhance identity protection and
combat fraud.

  - Continue to develop law enforcement techniques and methods to address cyber facilitated
crimes.

  - Release a National Security Strategy at intervals of around five years.

  - Introduce and maintain a national security capability plan.

  - Set annual coordinated national security budget priorities, informed by regular analysis of
national security risks at the start of each budget cycle.


-----

### CoNCluSioN

Australia’s national security is intrinsically linked to the economic and strategic transformation
in our region and in the world. As the peaceful rise of Asia continues, we will continue to
benefit. But if and when tensions arise, Australia must be part of the response to promote
stability.

The changing international environment therefore looms large for Australia’s national
security policies. It demands that we focus on our ability to influence emerging risks and
capitalise on opportunities in the region. Against a backdrop of fiscal restraint this will require
ongoing assessment of our diplomatic priorities. The changing environment will also require
consistent and creative bilateral engagement to reinforce our efforts in multilateral forums.
It suggests the need to forge stronger partnerships across defence forces in the region. It
emphasises the need for insightful intelligence and it confirms the importance of our growing
aid program.

More than any other activity of government, national security must integrate its active
international voice with strong domestic policies. We must always strive for an effective
continuum—from the Australian community, through business and government, to the
international arena. Indeed, more than ever, effective national security is about integrated
responses to complex challenges both at home and abroad.

Innovation will become more important. Digital and cyber-enabled threats are growing
and changing rapidly. We need to ensure our defences keep pace. International flows of
people, goods and money are also growing. We need to better harness our efforts to target
the associated security risks. For example, in coming years we need to see more effort
dedicated to pinpointing high-risk activity and individuals early.

Our pursuit of innovation will build on the solid pillars of our national security. We have
a strong defence force. We are adept at collecting and assessing intelligence. We have
effective law enforcement and resilient communities. We have robust border management
arrangements, despite challenges like people smuggling. Australia’s diplomacy and aid are
well targeted and our network of close partnerships, regionally and beyond, will continue to
serve us well.

Our strong national security footing underpins Australia’s economic engagement. It provides
a platform from which to pursue our commercial and strategic interests.

The emerging challenges for the security of our nation will require changes by degree.
Forging closer partnerships. Adapting cyber defences. Furthering our influence in the
world. These are the areas we must cultivate. These are the areas that will strengthen our
defences while opening up new opportunities.

Australians can embrace the Asian Century with confidence, as we have a strong foundation
upon which to build a secure future.


-----

### abbreviaTioNS aNd aCroNymS

ADF Australian Defence Force

ADMM ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting

AFP Australian Federal Police

AML Anti-Money Laundering

ANSF Afghan National Security Forces

ANZCTC Australia-New Zealand Counter-Terrorism Committee

APEC Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation

ASEAN Association of South East Asian Nations

ASIO Australian Security Intelligence Organisation

AusAID Australian Agency for International Development

AUSMIN Australia-United States Ministerial Consultations

CERT Computer Emergency Response Team

CTF Counter Terrorism Funding

DFAT Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade

EAS East Asia Summit

GDP Gross Domestic Product

G20 Group of 20

IAEA International Atomic Energy Agency

INTERFET International Forces East Timor

ISAF International Security Assistance Forces

NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organisation

OECD Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development

PIF Pacific Islands Forum

PRT Provincial Reconstruction Team (in Uruzgan province, Afghanistan)

RAMSI Regional Assistance Missions to Solomon Islands

UN United Nations

UNSC United Nations Security Council


-----

##### NoTeS

1. Australian Government 2012, Quarantine in Australia, Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Canberra,

www.daff.gov.au.

2. Australian Government 2012, AUSTRAC Annual Report 2011–12, Australian Transaction Report and Analysis Centre,

Canberra, www.austrac.gov.au.

3. Australian Government 2012, Annual Report 2011–12, Australian Customs and Border Protection Service, Canberra,

www.customs.gov.au.

4. Australian Government 2012, Annual Report 2011–12, Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, Canberra,

www.asio.gov.au. Additional figure provided by the Australian Federal Police.

5. Australian Government 2012, Annual Report 2011–12, Department of Immigration and Citizenship, Canberra,

www.immi.gov.au. Additional figures provided by the Department of Immigration and Citizenship.

6. Australian Government 2012, Annual Report 2011–12, Australian Customs and Border Protection Service, Canberra,

www.customs.gov.au.

7. Figure provided by the Cyber Security Operations Centre.

8. Department of Defence 2012, Global Operations, Canberra, www.defence.gov.au.

9. Australian Government 2012, Annual Report 2011–12, Australian Customs and Border Protection Service, Canberra,

www.customs.gov.au; Australian Government 2012, Annual Report 2011–12, Department of Immigration and Citizenship,
Canberra, www.immi.gov.au.

10. Australian Government 2012, Annual Report 2011–12, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Canberra,

www.dfat.gov.au. Additional figures provided by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

11. Australian Government 2012, Annual Report 2011–12, Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, Canberra,

www.asio.gov.au.

12. Australian Government 2012, Annual Report 2011–12, Australian Agency for International Development, Canberra,

www.ausaid.gov.au.

13. Figure provided by the Australian Federal Police.

14. Figure provided by the Department of Finance and Deregulation.

15. Australian Government 2009, Cyber Security Strategy, Attorney-General’s Department, Canberra,

www.ag.gov.au.

16. Australian Government 2009, Defence White Paper, Department of Defence, Canberra, www.defence.gov.au.

17. Australian Government 2009, Aviation White Paper, Department of Infrastructure and Transport, Canberra,

www.infrastructure.gov.au.

18. Australian Government 2010, Counter Terrorism White Paper, Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Canberra,

www.dpmc.gov.au.

19. Australian Government 2010, National Organised Crime Response Plan, Attorney-General’s Department, Canberra,

www.ag.gov.au.

20. Council of Australian Governments 2011, National Strategy for Disaster Resilience, Attorney-General’s Department,

Canberra, www.em.gov.au.

21. S Hollway, S Howes, M Reid, B Farmer & J Denton 2011, Independent Review of Aid Effectiveness, Australian
Government, Canberra, www.aidreview.gov.au.

22. Australian Government 2011, Independent Review of the Intelligence Community, Canberra,

www.dpmc.gov.au.

23. Australian Government 2012, Australia in the Asian Century White Paper, Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet,

www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.

24. See www.comlaw.gov.au.

25. Australian Government 2010, National Security Information Environment Roadmap: 2020 Vision, Department of the

Prime Minister and Cabinet, Canberra, www.dpmc.gov.au.


-----

26. Australian Government 2010, Critical Infrastructure Resilience Strategy, Attorney-General’s Department, Canberra,

www.tisn.gov.au.

27. See note 4.

28. Figure provided by the the Australian Embassy, Jakarta.

29. Australian Government 2012, Annual Report 2011–12, Australian Federal Police, Canberra, www.afp.gov.au.

30. Australian Government 2012, Budget 2012-13: Australia’s International Development Assistance Program, Canberra,

www.budget.gov.au

31. Australian Government 2012, Budget Overview 2012-13, Canberra, www.budget.gov.au.

32. See note 31.

33. Australian Government 2011, Countering Violent Extremism Strategy, Canberra, www.resilientcommunities.gov.au

34. Australian Government 2012, Annual Report 2011–12, Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, Canberra,

www.asio.gov.au.

35. See note 14.

36. Australian Government 2012, Annual Report 2011–12, Australian Customs and Border Protection Service, Canberra,

www.customs.gov.au.

37. Australian Government 2012, Annual Report 2011–12, Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, Canberra,

www.asio.gov.au.

38. Australian Government 2009, Commonwealth Organised Crime Strategic Framework, Attorney-General’s Department,

Canberra, www.ag.gov.au.

39. A Houston, P Aristotle & M L’Estrange 2012, Report of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers, Australian Government,

Canberra, www.dpmc.gov.au.

40. Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 2012, Budget Announcements, Canberra, www.daff.gov.au.

41. Australian Customs and Border Protection Service 2013, ‘Intelligence gets results in stopping guns and drugs –

17 January 2013’, media release, www.customs.gov.au.

42. Australian Crime Commission 2012, Organised Crime in Australia, Canberra, www.crimecommission.gov.au.

43. _United Nations Convention against Corruption, United Nations General Assembly resolution 58/4, 31 October 2003,_

[www.unodc.org.](http:www.unodc.org)

44. _Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions, Organisation for_
Economic Co-operation and Development Working Group on Bribery in International Business Transactions,
[15 February 1999, http://www.oecd.org.](http:http://www.oecd.org)

45. Figure provided by the Australian Federal Police.

46. Australian Government 2011, National Action Plan for Human Influenza Pandemic, Department of the Prime Minister

and Cabinet, Canberra, www.dpmc.gov.au.

47. Australian Government 2012, Annual Report 2011–12, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Canberra,

www.dfat.gov.au. Additional figure provided by the Department of Defence.

48. Australian Government 2012, Annual Report 2011–12, Department of Immigration and Citizenship, Canberra,

www.immi.gov.au.


-----

© Commonwealth of Australia 2013

ISBN 978-1-921739-97-2 (Print)

ISBN 978-1-921739-98-9 (PDF)

ISBN 978-1-921739-99-6 (RTF)

**Ownership of intellectual property rights in this publication**

Unless otherwise noted, copyright (and any other intellectual property rights, if any) in this publication
is owned by the Commonwealth of Australia (referred to below as the Commonwealth).

**Creative Commons licence**

With the exception of the Coat of Arms, this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 Australia Licence.

Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Australia Licence is a standard form license agreement that allows
you to copy, distribute, transmit and adapt this publication provided that you attribute the work. A summary
[of the licence terms is available from http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/au/deed.en.](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/au/deed.en)
[The full licence terms are available from http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/au/legalcode.](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/au/legalcode)

The Commonwealth’s preference is that you attribute this publication (and any material sourced from it)
using the following wording:

_Source: Licensed from the Commonwealth of Australia under a Creative Commons_
_Attribution 3.0 Australia Licence._

_The Commonwealth of Australia does not necessarily endorse the content_
_of this publication._

**Use of the Coat of Arms**

The terms under which the Coat of Arms can be used are set out on the Department of the Prime Minister
[and Cabinet website (see http://www.dpmc.gov.au/guidelines/).](http://www.dpmc.gov.au/guidelines)

Enquiries regarding the licence and any use of this work are welcome at:

The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet

PO Box 6500

Canberra ACT 2600

Tel: +61 2 6271 5111

Fax: +61 2 6271 5414

www.dpmc.gov.au


-----

