##### B l i D f


# 2019 SECURITY ENVIRONMENT REVIEW


-----

-----

Deep trends 6

Vulnerability at home 9

Europe 16

Neighbourhood 18

Sub-Saharan Africa and Southern Asia 26

Asia-Pacific 28

The United States 30

Cyber and space 31

Complex security 35

Notes & references 39


-----

###### "The liberty of the individual is guaranteed."

Constitution of the Kingdom of Belgium, Article 10.

###### "Enjoyment of the rights and freedoms recognized for Belgians must be provided without discrimination."

Constitution of the Kingdom of Belgium, Article 10.

###### "Everyone has the right to lead a life in keeping with human dignity."

Constitution of the Kingdom of Belgium, Article 23.


-----

##### Introduction

In the midst of a secure and enlarging Europe, our country has enjoyed several decades of security and
prosperity. After the fall of the Soviet Union, no major adversaries were able to threaten our security.
For many years, the number of armed conflicts, incidents of violence, and refugees decreased. Over the
last few years, however, as the charts on the following page show, there have once again been more wars,
conflict casualties, and forcibly displaced people. Despite economic uncertainty, world military
spending and the arms trade remain at the highest levels since the end of the Cold War and will continue
to increase. The central question of this security environment review is whether we should indeed expect
this long peace, this strategic pause, to be drawing to an end, and what the consequences could be for
our society.

To make a proper assessment of what challenges us, we must first determine what we seek to secure. In
the end, this can only be our way of life, characterized by some of the core values in our constitution:
life, liberty, democracy, prosperity, equality, and human dignity. Many of these values are taken for
granted, but they are increasingly contested inside and around our country. To uphold those values, our
way of life, the armed forces play a critical role in guaranteeing the security of our citizens, upholding
our country's freedom of action, securing vital infrastructure, and preserving strength vis-à-vis actors
that challenge our key values and core political, economic and security interests.

This is the starting point and this is what we have to keep in mind whenever we take stock of our position
in the world: how are we able to secure these core values and what is threatening them? This report
reconstructs some important deep trends, takes stock of key security issues in different regions, but also
evaluates to what extent we, our country and its partners, have also used the strategic pause to make
our position more resilient. It looks behind and forward; inside-out and outside-in.

This security environment review, the first of its kind, has been prepared by the Belgian Armed Forces,
benefited from the input of its different services and discussed with various external experts. It is meant
to inform society, our sole stakeholder, to raise awareness of the international context and impact on our
country. It is also expected to serve political decision-makers, to provide them with insights for making
strategy and for discussions about the many decisions that will shape the future of our society.


-----

-----

##### Deep trends

The restlessness of today's world is mainly caused by six deep evolutions: a profound shift in the balance
of power, the explosion of data, efficiency gains in the economy, environmental distress, political
fragmentation, and increasing lethality.

**Trend 1: Power shift. It is undeniable that, over recent decades, power has shifted away from the Euro-**
Atlantic world. Our share of the global economy has decreased and that has led to a relative loss of
political and military influence, of which the consequences are only starting to become clear. This power
shift is not merely relative. Many citizens in Europe and the United States have been confronted with
economic stagnation. The ending of the golden age of rapid growth of economic confidence, roughly
between the mid-nineties and the most recent financial crisis, combined with the rise of new political,
economic and ideological challengers renders more and more citizens uncertain – and sometimes angry.
The European Union, the Western world, and their values, are on the defensive.

**Trend 2: Data explosion: Sustained scientific progress in digital storage and energy devices, combined**
with growing investment, competition, and the development of large production facilities, is causing
data technology to continue to become cheaper, smaller, and faster. Exponential has become the new
incremental. This paves the way for more productivity gains through automation and because data
networks can create markets of unprecedented scale. The difference between human and artificial will
continue to fade, as wireless devices bring more data processing power to individuals, blend with the
human body through exoskeletons and various sensors permanently track our emotions and behaviour.
Key and disrupting innovation in connecting external data to bio-neural networks can bring the image
of augmented humans or cyborgs closer to reality. The control of both the devices and the data will
shape the distribution of power the same way as previous industrial revolutions did in the past.

**Trend 3: More economic stress: What exacerbates uncertainty is the fact that societies struggle to handle**
new efficiency gains from automation and digitization. Whereas productivity gains should be a good
thing, they also lead to greater difficulties in distributing wealth fairly. They do not always lead to gains
in wellbeing and happiness. This in turn aggravates the feeling of economic injustice and has led to
increased support for protectionism in several Western countries. But it also leads to problems in
countries where a growing population also increases the search for jobs. So, despite technological gains,
economic confidence does not always grow. The larger that gap between technological progress and
social confidence becomes, the greater the risk of social instability, protectionist policies, and a retreat
for globalization.


-----

**Trend 4: More environmental stress: We also observe a gap between environmental challenges and the**
degree to which new technologies are used to combat them. As a result of poverty and bad governance,
science and technology are often only applied slowly, to promote sustainable farming, for example, or
to mitigate climate change and alleviate water scarcity. With world population set to rise from 7.6 billion
in 2019 to 8.6 billion by 2030, this will cause enormous challenges. By 2030, Europe, with an ageing
population below 500 million inhabitants, will sit amidst two vast landmasses. Over 4.7 billion people
will live elsewhere in Eurasia and 1.7 billion people on the African continent, many of them in precarious
environmental circumstances.[1] This will undermine the stability of states, incite more competition for
natural resources, inside and between states, and enlarge intra- and trans-regional migration.

**Trend 5: Political fragmentation: While there exists a need for international cooperation on the**
numerous economic, environmental, and security issues, synergy is thwarted by political fragmentation.
There is political fragmentation inside and between countries. Internally, state structures are challenged,
mostly through polarized voting by their own citizens, who have lost confidence. The result is often an
awkward mixture of political fragmentation and nationalism, of actors seeking to weaken the state and
state elites seeking to preserve it. It also thwarts cooperation across borders. Multilateralism, one of the
pillars of Belgian foreign policy, is on the retreat. Global organizations are not being strengthened and
often replaced by regional, plurilateral or bilateral initiatives.[2] International regulations and law are
defied.

**Trend 6: Growing lethality: Making that context more complicated is the growing lethality of weapons.**
The latest Russian intercontinental ballistic missile, for example, is able to carry a charge of more than
40 megatons, or 2,000 times the bomb dropped on Hiroshima. New conventional explosives can be much
more powerful than traditional explosive materials; projectiles pierce the toughest armour. Combined
with cheap delivery vehicles, this evolution compels our armed forces to adjust. Moreover, the erosion
of Cold War arms limitation agreements, the vague doctrines of some nuclear powers, new kinds of
missiles, and the growing importance of cyber and space mean that the line between strategic deterrence,
premised on the capability of mass destruction, and other forms of warfare continue to blur.

These deep trends will not disappear. We expect them to have a far-reaching and lasting impact on our
security. Equally, these trends will defy international partnerships and organizations, however much
we as a small country have come to depend on them. This requires our country to maintain and enhance
the capacity to reflect carefully upon the evolving security environment, to assess existing threats, and
to anticipate new ones. But it also demands introspection, systematic monitoring and reporting on our
country’s position, including its vulnerability and strength. Preserving security starts with awareness of
your own strengths and weaknesses.


-----

##### Vulnerability at home

Belgium is a small yet rich country in the geographic heart of western Europe. It has the thirteenth largest
population and the eleventh largest economy in Europe. It is one of the best countries to live in. The
quality of life and wellbeing, as perceived by its citizens, is good. It is above the European average, yet
still significantly below other countries of comparable size in north-western Europe, such as the
Netherlands and Denmark.[3] As regards important building blocks of national power, such as social
cohesion, quality of governance, economic strength, and external resilience, Belgium performs averagely
and less well than comparable countries such as Austria, Denmark and the Netherlands.[4]

Belgium remains the most globalized country in the world.[5] Globalization has allowed our country to
profit from foreign investment, access to foreign markets, and from its growing role as a centre of
international governance. Yet, in a world of growing economic nationalism, this exposure also creates
dependency and vulnerability. Foreign companies, for example, control around 47 percent of Belgian
intellectual property and 55 percent of industrial production.[6] As much as 76 percent of the energy we
use depends on imports.[7] This dependency is larger than in comparable European states.

Belgium depends heavily on the international market, but international actors are critical of the
evolution of our country. On the one hand, international organizations praise assets, like our unique
geographic position, relative high level of wellbeing, and education. Yet, on the other hand, the World
Bank reports that the quality of governance, administration, and regulation has decreased and lags
behind comparable countries.[8] This was echoed by other institutions.[9] Important organizations have
stated that the productivity of our country remains behind its peers, that structural unemployment is
high despite labour shortages in certain sectors, that public debt levels are still high, that there is
underinvestment in infrastructure, and that progress on environmental issues has been too slow.[10]

The Federal Planning Bureau expects the economic situation to remain complex in the medium-long
term, with slower growth in the Eurozone, a growing risk of deteriorating trade relations, and relatively
slow economic growth in our country as a result.[11] Belgian citizens themselves are critical as well. Only
28 percent expect the future to be better. Trust in the government is below the levels in comparable
countries, as is satisfaction about how our democracy works. Around 58 percent of citizens assess the
economic situation to be good, while the average is above 75 percent in north-western Europe.[12] As much
as one fifth of the population feels itself poor.[13]


-----

**Less influence**

In terms of security and defence, this has important consequences. While international threats grow,
economic fragility usually leads to frustration, unrest, and fragmentation at home. This is especially so
when economic fault lines coincide with cultural divisions, as we have seen with the problem of religious
extremism. But it also applies to society at large, as we have witnessed with the emergence of the Yellow
Vests movement. And while economic uncertainty increases the need for a globalized country to
preserve balanced economic partnerships, the relative decline of power will make it more difficult to
shape relations with other countries. Even for small countries, power matters.

The weakening of Belgium’s economic and political position makes wielding influence abroad less selfevident. This is of importance first of all in the European context. Belgium has lost relative economic
power compared to most of its neighbours and has become increasingly dependent on those neighbours'
investments and energy supply. Experts have also highlighted the disadvantage of this relative
weakening and complex political structure in terms of diplomatic credibility. While Belgium has an
interest in European cooperation, it often lacks sufficient financial resources to contribute to the
implementation of European projects, which leads to unequal engagement, and insufficient political and
administrative efficiency to respond quickly to challenges and opportunities in the European context.

In the domain of military affairs, this has led to an ambivalent situation. While the government has stated
the need for a stronger European defence, the Belgian contribution to a solid European defence has
decreased. Belgium counts for about 2.8 percent of Europe's GDP, but only represents 1.8 percent of total
European defence spending. This share was still 2.1 percent in 2008. Belgium’s share of European
defence R&D dropped from 0.8 percent to 0.3 percent between 2008 and 2018. The share of troops in
foreign operations has decreased from 1.3 percent in 2008 to 1.2 percent in 2018.

Limited resources also make it harder to participate in European defence equipment projects that might
benefit the domestic industry. Already, the armed forces face difficulties in finding sufficient qualified
personnel to guarantee that our country has a seat around the table for new important initiatives relating,
for example, to the defence industry, to follow up on these initiatives, and to liaise with other domestic
departments or industries. European cooperation can create opportunities, but it also demands
significant investment in terms of human resources, particularly as presence also needs to be guaranteed
in other contexts, such as NATO.


-----

**Greater constraints, greater responsibility**

We should expect budgetary choices to remain difficult. While the necessity for sustained investment in
security and defence becomes more pressing, there is also a need for investment in public infrastructure,
from schools to energy, and an expectation by our citizens that their standard of living will be preserved.
This makes it even more imperative to clarify the importance of the armed forces and how they provide
security with a rather small budget. An average Belgian citizen still spends many times more on various
luxury products, such as pet food and the lottery, than he/she contributes via taxes to the defence of the
country.[14] At times of financial scarcity, clear communication towards society is key.

Communication, however, is not enough. In a context of growing challenges and limited budgets,
effectiveness is of the utmost importance. That requires the armed forces to strengthen their capacity to
scan the security environment, to assess threats, and to explain very transparently its recommendations
to the population and decision-makers. Effectiveness means sufficient means, clear priorities, leadership,
professionalism, and cooperation wherever possible. This makes a genuine integrated security and
defence strategy in which all actors seek excellence in their core business indispensable.

As the economic context will continue to be taxing, the armed forces are encouraged to explain not only
how they use financial resources efficiently, but also how they contribute to the financial soundness of
our country. Each euro spent on the armed forces is expected to protect 444 euros of economic interests:
industrial infrastructure, trade, and so forth. But the economic context also compels the armed forces to
become a catalyst of innovation, together with universities and companies. If our country seeks a return
for expenditure on defence material, it needs to participate in its development.

**Internal security challenges**

Terrorism remains security threat number one for the majority of our citizens. The terrorist attacks of
2016 have exposed to our country the vulnerability of critical infrastructure and the fact that security
threats do not stop at the border. Even if borders are closed, radical ideas and financing of terrorist
groups continue to cross national borders. Besides the human casualties and the consequences in terms
of social polarization, terrorist attacks have caused 2.3 billion euros in economic damage.[15]


###### "Each euro spent on the armed

 forces is expected to protect

 444 euros of economic

 interests."


-----

Since the terrorist attacks of 2016, no such major incidents have occurred. Yet the root causes of
radicalism remain present. The economic, social and cultural divide between different groups in our
society is still very large and could be exacerbated both by more economic uncertainty and security
incidents. Islamic extremism and the terrorist attacks have clearly sparked a counter-reaction from
rightist movements. Radicalism triggers radicalism. Even if the number of truly radicalized people is
small, their influence spreads rapidly and the impact of new violent incidents can be devastating. As a
result of the difficulty of constraining and preventing this phenomenon, it is likely that the armed forces
will continue to have to play a role in protecting our society against extremist violence.

This underscores again that our country is in need of a more integrated security strategy that clearly
identifies and divides responsibilities between different services from prevention, to early detection and
intelligence, disruption, dissuasion, defence, prosecution and re-integration. The armed forces stand
ready to protect our society and its citizens at all times. But, given the need for efficiency and the growing
insecurity abroad, priorities need to be clear and emergency situations clearly defined and limited in
time. Between 2016 and 2018, 3,246 soldiers participated in homeland defence; whereas only 1,947 could
be deployed abroad. Soldiers did not expect to be deployed as policemen.

Still, in case of terrorist and other similar security threats at home, the armed forces are ready, as a last
resort, to provide highly trained forces in support of the police. In addition, as the recent terrorist attacks
highlighted, the expertise of the armed forces in handling and dismantling explosive devices are
available in such circumstances.

The tenacity of terrorism and radicalization requires the armed forces to help contain them, in support
of domestic security services. The military intelligence service, the General Intelligence and Security
Service, is and will remain present in countries that are a breeding ground for terrorism. The military
intelligence service, together with the Centre for Cyber Security and other departments, is tasked with
building a basic capacity to guard the internet, with an eye on terrorism, misinformation and
propaganda. It has a specific responsibility for monitoring information and propaganda wars waged by
other states to the detriment of our national security and the core values enshrined in the constitution.

Belgian cities are very open and have depended on their openness to host important European and
international organizations. The result of this, however, is that your cities are important targets for
foreign infiltration, espionage and misinformation. Geopolitical rivalry and hybrid war, in which states
often seek to advance their interests and influence through proxies in other states, will likely only
increase this vulnerability. The military intelligence service will continue to support the State Security
Service in this regard in tracking and answering such threats.


-----

**Economic security**

Besides terrorism, the main concern of our citizens remains the state of the economy. The resilience of
our national economy depends above all on entrepreneurship, creativity, sustainability and
inclusiveness. The armed forces play an important role in this regard in preserving a secure environment
in which entrepreneurs can flourish. We expect this contribution to become more important in a time of
geopolitical and geo-economic turbulence.

With the rise of economic nationalism, aggressive industrial policy, and the desire of developing
countries to rapidly modernize their militaries, there is also a rising threat of industrial espionage.
Industrial espionage is estimated to have cost the European Union over one million jobs. It erodes our
national economy's core advantage: brains and knowledge. As our economy thrives on many small yet
highly innovative companies, some of them active in security-sensitive fields, this makes it more difficult
to guard our scientific knowledge against intellectual property theft. The military intelligence service,
through its capacity in cybersecurity, is ready to support other actors in combating industrial espionage.

The armed forces are indispensable to protecting economic lifelines. This applies to maritime trade. One
major incident on the River Scheldt could cost our economy around 30 million euros per day; one major
incident on a busy corridor in the North Sea could cost around 50 million euros per day. Navy patrol
and mine countermeasure ships remain ready to deal with such disturbances. But the challenge to
maritime trade is not confined to our littorals. Ports depend on access for shipping to some of the most
insecure chokepoints in the Middle East and East Asia, and on seas that are contested by major powers.
The Navy has been and will continue to be deployed to protect our maritime lifelines in distant seas and
to contribute to international efforts to secure shipping. Moreover, our special forces have trained to
intervene in case of threats to port infrastructure.

Each hour, about 36 international flights depart from or arrive at our national airports. About 8 of them
cross Europe and come from or are bound for countries outside the European Union. Millions of citizens
and billions in economic value depend on the security of our airports and international airspace. Our
soldiers have helped secure airports. As air traffic above our country grows by five percent each year,
fighter jets need to remain ready 24/7 to scramble whenever incidents occur. To guarantee the security
of our airspace, the armed forces contribute to air traffic control and develop a capacity to identify and
intercept drones. The downing of flight MH17 shows that civilian airlines are also vulnerable to the
proliferation of advanced missiles. The armed forces will go on monitoring this threat and contributing
to operations against armed groups that are or could become operators of surface-to-air missiles. Finally,


-----

we see growing security risks in countries that are important for airlines operating from Brussels and
thus consider the need to provide assistance whenever required.

Today, most citizens and companies trust that their data are secure, even though they are often
channelled back and forth across the globe. Some of these data concern private information, some
sensitive economic information, others financial transfers, as part of our financial wealth too has taken
on the form of data on a server. Even though these data are encrypted, adversaries, state and non-state,
are increasingly able to disturb data flows and even to crack their encryption. Electronic espionage,
disinformation campaigns via social media, and cyberwarfare pose increasingly important threats to the
resilience of our society. Military intelligence has the job of warding off cyber-threats, but with
technology developing extremely fast this will become harder and harder. Furthermore, major powers
are searching for the weakest spots in data infrastructures. For instance, special navy surveillance ships
have been detected above cables on the seafloor and various countries have developed strategies to
"blind and deafen" satellites.

It is not only goods and passengers that travel across borders, diseases and pandemics do so too. One of
the tragic consequences of populations growing in poverty is that many megacities or densely populated
rural areas in the South remain prone to outbreaks of pandemics. As the Ebola virus, for example,
spreads in central Africa, the N7H9 flu is still far from exterminated in Asia. Meanwhile, global financial
commitments to combat pandemics are not fulfilled and countries are reluctant to share information,
which hampers an effective international response.[16] Belgium has been commended for its capacity to
respond to pandemics, to which the armed forces make important contributions, but several weaknesses
in terms of our capabilities and internal coordination remain.[17]

Of all the countries in Europe, Belgium is the most dependent on external energy supply. Whereas
increasing energy efficiency remains one of the best ways to limit this vulnerability, the armed forces are
key in securing energy lifelines. The Belgian Pipeline Organization not only secures oil and kerosene
supplies through Europe in times of crisis, but also supplies strategic facilities like airports throughout.
With 800,000 families now depending on offshore wind energy, the protection of cables on the seafloor
will become increasingly important. Despite the push for renewable energy, our country will still rely
on the supply of fossil and nuclear fuel from unstable regions, which compels our armed forces to
contribute to the protection of external sources and corridors of supply, and the stability and prosperity
of relevant countries.


-----

_Figure: Overview of security threats to key economic lifelines._


-----

##### Europe

Whereas we have long taken European integration as a given, the European project has lost traction and
that has major consequences for the position and security of our country. The European Union is a
project of geopolitical importance. It seeks to preserve the peace between the large member states, with
the bloodshed of previous centuries in mind. It is meant to be a check against dictatorship, considering
the oppression of the Soviet regime and undemocratic regimes in southern European countries in more
recent history. It is also supposed to uphold some of the core values promulgated in our constitution.
Moreover, European integration is crucial to lowering the costs of trade with our main partners. Any
setback in European cooperation would be to the detriment of our national interests and values.

But Europe is not a given. One of the problems of the European project is that, while it still has the quiet
support of around half of the population, it faces a much more vocal opposition of about one third of the
population that is sceptical. In some countries, like the United Kingdom, such scepticism has been
historical. In other countries, negative attitudes have been exacerbated by a combination of economic
distress, the distance between the European institutions and citizens, Eurosceptic populism, and the
difficulty in managing the migration crisis.

Either way, Europe remains fragile. Even if the Eurozone has recovered after the crisis, internal
imbalances are still large, purchasing power and private sector employment have only grown slowly,
and Member States are reluctant to make it stronger. Eurosceptic parties have gained ground and
increasingly organize themselves across borders, while mainstream parties have also become more
reticent to deepening European unity and are challenging cohesion with more nationalistic economic
policies and free-riding. The same goes for migration. Since 2015, flows of refugees and immigrants have
become significantly smaller, but the problems that remain with regard to external border control,
reception, and integration might go on to fuel Euroscepticism.

The contribution of our country to European defence and security has decreased to the point that
questions can be asked about Belgium’s compliance with key stipulations of treaties, such as Article 42(3)
of the Treaty on European Union, which requires Member States "to improve their military capabilities"
and to make them available for common security and defence policy. If our economic production is
2.8 percent of the European total, defence spending was 1.8 percent in 2018 and the share of total
European troop deployments 1.2 percent. Compared to 2008, these shares have decreased. Both in the
context of NATO and the EU, as well as in bilateral partnerships, our country has been urged to do more.
Should this not change, Belgium risks finding it more difficult to influence European initiatives and
contribute to possibilities for collective security that make our citizens secure.


###### "Belgium risks finding it more

 difficult to influence European

 initiatives and contributing to

 possibilities of collective security

 that make our citizens secure."


-----

Europe's internal stagnation and fragmentation risks accelerating the region's relative decline with
respect to the world's main powers. Not only has its economic production hardly grown in absolute
terms since 2009; its share in world economic production has decreased from 27 to 20 percent in the last
ten years. Its share in high-tech exports shrank from 35 to 28 percent during the same period. The
challenge for Europe will be to preserve its power in a world that has become much more competitive,
with an economy that is no longer so productive and a population that will continue to shrink. By 2030,
Europe will probably only represent 6 percent of the world’s population, with about 40 percent of that
population being over 50 years old.

Its share in global defence spending has dropped to 14 percent. In absolute terms, European Member
States' defence spending decreased by about US$ 60 billion between 2008 and 2018. During the same
period, defence spending by the countries in Europe's neighbourhood, including Russia, Turkey, and
Saudi Arabia, increased by US$ 45 billion. European defence budgets are expected to increase, albeit
slowly, and depending on economic conditions. And despite these increases, force levels are set to
continue to fall, in terms of military personnel, as well as major systems, such as surface combatants and
fighter jets. As a result, as shown in Kosovo and Libya, European countries are not able to conduct largescale military operations independently.

Despite growing public and political concern about Europe's lack of innovation in key military
technologies, the United States still spends ten times as much on defence-related research and
development each year, China four times as much.[18 ]In critical domains, like cyber and space, as well as
the application of artificial intelligence, certain missile technologies and electronic warfare, the European
Union will find it increasingly difficult to preserve its capacity on par with certain major powers.[ 19]
Recent initiatives like the European Defence Fund (EDF) and the Permanent Structured Cooperation
(PESCO) are a first step forward but likely not sufficient to catch up.

The relative weakening of the European Union has important consequences for our country. More
political and diplomatic efforts will be required to understand and respond to challenges and changing
alignments between Member States. As a result of the relative weakening of Europe, Member States
might be more inclined to advance external partnerships with other powers, which might undermine
cohesion further. The European Union will continue to be obliged to respond to different kinds of
security threats on different parts of its border at the same time. The more it fails to do so, the more its
internal legitimacy will erode. With the current commitments and given the budgetary uncertainty, we
cannot take for granted that European countries will succeed in rebalancing the Transatlantic
Partnership and make a greater contribution to NATO, which affects the resilience of this alliance.


-----

-----

###### Neighbourhood

The weakening of Europe has diminished its presence and influence in its neighbourhood at a moment
that instability around Europe is on the rise. Europe has become less important as a trade partner to
many countries in the vicinity. Countries like China, Turkey, and the Gulf States have become an
alternative investor. European development aid, while still being the largest, has been stagnant and
challenged also by large volumes of loans from new creditors. As a result, many countries surrounding
Europe have diversified their foreign policies away from Europe.

In this regard, a growing contradiction is emerging between, on the one hand, the expectations of
European countries towards neighbouring states to help manage challenges like migration, terrorism,
and armed conflicts and, on the other hand, their ability to preserve Europe's position as a credible
partner and a security provider. The isolationist tendency in certain European countries could confirm
the image of Europe vacating certain parts of its neighbourhood and embolden others to fill the potential
void.

While European defence spending has decreased, the spending levels of our neighbours have increased.
Consequently, while European countries are experiencing more difficulties in contributing to operations
in the neighbourhood, other powers are using their military power more assertively – inside, around,
and beyond their borders. As Europe’s capabilities of projecting military force have decreased, external
powers such as China have stated the objective of increasing their presence in Europe's neighbourhood,
especially in the Mediterranean, but also in the Atlantic Basin, potentially via the Arctic Sea.


-----

**The north-east**

The Artic Sea is transforming from a strategic backwater into a key arena of competition. Efforts towards
multilateral cooperation have had modest results. With the melting of the ice, the Arctic Sea will become
an important gateway to the Atlantic Basin, both for traders and for soldiers. The Arctic is important for
the security of satellite communication, nuclear deterrence, and conventional force projection. In
addition, it plays a role for powers, such as China and Japan, to diversify maritime shipping. In fact, a
new competition seems to have started for dominance in the whole maritime belt around Eurasia – thus
including the Arctic.

One of the countries that is rapidly increasing its military presence in the Arctic is Russia. By population,
Russia remains Europe's largest country and biggest military spender. But its economy only ranks fifth
and its population is stagnant. The strategy of the Russian government is to protect sovereignty and to
advance its influence with a combination of relatively low-cost anti-access and area-denial measures, the
use of proxies in other states, robust strategic deterrence, and other means. While it has long since
abandoned the no-first-use principle in nuclear deterrence, it has created uncertainty about also using
nuclear weapons to retaliate in conventional conflicts – "escalate-to-de-escalate" – and has developed
several weapon systems that can be both tactical and strategic. This compels countries like ours to reflect
upon the repercussions for the nuclear posture of NATO and partner countries. While tensions have
somewhat abated since the Crimean Crisis and the downing of flight MH17, Russians are sceptical of a
detente with the West and Russian public distrust of the US has increased significantly. The result is
enduring ambivalence. While trade with Europe is significant, distrust and military competition remains.

These tensions have repercussions for stability in our common neighbourhood, including the Baltic Sea,
Belarus, Moldova, Ukraine, and the Black Sea. Most of these countries are poor and weak, and, as a result,
nervously try to balance between Russia and the West. The balance of power remains precarious. Eastern
European Member States are worried about Russian A2AD-bubbles (anti-access and area-denial) in the
Baltic and Black Sea. From Crimea and Kaliningrad, sophisticated air-defence and anti-ship missile
systems have been deployed. They can limit the freedom of movement of and threaten assets near Russia,
above international waters, but also inside the borders of European Member States. Russia is also
deploying a series of small new navy ships and aircraft equipped with advanced missiles. As a result,
eastern European Member States are keen on a larger NATO presence, which in turn makes the security
dilemma with Russia more pressing.


-----

-----

**Eastern Mediterranean**

Beyond the Black Sea, in the Balkans, the European Union has played a crucial role in stabilizing the
region after the violent collapse of the Republic of Yugoslavia. Decades of European engagement have
helped prevent violence from rekindling. But a combination of poverty, protracted ethnic tensions, and
fragile democracy mean that stability in the region is far from firm. Despite progress, for instance, in
relations between Greece and the newly renamed Republic of North Macedonia, the situation remains
sensitive in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Kosovo, and between Kosovo and Serbia. Against the backdrop of
relatively young, fragile states, organized crime is widespread and so is competition for influence by
regional powers.

Onwards, in the eastern Mediterranean, Turkey is an ambitious yet vulnerable regional power. Its
population is growing, but it is marred by economic fragility and internal tensions. Despite its role in
managing refugee flows, its strategic importance as a gateway to Asia, and large trade volumes, Turkey
has been diplomatically estranged from Europe and politically entrenched into strong presidential
leadership. Moreover, in Turkish strategic thinking, Europe, as a result of its military weakening, does
not figure as an important strategic actor. Hence, we should expect no improvement in the territorial
disputes in the Aegean Sea, the Cyprus question, and the competition for energy reserves in the eastern
Mediterranean seabed.

In the Levant, Syria remains a smouldering conflict, with frequent eruptions of fierce violence, as a result
of factionalism, the enduring presence or terrorist groups, and the interference of regional powers. As
much as the Syrian War was driven by internal tensions, rivalry between regional powers make a new
status quo improbable, with a risk that insecurity broadens into Lebanon, Turkey and other countries.
The security situation is rapidly worsening in the Palestinian Territories; Israel’s attitude to defending
its national security is hardening. Islamic terrorism is far from vanquished.


-----

**Southern Mediterranean**

In the Mediterranean, Europe has been focused on the flows of migration and refugees. These flows will
not disappear, as conflicts around the Mediterranean remain rife, large numbers of people live in poverty,
and climate change makes living conditions more difficult. Without major mitigation measures, climate
change and urbanization will lead to agricultural output in the southern part of the Mediterranean
stagnating or decreasing. At the same time, the Mediterranean is again a theatre of great power
competition, with, besides the traditional US presence, Russia seeking to maintain is military facilities in
Syria and China readying to back its New Silk Road with more frequent naval deployments and other
military engagements. While challenges grow and external powers are moving in, southern European
Member States see their security capabilities constrained by economic difficulties.

Egypt is the pivot between Africa and the Levant, and its Suez Canal is a vital trade route on which our
energy security and maritime trade depends. With a population set to rise to 160 million by 2050 and
considerable energy deposits found offshore, it has the potential to become a regional power. Stability
has largely returned after the 2011 uprising, but at the expense of political liberty and masking economic
problems, like high inflation, water scarcity, and worsening conditions for millions of small farmers. The
fundaments of Egypt's apparent success are not solid. At the same time, the government is developing
ever closer ties with Russia and China, including in defence.

Egypt is surrounded by insecurity, the Sinai Desert, where armed groups operate, and Libya. Since the
2011 allied intervention and the death of strongman Gaddafi, the state structure in Libya has almost
disappeared, turning the area into a corridor of crime, including human trafficking and slave trading,
between the Sahel and the Mediterranean and, increasingly, a sanctuary for terrorist groups, including
ISIS. Besides the domestic casualties, this situation imperils neighbouring countries and maritime trade.
More incidents of piracy and cross-border operation of terrorist groups are likely.

Tunisia is one of the possible targets. This small country is the only remaining democracy in northern
Africa, but very prone to radicalism and economically weak. A vast country, Algeria could become one
of the main flashpoints in the region. A difficult political transition looms as the incumbent president
holds on to power, despite growing opposition, rallying for influence in his own entourage, and there
are severe economic problems. Of all the north African countries, Morocco appears the most stable, but
with insecurity almost all around its borders.


-----

**The Atlantic Ocean**

As the North Sea is a marginal sea of the Atlantic Ocean, Belgium is an Atlantic country. For many
decades, we have considered security in the Atlantic Ocean as a given. The ocean was a highway for
trade; not a security issue. Today, however, there is growing uncertainty about the intentions of the main
Atlantic power, the United States of America, but also about the strength and position of the United
Kingdom. Whatever the status of the UK might be with regard to the European Union, the country faces
important internal economic and political challenges and could therefore be held back in its aspirations
to be a global military actor.

Against that backdrop, Russia is making its return to the Atlantic Ocean and the North Sea. Its navy and
air force are again more present, up to our national border. As the military capabilities of the Atlantic
countries are strained, it is less self-evident that Russian submarines and intelligence collection ships
will be kept track of. Moreover, China too is dispatching its navy more frequently into the Atlantic,
where it has done joint exercises with Russia. On the other side of the Atlantic Basin, both Russia and
China are challenging American dominance by establishing closer ties with various Latin American
countries.

Poverty and political instability affect several countries around the Caribbean Sea. This includes
European countries with overseas territory and exacerbates security threats such as drug trafficking to
Belgian ports, but also indirectly by ship or plane via Highway 10 to western Africa. There, littoral
countries are often incapable of preserving security at sea. Transatlantic trade in drugs, slaves, and arms
coincides with piracy, enriches armed groups, provides an incentive to sustain conflict economies and
undermines statehood.


-----

**The southern belt**

European and US troops have prevented a terrorist takeover in the Sahel, the belt that runs from the
Atlantic to the Red Sea, just south of the Sahara. They have pushed back terrorist groups including the
Islamic State and Al-Qaida in various countries and halted rebel groups marching towards the capital
of Mali. The presence of these troops remains crucial, but operating in this vast sea of sand is taxing.
Without structural political and economic progress, it risks becoming a long-term burden, particularly
because climate change risks agricultural production diminishing rapidly.

The Red Sea is the maritime gateway between Europe and Asia, channelling over half of Belgium's
seaborne trade. The security situation in this sea is deteriorating. In the last few years, there have been
several incidents of piracy. In Yemen, rebels respond to the superior military power of Saudi Arabia by
disturbing shipping through Bab-el-Mandeb. Using anti-ship missiles, naval mines, and other weapons,
even very large oil tankers are targeted. Peace in Yemen is unlikely to return soon. On the other side,
littoral states like Eritrea and Somalia will continue to struggle with instability. While it is in the interest
of the international community to jointly address this situation, competition between great powers
around the Red Sea is growing, with China, Russia, Japan, and others developing military strongholds.

Large countries, including Saudi Arabia and Iran, have become more assertive, partly as a result of their
ability to diversify partnerships among the main powers and partly to propagate nationalism to preserve
the legitimacy of political elites against the backdrop of economic difficulties. If Saudi Arabia is by far
the biggest military spender, Iran responds by means of asymmetric warfare, including missiles,
weapons that threaten shipping through the Strait of Hormuz, and financing rebel groups throughout
the region. As the West is winding down its presence in the Middle East, those regional powers, as well
as Turkey, Russia, and China, are advancing. Countries like Iraq, Syria, and Yemen remain arenas of
competition yet with different protagonists.


-----

-----

###### Sub-Saharan Africa and southern Asia

Beyond this, one of the most rapidly transforming regions consists of sub-Saharan Africa and southern
Asia. The population in this area is growing by 5 million each year in a most difficult economic and
environmental context. Despite some optimism, sub-Saharan Africa fails to catch up. In the last ten years,
income per capita in this region has barely grown, unemployment has not decreased and key sectors
that drive productivity, like manufacturing, have scarcely expanded. At the same time, the number of
armed conflicts increased and the number of refugees in the region grew from 2 million in 2008 to over
6 million last year, with a very high risk of more instability in several countries.

In comparison, southern Asia has achieved somewhat more positive economic results, although income
per capita remains very low, manufacturing growth remains a long way behind, and infrastructure is
poor. India has the potential to become a major power, but its economy remains fragile, its political
system fractured, and its society again more and more impaired by ethnic and religious divisions.
Militarily, India is severely constrained by limited budgets. The situation in other countries, including
Afghanistan, Pakistan, Nepal, and Bangladesh is and will remain unstable. Despite economic constraints,
the military build-up in southern Asia continues. Competition between India and Pakistan, two
countries that possess nuclear weapons, will persist.

Complicating the strategic landscape is the rivalry in and around the Indian Ocean, also an important
transit zone for the maritime trade of our ports. If countries around the Indian Ocean have barely
profited from globalization, external powers seek to secure their growing commercial interests. China is
rapidly expanding its footprint all around the Indian Ocean Basin, including eastern Africa. Its navy has
become more present and military cooperation with several countries is deepening. As the United States
and Europe find it less and less obvious to preserve their military presence along strategically important
sea lanes, such as the Gulf of Aden and the Bay of Bengal, China could emerge as a key new military
power, sparking tensions with India.

Both sub-Saharan Africa and southern Asia will be hit very hard by climate change. Agricultural
production could drop by 10 to 30 percent as soon as 2030.[20] This could lead to about 110 million climate
refugees, on top of a regional internal migration that already involves around 30 million people.[21]
Governments and the international community are aware, but mitigation measures are only slowly
being implemented. Consequently, famine could again spread. The population driven to impoverished
and insecure urban slums in this region could reach 1.5 billion people by 2050.[22] This will inevitably add
to the migration pressure on Europe and undermine efforts to build stable states.


-----

_Figure: Security issues in the global south._


_Figure: Security issues in the global south._


-----

##### Asia-Pacific

Looking eastward, the rise of China as Asia's leading power has far-reaching consequences for the
regional and global security outlook. In many ways, China remains a fragile power. A significant part
of its population remains poor, its economy unbalanced, and the environmental challenges significant.
Yet, most of its neighbours are either growing more slowly or are marred by more severe domestic
challenges. China's share of Asia's economic production has grown from 14 percent in 2000 to 49 percent
in 2018, and at the current growth rate could reach 57 percent in the next ten years.[23] China's share of
Asia's defence spending is now 51 percent, meaning that it spends more on defence than its neighbours
combined.

The security repercussions of China's ascent are manifold. China asserting its claims on Taiwan, adjacent
seas and the contested border with India more assertively could lead to incidents and possibly armed
conflicts. It remains to be seen how the United States will respond to China's challenge to its leadership.
Growing distrust between the two powers already complicates international cooperation. It is clear that
a new military arms race between the two is unfolding. This involves competition for military supremacy
in the Pacific, exacerbates rivalry in space and cyberspace, and accelerates the development of new
weapons, including all sorts of missile systems and unmanned combat vehicles. For the first time since
the fall of the Soviet Union, countries must consider the prospect of a new major power war.

We are seeing the formation of a long Pacific front line, with lesser powers attempting to preserve their
sovereignty and influence in between China and the United States. Regional tensions and great power
politics are intertwined. From north to south, there is the territorial dispute between Russia and Japan,
the uncertain outlook of North Korea as a nuclear power, tensions between China, Japan, and South
Korea, partially over the East China Sea, Taiwan's struggle for autonomy, and the territorial conflicts in
the South China Sea.

Unchecked, a rising China will also advance its interests more assertively beyond the Asia-Pacific region.
The whole of Eurasia could turn into a single arena of great power competition. Countries like China,
Russia, and Iran, despite mutual distrust, work together from the geographic centre, and are also
challenging Western dominance in the maritime belt around Eurasia – from the Indian Ocean to the
Arctic, and from the Atlantic to the Pacific. China also challenges some of our constitutional values.
While China's leadership initially insisted that all politics should remain domestic, the current leadership
suggests that its authoritarian system offers a new option for other countries.[24] This new competition
blends geo-economics and geopolitics. It is about economic means to advance political power, and vice
versa.


-----

-----

##### The United States

China's transition challenges the bedrock of US strategy, namely that the best way to preserve security
is to preserve supremacy.[25] The challenge to American supremacy does not only come from outside,
though. The US has significant advantages, like the world's most formidable military, a large economy,
abundant natural resources, and technological leadership. But compared to those economic and military
capabilities, the country suffers from social and political tension, including income inequality, racial
discord, the proliferation of firearms, partisan tensions, and low levels of political trust. The American
golden age of confidence that followed the defeat of the Soviet Union seems to have paused.

In terms of foreign policy, America has become more reluctant to engage internationally, to sacrifice
freedom of action to sustain international rules, and to invest in its alliances. As the strategic focus is also
shifting to the Asia-Pacific region, Europe is often left disorientated. Europe remains dependent on
American military assets and it would be incapable nowadays of sustaining large military operations
without American support. Yet there is uncertainty about America's intentions towards NATO,
economic relations, Russia, the fight against terrorism and arms control.

Is America's insistence on larger European contributions to NATO and more balanced trade part of a
transition period that will lead to a new beginning of a more resilient partnership, or will it be the
beginning of the end of that partnership? Either way, it confirms the need for small countries like ours
to be alert, to step up their own capability to keep track of changes in the world, to articulate their
interests, and to indeed contribute more to making the transatlantic partnership balanced and strong.
European countries need to respond to the fact that the Pacific will become more important to the United
States and that Sino-American rivalry will only accelerate the race for economic and military innovation,
with Europe in danger of being caught fragmented and weakened between these two giants.

This could be particularly manifest in more recent spheres of warfare, such as cyber and space. While
the US has led the Internet revolution, China is working hard to reduce its reliance on American servers,
chips, and software, but at the same time is rolling out its own Digital Silk Road. As regards cyberwar,
the US government spends over US$ 5 billion on military capabilities; and US$15 billion on overall
cybersecurity. In space, China now runs its own global navigation satellite network and competes with
the US for new technologies like quantum communication, anti-satellite weapons, and space-based
missile defence. The US spends at least US$ 40 billion on space each year, of which around US$ 11 billion
is for military purposes (MFP-12); China spends around US$ 14 billion and Europe around US$ 13 billion.


-----

##### Cyber and space

If power at first depended on the ability to control land, it became more dependent on seas, airspace,
and, more recently, on space and cyber. New spheres of competition do not replace others, but come on
top of them. Cyber and space have become the focus of intense economic competition. While major
powers advance connectivity through cyber and space, they also aspire to control and domination. On
the one hand they support relevant companies, networks, and technical standards in the sphere of cyber
and space to become global. On the other hand they pursue independence in terms of critical technology
through protectionism and industrial policy.

In space, the European countries, together with the United States, enjoyed almost unrivalled leadership
after the Cold War, but this position is slowly eroding. Other powers have developed their own systems
for global navigation, communication, and intelligence gathering. Weaknesses exist in terms of the
coverage, accuracy, and security of European satellites for government communication and intelligence.
Countries like Belgium rely almost exclusively on commercial or partner countries' satellites, and the
European Union as a whole still has significant dependence on American satellites. Concerns are
growing about capabilities being developed to destroy, disturb, jam, or spoof the functioning of
European satellites. In recent years, European satellites have been the target of hostile espionage and
jamming activities.

While the European Union has been a trailblazer in rules for data security and the protection of data
privacy, implementation and enforcement are not a given because of its very open market, the
dominance of large external companies, the dependence on external technology, the fragmentation
between governmental agencies, the fact that much of Europe’s data is transferred via intercontinental
cables to data centres abroad, and the enormous volume of such data. This is further complicated by the
continued digitization of key commercial and governmental services, the promise of powerful 5G
networks, and the expansion of the cloud. A lot of the information belonging to European companies
and citizens is stored in overseas data centres and transferred through networks that are built or
operated by foreign companies that have the duty to cooperate with the intelligence services of their
home country.

A primary challenge for the protection of data security in the cybersphere is thus again a dependency
on external suppliers and the difficulty of monitoring the entire network. There are numerous threats to
our cybersecurity. Cyber-attacks can be active, with the aim of influencing or damaging systems, or
passive, with the aim of collecting information. Attacks can be prepared in advance, by secretly building
backdoors in the hardware or software, or through intrusion afterwards. The focus of such attacks ranges


-----

from the smallest computer chip to circuit boards, servers, data centres, large networks, and the entire
global internet. Every part is vulnerable, and the vast volumes of data makes attacks harder to detect.
Even highly secured data centres have been infiltrated by means of infected computer chips. Systems
that are physically isolated from unsecured networks, through what is known as an “air gap”, have
proved vulnerable to attacks through USB sticks, sensors that are connected to them, by the capturing
and transmitting of radio waves, sound waves, and electromagnetic signals. Cyber-attacks against
protected, air-gapped systems can now literally happen wirelessly from the sky or any device near them,
like an air-conditioning system or a basic telephone.

As it is increasingly difficult to protect and isolate data, it is also harder to encrypt them. Some countries
require companies to have backdoors in their encryption as a condition of operating in their market.
Artificial intelligence is used to crack encrypted data. As a result, countries are attempting to defend
themselves against such attacks by means of quantum encryption. China has tested the first quantum
communications satellite and has built a fibre-optic cable link for quantum communication between
Shanghai and Beijing. The mastery of quantum technology will likely be decisive for cybersecurity.

The weaponization of the cybersphere casts a permanent shadow over our national security. National
security is threatened indirectly through economic weakening. While cyber-espionage targets our
valuable know-how, the failure to commercialize relevant know-how could render our country less well
placed to spearhead future productivity gains. Cyber-espionage complicates our ability to influence
external partnerships because counterparts might know more about our agenda than we know about
theirs. Information wars through the cybersphere can also discredit the functioning of democracy by delegitimizing governments and distorting elections. Cyber-attacks can disturb social life and cause unrest,
for instance through hate campaigns or by disturbing the functioning of government services and key
economic assets such as airports, banks, and so forth.

Cyber-vulnerability also compromises the capability of the armed forces to defend the country. Just in
the last few years, various incidents around the world have revealed how cyber-attacks can block or
change the signals of radar systems, halt and distort the signal of global positioning, interfere with other
military satellites, infiltrate into combat aircraft, steal sensitive data from warships, incapacitate army
vehicles, hack into highly secured networks for military planning and missile defence, and so forth. The
challenge is immense, with on the one hand the need for the armed forces to continue to contribute to
the overall cybersecurity of our country and on the other hand the necessity to deter, prevent, detect,
attribute, block, handle, and rapidly recover from cyber-attacks against specific weapon systems. This
implies a permanent effort to be innovative and to aim for maximum efficiency through synergy with
both domestic and external partners.


-----

-----

##### Complex security

Emerging from this global survey, first of all, are three important geographic vectors of uncertainty. One
vector concerns the future of the global South, where a combination of rapid population growth against
a backdrop of economic and political fragility will continue to cause severe challenges for Europe. A
second vector concerns the transition of China. Despite its vulnerability, China's transition and
initiatives like the New Silk Road once again turns Eurasia into a large arena of power politics. In this
arena, Europe will find it less easy to secure its interests and will see countries like Russia hedge more
assertively between the Eastern and Western ends of Eurasia. A third vector concerns the Atlantic
community itself, in which the strategic reorientation of the United States, the uncertainty about the
future course of the United Kingdom, and the fragility of the European project are challenging some of
the bedrocks of Belgian security policy.

To none of these vectors of uncertainty will our country be immune, especially given that our own
country is institutionally divided, faces economic challenges, and is looked at rather critically from
outside. We are a fragmented country in a fragmenting world.

This is a security environment in which the non-state challenges, like migration, terrorism, and piracy,
are unlikely to disappear. As the consequences of climate change come to be felt more widely and as the
economic growth model seems to provide fewer benefits in terms of jobs and purchasing power, more
states could face social unrest, political fragmentation, and radicalism. This is true for many countries
surrounding Europe and for many countries inside Europe – including ours.

But how we address these challenges will be conditioned by the beginning of a new era of complex
competition between major powers. It is complex because it often remains covert to our society as states
compete quietly for economic and technological power and the first visible violent incidents have
remained rather distant. It is also complex because it is capricious. Sometimes it looks as if states are
becoming increasingly fragile; at other times they seem to be getting stronger. Sometimes we see
populism and the politics of emotion; at other times we observe measured moves and counter-moves.

It is complex also because it is comprehensive. Security does not just entail military strength, but also
technology, manufacturing, information, propaganda, and political legitimacy. It is complex, finally,
because it does not seek to stop connectivity and communication, but to dominate it, in the digital
domain, in space, but also in traditional continental, maritime, and airborne connections.


###### "We are a fragmented country

 in a fragmenting world."


-----

-----

This poses small European countries like ours a number of difficult and fundamental choices. To begin
with, our democracy seems to be at a disadvantage compare to authoritarian states when it comes to
coordinating the different tools of comprehensive competition. The first need is thus to demonstrate that
Western democracy can remain competitive without sacrificing its core constitutional values.

A second dilemma exists with regard to the growing need to preserve our security and all other
necessities to preserve a cohesive, resilient, and dignified society. The challenge in this regard is not to
prioritize, for instance, either security or schools, but to find the means to do the two at the same time,
as growing the next generations depends as much on security as security depends on the education of
the next generations. Statecraft is about doing many things effectively at the same time.

A third choice concerns international cooperation. Small countries like ours have a large stake in
international cooperation and openness. Yet today's world shows that neither alliances nor
organizations are immune to the consequences of nationalism and rivalry. This poses our country the
challenge of continuing to invest in international cooperation, but also doing so through our own
strength instead of just utilising the strength of others. What matters in international cooperation is not
only the pursuit of strength, but how responsibly you use it.

A fourth quandary: geographic scope. Through trade, challenges, and partnerships, our interests are
global and require the capacity of long-range power projection. But regional threats are imposing
themselves much more pressingly in our neighbourhood and so there is a greater need to prioritize
challenges closer to home. So, from that viewpoint, small countries have to find ways to contribute to
robust capabilities for Europe to secure its extended neighbourhood and the main passages to that area,
and by doing so to make itself more reliable and capable as an international actor, partner, and ally.

A fifth difficulty concerns the growing spectrum of security threats. On the one hand, states are
deploying more lethal weapons. On the other hand, non-state actors, from terrorists to pirates, remain
active. In the training of our military personnel, the acquisition of equipment, the development of our
strategy, and the pursuit of international cooperation we need to guarantee sufficient adaptability to
combine those tasks. One unavoidable discussion concerns the very top end of the spectrum of threats:
nuclear warfare. As major powers modernize their nuclear weapons, Belgium will have to take a position
on nuclear posture debates inside NATO, as well as on possible arms limitation initiatives.

A sixth tension: lethality versus the means of delivery. As technology advances rapidly, more emphasis
is put on factors such as speed, range, accuracy, stealth, unmanned vehicles, autonomy, the degree to
which platforms are networked, and so forth. These are certainly important. But defence, deterrence,


-----

and war also remain a matter of being lethal and maintaining the capability of inflicting damage on
aggressors. Our capabilities have to strike the right balance.

The new world order leaves us no choices. However pressing and complicated many of the dilemmas
might look, security requires us to oversee, coordinate, and strengthen many things at the same time. It
is integral and comprehensive by default. The baseline, however, remains that any country, however
large or small, can shape its future better, that it remains more effective, when it is cohesive and well
organized, when its citizens are encouraged to give it their best, and when it maintains the ability to
shape its own future. When it does these things it will also maintain the resilience to respond wisely to
new security challenges.

Today, the position of our country remains rather fragile and many uncertainties for the future remain,
in a time when the world as a whole is also becoming more turbulent. Peace and security cannot be taken
for granted. But in those challenges we can also find, as part of the government, as soldiers, and as
individual citizens, a unique opportunity to defend what is dear to us, to safeguard the fruits of the
sacrifices of previous generations, to build on them, to uphold the values that were fought for in the past
and that are enshrined today in our constitution, and to make this small country secure, prosperous, and
benevolent.


###### We should consider the many

 challenges as opportunities to

 defend what is dear to us and

 to safeguard the fruits of the

 sacrifices of previous

 generations 

 - and to build on them.


-----

##### Notes and references

1 United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, 2017. Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision.
New York: UN. Note concerns zero-migration scenario.
2 Plurilateral means one, often large, country taking the lead in advancing cooperation with a group of other states.
3 European Commission, 2018. Spring 2018 Standard Eurobarometer. Brussels: European Commission, 14 June 2018.

4 International resilience means the ability to limit and handle exposure to external vulnerabilities, such as dependence on
supplies of goods, energy, and so forth.
5 Globalization Index.
6 Eurostat Statistical Database.

7 Eurostat Statistical Database.
8 World Bank, 2018. Worldwide Governance Indicators.
9 The OECD stated that the "complex political and institutional setting means that a consensus on economic issues is difficult
to achieve", while the European Commission stressed the complexity of the Belgian Tax System. See: OECD, 2017. OECD
Economic Survey Belgium. Paris: OECD, June 2017, p. 11; European Commission, 2018. Commission Staff Working Document:
Country Report Belgium. Brussels: European Commission, 7 March 2018, p.3
10 International Monetary Fund, 2018. Article IV Consultation Conclusions. Washington: International Monetary Fund, 8 March
2018; International Monetary Fund, 2018. _Article IV Consultation Conclusions. Washington: International Monetary Fund, 14_
December 2018; OECD, 2017. OECD Economic Survey Belgium. Paris: OECD, June 2017; European Commission, 2018.
Commission Staff Working Document: Country Report Belgium. Brussels: European Commission, 7 March 2018.

11 Economische Vooruitzichten 2018-2023.
12 European Commission, 2018. Spring 2018 Standard Eurobarometer. Brussels: European Commission, 14 June 2018.
13 Subjective poverty
14 Gokken is een miljardenbusiness in ons land, VRT, 10 January 2018.
15 Roosens, Edward, 2016. Economische impact terreuraanslagen. Brussels: VBO.

16 Leigh, Jennifer, 2018. Global epidemics: how well can we cope? _BMJ, 362; World Health Organization, 2018._ _Managing_
_Epidemics. Geneva: World Health Organization._
17 World Health Organization, 2017. Joint External Evaluation of IHR Core Capacities of the Kingdom of Belgium. Geneva: World
Health Organization.
18 Kepe, Marta, et al. Exploring Europe’s Capability Requirements for 2035 and Beyond. Brussels: EDA

19 European Cyber Security Organisation, 2016. _European Cybersecurity Industry Proposal for a Contractual PPP, June 2016;_
European Commission, ESA, EDA, 2017. Technologies for European Non-Dependence and Competitiveness Critical Space
Technologies. Brussels: European Commission.
20 UNEP, 2015. Africa's Adaptation Gap. New York: UNEP; FAO, 2016. Climate change predictions in Sub-Saharan Africa: impacts and
_adaptations. Rome: FAO; Laborde, David, et al. 2012. Climate Change and Agriculture in South Asia. Washington: World Bank;_
CDKN, 2018. The IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report: What’s in it for South Asia? Delhi: CDKN.
21 World Bank, 2018. _Internal climate migration in Sub-Saharan Africa. Washington: World Bank; UNCTAD, 2018._ _Economic_
_Development in Africa Report 2018. Geneva: UNCTAD, chapter 2, pp 41-63._
22 UN HABITAT, 2014. UN Habitat Annual Report 2014. New York: UN, p. 15.

23 World Bank, 2019. World Development Indicators. Note: Asia includes Southern and Eastern Asia.
24 Xi Jinping at the 19th CPC National Congress, October 2017.
25 White House, 2017. National Security Strategy of the United States of America. Washington: White House, p. 2-3.


-----

###### Verantwoordelijke uitgever: Kolonel stafbrevethouder Guido Hart Éditeur responsable : Colonel breveté d’état major Guido Hart


## “ Le bonheur est notre destin véritable.”
#### Jacques Brel


-----

