# Recommendations


-----

### Table of contents

##### Foreword 1

 Executive Summary 2

 1. Why update the Vision 2030 of the Belgian Armed Forces? 3

 2. Vital and strategic interests 4

 3. Missions 6

 4. Capability mix 9

 5. Personnel 14

 6. Budgetary capacity 16

 7. Defence- Research & Development-Industry Strategy 18

 Conclusion 20


-----

### Foreword

In December 2020, the Belgian Defence Minister Ludivine Dedonder mandated Colonel Eric Kalajzic (RHID)
and Tanguy Struye de Swielande (UCLouvain) to formulate recommendations with the aim of updating the
2016 Strategic Vision. They selected ten academics, respecting linguistic, gender and academic balance:

 Sven Biscop (UGent & Egmont Institute)

 David Criekemans (UAntwerpen & KU Leuven)

 Cind Du Bois (KMS)

 Joseph Henrotin (CAPRI & ISC)

 Jonathan Holslag (VUB)

 Alexander Mattelaer (VUB & Egmont Institute)

 Delphine Resteigne (ERM & UMons)

 Dorothée Vandamme (UMons & UCLouvain)

 Nina Wilen (Egmont Institute & Lund University)

 Caroline Zickgraf (ULiège)

Also in attendance at the meetings were a member of the Cabinet, one member of the Defence Staff and
two interns.

The group acted as an independent expert group and met in person on nine occasions between February and
May at the Royal Military Academy and virtually. Prior to every session, those who wished to do so submitted
a contribution in writing to the coordinators to structure the discussion of the session of the day. The
coordinators also organised 10 online sessions with several experts on the following themes: strategic visions
of neighbourhood countries, hybrid and information warfare, military medical support, AI & quantum
computing, cybersecurity, terrorism in Belgium, special operations, intelligence, nuclear deterrence (future
of treaties & evolution) and dirty weapons, the NATO development planning process and EU Planning
Defence Capability and innovation and research led by RHID.

The following document is a synthesis of all the discussions, written contributions and exchanges of the last
few months.

The members of the committee, while not necessarily supporting each individual statement, all subscribe to
the general thrust of this report.


-----

### Executive Summary

 The evolving security environment will demand more involvement and commitment from Belgian
Defence, for which it is not yet sufficiently prepared. There is a need to develop a more proactive
and anticipatory strategic culture as a result of increasing uncertainties and geopolitical changes.

 Belgian Defence needs to be able to fulfil its five missions - national readiness and resilience,
collective defence, projecting forces abroad contributing to collective security, defence diplomacy
and aid to Belgian society – which are interconnected with Belgium’s vital and strategic interests.

 Belgium cannot further reduce its range of capabilities. Belgian Defence needs to be able to play its
role in all domains – land, air, sea, space, cyber and information. Despite major acquisitions during
the preceding legislature, there are still shortfalls in our capabilities. Furthermore, capabilities need
to be rebalanced between collective security and collective territorial defence.

 To meet the requirements for missions and capabilities, there is an urgent need of recapitalisation in
personnel. The decrease in personnel needs to be reversed and shifted towards increasing
recruitment and profile diversity.

 The current government will increase the defence expenditure to 1.24% of pre-COVID-19 GDP and
future governments should align with the average of NATO non-nuclear European members, an
average that has already surpassed 1.7%.

 There is a need to strike the right balance between missions, capacities, personnel and budget.

 A vibrant security and defence industry will enable Belgium to participate in multilateral research
projects and capability initiatives that further the needs of Defence

 Belgium has to demonstrate to its partners that it will take its share of the burden and accept
collective risks. Belgium acting as a free-rider would not be acceptable to its NATO and EU partners
and allies.


-----

### 1. Why update the Vision 2030 of the Belgian Armed Forces?

Since the publication of “Vision 2030” in 2016, based on analyses carried out in 2014 and 2015, international
tensions have increased and the pace of strategic change has accelerated.

Both state and non-state threats are challenging the stability and security of our country and our allies. It is
therefore important to assess the implications of these trends for our national defence strategy. On a
systemic level, international cooperation has, to a certain extent, been overtaken by competition between
the major powers, particularly between China, Russia and the United States. This has weakened international
organisations and undermined multilateralism as the organising principle of international order. Under the
Trump administration, the United States was characterised by an inward retreat, an increase in nationalism
and a withdrawal from international organisations.

Faced with this, China and Russia were able to increase their influence, promote authoritarianism and
weaken democracy worldwide, primarily through subversion and coercion. This has led to a weakening of
international norms and rules and multilateralism, the founding principles of Belgian policy, and a resurgence
of proxy wars and potential flashpoints, particularly in Eastern Europe, the East and South China Seas and in
the Middle East and Africa. These factors of instability are aggravated by the superimposition of nuclear
proliferation and, more broadly, by the weaponisation of advanced technologies. Other trends, such as
climate change, increased food insecurity and the destabilisation of energy supply, the difficult management
of migratory flows and demographic pressure, the intensification of transnational organised crime, the rise
of populism, nationalism, and terrorism, are exacerbating these tensions and general volatility. The
development of new, unregulated technologies is aggravating the situation, whether by means of
cyberattacks, disinformation, or competition for resources (including big data digital resources).

Confronting these factors of instability, the EU is struggling to develop a common foreign and security policy,
despite an increasingly volatile neighbourhood (Belarus, Ukraine, Syria, Caucasus, Mediterranean, Turkey,
Pan-Sahel).

It is vital to avoid a strategic vacuum that would leave our country unable to anticipate phenomena and
trends and would lead us to reactive policies. Such a situation would lead to an overall weakening of our
institutions and a deterioration of the socio-economic situation, already undermined by the current health
crisis.

In the face of these plural, heterogeneous and yet interconnected threats, the Belgian Armed Forces are one
of the main pillars of the stability and security of the State. As such, it is essential that they remain relevant
and resilient. The Armed Forces must therefore accelerate the implementation of the 2030 vision and
develop and integrate new areas of capability and skills such as Robotics, Cyber and AI in order to contribute
to collective defence and security. Finally, an essential precondition for the implementation of these
objectives is a recapitalisation in personnel to enable the execution of different missions and tasks.


-----

### 2. Vital and strategic interests 

Vital and strategic interests guide any decision by the Belgian government to commit its defence capabilities
at home or abroad.

#### Vital interests

Belgium’s vital interests are those that guarantee the very existence of our society and way of life. When
threatened, they trigger immediate and forceful reactions. In our democracy, these vital interests form part
of the social contract concluded between the population and governmental authorities. The following
interests are identified as vital to Belgium: security, political sovereignty, social and economic prosperity.

##### Security:

 La sécurité physique des habitants de la Belgique ;

 L'intégrité territoriale, y compris la zone économique exclusive (ZEE), l'espace aérien et le
cyberespace ;

 La sécurité et l'indépendance des infrastructures critiques et des chaînes d'approvisionnement.

##### Political sovereignty:

 Political independence and the integrity of the democratic process;

 Securing individual and collective freedoms and dignity according to the Constitution;

 Maintenance of the Rule of law.

##### Social and economic prosperity:

 The ability of the Belgian people to enjoy a high level of economic and social well-being, to support
their families and those close to them and to have opportunities to improve their lives;

 Equality of opportunity, regardless of gender, race or sexuality;

 The ability of the country to secure its economic prosperity and maintain independent decisionmaking capacity;

 Safeguarding access to vital resources, securing critical infrastructure and domains, guaranteeing
that foreign direct investments in strategic sectors are secure and present no threat to the
continuity of said actors;

 Maintaining capabilities and opportunities for innovation, scientific research and R&D.

#### Strategic interests

Belgium’s strategic interests are those that help the country secure its vital interests and safeguard them.
While not vital per se, strategic interests can, if threatened, have a direct impact on the safeguarding of our
vital interest. They include supporting and promoting multilateralism and alliances, securing our direct
neighbourhood, SLOCs[1] and addressing transnational challenges.

1 Sea Lines of Communications


-----

##### Multilateralism and alliances:

Promoting and defending a rules-based international order is of strategic importance to Belgium, in order to
guarantee a stable and secure international environment that is conducive to safeguarding our vital interests,
in particular because of the return of competition between major powers. Multilateralism is a foundation of
our international status, and alliances guarantee our inclusion and integration within the international
system as well as our political independence and international security and prosperity. In that regard, the EU
and NATO are cornerstones of our strategic interests: their effective functioning is fundamental to Belgium’s
functioning and security. In the EU, we have pooled key elements of our political and economic sovereignty.
This means promoting and ensuring the consolidation and further deepening of EU integration. NATO
guarantees our fundamental security needs and our inclusion in the largest defence alliance. This is also the
case for our membership and commitments to international peace and security in the context of the UN, as
well as the OSCE, two stepping stones towards protecting and defending our interests.

##### Immediate neighbourhood: 

In order to ensure a stable and secure environment for our political independence and our economic growth
and prosperity, it is essential to safeguard the stability of our immediate neighbourhood and the free
movement of goods to our coast and ports. This includes the stability and security of the Channel and the
Northern Atlantic area, the Eastern flank, and the Mediterranean region (Southern flank).

The Channel and Northern Atlantic area are essential for guaranteeing safe access to natural resources and
markets for our products. On the Eastern flank, the deterioration of security directly impacts upon NATO and
the EU, thereby affecting Belgium, mostly because of Russia’s ongoing destabilisation of Ukraine and its
threatening behaviour towards EU Member States and NATO allies. In the Southern flank, the Mediterranean
shores from North Africa to the Near and Middle East are highly unstable and insecure, which raises
traditional security issues (growing military presence of great and regional powers) as well as human security
challenges (terrorism, refugees, human trafficking).

##### Lines of communications:

Guaranteeing the freedom of navigation, the security of maritime routes and open trade worldwide means
that the global maritime environment needs to be secured from geo-strategic rivalries, piracy and organised
crime (for example in the Mediterranean, the Gulf of Guinea, the South China Sea). Securing lines of
communications so that they can operate effectively is not limited to the maritime domain but also concerns
other domains (cyber, air, land and space).

##### Transnational challenges:

Climate change, demographics and migration, pandemics, scarcity of resources and disruptive technologies
will challenge our security environment in the decades to come. In particular, the intersection of these forces
will have a profound impact on our security environment. As threat multipliers, they impact both our vital
and our strategic interests. They can pose a direct threat to our way of life, economy and prosperity, and also
pose an indirect threat due to their exacerbating effect on existing instabilities or tensions. In that regard,
managing those forces and their impact is central to securing Belgium’s national interests.


-----

### 3. Missions

Our defence policy should define the missions that the Belgian Armed Forces engage in. Their readiness to
take on different missions and tasks rests on a core of inner strength: a well-resourced national defence
establishment that is firmly anchored within Belgian society. The nurturing of such an establishment
constitutes the long-term foundation for executing all other missions. These range from the honouring of
Belgium’s collective defence commitments and conducting expeditionary operations supporting collective
security and/or national objectives to engagement in defence diplomacy and supporting civil authorities
when temporarily overwhelmed at times of crisis.

These five different missions shield the Belgian population from threats both near and far. Maintaining the
strength of the inner core is paramount: it is the national defence establishment that provides the Belgian
government with the ability to act and protect the interests of all Belgian citizens. This ability is ultimately
measured in terms of its readiness to employ and sustain forces in all geospatial domains, drawing on a pool
of human and material resources that is sufficient not only to meet national requirements but also to
shoulder a proportional share of the burden in a NATO and EU context in order to be a loyal and committed
member state.

#### National readiness: establishing the force, enabling a resilient society

The military ability to act does not appear out of thin air: it is painstakingly built from a variety of parameters.
On a national level this requires the ability to _analyse the security environment, to_ _plan and_ _command_
operations, and to _decide on the employment of the force – and to_ _resource_ it accordingly. As such, the
national defence establishment is key to maintaining the required level of readiness to execute all other
missions and to nurture the resilience of society writ large. These two dimensions – readiness and resilience
– are intimately intertwined. Military readiness provides society with the means to absorb shock and respond
to any emergency. Societal resilience therefore relies to a considerable extent on the military providing the
backbone for the continuity of government. Vice versa, military readiness builds on the armed forces being
fully embedded in the society they are meant to defend. A high state of readiness requires sufficient
personnel, the security of supply with respect to equipment, and a command and training system for
transforming human, material and financial resources into useable capabilities.

Maintaining national military readiness and thus enabling societal resilience is the foundational mission
defined by our defence policy. This is the mission that ensures that any Belgian government – be it now or a
generation from now – will have the ability and freedom to act whenever it wants to act. Without that
foundation, none of the other missions can be undertaken successfully. The military intelligence system and
the defence staff informs and enables decision-making in the National Security Council and the Council of
Ministers. The force structure, encompassing all geospatial domains, provides decision-makers with the
means to act when called for. At the same time, this national defence establishment contributes to
employment, industrial activity, research & development and societal resilience. By virtue of being fully
embedded in the society, the armed forces can generate the numbers of personnel and the secure supply of
materiel it requires for maintaining the appropriate degree of readiness for all other missions.

#### Collective defence: to deter and to defend

After the Cold War, collective defence shifted into the background, and the focus of Belgian Defence
gradually shifted to collective security, with expeditionary operations outside EU and NATO territory
becoming the primary mission. In practice, collective deterrence and defence have always remained vital;
the Russian invasion of Ukraine only underlined this.


-----

In view of Russia’s assertiveness, and the US strategic shift from Europe to Asia, European states, including
Belgium, must significantly enhance their contribution to NATO’s deterrence and defence. Belgium’s vital
security interests are anchored within, and therefore fundamentally dependent on, the system of collective
defence.

Collective defence is more demanding than collective security and therefore has to be prioritised in terms of
equipment, manpower, doctrine, planning, training, readiness and stockpiles.

NATO will remain a collective defence organisation based on deterrence and the ability to counter aggression
with all possible means. NATO’s overall strategy is based on an appropriate mix of conventional, nuclear and
missile defence capabilities. This implies that the conventional component cannot be reduced any further
without increasing the already substantial degree of reliance on nuclear deterrence. If anything, boosting
conventional firepower and as well the hybrid capabilities of European allies will be critical to maintain
credible deterrence across all possible scenarios. In addition, there exists a growing need for greater flexibility
and the ability to deploy reinforcements to remote areas. Mobility, secure communication and supply access
are priorities.

Belgium constitutes one of the key arteries for reinforcing and sustaining combat forces in Central and
Eastern Europe due to the presence of various North Sea ports. With NATO's eastward expansion, distances
have increased; demarcation lines are blurred; a network of territorial depots no longer exists and stocks
have to be mobile; different logics of confrontation are combined and cover very diverse domains ranging
from the cognitive domain to the domain of the highest intensity at different locations. The speed of reaction
and decision making gives a substantial advantage in the five dimensions, sea, land, air, space, and
cyberspace. NATO’s forward presence alongside the Eastern flank and the ability to respond flexibly to all
conceivable scenarios – requiring the readiness to ‘fight tonight’ if need be – is key. Belgium must assume its
fair share of the burden and the risk that this entails if it is to genuinely support the architecture of European
security.

#### Projecting force abroad: contributing to collective security

Belgium’s strategic interests include a stable and rules-based international environment; it must therefore
continue to contribute to collective security as well. This entails actively participating in international crisis
management operations, security force assistance missions, peace support operations and when necessary,
combat operations against adversaries which threaten to destabilise the international order.

Belgium and the other European states must increase their capacity to deal with any crisis in their periphery
that falls below the threshold of NATO’s Article 5. Whenever necessary, Belgium and its European partners
must be able to launch autonomous expeditionary operations to prevent security threats from spilling over
into the EU, to provide humanitarian support to partner states in need, and or to stop external powers from
steering EU’s neighbours in a direction that runs contrary to its security.

In this context, EU-NATO coordination is crucial. In terms of capability-development, Belgium can strengthen,
when possible, its force posture for collective defence through cooperation and integration with other
countries, along the lines of the BENESAM[2] and CaMo[3] frameworks. If the choice were made to re-build a
second, mechanised brigade, for example, that could not be done on a purely national basis in a cost-effective
way. Belgium’s investment in major new platforms for all components is an opportunity to pursue further
integration. By investing in its armed forces and in their integration with partners, Belgium could contribute
to some of PESCO’s[4] core building-blocks and assume a role in its further development.

2 BENESAM: ‘Belgisch-Nederlandse Samenwerking’ – ‘Belgium-Netherlands Cooperation Agreement’ is the name of the Belgian-Dutch
naval cooperation.
3 CaMo: ‘Capacité motorisée’ – Strategic partnership between Belgium and France in the framework of the Motorised Capacity
(CaMo) cooperation project.
4 PESCO: Permanent Structured Cooperation


-----

In addition to building the capacity for autonomous operations in the neighbourhood, the EU should focus
on building solidarity and effective deterrence (and, when necessary, retaliation or coercive actions) in the
non-military dimensions of Art. 42.7 TEU.

#### Defence diplomacy: to interact with partners outside the operational realm

Our network of defence attachés, our military representation within the different international organisations
(NATO, EU, OSCE and UN) and Belgium’s contribution to the military staffs at different levels allow Belgian
Defence to support our national diplomacy abroad.

Long-term relationships are also developed by maintaining and nurturing foreign partnerships to help and
contribute to a safe and secure environment through Military educational and training exchanges[5] (the Royal
Military Academy, the Royal Defence College, dedicated training centres). Developing additional activities
such as military dialogues, military partnerships programmes, military assistance and common exercises is
essential to an effective defence diplomacy. These collaborations and partnerships are mutually beneficial
not only to Belgium but also to our partners, especially to Belgium's neighbouring countries, by contributing
to the development of the nucleus of a renewed European strategic culture.

#### Aid to Belgian society: to support and enable civilian authorities in need

Defence can support civilian authorities in the form of resources and capabilities if the latter are temporarily
overwhelmed in a crisis. As such, the armed forces contribute to the collective solidarity effort for a limited
_period._

In order to be able to fulfil these numerous missions in various contexts (National, European, NATO and UN),
Belgium must continue to invest in the capabilities of its different components and in the future cyberinfluence dimension.

5 e.g. European Security and Defence College, NATO Defence College, NATO School, Oberammergau, 4th Cycle of the High Security
and Defence Studies (HSDS)…


-----

### 4. Capability mix

#### Warfare is changing

Our global and regional security environment will continue to evolve during the next decade. Hence, our
Belgian Armed Forces will face persistent and simultaneous challenges in physical and non-physical domains.
Increasing uncertainties and geopolitical changes therefore require us to develop a more proactive and
anticipatory strategic culture.

Together with our allies and partners, we need to be prepared to operate across the full spectrum of conflict.
The keys to success are cognitive superiority, resilience, influence and power projection, integrated multidomain defence and cross-domain command. We also have to achieve comprehensive interoperability, and
this can only be realised by fielding a C4I[6] architecture that allows operational commanders to sense, decide
and act more wisely than the adversary, both now and in the future.

An effective conventional deterrence and defence requires the capacity to fight a high intensity war. This
implies enhancing the intelligence and the firepower of our armed forces. These currently have a primarily
expeditionary posture. We need thus to rebalance our efforts between collective territorial defence and the
projection of forces in the framework of expeditionary crisis response operations. Furthermore, in each of
our operational commitments, we need to develop cyber and information warfare capabilities. Effective
contributions to operations abroad require the capacity to sustain significant units in operations on a
permanent, year-round basis. So that contributions to ongoing operations do not need to be interrupted,
sufficiently large forces will be required. These will need to be in a high state of readiness and must offer an
increased depth in terms of logistics. This cannot be achieved within the 25 000 FTE personnel envelope that
was previously envisaged for a more benevolent security environment.

Belgium cannot further reduce its range of capabilities and its troop numbers– it is already highly specialised
and has been downsized too much. The time has come to expand the range and the numbers, in light of the
needs of national readiness, collective defence and collective security. The multiplication of synergies with
other NATO and EU countries is indispensable, starting with our increased partnerships with our neighbours
– and will not only involve furthering existing partnerships (e.g. between the Belgian Navy and the
Netherlands, CaMo with France, C-SOCC[7] with the Netherlands and Denmark), but developing new ones.

Despite major acquisitions during the preceding legislature, our capabilities still have important shortfalls.
These are well known to our allies and have been highlighted in the capability development processes, both
in NATO (NDPP[8]) and the EU (CARD[9]). Our reliability and reputation as a trustworthy partner depend on this.
In the absence of such investments and capability development, measures instituted by our allies and
partners as a means of exerting pressure could target our country– including in its socio-economic wellbeing.

#### Intelligence

Intelligence is essential to ensure that available assets are committed appropriately and efficiently. Analysis
and information gathering capabilities, both human and technical (signal, imagery, artificial intelligence,
quantum computing, big data exploitation and storage), are required to strengthen autonomy in decisionmaking and crisis or conflict preparedness. To that end, we must guarantee our ISR[10] capabilities.

6 C4I: Command, Control, Communications, Computers, & Intelligence
7 C-SOCC: Composite Special Operations Component Command - combines national capabilities from the three participating nations
into a deployable multinational headquarters, specifically designed for commanding several Special Operations Forces task groups.
8 NDPP: NATO Defence Planning Process.
9 CARD: Coordinated Annual Review on Defence.
10 ISR: Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance


-----

Moreover, one of Belgium’s assets, but also one of its vulnerabilities is the fact that the main institutions of
the European Union and NATO are based in Brussels. To maintain our position as a host state and maintain
the secure functioning of these institutions, Belgium needs to strengthen TESSOC[11] capabilities.

#### Land

Our land component is the one with the most shortfalls. Belgium’s NATO partners expect from our country
one fully operational motorised brigade that is combat ready, sustainable and deployable. This is not met by
means of the CaMo[12] project. We mainly lack indirect and direct fire support and tactical air defence systems.
Furthermore, the brigade’s full realisation requires that all related systems (ammunition, communications,
cyber-electronic warfare, tactical ISR, logistics, etc.) be available. Yet the current composition of our sole
brigade does not correspond to that of a typical combined arms motorised infantry brigade as defined by
NATO or the French Army. CaMo offers significant capabilities in expeditionary operations and could also be
engaged in a collective defence mission in Europe if adequate support systems are acquired – including but
not limited to, bridge laying capabilities.

At present, the Belgian Land Component cannot meet the growing NATO Capability Targets that result from
the need to be able to reinforce the Eastern Flank in crisis scenarios. To mitigate this shortfall, it needs to
grow in terms of both unit and personnel numbers.

This requires:

 The continued application of the 2016 Strategic Vision and its capability development plan. This is
particularly the case with regard to the application of indirect fire (artillery) but also ground-based
air defence (GBAD)/counter-unmanned aerial systems (C-UAS) and their associated sensors.

 Considering a potential Belgian involvement in the future Franco-German Main Ground Combat
System (MGCS).

Special operation capabilities should be developed in accordance with the 2016 Strategic Vision, including
with the indispensable SOF Air assets (rotary wings and V/STOL[13] aircraft; see later).

#### Air

As far as our air capabilities for multi-role combat and transport platforms and strategic enablers are
concerned, recent acquisitions cover the requirements only partially (34 x F-35, 7 x A400M, 1 x Airbus A330
MRTT[14], 4 x MQ-9B).

The following capabilities ought to be considered to face current and coming operations:

 Contributing to NATO’s ALTBMD15 through antiballistic capabilities, taking into account the
changes induced by hypersonic systems;

 Acquiring the capability to engage time-sensitive targets by arming MQ-9B drones16;

 Augmenting the envisioned small mass of 34 F-35 by means of additional multi-role platforms and
loyal wingmen drones, very long-range air to air missiles and cruise missiles.

In terms of rapid reaction capability, the Special Operation Regiment is severely lacking in airmobile tactical
mobility.

11 TESSOC: Terrorism, Espionage, Subversion, Sabotage and Organised Crime.
12 CaMo: Motorised Capacity (in French)
13 VSTOL: Vertical or Short Take Off and Landing
14 MRTT: Multi-role Tanker Transport.
15 ALTBMD: Active Layered Theatre Ballistic Missile Defence
16 Being tele-operated, they will not have the capacity to target or launch weapons autonomously. Therefore, arming the drone would
not contradict the spirit or the letter of the 2018 resolution.


-----

We lack ground-based air defence assets against cruise, hypersonic and ballistic missiles to protect our
governmental bodies, our critical infrastructures, the international decision-making centres established on
our territory, and the infrastructure intended to facilitate the arrival of reinforcements and cargo from across
the Atlantic or the Channel. Increasing our capacities is crucial since our partners and allies do not have
enough ground-based air defence capabilities and airborne air defence to provide support and protect our
population and territory.

#### Sea

As far as maritime capabilities are concerned, agreements were concluded during the previous legislature for
the acquisition of two ASWF (Anti-Submarine Warfare Frigate) and six MCM systems (Mines
Countermeasures vessels) for mine hunting.

As it stands, we do not have the necessary platforms to guarantee a permanent presence at sea. As part of
the EU's maritime strategy review and given the importance of freedom of navigation for an open economy
such as Belgium, it is essential to reassess the necessary means to contribute to and assume our international
responsibilities.

This would allow Belgium to contribute more regularly to the EU’s permanent presence in areas of interest
(Mediterranean, Red Sea/Gulf of Aden/Indian Ocean, Strait of Hormuz/Gulf of Oman, Gulf of Guinea) and to
participate to NATO deterrence and operations.

#### Medical

Our capacity to provide medical support to deployed troops is limited, as is our reach-back capability (Queen
Astrid Military Hospital-QAMH). Therefore, we need either to rely on another nation’s help or have to limit
the number of simultaneous operations in various areas. Defence lacks sufficient protected evacuation assets
to follow land manoeuvre or air platforms for medical transport to guarantee compliance with NATO and EU
standards[17]. Other medical support capabilities are needed, such as mobile laboratories for operations
deployed in high-risk areas, and a medical intelligence capability. The ability to operate in CBRNcontaminated environments constitutes a key element of resilience in national and collective defence
missions.

#### Cyber-influence

Major efforts must be made in cyberspace and information warfare in order to satisfy both our national
missions and those of collective defence and security. We recommend developing a cyber-influence
command to support our military operations as well as our national resilience. The multidimensional nature
of cyberspace calls for the coupling of the cyber and information/influence domains, as well as for
cooperation and coordination on a national level. Homeland cyberspace operations should be
complemented by deployed and remote cyberspace operations. This will require recruiting enough
technicians, analysts, staff members specialised in that field. Technological watch on emerging technologies
and innovations needs to be implemented and incorporated with procurement processes in simplified
administrative procedures. Enhancing these capacities will also reinforce the EU and NATO capacities, and
improve readiness for joint and combined operations both at the domestic and the international levels.

Cyber capacity will also include influence operations and information warfare (IO/IW). This includes
identifying the threat, countering it, fighting it or influencing our adversaries, including those that have robust
and effective information warfare strategies and a whole-of-government approach to information operations
(most notably Russia, China and Iran).

17 Strategic medical evacuation as defined by NATO remains a national responsibility


-----

The cyber-influence command should be established based on benchmarking which would be reflected in a
continuous study involving the analysis and adaptation of the organisational modes of partners and allies in
order to improve performance.

#### Space

Defence should gain and guarantee access to resilient and secure space-based services (satellite
communications, space-based ISR, PNT[18]) supported by trained staff and R&D programmes. Defence will
contribute to the security[19] and resilience of national and allied space assets by developing its national and
international duties in terms of Space Domain Awareness[20] and Space Traffic Management.

#### Technical innovation and anticipation

The development of advanced weapons systems implies rapid technological developments that will impact
Defence and need to be closely and continuously monitored. Technological anticipation and investment will
be key to guaranteeing our security and success. Regular investment in RT&D is required, as well as a
proactive capacity to operationalise and industrialise the outcomes of fundamental and applied scientific
research. Robotics, AI and quantum computing will penetrate and accelerate warfare. Combined with Big
Data and advanced analytical capabilities, these technologies will significantly improve C4ISTAR[21] systems.

In addition, investment in green technologies and energies will be required in order to address environmental
challenges and decrease our logistical footprint, as a means of encouraging reduced energy consumption,
reducing the number of refuelling convoys, or recycling, amongst other things.

#### Outsourcing

In order to preserve their operational capability, states have to privatise some functions. While the partial
outsourcing of areas such catering, the security of installations and maintenance of equipment on Belgian
territory does not appear to be problematic, more advanced outsourcing, particularly in theatres of
operation, could pose major problems. In this respect, Belgium may also want to reflect on developing a legal
framework enabling the requisition of privately owned materiel and infrastructure in cases of grave
emergency.

In conclusion, Belgium has to demonstrate to its partners that it will take its share of the burden and collective
risk. The new threats we face imply a combination of deterrence and force projection, with interoperable
capabilities. Belgium therefore needs an adapted defence toolbox in all operational domains, which provides
a wide range of combat capabilities, the necessary means of support and capabilities in order to guarantee
that the government has decision-making autonomy and a number of options that will enable it to provide a
concrete demonstration of its solidarity with our partners, in proportion to our size and means.

This toolbox should be flexible and deployable, available at short notice (enhanced readiness), with enough
certified combat ready units that can be deployed without lengthy preparation for collective defence and
security. The toolbox must also be dimensioned in line with our international obligations, most notably those
commitments related to the agreed Political Guidance in a NATO framework (i.e., meeting the apportioned
NDPP targets) and the EU’s permanent Structure Cooperation (i.e., the 20% defence investment expenditure
and 2% defence R&T targets).

18 PNT: Positioning, Navigation and Timing
19 For example, developing cyber for space services in synergy with the ESA Cyber Center of Excellence in Redu, microsatellites
monitoring services, etc.
20 This can take several forms: contribution to international organisations or pooled capacities, development of Space Weather
services or sensors, autonomous national niche capacity, etc.
21 C4ISTAR: Command, Control, Communications, Computer, Intelligence, Surveillance, Targeting Acquisition and Reconnaissance.


-----

To facilitate future capability acquisitions, we need to invest in strategic foresight analysis on a structural
level by creating a foresight cell.

Finally, freedom of action should be guaranteed for successive Belgian governments so that they can
significantly contribute to operations or scenarios as they see fit.


-----

### 5. Personnel 

One of the most important challenges for Defence up to 2030 is the recapitalisation in personnel due to a
decrease in personnel, caused both by the retirement of almost half of the current workforce and by attrition.
This needs to be compensated both by an increase in recruitment, including to levels that exceed the current
total workforce, but also by efforts to retain its personnel. Existing measures notwithstanding, the rapid
reduction of personnel is accompanied by a significant loss of knowledge, experience and know-how. This is
placing increasing pressure on the remaining workforce. Efforts to increase its motivation, but also to develop
its creativity, empathy and adaptability while guaranteeing its diversity, are all essential pillars when it comes
to developing and retaining a well-functioning workforce. More effective consideration should therefore be
given to the aspirations of both military and civilian personnel throughout their careers, although this is a
political matter that extends beyond strict HR management. As developed in the 2016 Strategic Vision, a
more flexible personnel policy will be required to meet the needs of the organisation and the expectations
of its personnel. Career management should be more flexible and should be informed by military and civilian
expertise in HRM.

Four transversal axes should constitute the guidelines of our personnel strategy:

_Proximity_

In order to be attractive and close to its citizens, Belgian Defence should remain closely connected to its
society, both in order to retain a societal support base, but also to promote career opportunities in its ranks.

In order to enable sustainable growth of the force structure, Belgian Defence should offer a balanced regional
presence, thereby guaranteeing an improved work-life balance for its members. The expansion of regional
_quartiers du futur to all Defence districts should allow Defence to regain a place in the local socio-economic_
fabric and to be an integral part of the post-COVID-19 socio-economic revival. This proximity should allow
Defence, as a socially responsible actor, to increase societal resilience which is indispensable in the current
and projected security environment. Societal changes and evolving family configurations require improving
the reconciliation of private and professional life, including for personnel serving abroad. Given the changes
induced by the COVID-19 crisis, the hierarchical authorities should encourage and support new work models.

_Openness_

Defence should explore the possibilities for partnerships with both the private and the public segments that
bring an added value, so as to ensure greater flexibility for its personnel, especially for the NEET (Not in
_Education, Employment or Training) but also for jobs and skills that are in high demand in Defence as well as_
in society at large. The role played by reservists in this respect is a considerable advantage, particularly with
regard to niche skills or in case of crises. Increasing the size of the reserve force is necessary both for
organisational efficiency and for strengthening Defence’s societal base, but also in order to address current
and future security challenges. To this end, the status of the reserve should be made more attractive and
flexible and should allow to engage reservists in operational missions. Reservists should be able to combine
their status with another job in a more flexible and modular manner. Specific capabilities (cyber, technicians,
mechanics, medical-technical staff, and logistical profiles) should be acquired by increasing the use of civilian
service providers (through sourcing). Diversification could also take the form of a non-deployable civilian
reserve specifically trained for the job. Further studies by Defence Staff will be needed in order to exploit this
path of personnel diversification.

_Diversity_

Taking into account the reality of current operations and considering the variety of profiles within the
organisation, Defence should strive to offer a working environment in which respect and the appreciation of
differences prevails. It should therefore seek to strengthen the development of a positive and inclusive
organisational culture in order to attract and retain a workforce that reflects the diversity of our society, at
all hierarchical levels. A diversified workforce will better reflect Belgium’s multicultural society; it will also
improve its operational effectiveness in complex environments. Greater staff diversity should be achieved


-----

through increased recruitment of underrepresented groups, in particular women and ethnic minorities, and
members of the LGBTQIA+ community.

_Complementarity between military and civilian personnel_

Defence should contribute to social mobility and therefore strengthen its societal role, thereby improving its
relationship with the society which it serves and boosting its recruitment possibilities. Providing a first
professional experience to unemployed youth and NEETs, participating in federal and regional campaigns to
stimulate young people’s interest in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics)-related
careers; continuing to organise a third level of qualifying secondary education preparing for jobs in the
security sector and reassessing the effects and attractiveness of the Life Time Employment concept are only
some examples of the important efforts that need to be made in this domain. Furthermore, improving the
attractiveness of careers in Defence should also favour its competitiveness on the job market. The
organisation’s deficit in a number of skills (e.g. technicians in all components, specialised medical personnel,
infantrymen and women) will require special recruitment and retention measures.

In addition to military personnel, the role of civilian personnel should be strengthened for those tasks that
do not require specific military expertise. Civilians bring specialised expertise to Defence in both operational
capabilities and support services. Organisational continuity and complementary can be improved by putting
civilians in specific functions, primarily in the education, personnel, budgetary, cyber and legal areas, bringing
specialised expertise and providing sourcing oversight and support management services. The neighbouring
countries’ Armed Forces consist of approximately 20% civilian personnel[22] while the Belgian Defence barely
reaches 5% (1540 FTE in January 2021). Emphasis on the recruitment of civilian personnel is indispensable to
reach the threshold of 15% of civilian personnel by 2024 and similar partner’s levels by 2030. The creation of
a specific status for civilians and its possible alignment to the current statutes and salaries of military
personnel would also improve the attractiveness and retention of civilians. Five common values will unite
civilian and military personnel around their job: professionalism, respect, integrity, courage and trust.
Learning and appropriating these values will prepare Defence personnel to execute their missions in an
increasingly culturally complex environment, both in Belgium and abroad.

22 NATO STO HFM-226 Task Group, Civilian and Military Personnel Integration and Collaboration in Defence Organizations, STO
Technical Report, March 2018, 456p.


-----

### 6. Budgetary capacity

Expressed in constant euros, our Defence budget decreased on average by 1.26% a year between 1981 and
2019. Following the policy note of our Minister of Defence, the goal is to increase our defence expenditure
to 1.24% of pre-COVID-19 GDP. While today’s governmental budgetary cutbacks impact Defence (in 2021,
the budget will decrease by 0.89%), this increase in purchasing power will be pivotal if we want to keep on
performing our core tasks and if we want to remain a reliable partner for our allies. Keeping our budget in
line with our missions and tasks will be the main challenge.

The benchmark used in the 2016 Strategic vision for Belgium’s defence expenditures of 1.3% of GDP by 2030
was the average of NATO non-nuclear European members, but, as shown in graph 1, that average has already
surpassed 1.7%. Given that Belgium’s defence expenditure is only just above 1% of GDP, the Belgian growth
path will have to be re-assessed, therefore, to ensure that Belgium can maintain its military relevance and
stay in line with our European allies.

At the same time, a percentage of GDP is to some extent an arbitrary metric, particularly in times when the
GDP has shrunk in the wake of the COVID-19 crisis. The real aim should be to ensure sufficient funding to
meet Belgium’s apportioned capability targets as well as to use that capability, whenever needed, to remain
a credible partner. We recommend a benchmark that designates a minimum of 20% of total defence
spending for the purchase of military equipment in order to fill strategic capability gaps (according to the
NATO guidelines on deployability and sustainability and to the PESCO commitments). As shown in graph 2,
Belgium scores considerably worse than the majority of NATO allies.


-----

_Note: figures are estimates_

Finally, our defence budget is not the only criterion. We should also benchmark ourselves against our
European allies in terms of the ratio between size of our armed forces and the size of the population – and
this shows that we have fallen below the threshold.


-----

### 7. Defence- Research & Development-Industry Strategy

Innovative, local and contributing to the reduction of trade balance deficit, the defence industry sector
(Belgian Security & Defence Industry – BSDI) is an asset for the Belgian economy (with 15,400 direct jobs) but
also for Belgian Defence and the country’s contribution to European strategic autonomy. Belgian Defence
historically supports the industry through the protection of its economic, scientific and industrial potential
against foreign interference and industrial espionage. Evolving threats, in particular in the cyber domain,
require reinvigorating this mission, including in the prevention of threats that executives face abroad.

Belgian Defence already cooperates with the industry on a variety of topics, including research and testing.
It also works in cooperation with the Federal Public Service economy aeronautics-defence direction and
supports the Regions engaged in exportation processes. Beside these existing roles that need to be
maintained, more could be done.

The Defence leadership should play a leading role in the triple helix partnership scheme by coordinating
Belgian defence procurement with relevant industrial actors and research institutions. This scheme needs to
be implemented by means of clear forecasts of Belgian defence requirements in the short and longer term
and by means of a clear definition of KETA (Key Enabling Technological Defence and Security Applications).
In 2016, the “Belgian interests in the domain of the defence and security policy” document, endorsed by the
Council of Ministers, stated that having a national defence industry base was in Belgium’s national interest
(in order to master the dependencies that multinational partnerships entail for Belgian decision-making).
However, that document did define the KETAs in a restrictive way (namely: defence (sub)systems, C4I,
advanced materials, defence training simulators and cyberdefence applications). These should be expanded
within a federal defence and security technology strategy that could include AI, cryptology and data
protection, military space systems (participation to launchers, satellites, in accordance with the national
space policy), optronics, robotics/cobotics and any technology that could lead or play a game-changing role
in military capabilities, including those that can have an impact on dual applications. KETAs are just one side
of the ESI (Essential Security Interests) coin. In addition, Defence should identify in which way and in which
domain they wish to rely on the Belgian defence industry’s production and MRO (Maintenance Repair &
Overhaul) to support the Armed Forces in crisis scenarios, in which the assured availability of equipment is
most likely to be critical and, in this way, achieve Assured Security of Supply.

Furthermore, Defence can help enable the integration of the Belgian industry into international programmes,
particularly European ones, and not only those in which Belgium is engaged but also those in which Belgium’s
industrial technology can provide Europe with an advantage and can serve to reinforce the European Defence
Technological and Industrial Base (EDTIB). Defence can assist by lending its weight on a political level to
guarantee that the industry’s voice is heard within international industry planning processes. Whenever
possible, Defence should also support Belgian firms, European consortia with Belgian buy-in or the
participation of the Belgian Defence Technological and Industrial Base (BDTIB) and EDTIB in international
programmes if it contributes to the ESI entailing both Assured Security of Supply and technological autonomy
at the national and EU level.

Defence is an industry client. For the future, Belgium should, depending on its military necessities and the
required standards, encourage investing and buying in European programmes.

Belgium must also decide in which areas it wants to contribute, notably in the framework of PESCO and the
European Defence Fund (EDF). The EDF will make it possible to co-finance collaborative projects for the
development of military capabilities. Remaining active within PESCO, implementing the framework for
granting eligibility status to our companies and showing Belgium’s solidarity in the form of its commitments
under the National Implementation Plan (NIP), will provide opportunities for our companies to benefit from
this co-financing.


-----

A vibrant security and defence industry will enable Belgium to participate in multilateral research projects
and capability initiatives that will further the needs of Defence. However, the complex structure of the
Belgian State necessitates all Belgian governments and entities to work together on an equal basis, and to
develop the necessary mechanisms to protect, consolidate and further develop the industrial and scientific
potential of the country. Defence will need to work together with the Belgian Regions in this domain, so as
to work together in order to strengthen the economic security of the federation as a whole. This implies a
significant expansion of the defence R&T budget to 2% of defence spending.

The Royal Higher Institute for Defence has a key role to play in enabling defence R&T to flourish in function
of national DTIB objectives. Together with the Belgian universities network it will foster a culture of
innovation in advanced technologies and defence analysis.

Finally, enhanced cooperation should be encouraged in the STEM field (Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics) between Defence, the industrial sector and higher education to provide sufficient personnel
in the fields of IT, robotics, cyber security, data, artificial intelligence, quantum physics…


-----

### Conclusion

In the past few decades, the Belgian Armed Forces have been all too often side-lined in State policies, in order
to favour other sectors. Yet the erosion of international security in the past decade calls for the position of
Defence at the centre of governmental policies to be re-established.

While it remains one of its first missions, Belgian Defence is about more than securing our territory and
constitutional freedoms; it also forms a key element of Belgium’s external policy and international standing,
in that it acts as a facilitator of Belgium’s external action, as an instrument of our country’s multilateral
engagements and as an important socio-economic force within the country’s domestic scene. The credibility
of our country, both domestically and externally, depends on having the capabilities and willingness to act
and play our part. To remain coherent, our multilateral engagements must be backed up by credible
capabilities. Not doing our fair share in defence will have an impact on our overall relations with our EU and
NATO partners, in economic and political dossiers as well.

Beyond our reliability as a partner and ally, our military needs to be recognised in its domestic role as a socioeconomic force that employs tens of thousands of individuals; it is a vector of social mobility, integration and
diversity. Fulfilling this role means reasserting the military’s social role and guaranteeing its timeliness and
currency, including by improving the personnel’s well-being and preparedness, e.g. with up-to-date
infrastructure.

A credible capability is based on a triangle: personnel – budget – equipment. To guarantee the accuracy and
reliability of our armed forces, Defence should be finely tuned to our country’s international security
environment. This requires continuous assessment, monitoring and adaptation to that environment, the
ability, not only to act in a timely and flexible manner, but also, when possible, to anticipate and increase our
preparedness and resilience.

Defence should be fully embedded in Belgian society, playing the substantial role it is meant to play, and
should participate in our country’s social and economic prosperity in association with the industrial and
academic worlds.

Indeed, protecting our population, defending our vital and strategic interests, and contributing to a
multilateral security architecture based on international norms and respecting human rights are key features
of the social contract between state authorities and the people. It is an insurance for a safe and secure
environment that is necessary in order to ensure our welfare and prosperity.


-----

# Update of the Strategic Vision 2030:

 Recommendations


Photo source: DG StratCom


Responsible publisher: Ludivine Dedonder, Minister of Defence

Rue Lambermont 8

1000 Brussels


-----

