**UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF**

**THE PRIME MINISTER**

# CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY BELGIUM 2.0 2021-2025

## MAY 2021


-----

-----

### Summary

The Belgian population and organizations have various development
opportunities thanks to the presence and growth of digital services and
technologies. However, government, citizens and organizations are also
increasingly facing (advanced) cyber threats, which can increase the risks
and compromise the opportunities of digital services and technologies.
The goal of this updated National Cybersecurity Strategy is to safeguard
the capabilities of services, goods, people and capital across borders.

The aim of this strategy is to present a forward-looking vision of an open,
free and secure cyberspace that responds to potential cyber threats Belgium
faces or may face. This document identifies the different stakeholders, the
main threats, conveys a clear mission and, based on this, puts forward
strategic objectives and priorities for the coming years, as well as the re­
sources necessary to be able to achieve them. Since cybersecurity must be
treated as a shared responsibility, the different roles of the actors involved
are described. The Centre for Cybersecurity Belgium (CCB) is responsible
for the coordination of cybersecurity, so it has a key role in the realization
of this Cybersecurity Strategy 2.0.

_Centre for Cybersecurity Belgium, Brussels, May 2021_


-----

-----

### Table of contents

Summary....................................................................................................... 3
1. Introduction............................................................................................ 7

1.1 Policy Context.......................................................................................7

1.2 Cybersecurity........................................................................................8

1.3 Target audiences...................................................................................9

1.4 Vision...................................................................................................11

1.5 Mission................................................................................................11

2. Risk assessment.................................................................................... 13

2.1 Threats................................................................................................14

2.2 Technology trends and risks...............................................................16

3. Strategic objectives and approach........................................................ 21

3.1 Strengthen the digital environment and increase trust

in the digital environment..................................................................21

3.2 Arming users and administrators of computers and networks...........23

3.3 Protecting Vital Organizations from all cyber threats.........................25

3.4 Responding to cyber threats..............................................................27

3.5 Improve public, private and academic ­collaborations........................30

3.6 A clear international commitment......................................................31

4. Responsibilities..................................................................................... 33

4.1 The Centre for Cybersecurity Belgium (CCB).....................................33

4.2 The Federal Police..............................................................................34

4.3 The Public Prosecutor’s Office............................................................35

4.4 Defence...............................................................................................36

4.5 The National Crisis Centre (NCCN)....................................................37

4.6 State Security Service (VSSE)..............................................................37

4.7 The Federal Public Service Foreign Affairs.........................................38

4.8 The National Security Administration (NSA).......................................38

4.9 The Coordination Unit for Threat Analysis (CUTA).............................39

4.10 Sectoral authorities.............................................................................39
4.11 The Belgian Institute for Postal Services
and Telecommunications (BIPT)..........................................................40

4.12 Federal Public Service Economy.........................................................40
4.13 Governance framework and consultation platforms..........................41

5. Resources.............................................................................................. 45


-----

-----

### 1. Introduction

Our society and economy are constantly changing. This process is accel­
erated by digital transformation. People, organizations, devices, data and
processes increasingly connect and interact through online channels such
as the internet, mobile devices, Internet of Things (IoT), or the cloud for
storing (personal) files and photos. This growth in the use of new technol­
ogies has been accompanied by an increase in cyberattacks, as well as an
increase in the severity and impact rate of these attacks. Sensitive data,
including personal data, customer data and politically sensitive data (e.g.
military intelligence), is increasingly at risk of disclosure. Therefore, it is of
utmost importance to protect this data by securing the digital environment.

1.1 Policy Context

In 2012, Belgium signed off on its first Cybersecurity Strategy, which focused
on recognizing cyber threats, improving security, and establishing measures
to respond appropriately to incidents. With the continuous change in the
cyber landscape, a new Belgian cybersecurity strategy that responds to
current and future risks and threats is needed.

The Cybersecurity Strategy 2.0 shapes Belgian policy and aims to secure the
cyber landscape at all levels, for all stakeholders. Monitoring, coordinating
and overseeing the implementation of the Belgian Cybersecurity Strategy
is the responsibility of the Centre for Cybersecurity Belgium (CCB). The
Cybersecurity Strategy 2.0 sets goals for 2025 and will be periodically
reviewed and adjusted where necessary.

This Strategy is also framed in an international context. For example,
the European Union is working on a number of initiatives to promote
and improve cyber resilience within the EU. In July 2016, the Security of
_Network and Information Systems (NIS) Directive was adopted, which was_
transposed into Belgium law on 7 April 2019: Act establishing a framework
_for the security of network and information systems of public interest for_
_public safety. Article 7 of this directive (reproduced in article 10 of the_
Belgian NIS Act) requires member states to draw up a national strategy
for the security of network and information systems.

In addition, in June 2019, the Cybersecurity Act came into force, which,

h h d d k h


-----

Union’s cybersecurity agency. This regulation additionally highlights the need
for a European Information and Communication Technology cybersecurity
certificate, with a view to increasing trust in and the security of products
and services that are crucial for the digital single market.

Finally, national resilience commitments under the NATO Cyber Defence
_Pledge should be kept in mind._

1.2 Cybersecurity

_Cybersecurity is the result of a set of security measures that min­_
_imize the risk of disruption or unauthorized access to information_
_and communication (ICT) systems._

Cybersecurity includes all reasonable and acceptable measures to protect
the ICT of citizens, businesses, organizations and government from cyber
threats. It involves protecting systems (such as hardware, software and
related infrastructure) and networks, as well as the data they contain.
Measures to combat the use of ICT for fraud, for incitement or for recruiting
terrorists are, strictly speaking, outside the scope of this strategy.

Cybersecurity requires the development and strengthening of technical
and organizational measures. First, the right objectives must be identified
as well as the appropriate awareness campaigns around cybersecurity
for all stakeholders. Consideration should also be given to implementing
preventive measures to protect sensitive data from cyber threats and
incidents to prevent unauthorized access to this data. It is also necessary
to monitor and analyze any threats. Then, if an incident does occur, it is
important to be prepared to respond and resolve it in an efficient manner.

Identifying a cybersecurity “governance framework” is important for
achieving cybersecurity goals. Consequently, it is crucial to define roles
and tasks as well as to clarify the responsibility of all stakeholders involved.
Establishing a national governance framework allows for dialogue and
coordination of the various activities.


-----

The General Data Protection Regulation, and “Privacy” in general, are not
part of cybersecurity as such, but they are obviously a big issue in terms
of the CCB’s mission to detect incidents and threats. Good cooperation
with the Belgian Data Protection Authority is therefore necessary. Simi­
larly, while fighting online disinformation campaigns is not actually a part
of cybersecurity, it is connected to it. Cooperation with the competent
intelligence and security services is also indispensable in this context.

1.3 Target audiences

**Companies**

 Self-employed

 SME

**Population**  Large companies &

 All citizens establishments

**BE**

**Organizations of Vital**
**Interest**

Operators of Essential
Services & DSP

Critical Infrastructure

Nuclear Installations **Government Services**

Cybersecurity is not just the responsibility of government. It is a collaborative
effort to which all stakeholders involved can contribute. Improvements in
overall safety will come through everyone’s efforts.

i. Population
Citizens are primarily responsible for protecting their own property. This
includes smartphones, laptops, tablets, but also the applications on them
(such as banking applications) and therefore the data they contain. Pro­
tecting their own devices and applications and using them appropriately
makes it more difficult for threat actors to launch cyberattacks. With support
from the government and the media, such as Safeonweb.be and https://
risk-info.be/en, the population can be/become aware of the main cyber

h d f l l d h b


-----

ii. Companies
Companies play a big role in protecting their own infrastructure and their
employees’ data. Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs, less than 250 em­
ployees) have an important place in this, as they comprise more than 99%
of Belgian companies. This group of stakeholders includes educational
institutions and suppliers of security products. Security products such as
firewalls, virus scans, encryption or other software and hardware products
make IT systems a lot safer and reduce the likelihood of incidents. Investing
in these security products, supporting suppliers of them, and facilitating
users of IT systems in the use of these products is important. Developing
a basic cybersecurity certification that allows a company to demonstrate
that it is paying due attention to the most common cyber threats is a not
insignificant aspect of this approach and can also serve as a competitive
advantage. In 2019, the European Union also launched a cybersecurity
certification framework in this vein.

iii. Government Services
Belgium has a complex government structure which does not make a
coordinated cybersecurity policy for government departments easy. The
federal government has horizontal, vertical and programmatic services.
Regions and Communities have ministries and directorates. The Centre
for Cybersecurity Belgium (CCB) develops advice and guidelines that are
available to all government departments.

Security and cybersecurity in particular are federal matters and dealt with
at the national level.

iv. Organizations of Vital Interest
Our country’s Organizations of Vital Interest (OVI) need to be optimally
protected against cyberattacks, as incidents affecting these organizations
can have a large-scale, national impact.

In this context, Organizations of Vital Interest Refer to the public and private
entities that provide an essential service to the Belgian population and
that use network and information systems to do so. OVI should therefore
be understood as the operators of critical infrastructures, Operators of


-----

essential services, digital service providers and nuclear facilities (as referred
to in their respective legal frameworks)[1].

The initial determination of who Organizations of Vital Interest are is done
by the sectoral authorities, in consultation with the National Crisis Centre
(NCCN) and the CCB. The categorisation is meant to be evolutionary and
includes the sectors of energy, mobility, telecoms, finance, drinking water,
public health, digital service providers and government.

1.4 Vision

Belgium advocates an open, free and secure cyberspace where citizens
and businesses can fully develop, where they can engage internationally,
and where fundamental rights are safeguarded and protected. To build and
ensure society’s essential trust in cyberspace, cybersecurity is of necessary
and decisive importance. This is a shared responsibility of all stakeholders
and requires a broad-based approach.

1.5 Mission

_By 2025, Belgium should be one of Europe’s least vulnerable_
_­countries in the cyber domain._

The Cybersecurity Strategy 2.0 aims to make Belgium one of the least
vulnerable countries in Europe in the cybersecurity domain by 2025. This
will be underpinned by outlining action plans to protect all stakeholders,
from the general population and private organizations to Organizations
of Vital Interest. The strategy is aligned with government and private
sector investment strategies for future development and ensures these
investments and the creation of new opportunities and jobs. In addition,
the strategic objectives enable us to be prepared for new technological
developments and the potential risks.

_1 Although the country’s Scientific and Economic Potential and organizations providing_

_essential services within the public sector fall within the intended scope of “Organizations_
_of Vital Interest,” a clear cyber governance framework for these sectors must first be_


-----

-----

### 2. Risk assessment

The Belgian National Risk Assessment 2018-2023 of the National Crisis
Centre considers cyber as one of the main risk clusters our country will face
in the coming years. Within this cluster, cybercrime and hacktivism against
businesses and critical infrastructures are identified as national priority risks.

In 2017, we saw how the WannaCry ransomware spread to more than
150 countries and interrupted business activities, and how the NotPetya
malware grew in a flash into the most expensive cyber incident ever.

Furthermore, the evolution of the cyber threat from financially driven to
geopolitically motivated is extremely concerning. Western countries are
facing a threat in cyberspace that exceeds the danger of physical attacks.
These cyber threats can have serious direct consequences on, for example,
our electricity distribution, our banking systems or on the availability of all
online services. Continued media coverage of cyber incidents, even minor
ones, can cause the public to lose confidence in the digital environment
and services, which can have pernicious economic consequences.

As part of the hybrid threat, the cyber threat can be used to amplify the
effects of other attack methods. With this threat, a combination of, say,
a physical attack with a series of cyberattacks can seriously amplify the
effect and temporarily create an atmosphere of chaos.

This strategy defines national goals for the period 2021-2025 to meet this
constantly changing cyber landscape. In order to set the right priorities
in formulating these objectives, it is necessary to have a clear picture
of the various cyber risks and threats that Belgium may face during this
period. This chapter provides a concise overview of key threat actors and
technological risks.

However, it should be mentioned that risk assessment is an ongoing process.
Calibrated consultative platforms, such as the Coordinating Committee on
Intelligence and Security and its Platform 4 Cyber, will therefore continue
to evaluate the measures taken, monitor cyber trends and adjust objectives
as necessary. The preparation of a Belgian contribution to the European
5G risk assessment in 2019 is an example.

In addition, as a follow-up to the Belgian National Risk Assessment 2018-

h l f d h l h ll


-----

involved actors of the main risk clusters (of which cyber is a part). It aims
to better identify the underlying causes and effects in order to provide a
clear overview to decision-makers when dealing with the risk.
Finally, events that involve an increased cyber risk (international summit,
elections, etc.) regularly take place on Belgian soil. These types of events
may require an exceptional risk assessment to identify heightened risks
and recommend appropriate actions.

2.1 Threat actors

Because the motivations and capabilities of threat actors are constantly
changing, it is critical to understand and monitor who the most significant
threat actors are. This also allows us to understand how the cyber landscape
is evolving. Belgium considers the following actors to be the biggest threat
to the Belgian state and population: cybercriminals, foreign military and
intelligence services, terrorist groups and hacktivists.

Threats

**Foreign military and**
**intelligence services**

Countries have plenty of physical **Terrorism**
weapons, an offensive cyber arsenal Cyber terrorists use the internet to commit acts
and intelligence with which to inflict of violence for the purpose of gaining a political
economic damage on other states, advantage and instilling fear in the population.
with a view to political instability and
weakening their defences.

**Threats**

Description of the major
threats and their intentions
and capabilities

**Hacktivism**

Hacktivism is performing intentional
cyber activities with the intention of **Cybercrime**
promoting a political agenda, The goal of cyber criminals is to misuse
religious belief or social ideology. computers, the internet or networks for

financial gain.

2.1.1 Cybercrime

The (potential) impact of cyber threats emanating from cybercriminals has
become increasingly clear in recent years. These include not only threats that
could disrupt our infrastructure, but also threats to the integrity, availability


-----

and confidentiality of the information we digitally capture, analyze and
exchange. The digitalization of things or goods (Internet of Things) implies
that they are ‘hackable’. This has a direct impact on the overall security
of every citizen, but it also means that these things or goods may contain
digital traces that could be of interest in crime investigations.

The main objective of criminal actors, both individual actors and those
involved in organized crime, is usually to generate money and profit, for
example through phishing, data theft or ransomware. In some cases, they
may additionally have destructive purposes in mind, for example data
sabotage or cyberattacks. Cybercriminals specialize in specific services,
which they then offer on the Dark Web for a fee. This allows a criminal to
subscribe to, for example, an Exploit Kit, which allows them to use the
latest digital intrusion techniques without any technical knowledge.

Cybercriminals offer their services to anyone willing to pay for them. There­
fore, in addition to cyberterrorism, criminal organizations (or individuals)
seeking to cause material and/or physical harm should be factored in as
a potential threat actor at the national level. Indeed, the potential impact
of cyberattacks on critical infrastructures can be such that the stability of
state institutions is jeopardized.

2.1.2 Foreign military and intelligence services

Nations and states possess a great deal of knowledge and physical weapons,
as well as an offensive cyber arsenal. There is always a chance that they may
wish to use these for purposes other than protecting their own citizens.
Military and intelligence services can deploy their knowledge and weapons
to inflict economic damage on other states, to create political instability in
other states, and/or to weaken other states’ defences. Foreign military and
intelligence services are not only conducting more cyberattacks in order
to gain a competitive advantage in terms of intelligence, but increasingly,
advanced techniques are being used to disrupt the operations of organ­
izations — and indirectly so the countries in which they are based — for
example by exposing confidential information.

The capabilities of various national military and intelligence agencies are
becoming more sophisticated. Therefore, it is becoming increasingly diffi­
cult to detect such cyberattacks and to take preventative action to defend
against them. Consequently, the actual activity of these threat actors is
much more frequent than statistics indicate.


-----

2.1.3 Hacktivism

Hacktivism is the performance of various intentional cyber activities for
the purpose of promoting a political agenda, religious belief, or social
ideology. It may be a politically motivated movement that carries out this
activity. Currently, the most commonly used attack methods in this regard
are doxing[2], DDoS[3], web defacement[4] and unlawfully taking over identities
and social media channels.

2.1.4 Terrorism

Cyberterrorism is the carrying out of violent activities using the internet,
with the underlying goal of gaining political advantage through intimida­
tion and instilling fear. These acts can result in destruction, loss of life and/
or physical harm. The most obvious targets of cyberterrorists are public
services, industries and critical infrastructures.

For example, some terrorist groups use the online world as a propaganda
and recruitment channel for terrorism. Since 2016 there has been a clear
transition from the use of Twitter and Facebook to more encrypted com­
munication channels. Current developments also point to an increasing use
of cyber tools to finance terrorism, e.g. through ransomware, cryptomining
or even crowdfunding. In this context, there is great concern that terrorist
organizations will also carry out more cyberattacks. However, it seems that,
until now, these attack techniques are fairly limited. To carry out DDoS
attacks, groups still purchase domain hosting services, download software
and rent botnets, rather than developing their own cyber weapons.

2.2 Technology trends and risks

The technological landscape does not stand still, and new products are
coming onto the market all the time. Organizations are applying these
new technologies to stay competitive and develop new opportunities.
However, there are also risks associated with these technological develop­
ments, also because they help further develop the skills of threat actors.
It is therefore crucial to always be aware of developments in technologies
and the associated risks.

_2 Doxing is the usually unlawful public dissemination of a person’s information or documents._
_3 DDoS stands for distributed-denial-of-service attacks in which a large volume of data is_

_sent to one specific system to disrupt its normal operation._


-----

Technology trends and risks

**Digitalization and dependence**

Organizations are applying new technologies to
further develop new opportunities, leading to
increased exposure to cyber threats. In reality, all
organizations need to protect more with less.

**Technology**
**Trends and Risks**

**War for Talent** **Technological Developments**

Lack of cyber talent can jeopardize our ambition to promote security and privacy in a digital society, as well as the goal of achieving future opportunities that new technologies offer. New technologies provide opportunities for new developments, although their use increases the complexity and virtualization of the ICT environment, and consequently the exposure to emerging cyber threats.

2.2.1 Dependency

Organizations are applying new technologies to develop new opportunities
and to increase their productivity or efficiency. The increase in the use of
these technologies is therefore creating an ever-growing dependence on
ICT. This is accompanied by increased exposure to cyber threats. It can
also be generally observed that technologies are being deployed at a
faster rate than the security for these technologies.

Organizations will be more committed to providing and using new tech­
nologies than to allocating budgets for their security. It is often overlooked
that new technologies are not always extensively tested immediately. It
is therefore a big risk to assume that no attacks exist yet or that it is safe
to implement and secure the technology in the usual ways. After all, it
often takes a few months or years for most attacks and vectors on a giv­
en technology to become public and to be properly protected against.
Secure development — with attention for security — should therefore be
included in the development process of new software and technologies.

There is also an ever-increasing reliance on third party providers at every
step: development, production, maintenance, and processing. This in­
creases the risk and potential critical impact of what are known as “supply
chain attacks”.

h f d l h d


-----

This is the situation that arises when a product is safe when obtained by
a consumer, but when connected to a network, it becomes dangerous
due to malicious, incorrect, or careless changes to the operational code.

2.2.2 Technology-specific risks

New applications resulting from emerging technologies often offer major
advantages over traditional methods; for example, in terms of efficiency
and economies of scale. However, there are sometimes specific security
risks associated with them.

A good example is cloud computing. The big advantage is that the infra­
structure no longer needs to be maintained and everything scales with
the pace at which the organization grows. A central cloud infrastructure
can therefore be professionally well secured. However, the risk is that an
unauthorized access suddenly means compromising a very large amount
of information.

Two economic threats can also be formulated in this regard. First, the world
of cloud-based applications is characterized by the presence of a limited
number of global players, where economies of scale can be played out,
creating a concentration risk. On the other hand, innovation in this market
is often offered by new, much smaller players. These young organizations
are often not on the same level in terms of performance and maturity of
processes. This can lead to misplaced confidence in these applications.

Ever-increasing technological development of new (types of) ICT-based
products and services in many economic sub-areas also requires supervisory
authorities to rapidly evolve market surveillance and inspection capabilities.
On the flip side, of course, these technologies sometimes offer advantages
for building market surveillance more efficiently.

Authorities already pay considerable attention to person-centred aspects
around “security” and “privacy”. In contrast, the product-related aspects
of these topics, such as regulation and control, are barely covered by the
supervisory authorities, if at all. Thus, there is a need to adjust the existing
legal framework. This should be done mainly from a European/international
framework. The European Cybersecurity Act is an important step in this
regard, and requires a clear Belgian implementation.

Another common risk is individually protecting internet-connected devices.

h b h ll h h f h


-----

It is very important to assess the risks and establish the necessary security
before deploying new technologies. The speed in development and adop­
tion of new technologies such as artificial intelligence, quantum computing,
blockchain, and smart meters & grids makes appropriate evaluation of
(and protection against) all risks challenging.

2.2.3 War for Talent

With the digital transformation and the adoption of new technologies,
there is also a rise in misuse of these systems. It is therefore important
as an organization to invest in recruiting IT profiles, as well as IT security
profiles. However, there is a lack of cybersecurity talent in the job market.
There are few courses where cybersecurity is a (major) component. Often
it is taught as an ancillary subject, so little knowledge of it is gained or
transferred in practice.

Therefore, there is a clear shortage of cybersecurity professionals. As a
result, many organizations will not be able to fill these positions or will fill
them with other profiles. The challenge of finding competent and reliable
employees obviously goes hand in hand with the internal threat (“the
insider threat”).


-----

-----

### 3. Strategic objectives and approach

The aim of a cybersecurity strategy is to respond to technological de­
velopments and to meet the high need to protect the population, the
private and public sectors and the vital sectors. The Cybersecurity Strategy
2.0 contains six strategic objectives for the next four years. This strategy
prescribes a number of actions to achieve these strategic objectives. This
will be achieved thanks to the help of various stakeholders.

3.1 Strengthen the digital environment and increase
trust in the digital environment

3.1.1 Investing in a secure network infrastructure

Work will be done together with the internet service providers (ISPs) to
create a more secure basic network infrastructure. New protection tech­
niques will follow technological evolutions, such as the Internet of Things
(IoT) and new generations of fixed and mobile networks.

Network infrastructure security can be improved by adopting more secure
internet standards (DNS security, secure routing, encryption, etc.). These
standards provide a safe way to exchange data, i.e. a “safe data transport
layer”. Online data exchange is then secure across the board. This reduces
the risk of an attack on a weak link in the chain.

Such standards can also ensure more trusted identities and publications
on the internet. This can be done, for example, by encouraging the use of
technology such as Itsme and Extended Validation Certificates on websites.

A test environment (“testbed”) for infrastructure can also be developed.
A testbed is a platform that allows new infrastructure to be tested in a
reliable, controlled and secure environment before it is widely used.

3.1.2 Establishing a Cyber Green House

Establishing a Cyber Green House will provide a significant boost to in­
novation in the cybersecurity sector. The creation of such an innovation
centre aims to test innovative cyber solutions and business models in a
risk-free environment and to disseminate Cybersecurity Guidelines and
Best Practices.


-----

3.1.3 Foster expertise and knowledge

To meet the need for greater security and more security professionals,
more has to be invested in expertise and knowledge. Educational institu­
tions make a significant contribution to the cybersecurity landscape. They
not only play an important role in increasing knowledge by conducting
research, but also by contributing to the development and provision of
relevant training.

There will be further investment in Research & Development (R&D) in the
area of Cybersecurity. The private sector and educational institutions such
as universities and colleges will work closely together.

European initiatives in this framework will be evaluated from this objective.
Security managers of public institutions should be trained to an adequate
level of security, through training programmes for public officials.

To address the lack of information security professionals, both within the
government and private sector, more young people should be encouraged
to pursue STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics)
courses. This requires establishing contacts with communities and defining
a coherent policy on the subject in collaboration with relevant partners.
For example, awareness and information materials can be provided to
schools or mentoring programmes can be organized.

3.1.4 Cybersecurity Certification and Labelling of Products, Services
and Processes

Belgium will create a framework to allow companies to evaluate and certify
the security of ICT products, services and processes.

This framework will be aligned with the EU Cybersecurity Act 2019 and
developments underway at the European level. The EU Cybersecurity Act
aims at a European recognition of delivered certificates, as well as maximum
alignment with existing European and international reference frameworks.

To this end, as required by the EU Cybersecurity Act, Belgium will establish
a National Cybersecurity Certification Authority (NCCA). The NCCA, in
consultation with, among others, market surveillance authorities, other
sectoral authorities and the National Crisis Centre, will coordinate the
necessary expertise in cybersecurity certification, authorize certificates
with high security requirements and establish close cooperation with


-----

BELAC (the Belgian accreditation organization) by making maximum use
of existing processes, procedures and regulations.
Work will also be done on a cybersecurity recognition mechanism for
companies, with a special focus on SMEs who wish to demonstrate that
basic cybersecurity requirements, best practices and policies are in place.
It is important for strategic sectors to think about an integrated approach
that combines IT aspects, physical protection and staff screening.

These initiatives strongly support the vision of this Cybersecurity Strategy
and will boost customer confidence in the security of the digital environment.

3.1.5 Strengthening the cyber skills of intelligence and security
agencies

To provide an appropriate response to the rapidly growing threats, the
capabilities and skills of our intelligence and security services must at least
keep pace with them. The human capital of technical experts in cyber­
security constitutes the nation’s best weapon against these new threats.

In order to provide our services with the necessary experts, alternative re­
cruitment and employment methods will be evaluated and used whenever
possible. After all, the need for young and highly trained computer experts
does not only exist within our security services. The “War for Talent” is
being fought among specialized companies, large multinationals and all
the security services in Europe and beyond. To expand their knowledge,
such technical experts often seek new challenges and are usually not look­
ing for a job for life. A sufficiently flexible recruitment system and more
competitive remuneration should enable our security services to better
compete on the labour market.

Government departments must also offer their technical cybersecurity
experts sufficient high-quality technical training. This not only counts as
an important motivating factor, but it also guarantees sufficient technical
knowledge and expertise.

3.2 Arming users and administrators of computers and
networks

Almost all of the internet’s infrastructure and systems are in the hands of
private owners. It is therefore of great importance that every owner of a


-----

computer system or network is adequately armed to protect it from cyber
threats and attacks.

3.2.1 Raise awareness and engage

In addition to informing citizens about potential threats, the government
is striving to make citizens more aware about how to better protect them­
selves from potential cyber risks.

To protect systems and computer networks, not only are technical protec­
tion measures necessary, but each user must use them responsibly. Those
who are sufficiently aware and vigilant quickly become the best detection
system for cyberattacks. From the website www.safeonweb.be, the public
can get all the information about specific threats, how to recognize them
and how to protect themselves or respond.

The internet belongs to and is for everyone. Its safety is also a shared effort.
Therefore, the population is urged to participate in security. For example,
anyone can forward suspicious emails to suspicious@safeonweb.be.
Such initiatives will be expanded.

The CCB organizes an annual awareness campaign through the media and
frames it through European initiatives. The European cybersecurity agency
the ENISA organizes European Cybersecurity Month every October.

Through good collaborations, contact between citizens and quality ser­
vice providers in cybersecurity in our country should be facilitated. Such
streamlined contact should enable citizens to address security incidents
and neutralize problems.

Raising awareness also has a direct impact on the business community and
creates a general culture of concern and safety. Awareness campaigns,
such as through webinars, guides or the cybersecurity KIT, should be
further deployed.

3.2.2 Informing about threats and vulnerabilities

Timely warnings about emerging and significant threats or vulnerabilities
is crucial.

The CCB permanently analyzes all available information on cyber threats
or vulnerabilities and sends out alerts where necessary. For the public, the

h h d l d d d d


-----

relationship with the general media. BE-Alert from the National Crisis Centre
(NCCN) can support and send alerts within a specific region.

Companies and organizations are urged to publish a “Coordinated Vul­
nerability Disclosure Policy.” Through sectoral authorities, professional
organizations and the Cyber Security Coalition Belgium, they will be
informed of significant threats or vulnerabilities. Organizations of Vital
Interest will also receive targeted and non-public alerts through the CCB’s
Early Warning System (EWS).

The CCB, with the national Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT.
be) and as a national CSIRT (Computer Security Incident Response Team),
is tasked with detecting, analyzing and informing users of online security
problems and vulnerabilities. However, this cannot be done without the
support of internet service providers who must quickly forward the warnings
to their vulnerable or threatened customers.

3.2.3 Disseminate cybersecurity guidelines and best practices

Cyber threats and the attack techniques used are evolving very quickly.
Knowledge sharing and the sharing of best practices is therefore very
valuable. Not only does this enrich knowledge and generate new ideas to
address the threats, but it also facilitates decision-making. Cybersecurity
knowledge is shared through existing or to-be-established platforms.

The CCB maintains an Online Cybersecurity Reference Guide to assist
organizations in developing a cybersecurity strategy. The guide offers
“basic” and “more advanced” recommendations in terms of planning, risk
management, security measures and evaluations in the use of computers
and computer networks. The identification and management of risk is
critical in this regard. The guidelines offered are based on international
standards and are continuously updated by the CCB. As such, companies
are strongly encouraged to adopt these guidelines in their cybersecurity
policies.

3.3 Protecting Organizations of Vital Interest from all
cyber threats

Across the world, Organizations of Vital Interest are facing a rapidly in­
creasing and more sophisticated cyber threat. Given that cyberattacks

h h fi


-----

and on national security, it is crucial to support them appropriately to
protect themselves.

3.3.1 Optimize information exchange and send alerts

The CCB, as the national cybersecurity authority, receives all pertinent
threat information from its partners. It continuously analyzes this received
information and sends out alerts through its Early Warning System (EWS)
or other channels. This ensure that

the Organizations of Vital Interest are continuously informed about relevant
cybersecurity threats, vulnerabilities or incidents.

In Belgium, sectoral authorities have a crucial responsibility in identifying,
regulating and monitoring the Organizations of Vital Interest. A consulta­
tion platform between these sectoral authorities (Cyber Security Sectoral
Authorities Platform – CySSAP) should help optimize the management of
information exchanges with Organizations of Vital Interest, also in view of
cross-border dependencies.

3.3.2 Improve protection for international institutions

Belgium is home to many international institutions, including NATO (North
Atlantic Treaty Organization) and institutions of the European Union. The
Belgian Organizations of Vital Interest that support these institutions will
be identified so that appropriate protection can be provided.

In addition, good dialogue and cooperation with the international institutions
in our country is important and necessary to increase the effectiveness of
protection and response to cyberattacks.

3.3.3 Be able to handle incidents with national impact

The National Cyber Emergency Plan continues to be operationalized.
Through optimal cooperation between the CCB’s national Computer
Emergency Response Team (CERT.be), the Integrated Police Services and
the National Crisis Centre (NCCN), incidents are dealt with quickly and
effectively and legal investigations are immediately integrated.

Incidents with a national impact are escalated to the appropriate level
and acted upon by ad hoc Rapid Reaction Teams where other services
and partners are also efficiently engaged.


-----

3.3.4 Exercises

The Belgian Cyber Emergency Plan was approved by the Council of Min­
isters in 2017 and describes the procedures to be followed by the various
services in the event of a cyber incident. This plan should be evaluated each
year and adjusted as needed. The CCB plays a coordinating role in this.
Holding regular exercises is important for building resilience to incidents
and to test the effectiveness of the Emergency Plan. The lessons learned
from these exercises can then inform the annual reviews of this plan.

Therefore, the participation of Belgian security forces, other government
departments and Organizations of Vital Interest in both international and
national exercises is highly desirable. The coordination of Belgian partici­
pation in such exercises is ensured by consultation between the CCB, FPS
Foreign Affairs, NCCN and the Ministry of Defence.

3.4 Responding to cyber threats

Addressing increasing cybercrime and government threats requires in­
vestment in the rapid identification of, and response to, danger to our
population, to our economy, or to Organizations of Vital Interest.

3.4.1 Mapping the international threats

The Continuous monitoring and assessment of international cyber threats
is critical to reducing the risk of cyberattacks and incidents. It is the first
step of any defence.

The cyber intentions and capabilities of “actors” against our essential and
vital interests must be identified and the potential sources of threats must
be monitored. In order to protect our computer networks, the evolution
of their technical tactics, techniques and procedures must be known as
much as possible and our means of protection relative to them must be
evaluated..

3.4.2 Disrupting criminal cyber infrastructure

Cybercriminals specialize and reuse the attack techniques and software
circulating on the Dark Web. To carry out their high-tech or large-scale
cyberattacks and also to remain anonymous, they use proprietary as well
as compromised computer systems on the internet.


-----

Disrupting this criminal cyber infrastructure partially undermines the crim­
inals’ business model. This can include:

-  Detecting and neutralizing the infrastructure through legal means

-  Detecting compromised systems and notifying the owner

-  Protecting public and corporate communications from known malicious
infrastructure

-  Sharing information nationally and internationally

It requires all intelligence and security agencies to work closely together.

3.4.3 Develop an appropriate repressive capacity

To reduce Belgium’s vulnerability in the cyber domain, preventive measures
are crucial. Well-informed and resilient citizens, businesses and governments
will ward off and discourage future cybercriminals. The influx of criminal
cases decreases with each investment in prevention. As a result, the police
and the judiciary will no longer have to deal only with symptoms, but must
be able to tackle the root causes.

At the same time, it is clear that cybercrime will continue. An effective and
competent repressive shutting-down mechanism is therefore still needed
to optimally address the residual category of computer crimes commit­
ted. Perpetrators of computer crime must be identified and caught, and
evidence of the part they play must be gathered. As stated above, the
criminal infrastructure must be mapped out and dismantled, illegal assets
must be seized and confiscated, and the suspects must be prosecuted and
properly punished. Since cybercriminals mainly operate in an international
context, this also requires coordination with other countries affected.

This strategic plan’s ambition is to support the development of an appropri­
ate repressive capacity. Such repressive capacity must be able to adequately
and competently detect, investigate, prosecute, and sanction cybercrime.

The objective here is first of all to build up the appropriate capacity and
expertise at all levels of the integrated police (both the local police and
the decentralised and central services of the federal police) so that the
mapping-out and investigation capacities expected of each level can be
effectively and quickly realised in a digital environment.

The intention is subsequently to ensure that the prosecutor’s offices and

h f ll d l d d d h ffi


-----

investigating judges and sitting magistrates with an interest in cybersecurity
and cybercrime and who are following an aligned training path for this
purpose. These magistrates are supported by specialized internal networks
within which they can exchange and discuss experiences, problems and
best practices. The investigation and prosecution activities of the judiciary
must be guided by an extensive policy on cyber crime.

3.4.4 Develop an appropriate defence capability

The internet is increasingly becoming a target and a tool in international
conflicts.

All NATO heads of state and government have declared that cyberspace
should be considered a new operational domain (in addition to the classic
land, air and maritime domains) in which military and intelligence opera­
tions can be conducted.

Adversaries use every opportunity in and across cyberspace to strengthen
their information position, to disrupt our civilian and military systems, and
to undermine confidence in the information that supports our operations.
The further expansion of cyber capabilities within the General Information
and Security Service (ADIV/SGRS) and the Ministry of Defence is therefore
one of the priorities in the policy paper of the Minister of Defence and in
the Strategic Plan of Defence. It should also eventually lead to the creation
of a fifth component that will focus specifically on the cyber threat. The
objective is twofold: a better understanding of and protection against the
cyber threat, and a better understanding of the opportunities. The cyber
strategy of the Ministry of Defence sets out these objectives in concrete
terms. Moreover, this component will have an important dual character in
support of society in case of (hybrid) crises.

3.4.5 Attribution

Identifying and attributing a cyberattack to a particular person, group or
state plays an increasingly important role in world politics. The discussion
around the need and possible international coordination of the attribution
of a cyberattack is high on the international agenda of NATO, EU and UN,
among others. Attribution, however, remains a political and sovereign
decision with a major impact on foreign policy. A possible attribution will
therefore be thoroughly analyzed and decided through a coordinated
national procedure. For this, capacity building is crucial.


-----

3.5 Improve public, private and academic ­collaborations

In the prevention, reduction, treatment and monitoring of cyber threats
and incidents, cooperation between the stakeholders involved, both at
the national and international level, is a key to success.

3.5.1 Promote coordination and collaboration

Each stakeholder that plays a role in Belgium’s cybersecurity has its own
specific responsibilities. However, it is crucial to coordinate all initiatives
centrally. The CCB, as the national authority, is responsible for coordination
between the stakeholders involved: including public services but also the
private and scientific sector.

Cybersecurity knowledge and the evolution of the cyber threat will be
shared through existing or new platforms between the relevant security
agencies, public authorities, and the private and academic sectors. Regular
meetings allow experts to share information and experiences directly and
to network with each other. The open and structural dialogue should allow
the CCB to better understand the most urgent needs.

3.5.2 Supporting the Cyber Security Coalition

The Cyber Security Coalition is a unique partnership in which players from
academia, public agencies and the private sector join forces in the fight
against cybercrime. By 2020, 100 organizations from the three sectors were
already active members, contributing to the coalition’s mission and goals.

The coalition provides a response to the urgent need for cross-sector
collaboration, by:

-  sharing knowledge and experience

-  initiating, organizing and coordinating concrete cross-sector initiatives

-  raising awareness among citizens and organizations

-  promoting the development of expertise

-  and making recommendations for more effective policies and regulations

The government, and the CCB in particular, will actively support the Cyber
Security Coalition and participate in its activities.


-----

3.6 A clear international commitment

The cyber threat is global and cannot be addressed solely at the national
level. International cooperation is an important pillar of a decisive national
cybersecurity policy. Cybersecurity requires a holistic perspective that em­
ploys the various vectors of international cooperation (diplomatic, military,
economic, etc.). It is therefore important that the various authorities involved,
in close consultation and in their separate powers, work closely together.

Belgium supports the legislative and diplomatic role of the EU, NATO and
other relevant international organizations in their contribution to an open,
free and secure cyber environment and will actively participate whenev­
er possible. Particular attention goes to the agency for cybersecurity in
Europe, ENISA. Since its inception in 2004, ENISA has been developing
an overall culture and awareness for network and information security in
the EU. The CCB will continue to represent Belgium in the various bodies
and platforms of ENISA.

Bilateral cooperation between all relevant authorities in Belgium and
their foreign counterparts also optimizes international cooperation and
can strengthen trust.


-----

-----

### 4. Responsibilities

Collaboration and the assumption of shared responsibility are crucial for
developing effective cybersecurity. Defending the digital environment in
Belgium against (emerging) threats is not just the government’s responsi­
bility. The other stakeholders can also make relevant contributions to the
various goals and related action plans, including citizens, businesses and
Organizations of Vital Interest.

Just as in the real world it is the responsibility of every ICT system owner to
properly secure their system and to manage and use it responsibly. Every
citizen should be informed and aware of the main risks when using ICT
and the internet and should heed the security advice given. Specifically,
this means that every user must both take care of the technical security of
their systems and use these systems in a responsible manner. Companies
and public institutions must protect their environment and understand
their responsibilities if they are victims of a cyberattack.

4.1 The Centre for Cybersecurity Belgium (CCB)

The CCB monitors, coordinates and oversees the implementation of Bel­
gian cybersecurity policy. From an integrated and centralized approach,
it manages the various projects in the field of cybersecurity and ensures
coordination between the services and authorities involved, and the public
authorities and the private or academic sector.

In cooperation with the National Crisis Centre, the CCB ensures crisis
management in cyber incidents. For administrations and public institutions,
the CCB disseminates standards, guidelines and safety norms.

The CCB raises awareness of the main cyber threats and how to protect
against them. Specific programmes with public and private entities should
increase expertise in the cybersecurity domain.

The CCB is also tasked with coordinating Belgian representation in in­
ternational cybersecurity forums, monitoring international commitments
and proposing the national position in this area. It does this with a view to
coherent foreign action in close consultation with the FPS Foreign Affairs
and the Ministry of Defence.


-----

The CCB proposes the Belgian position to the European institutions, among
others regarding certification and labelling of products and services.

4.1.1 CERT.BE

As the national CSIRT (Computer Security Incident Response Team), the
CCB also has an important detecting and alerting role. The Computer
Emergency Response Team (CERT.be), as an operational service of the
CCB, is responsible for detecting, observing and analyzing online security
issues such as cyber threats, vulnerabilities in ICT systems or cyber incidents.
CERT.be will continually inform the population, companies, public services
and Organizations of Vital Interest about these issues. In this sense, CERT.
be is the central hub for exchanging cybersecurity information.

4.2 The Federal Police

The integrated police services, in cooperation with their partners, are
responsible for combating computer crime.

As the first-line police, the local police are the first point of contact for
citizens, businesses and government agencies. In this role, they engage
the specialized services (RCCU/FCCU) when required.
Within the Federal Judicial Police, the Regional Computer Crime Units
(RCCUs) and the Federal Computer Crime Unit (FCCU) are responsible
for the legal handling of ICT crime.

An RCCU is responsible for providing specialized assistance in investiga­
tions in a computerized environment — with mainly a supporting role in
forensic analysis of ICT material (PCs, smartphones) — for cases concerning
all kinds of crime, for both the local police and the Federal Judicial Police
of the district of which it is part. It also deals autonomously with the legal
approach to computer crime files linked to its district operation. Here, the
collection of digital evidence is important, with the aim of tracking down
the perpetrators and bringing them to justice.

As an operational service, the FCCU is part of the Central Directorate for
Combating Serious and Organised Crime. In addition to a forensic support
analysis role, primarily as support for the central services, it is responsible,
on an autonomous basis, for the legal handling of computer crime cases
related to attacks on the ICT infrastructure of critical infrastructures or

l h h l k h b


-----

linked to a district or are cross-district, the FCCU plays a coordinating role.
The FCCU also serves as a national point of contact in the international
approach to cybercrime.

4.3 The Public Prosecutor’s Office

Investigations in general, but also for cybercrime in particular, are con­
ducted in each judicial district under the direction of the competent Public
Prosecutor. The latter gives the integrated police services and, if necessary,
other investigative services the necessary orders to collect evidence and
bring the truth to light. Ultimately, it is the public prosecutor who will
or will not bring the cyber crimes to court. On these matters, the Public
Prosecutor usually has one or more reference cybercrime magistrates who
are primarily responsible for investigating cybercrimes.

The Federal Prosecutor is part of the Public Prosecutor’s Office and is
specifically charged with the exercise of criminal procedure for well-de­
fined crimes (including terrorism, violations of humanitarian law, etc.). The
Federal Prosecutor’s Office may also be asked to take charge of coordi­
nating criminal investigations that cover several jurisdictions or have an
international dimension, in consultation with the Crown Prosecutor. The
Federal Prosecutor has a Cyber Unit that includes federal magistrates who
are particularly focused on the investigation of cyber crimes. These include
complex cybercrimes with a large international dimension, committed by
organized criminal networks using advanced techniques, and threats to
Critical National ICT Infrastructures. Finally, the Federal Prosecutor is also
tasked with promoting international operational cooperation and represents
the Public Prosecutor’s Office at EUROJUST and the European Judicial
Cybercrime Network. If a cybercrime cannot be immediately located in a
well-defined district, the Federal Prosecutor may order the first and most
urgent investigations.

The Cyber Emergency Plan engages the Public Prosecutor’s Office in the
management of cyber incidents and crises.

Criminal policy and the proper overall and coordinated operation of the
Public Prosecutor’s Office is the responsibility of the College of Public
Prosecutors. The latter may issue instructions that are mandatory for all
members of the Public Prosecutor’s Office. They are assisted by national

k d f l d f l


-----

With regard to cybercrime, this is the CYBERCRIME REN, the main coordi­
nation of which is done by the Prosecutor-General’s Office in Antwerp. On
policy questions, the CYBERCRIME REN is the appropriate point of contact.

4.4 Defence

The Ministry of Defence is developing a cyber strategy, policy plan, and
the necessary capabilities to support military and intelligence operations
from, as well as conducted in, the cyber domain. These investments will
enable Belgium to have long-term technical/technological capabilities that
will allow it to protect necessary infrastructure from cyberattacks, and if
necessary, to carry out a counter-attack.

The Ministry of Defence will have a high-tech cyber capability to maintain
its freedom of action in and through cyberspace in military operations.

Additionally, the Ministry of Defence supports national cybersecurity
policy by:

-  Loyally fulfilling the commitments set forth in the National Cyber
Emergency Plan;

-  Engaging its capabilities as needed as a technical expert in support of
specific legal cases or as technical support for specific CERT.be cases;

-  Offering senior expertise level malware analysis to national stakeholders;

-  Integrating relevant cyber threat intelligence into the national cyber
threat intelligence platform;

-  Tracking actors with intentions and capabilities of cyberattacks on
national vital interests and structures;

-  Coordinating, where appropriate in consultation with Foreign Affairs and
the CCB, Belgian participation in international cybersecurity exercises;

-  Making the mil.cert infrastructure available as a backup site for CERT.
be’s Incident Management, in crisis situations where the national in­
frastructure is unavailable;


-----

-  During national crises, deploying its intrusive and offensive capabilities
to respond with a cyberattack of its own to neutralize an attack and
identify its perpetrators.

4.5 The National Crisis Centre (NCCN)

The NCCN, together with the CCB, ensures the organization and coordi­
nation of the Cyber Emergency Plan at the national level. The NCCN and
the CCB are jointly responsible for crisis management.

The management of the direct and indirect societal consequences of a
crisis remains the prerogative of the NCCN, the sectoral authorities, and
the members of the government concerned. The NCCN organizes and
directs communications in the event of a national cyber crisis (see National
Cyber Emergency Plan).

The NCCN’s 24/7 on-call service ensures the availability of CERT.be, which
provides first-line support for national incidents and crises.

The NCCN provides legal and organizational support to sectoral authorities
for the identification of critical infrastructures and Operators of Essential
Services of Essential Services of essential services. It also contributes to the
assessment of cyber risks that may disrupt the operation of Organizations
of Vital Interest or certain events (see Chapter 3).

The NCCN manages the list of Organizations of Vital Interest and is re­
sponsible for coordinating the follow-up on and adaptation of the relevant
regulations.

Finally, the NCCN continuously analyzes key national risks (including cyber
risks) and conducts ad hoc risk analyses on special issues that present an
increased risk, in cooperation with all relevant partners.

4.6 State Security (VSSE)

The mission of the State Security Service (VSSE) is to collect, analyze, and
process intelligence on activities that threaten or could threaten the in­
ternal security of the state, the external security of the state, or the state’s

fi d l


-----

As part of its mission, the VSSE maintains appropriate contacts with
and gathers intelligence from foreign ancillary services, and shares the
information received as much as possible with CERT.be and with other
relevant partners.

4.7 The Federal Public Service Foreign Affairs

The roles of the Federal Public Service Foreign Affairs in terms of cyber­
security are:

-  Acting as an International Single Point of Contact at the diplomatic
level, both bilaterally and within relevant multilateral organizations
(including EU, NATO, OSCE), especially at times of crisis.

-  Determining Belgium’s representation in international negotiations and
dialogues, in consultation with the relevant Belgian authorities.

-  Informing relevant Belgian authorities of pertinent international
evolutions.

-  Defining a position in international dossiers, in agreement with all the
Belgian authorities concerned.

-  Coordinated or uncoordinated international attribution of malicious
cyber activities.

-  Offering its experience to the competent authorities (CCB), as well as
the environment of an international network for observing and analyzing
online security problems, such as cyber threats, vulnerabilities in ICT
systems, or cyber incidents.

4.8 The National Security Administration (NSA)

The National Security Administration is preeminent in the realm of infor­
mation security, albeit the most sensitive data or “classified” information.


-----

The Cybersecurity Strategy in this document addresses four distinct au­
diences. Three of these audiences are also among those targeted by the
National Security Administration:

-  Companies

-  Government Services

-  Organizations of Vital Interest

For companies and government agencies, the NSA is developing a number
of products that allow for better protection of classified information in a
cyber environment. The use of data encryption developed by the NSA can
take the security of classified information in the cyber domain to the next
level, in both the private and public spheres. For example, the national
classified network, the development and organization of use of which still
has to be worked out, will facilitate the secure exchange of information
between public administrations, thus reducing cyber risks.

For certain vital organizations, the NSA can also perform security verifi­
cations (security advice or screening of sensitive occupations). To do so,
it first requires these organizations to go through a risk analysis, threat
analysis and impact analysis and to map out the security measures of their
information systems. This process not only raises awareness of the meas­
ures taken by these organizations in the cyber domain, but also reinforces
these measures.

4.9 The Coordination Unit for Threat Analysis (CUTA)

The responsibilities of the Coordination Unit for Threat Analysis (CUTA)
include assessing the threat of terrorism and extremism. In the event
of cyber threats or incidents that are (potentially) related to terrorist or
extremist groups or ideologically or religiously inspired hacktivists, CUTA
may conduct a threat analysis for the National Crisis Centre in cooperation
with its partner agencies.

4.10 Sectoral authorities

The NIS Act of 7 April 2019 (establishing a framework for the security of
network and information systems of general interest for public safety)

d h l l f l f h l


-----

authorities in Belgium are each responsible for the identification, standard­
ization and inspections of Operators of Essential Services in their sector.
The CCB and National Crisis Centre have an important advisory role in this.
The NIS Act identifies six different sectors for Operators of Essential Ser­
vices — Energy, Transportation, Finance, Digital Infrastructure, Healthcare,
and Drinking Water — alongside digital services such as cloud computing
services, online search engines, and online marketplaces.

4.11 The Belgian Institute for Postal Services and Tele­

communications (BIPT)

The Belgian Institute for Postal Services and Telecommunications (BIPT)
monitors the security of the electronic communications networks and
services of telecom operators. For example, BIPT monitors operators’
compliance with both legislation (e.g. risk analyses and related security
measures) and its decisions, handles security incident reports (including
incidents that constitute a personal data breach, in conjunction with the
Data Protection Authority, APD-GBA), and has various powers to do its job
(including issuing binding instructions to an operator). It also has a Crisis
Response Team in case of the aforementioned incidents.

BIPT is also the sectoral authority and inspection service for the digital
infrastructure sector (Internet Exchange Points, providers of DNS services
and registries of top-level domain names) under the NIS Act and for the
electronic communications and digital infrastructure sectors under the
“Critical Infrastructures” Act.

Furthermore, BIPT is in charge of monitoring the application of the legal
provisions transposing the Radio Equipment Directive, or RED (2014/53/
EU), concerning products containing a radio functionality.

4.12 Federal Public Service Economy

The Federal Public Service Economy, SMEs, Self-Employed and Energy
has the task of creating the conditions for a competitive, sustainable and
balanced functioning of the goods and services market in Belgium. Given
the increasing digitalization of our society and businesses, the FPS Economy
is involved in several areas of cybersecurity.

h l d f h d fi d d d


-----

supervision of the energy and digital service provider sectors under the
NIS Act.
Victims of different types of cyber scams can report cyber fraud to Meld­
punt/Point de contact, a service of the FPS Economy, which shares relevant
data around these reports with the CCB and refers victims of cybercrime
to the police.

Given the importance of SMEs to the Belgian economy, the FPS Economy
will work more closely with the CCB to increase the cybersecurity of this
group of companies.

4.13 Governance framework and consultation platforms

In addition to their own various responsibilities, collaboration among the
stakeholders involved is a key factor in preventing, reducing, handling and
monitoring cyber threats and incidents. Cybersecurity knowledge and the
evolution of the cyber threat is shared between the relevant security agen­
cies, public authorities, and the private and academic sectors via existing
or new platforms. Regular meetings allow experts to share information and
experiences in direct contact and to network with each other.

In Platform 4 Cyber of the Coordination Committee on Intelligence and
Security (CCIV/CCRS), the intelligence and security services discuss general
cybersecurity policies.

Consultation between the supervisory authorities of Organizations of Vital
Interest takes place via the Cyber Security Sectoral Authority Platform
(CySSAP).

The Cybercrime Expertise Network (REN) brings together experts from the
public services in the area of cybercrime, for periodic consultation. This is
coordinated by the General Prosecutor’s Office in Antwerp.

The CSI/DPO platform (les Conseillers en Sécurité de l’Information/Data
Protection Officers) brings together the security advisors and data pro­
tection officers of each government department. A specific meeting on
cyber issues is organised every quarter as part of CCB/CERT’s Quarterly
Cyber Threat Report.


-----

SIT (Synergy IT) is the platform for sharing knowledge and consulting
between IT managers from all federal public services (Federal Public Ser­
vices, public social security institutions and public utility Institutions). The
SIT meets on a monthly basis, with the goal of initiating and following up
on joint IT initiatives, both government contracts and projects, as well as
providing technical input on G-Cloud initiatives.

The development of formal Belgian positions in international discussions
takes place through the proper channels of FPS Foreign Affairs.

The Interministerial Economic Commission (IEC) is an independent, flexible,
technical-administrative coordination mechanism at the FPS Economy,
SMEs, Self-Employed and Energy that can assist in defining and aligning
the administrative positions of the federal and federated authorities in
national, European and international dossiers.

IIn the ISP think tank, the CCB regularly consults with the largest internet
service providers in Belgium regarding concrete measures and projects
that can increase cybersecurity for Belgian citizens and companies.

The quarterly cyber threat reports, organized by the CCB and CERT.be,
bring together several of these consultation platforms and inform all
participants and Organizations of Vital Interest about the active threats.

The Cyber Security Coalition Belgium regularly brings together experts
in the domain from the private, academic and public communities. This is
done during experience-sharing events and in focus groups to discuss best
practices, experiences or initiatives about various topics (cloud security,
NIS, crypto, etc.)


-----

-----

-----

### 5. Resources

To execute the stated vision and the six strategic objectives of this ambi­
tious strategy, significant but essential additional investments are required.
A clear commitment from the Belgian government to these resources
is thus the cornerstone of this renewed national cybersecurity strategy.
Indeed, increased cyber capacity is crucial to effectively and feasibly arm
our economy, government services and Organizations of Vital Interest
against ever-increasing cyber threats.

Investments in cybersecurity also have a direct and clear economic impact.
If the government succeeds in inspiring and ensuring trust in “digital life”,
businesses and citizens will be more comfortable investing in more digital
applications. This will boost productivity and economic growth in our
country, and cyberattacks will be even more avoidable.

With this concrete investment commitment, Belgium is following the
significant initiatives in neighbouring countries. In addition, the invest­
ments are referred to generate important confidence about the realistic
implementation of our objectives, especially among our European and
international partners. After all, many of them have an important office
or representation in our country.

The mission to make Belgium one of Europe’s least vulnerable countries
in the cyber domain by 2025 is a collective effort. In addition to the CCB,
other government departments, the intelligence and security services,
as well as the business community, the Organizations of Vital Interest
themselves, academia, and citizens each have individual responsibilities
to achieve the ambitious goals set.

The federal government has an important responsibility in this, to set the
direction but also to set the example. It will therefore build a credible
cyber capability that can keep pace with other Belgian actors and seek to
connect to the capabilities of our neighbouring countries.


-----

-----

-----

Prepress and printing
Central printing office of the Chamber of Representatives

Brussels, May 2021

Responsible editor
Center for Cybersecurity Belgium
M. De Bruycker, Director
Rue de la Loi, 18
1000 Brussels
D/2021/14828/004


-----

