###### Navy, Army, and Air Force


###### Restructuring of the Armed Forces


###### Ministry


###### Navy, Restructuring Army, and of the Armed Air Force Forces

 Reorganization Military of the national Service industry of defense

# National Strategy of Defense


-----

#### Peace and security for Brazil.

###### www.defesa.gov.br

1st edition


-----

### Summary

Decree no. 6703 04
Rationale 05

**I – Systematic Formulation** **07**
Introduction 08
National Strategy of Defense and National Strategy of Development 08
Nature and scope of the National Strategy of Defense 09
National Strategy of Defense’s guidelines 11
Brazilian Navy: the hierarchy of the strategic and tactical objectives 20
Brazilian Army: the imperatives of flexibility and elasticity 23
Brazilian Air Force: guiding surveillance, air superiority, focused combat, air strategic combat  28
The strategic sectors: cybernetics, space and nuclear 32
Reorganization of the national defense industry:
independent technological development 34
Mandatory Military Service: republican leveling and national mobilization 37
Conclusion 39

**II - Implementation Measures** **41**
Context 42
Hypotheses of Employment (HE) 46
Joint employment of the Armed Forces fulfilling the HE 46
Fundamentals 47
The structuring of the Armed Forces 48
Science, Technology and Innovation (ST&I) 52
Defense Industry 54
Defense Intelligence 55
Strategic Actions 55
Science and Technology 55
Human Resources 57
Education 58
Mobilization 59
Logistics 60
Defense Industry 60
Command and Control 61
Training 61
Defense Intelligence 62
Doctrine 62
Peacekeeping Operations 62
Infrastructure 63
Law and Order Enforcement 64
Regional Stability 64
International Participation 65
National Security 65
Final Provisions 66


-----

##### Decree no. 6703, of December 18, 2008


The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC, pursuant to his powers assigned by Art. 84, subsection VI, section “a” of the Constitution, and compliant to the provisions of the Decree
dated September 6, 2007, which establishes a Ministerial Committee to Design the
National Strategy of Defense,

DECREES:

Art. 1st Approves the National Strategy of Defense attached to this Decree.

Art. 2nd The bodies and agencies of the federal public administration should consider, in
their planning efforts, actions that contribute to strengthen the National Defense.

Art. 3rd This Decree shall enter into force on the date of its publication.

Brasília, December 18, 2008; 187th year of the Independence and 120th year of the
Republic.

###### LUIZ INÁCIO LULA DA SILVA
Nelson Jobim
Roberto Mangabeira Unger


-----

##### Rationale


Brasília, December 17, 2008.

Your Excellency the President of the Republic,

1. We hereby submit to the highest consideration of Your Excellency the attached
proposal the National Strategy of Defense, which is a theme of interest to all sectors of
the Brazilian society, based on the foundations, objectives and principles set forth in the
Federal Constitution.

2. Brazil, from its political and economic stability, enjoys a distinguished position in the
international scenario, which requires a new posture in terms of Defense, to be consolidated
by means of the engagement of the Brazilian people. The society will be urged to improve
the submitted proposals through their democratic system representatives, and through
their direct participation in the debates.

3. The current proposal of a National Strategy of Defense fulfills Your Excellency’s
determination expressed in Presidential Decree of September 6, 2007, that established a
Ministerial Committee to design it, chaired by the Minister of Defense, coordinated by the
Minister-in-Chief of the Secretariat for Strategic Affairs and consisting of the Minister of
Planning, Budget and Management, the Minister of Finance, and the Minister of Science
and Technology, assisted by the Navy, Army and Air Force Commanders.

4. Aiming to debate this theme and due to the fact that its content is turned to the
accomplishment of the State’s interests and the society’s interests as a whole, the
Committee consulted experts, representatives of various public and private agencies, as
well as knowledgeable citizens in the area of Defense, in addition to the Commanders of
the three branches of the Armed Forces and their key advisors.

5. The Plan focuses on middle and long term strategic actions, and aims at modernizing
the national defense structure, acting upon three structuring axes: reorganization of
the Armed Forces, the restructuring of the Brazilian defense industry, and the troop
requirements policy for the Armed Forces.

6. The reorganization of the Armed Forces requires the redefinition of the role of the
Ministry of Defense and the listing of strategic guidelines related to each Military branch,
specifying the relations that should prevail among them. Along with these guidelines, the
role of the following three decisive sectors for national defense is discussed: cybernetics,
space and nuclear.


-----

7. The restructuring of the Brazilian defense industry is intended to ensure that the
equipment needs of the Armed Forces are based on technologies that are domestically
mastered.

8. Finally, it guides the relationship of the society and their Armed Forces, and discusses
the requirements of the military troops and their consequences on the future of the
Mandatory Military Service. The purpose is to strive so that the Armed Forces may reflect
the Nation itself in their personnel. The Mandatory Military Service should, therefore, act
as a republican space in which the Nation could stand above the social layers.

9. Therefore, Mr. President, this initiative of Your Excellency’s Government, i.e., of
inserting defense issues into the national agenda and designing a long term planning
for the defense of the country is an unprecedented fact in the Brazilian State. This
establishes a new step in the treatment of this relevant theme, intimately linked to the
national development. It reaffirms the commitment of all of us, Brazilian citizens, civilians
and military, to the highest values of sovereignty, to the integrity of our national heritage,
territory and unity, within the comprehensive context of a democratic plenitude and
absolute respect for our neighbors, with whom we sustain and will sustain a growingly
solid relation of friendship and cooperation.

Respectfully,

**NELSON A. JOBIM** **ROBERTO MANGABEIRA UNGER**
Minister of Defense Minister Head of the Secretariat for

Strategic Affairs of the Presidency

Introducción


-----

-----

##### Introduction


Brazil is a peaceful country, by tradition and conviction. It lives in peace with its
neighbors. It runs its international affairs, among other things, adopting the
constitutional principles of non-intervention, defense of peace and peaceful resolution
of conflicts. This pacifist trait is part of the national identity, and a value that should
be preserved by the Brazilian people.

Brazil – a developing country – shall rise to the first stage in the world neither
promoting hegemony nor domination. The Brazilian people are not willing to exert their
power on other nations. They want Brazil to grow without reigning upon others.

This is perhaps the reason why Brazil has never conducted a wide discussion about
its own defense affairs throughout its history. Periodically, governments used to
authorize the acquisition or production of new defense products, and introduced
specific reforms in the Armed Forces. However, a national strategy of defense has
never been proposed to systematically guide the reorganization and reorientation of
the Armed Forces; the organization of the defense industry in order to ensure the
operational autonomy of the three service branches: the Navy, the Army and the Air
Force; and the policies for the composition of their troops, moreover reconsidering
the Mandatory Military Service.

However, if Brazil is willing to reach its deserved spot in the world, it will have to
be prepared to defend itself not only from aggressions, but equally from threats.
Intimidation overrides good faith in the world where we live. Nothing substitutes
the engagement of the Brazilian people in the debate and construction of their
own defense.

##### National Strategy of Defense and National Strategy of Development

1. The national strategy of defense is inseparable from the national strategy of
development. The latter drives the former. The former provides shielding to the latter.
Each one reinforces the other’s reasons. In both cases, “nationality” emerges and
the nation is built. Capable of defending itself, Brazil will be in a position to say no
when it has to say no. It will be able to build its own development model.

2. It is difficult – and necessary – for a country that has dealt very little with war
to convince itself about the need to defend in order to build itself. Although they


##### National Strategy of Defense and National Strategy of Development


-----

are fruitful and even indispensable, the arguments invoking the usefulness of both
technology and defense knowledge for the development of a country are not enough.
The resources demanded by defense require the transformation of consciences so
that it becomes a defense strategy for Brazil.

3. It is difficult – and necessary – for the Armed Forces of such a peaceful country
like Brazil to keep, amidst peace, the encouragement to be ready for combat and to
develop the habit of transformation in favor of this state of readiness.

Will to change; this is what the nation currently requires from its sailors, soldiers and
pilots. It is not only a matter of funding and equipping the Armed Forces. It has to do
with having the Armed Forces transformed to better defend Brazil.

4. A strong defense project favors a strong development project. A strong development
project is guided by the following principles, whatever its remaining guidelines are:

a) National independence achieved by the mobilization of physical, economic
and human resources to invest in the country’s production potential. Taking
advantage of foreign savings without depending on them;

b) National independence achieved by an autonomous technological capacity
building, including the spatial, cybernetic and nuclear strategic sectors. Whoever
does not master critical technologies is neither independent for defense nor for
development; and

c) National independence ensured by the democratization of educational and
economic opportunities, and by the opportunities to extend public participation
in the decision-making processes of the political and economic life of a country.
Brazil will not be independent until part of the population lacks the appropriate
conditions to learn, work and produce.

##### Nature and scope of the National Strategy of Defense

1. The National Strategy of Defense is the link between the concept and the
national independence policy, on the one hand, and the Armed Forces to protect
this independence, on the other hand. It deals with political and institutional issues
that are decisive for the defense of the country, such as the objectives of its “great
strategy” and the means to cause the nation to take part in the defense issues. It also
discusses typical military problems derived from the influence of this “great strategy”


##### Nature and scope of the National Strategy of Defense


-----

in the guidance and in the operational practices of the three service branches.

The National Strategy of Defense will be complemented by plans for peace and war,
designed to cope with the different hypotheses of employment.

2. The National Strategy of Defense is organized around three structuring axes.

The first structuring axis deals with how the Armed Forces should be organized
and guided to better perform their constitutional mandate and their assignments
in situations of both peace and war. Strategic guidelines related to each one of the
branches are listed, and the relations that should prevail among them are specified. The
way of transforming such guidelines into operational practices and capacity building
is described, and the technological timeline necessary to ensure their achievement
is proposed.

The analysis of the hypotheses of employment of the Armed Forces – to protect the
Brazilian air space, the territory and the jurisdictional waters – allows providing more
precise focus to the strategic guidelines. No hypothesis of employment analysis
should, however, disregard the future threats. This is exactly why the strategic
guidelines and the operational capacity building should transcend the immediate
horizon that current experience and knowledge enable us to unveil.

In addition to the constitutional mandate, the assignments, the culture, custums and
competencies typical of each branch of the Armed Forces, and the way they should
be organized into an integrated defense strategy, the role of the three decisive sectors
for the national defense is discussed: cybernetics, space and nuclear. The way how
the three service branches should operate networked – linked one to each other
and to the surveillance of the Brazilian territory, air space and jurisdictional waters –
is described.

The second restructuring axis refers to the reorganization of the defense industry,
in order to ensure that the equipment needs of the Armed Forces are met and be
based on technologies that are domestically mastered.

The third structuring axis discusses the composition of the Armed Forces’s troops
and, consequently, about the future of the Mandatory Military Service. Its purpose is
to strive so that the Armed Forces may reflect the nation itself in their personnel, so
that they do not become a part of the Nation that is paid to struggle on the account
of and to the benefit of the other parties. The Mandatory Military Service should,
therefore, operate as a republican space in which the Nation could stand above the
social layers.


-----

##### National Strategy of Defense’s guidelines


The National Strategy of Defense is based on the following guidelines.

1. To dissuade the concentration of hostile forces in the terrestrial borders, in the
limits of the Brazilian jurisdictional waters, and prevent them from using the national
air space.

In order to dissuade, one needs to be prepared to combat. Technology will never be an
alternative to combat, no matter how advanced it is. It will always be a combat tool.

2. To organize the Armed Forces under the aegis of the monitoring/control, mobility
and presence trinomial.

This triple imperative is applicable to each branch, as long as the suitable adjustments
are made. From this trinomial results the definition of the operating capacity of
each branch.

3. To develop the ability to monitor and control the Brazilian air space, the territory
and the jurisdictional waters.

This development will happen from the adoption of land, sea, air and space monitoring
technologies that shall be fully and unconditionally mastered domestically.

4. To develop the capacity of promptly responding to any threat or aggression backed
by the capacity to monitor/control: the strategic mobility.

The strategic mobility – seen as the skill to quickly reach the operation theater –
reinforced by the tactical mobility – seen as the skill to move within this theater – is the
priority complement to monitoring/control, and one of the bases of combat power,
requiring the Armed Forces to act more than jointly, rather in a unified manner.

The mobility requirement is of utmost importance, given the vastness of the space
to be defended, and the shortness of means to do it. The effort of being present,
especially along the terrestrial borders and in the most strategic stretches of the
coastline, has intrinsic limitations. It is mobility that will allow overcoming the harmful
effects of these limitations.

5. To deepen the link between technological and operational aspects of mobility,
under the discipline of well-defined objectives.


-----

Mobility depends on the appropriate land, sea and aerial means and on the ways to
combine them. It also depends on the operational capacity building that shall allows
taking the most out of the potential of mobility technologies.

The link between the technological and operational aspects of mobility has to be
carried out in order to reach well-defined objectives. There is one objective, among
these, that keeps an especially close relationship to mobility: the capacity to alternate
the concentration and deconcentration of forces aiming to dissuade and combat
the threat.

6. To strengthen three strategically important sectors: cybernetics, space and nuclear.

This process of strengthening will ensure the fulfillment of the concept of flexibility.

As a result of their own nature, these sectors transcend the border line between
development and defense, between the civilian and the military.

Both space and cybernetics sectors will, together, enable that the capacity to see
one’s own country do not depend on foreign technology, and that the Armed Forces,
together, can network supported by a monitoring system also space-based.

Brazil is committed – as per the Federal Constitution and the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons – to the strictly peaceful use of nuclear energy.
However, Brazil also asserts its strategic need to develop and master nuclear
technology. The country needs to ensure the balance and the versatility of its
energy matrix and advance in areas such as agriculture and health, which may
benefit from nuclear energy technology. And carry out, among other initiatives that
require technological independence in terms of nuclear energy, the nuclear-propelled
submarine project.

7. To unify the operations of the three branches of the Armed Forces, far beyond the
limits imposed by joint exercise protocols.

The main instruments of this unification will be the Ministry of Defense and the Defense
Staff, to be reorganized into a Joint Staff. They should gain broader dimension and
more comprehensive responsibilities.

The Minister of Defense will fully perform all the direction of the Armed Forces, those
the Constitution and the Laws do not explicitly assign to the President.

The subordination of the Armed Forces to the constitutional political power is a basic
premise of the republican regime and a guarantee of the Nation’s integrity.


-----

The Secretaries of the Ministry of Defense will be freely chosen by the Minister
among Brazilian citizens, military officers of the three service branches and civilians,
observing the peculiarities and functions of each Secretariat. The initiatives to
compose staffs of civilian specialists in defense will promote a future increase in
the access of civilians to top positions in the Ministry of Defense. All contrary legal
provisions will be revoked.

The Joint Staff will be headed by a top ranked general officer, and will include the
Chiefs of Staff of each branche of the Armed Forces. It will be directly subordinate
to the Minister of Defense. It will build initiatives that will materialize the thesis of
doctrinaire, strategic and operational unification, and will count on a permanent
structure that will allow it to accomplish this task.

The Navy, the Army and the Air Force will have each one a Commander appointed
by the Minister of Defense and nominated by the President. Each service branch’s
Commander, within the scope of their assignments, shall perform the direction
and management tasks of the respective branch, shall propose its policies
and doctrines and prepare its operational and support means to fulfill their
constitutional mandates.

The Staffs of each service branch, subordinated to their Commanders, will be
the strategic formulation agents of in each of them, under the guidance of their
respective Commander.

8. Reposition the personnel of the Armed Forces.

The main Army units are deployed in Southeast and South Brazil. The Navy fleet
concentrates in the Rio de Janeiro city. Almost all of the Air Force technological
premises are located in São José dos Campos, São Paulo. The most critical
defense concerns are, however, in the North, West and in the South Atlantic
regions.

Without ignoring the need to defend the largest demographical concentrations and
the largest industrial centers of the country, the Navy shall be more intensely present
in the region of the Amazon River mouth, and in the large Amazon and ParaguaiParaná river basins. The Army shall deploy its strategic reserves at the central region
of the country, from where troops can be moved towards any direction. The Army
shall also concentrate their regional reserves in the respective areas, in order to
make it possible to provide an immediate response to either a crisis or an armed
conflict situation.


-----

For the same reasons that require the creation of the Joint Staff, Naval Districts
or Regional Commands of each service branch will have common jurisdiction
areas, except in case of impeding specific or local circumstances. General Officers
commanding, due to their respective branch a Naval District or a Regional Command
shall gather regularly, along with their main advisors, in order to ensure the operational
unity of the Armed Forces in that specific area. In each area shall be structured a
Regional Joint Staff, which will be activated to carry out and to update the operational
planning for the area, starting during peacetime.

9. To enhance the presence of Army, Navy and Air Force units in the border areas.

It should be made clear that, given the continental dimensions of the national territory,
presence may not mean omnipresence. A presence gains effectiveness thanks to its
relation with monitoring/control and mobility.

In the terrestrial borders and in Brazilian jurisdictional waters, the Army, the Navy
and the Air Force units perform, above all, vigilance tasks. While fulfilling these
tasks, the units just gain their full meaningfulness as they make up the integrated
monitoring/control system, also done from space. At the same time, these units
reinforce themselves as instruments of defense by means of their links with the
tactical and strategic reserves. The sentinels alert. The reserves forces respond and
operate. And the efficacy in employing regional tactical and strategic reserve forces
is proportional to their ability to meet the mobility requirements.

10. Prioritize the Amazon region.

The Amazon region represents one of the most important points of focus for defense
purposes. The defense of the Amazon region requires the progress of a sustainable
development project and also involves the trinomial of monitoring/control, mobility
and presence.

Brazil will be watchful to the unconditional reaffirmation of its sovereignty upon the
Brazilian Amazon region. It will repudiate, by means of actions of development and
defense, any attempt of external imposition on its decisions regarding the preservation,
development and defense of the Amazon region. It will not allow organizations or
individuals to serve as instruments for alien interests – political or economic – willing
to weaken the Brazilian sovereignty. It is Brazil that takes care of the Brazilian Amazon
region, at the service of mankind and at its own service.

11. To develop logistic capacity, in order to strengthen mobility, moreover in the
Amazon region.


-----

This is so important to have transport, command and control structures capable of
operating under a wide variety of circumstances, including the exceptional conditions
imposed by an armed conflict.

12. To develop the concept of flexibility in combat to meet the requirements of
monitoring/control, mobility and presence.

This will require – especially from the Ground Force – that the conventional forces
develop some of the attributes assigned to non-conventional forces.

The Armed Forces with such attributes will be the only ones capable of operating in
the vast spectrum of circumstances that the future might bring.

The convenience of ensuring that conventional forces do acquire attributes usually
associated to non-conventional forces may sound more evident in the Amazon forest
environment. These equally apply, however, to other areas of the country. This is not
an adaptation to localized geographical specificities. This is a response to a general
strategic vocation.

13. To develop the repertoire of practices and operational qualification of combatants
to meet the requirements of monitoring/control, mobility and presence.

Each man or woman serving the Armed Forces has to have three sets of means and skills.

Firstly, each combatant should have the means and skills to operate in networks,
not only with other combatants and troops of his own branch, but also with
combatants and troops of the other branches. Communication technologies,
including vehicles that monitor the surface of the earth and the sea from space
should be seen as reinforcement instruments for defense and combat initiatives. This
is the meaning of the monitoring and control requirement and its relationship with the
requirements of mobility and presence.

Secondly, each combatant should have for use technologies and knowledge that
allows the radicalization, in any theater of operations – terrestrial or naval – of the
imperative of mobility. It is to this imperative – combined with the capacity of combat
– that should serve the platforms and weapon systems available to combatants.

Thirdly, each combatant should be trained to approach combat in a way to attenuate
the traditional and rigid forms of control and command, on behalf of flexibility,
adaptability, audacity and surprise in the battle field. This combatant will be, at the
same time, a commanded individual who knows how to obey, to take the initiative
in the absence of specific orders, and to guide himself amidst the uncertainties and


-----

startles during the combat, as well as a source of initiatives, capable of adapting his
orders to the reality of the dynamic situation he is dealing with.

The world sees a rise in the style of industrial production marked by the attenuation
of contrasts between the planning and running activities, and by the growing relative
importance of strict expertise in the activities to be performed. This style finds a
counterpart in the way of making war, more and more characterized by extreme
flexibility. The ultimate consequence of this trajectory is the minimization of the
existing contrast between conventional and non-conventional forces, not in terms of
the weapons each force might use, but in terms of the radical approach adopted by
both in terms of the concept of flexibility.

14. To promote, on Brazilian militaries, the joining of the attributes and skills required
by the concept of flexibility.

The Brazilian military needs skills and roughness. They need to master the
technologies and the operational practices required by the concept of flexibility. They
should identify themselves with the country’s demanding or extreme geographical
peculiarities and characteristics. This is the only way the concept of flexibility will be
carried out in practice taking into account the characteristics of the national territory
and the geographical and geopolitical situation of Brazil.

15. To review the troop composition of the three service branches, from the perspective
of a human resource employment optimization policy, in order to properly design
them to meet the provisions of the National Strategy of Defense.

16. To structure the strategic potential in terms of capacities.

It is important to organize the Armed Forces in terms of capacities, and not specific
enemies. Presently, Brazil does not have any enemies. In order not to have them in
the future, it is necessary to keep peace and be prepared for war.

17. To prepare troops to fulfill law and order enforcement missions, under the terms
of the Federal Constitution.

The country watches to prevent the Armed Forces from performing police functions.
Performing internal law and order enforcement operations is part of the constitutional
responsibilities of the Armed Forces, but only when the constituted powers do not
manage to preserve the homeland peace, and when it is required by one of the Heads of
the three Constitutional Powers. Legitimating these responsibilities presumes, therefore,
a legislation to rule and backs the specific conditions and the federative proceedings
that should trigger out these operations, safeguarding their participants.


-----

18. To encourage the integration of South America.

This integration not only will contribute to the defense of Brazil, but it will also allow
the country to promote regional military cooperation and the integration of the
defense industrial bases. It will dissipate the spectrum of possible conflict situations
in the region. Along with all the other countries, a move is being made towards
the construction of a South-American unit. The South American Defense Council,
under discussion in the region, will establish a consultative mechanism that will allow
preventing conflict situations and promoting regional military cooperation and the
integration of the defense industrial bases, in which no country external to the region
should participate.

19. To prepare the Armed Forces to perform growing responsibilities in peacekeeping
operations.

In such operations, the Armed Forces will act under the guidance of the United Nations,
or in support to the initiative of multilateral organizations from the region, since the
strengthening of a collective security system is beneficial to world peace and to the
national defense.

20. To expand the country’s capacity to meet international commitments in terms of
search and rescue.

It is a priority task to the country the improvement of the existing means and training
of the staff involved in search and rescue activities in the national territory, Brazilian
jurisdictional waters, the areas that Brazil is accountable for, as a result of international
commitments.

21. To develop the potential of military and national mobilization to assure the
dissuasive and operational capacity of the Armed Forces.

By facing an occasional degeneration of the international scenario, Brazil and its
Armed Forces should be ready to take measures to protect the territory, the sea
lanes of trade, oil platforms, and the national air space. The Armed Forces should
also be able to quickly increase the human and material resources available for
defense. The imperative of elasticity is expressed in terms of the national and military
mobilization capacity.

When stating the national mobilization, the Executive Power will delimit the area in
which this will take place and will also specify the necessary measures to be carried
out, such as the power to take control of material resources, including the means
of transport that are necessary for defense actions, in accordance with the National


-----

Mobilization Law. Military mobilization demands the organization of a reserve force,
which can be mobilized under such circumstances. It then reports back to the issue
of the future of the Mandatory Military Service.

The dissuasive and defensive power of the Armed Forces will be compromised if
elasticity is not ensured.

22. To qualify the national defense industry so that it conquers the necessary
autonomy in indispensable technologies to defense purposes.

A special legal, regulatory and taxation regime will protect the national private
enterprises of defense products from the risks of the mercantile immediacy and will
assure the continuity of government procurement. However, the counterpart of such
special regime will be the strategic power that the State will exercise over these
companies, to be assured by a set of instruments of private or public Law.

The mission of the State sector that takes care of defense products will be to operate
at high-tech level, developing the technologies that cannot be profitably achieved or
obtained by the companies, in the short or in the medium term timeline.

The formulation and execution of the purchase policy of defense products will be
centralized at the Ministry of Defense, under the responsibility of a secretariat of
defense products, the execution of which can be assigned to third parties.

The national defense industry will be encouraged to compete with the external markets
in order to increase their production scale. The consolidation of the South American
Nations Union may lessen the tension between the requirement of independence in
terms of defense production and the need to offset costs with scale of acquisitions,
enabling the development of defense production together with other countries of
the region.

Partnerships with other countries will be attempted, aiming at developing the
technological capacity and the making of national defense products to gradually rule
out the need to purchase imported services and products.

Whenever possible, these partnerships will be built as an expression of a more
comprehensive strategic association between Brazil and the partner country. This
association will stand out in defense and development collaborations, and it will be
ruled by two orders of basic motivation: international and national.

The motivation of international order will be that of working with the partner-country
on behalf of broader pluralism of power and of worldwide vision. This joint work


-----

goes through two stages. On the first stage, the objective is to have emerging
countries, including Brazil, best represented in the established international
organizations – the political and economical ones. On the second stage, the
objective is to restructure the international organizations, including the one that
takes care of the international trade regime, so that they become more open to
divergence, to innovation and to experiments, than the institutions born at the end
of World War II.

The motivation of national order will be that of contributing to the expansion of the
institutions that may democratize the market economy and deepen democracy,
organizing a socially inclusive process of economic growth. Bi-national experimenting
is the preferred method for this effort: the initiatives developed together with the
partner-countries.

23. To maintain the Mandatory Military Service.

A Mandatory Military Service is a basic condition for Brazilians to be mobilized in
defense of the national sovereignty. It is also an instrument to affirm the unity of the
Nation, above any social layer division.

The objective to be gradually pursued is to make Military Service really mandatory.
As the annual number of applied individuals is much higher than the number of
enlisted ones needed by the Armed Forces, they should be selected according
to their physical stamina, their aptitudes and their intellectual capacity, instead of
allowing them to self-select, taking care so that all social layers are represented.

In the future, it will be appropriate that those who are exempted from the mandatory
military service be encouraged to render civilian services, preferably in a region of
the country that is different from their region of origin. They would render the service
according to their educational background and would also receive additional training.
At the same time, therefore, the service would be an opportunity for learning, for
expressing solidarity, and an instrument of national unity. Those to render the service
would receive basic military training to be prepared for any future mobilization. And
they would then compose the reserve force capable to be mobilized.

The officer schools of the three service branches should continue to bring in
candidates of all social layers. It is great that a growingly larger number of them
come from working class. It is necessary, however, that troops of the Armed Force
be composed by citizens coming from all social layers. This is one of the reasons
why an increase in the value of the career – including in terms of wages – represents
a national security demand.


-----

##### Brazilian Navy: the hierarchy of the strategic and tactical objectives


1. In terms of designing the relationship among the strategic tasks of “sea denial”,
“sea control” and “power projection”, the Brazilian Navy will be ruled by an unequal
and joint development. If the Navy accepted to provide the same weight to all three
objectives, there would be a big risk of being mediocre in all of them. Although all of
them deserve to be developed, this will happen in a certain order and sequence.

The priority is to ensure the means to deny the use of the sea to any concentration of
enemy forces approaching Brazil from the sea. “Sea denial” is the one that organizes
Brazil’s maritime defense strategy, before fulfilling any other strategic objectives. This
priority has implications in the rearrangement of the naval forces.

While ensuring its power to deny the enemy the use of the sea, Brazil needs to
maintain its focused capacity of power projection and establish conditions to control
– at the necessary degree for defense and within the limits of the international Law –
the maritime areas and the interior waters of political-strategic, economic and military
importance, and also their sea lanes of communication. Despite this consideration,
“power projection” is hierarchically subordinate to “sea denial”.

“Sea denial”, “sea control” and “power projection” should focus, without defining any
hierarchy for the objectives, and according to the circumstances, on the following:

a) Proactive defense of the oil platforms;

b) Proactive defense of naval and port facilities, archipelagos and oceanic
islands located within the Brazilian jurisdictional waters;

c) Promptness to respond to any threat against sea lanes of trade, by States,
or by non-conventional or criminal forces;

d) Capacity to join international peacekeeping operations outside of the territory
and the Brazilian jurisdictional waters, under the aegis of the United Nations or
other multilateral organizations in the region;

The construction of means to control maritime areas will focus on the strategic areas
of maritime access to Brazil. Two coastal areas will continue to deserve special
attention from the perspective of the need to control the maritime access to Brazil:
the strip that goes from Santos to Vitória, and the area around the mouth of the
Amazon River.


-----

2. The doctrine of unequal and joint development has implications in the rearrangement
of the naval forces. The most important implication is that the Navy will rebuilt itself,
in stages, as a weapon balanced among the underwater, the surface, and the
aerospace components.

3. To ensure the sea denial objective, Brazil will count on a powerful underwater naval force
consisting of conventional and nuclear-propelled submarines. Brazil will maintain and
develop its ability to design and manufacture both conventional and nuclear-propelled
submarines. It will speed up investments and the necessary partnerships to run the
nuclear-propelled submarine project. It will arm conventional and nuclear-propelled
submarines with missiles and will develop the capacity to design and manufacture them.
It will seek to gain autonomy in cyber-technologies that guide submarines and their
weapon systems, making possible for them to network with other naval, ground and
air forces.

4. To ensure its power projection capacity, the Navy will also have Marines available
and permanently ready for employment. The existence of these means is also
essential for the defense of naval and port facilities, archipelagos and oceanic islands
within The Brazilian jurisdictional waters, to perform in international peacekeeping
operations and humanitarian operations anywhere in the world. In the waterways,
these means will be fundamental to ensure the control of the banks during riverine
operations. The Marine Corps will consolidate itself as the force of expeditionary
character par excellence.

5. The naval surface force will count both on big ships, capable of operating and
remaining on the high sea for a long time, and smaller vessels used to patrol the
coastline and the main Brazilian navigable rivers. A requirement for the maintenance
of this fleet will be the capacity of the Air Force to work along with Naval Aviation to
guarantee local air superiority in case of an armed conflict.

Among the high sea vessels, the Navy will dedicate special attention to the design
and manufacturing of multiple-purpose vessels that can also be used as aircraft
carriers. Preference will be given to conventional and exclusive aircraft carriers.

The Navy will also count on combat, transport and oceanic, coastal and river
patrol vessels. These vessels will be designed and manufactured according
to the same concerns in terms of the functional versatility that will guide the
construction of high sea warships. The Navy will increase its presence in the
navigable waterways of the two large river basins – the Amazon and ParaguaiParaná rivers – using both patrol boats and transport ships, both provided with
helicopters and adapted to the water regime.


-----

The presence of the Navy in the river basins will be facilitated by the country’s
dedication to the establishment of a multimodal transportation paradigm. This
paradigm will include the construction of the Paraná-Tietê, Madeira, TocantinsAraguaia and Tapajós-Teles Pires waterways. Whenever possible, the dams will be
provided with locks in order to ensure free navigability along the waterways.

6. The monitoring, from space, of the surface of the sea shall integrate the repertoire
of practices and operational training programs of the Navy.

From this monitoring, underwater and surface naval forces will strengthen their
capacity to network with ground and air forces.

7. The organization of a naval force and maritime strategy underwater, surface and
aerial components will allow the enhancement of the flexibility with which the main
objective of the maritime security strategy is protected: dissuasion as a result of sea
denial to the enemy approaching Brazil from the sea. In a broad spectrum of combat
circumstances, moreover when the enemy force is much more powerful, the surface
force will be designed and operated as a tactical or strategic reserve. Preferentially,
and whenever the tactical situation allows, the surface force will be engaged in the
conflict after the initial employment of the underwater force, which will operate in
coordination with space vehicles (for monitoring purposes) and with aerial means (for
focused fire purposes).

This combat unfolding in successive stages under the responsibility of different
contingents will allow, in a naval war setting, the speed up of the swift rotation
between the concentration and deconcentration of forces and the enhancement of
flexibility at the service of surprise.

8. Naval Aviation, embarked in ships, will be one of the links between the preliminary
stage of combat, under the responsibility of the underwater force and of its space and
air counterparts, and the subsequent stage, conducted with the full engagement of
the naval surface force. The Navy will work along with the national defense industry to
develop a versatile defense and attack aircraft, which could maximizes the defensive
and offensive air potential of the Naval Force.

9. The Navy will start studies and will get ready to establish, at the relevant venue,
as near as possible to the mouth of the Amazon River, a multiple-use naval base
that is comparable, in terms of scope and density of its means, to the Naval Base
of Rio de Janeiro.

10. The Navy will speed up the construction work of its conventional and nuclearpropelled submarine bases.


-----

##### Brazilian Army: the imperatives of flexibility and elasticity


1. The Brazilian Army will fulfill its constitutional mandate and will perform its
attributions, during peace and war, under the guidance of the strategic concepts of
flexibility and elasticity. Flexibility, on its turn, includes the strategic requirements of
monitoring/control and mobility.

Flexibility is the capacity of using military forces with minimum pre-established
rigidity and maximum adaptability to the circumstances when the employment of
force is needed. During peace time, it means the versatility with which presence – or
omnipresence – is replaced with the capacity to be present (mobility) under the light
of information (monitoring/control). During war time, it requires the ability to maintain
the enemies permanently imbalanced, surprising them by means of the dialectics
of concentration and deconcentration of forces, and of the audacity with which the
unexpected blow is fired.

Flexibility reduces the importance of the contrast between conventional conflict
and non-conventional conflict: it demands for the conventional forces some of the
attributes of non-conventional forces, and ratifies the supremacy of intelligence and
imagination upon the mere accumulation of material and human resources. For
this reason, it refuses the temptation of seeing high technology as an alternative to
combat, assuming it as an element of reinforcement to the operational capacity. It
insists in the role of surprise. It transforms uncertainty into solution, instead of facing
it as a problem. It combines meditated defenses with devastating attacks.

Elasticity is the capacity to rapidly increase the dimensions of the military forces when
the circumstances do require, mobilizing the country’s human and material resources
in large-scale. Elasticity demands, therefore, the construction of a reserve force, which
can be mobilized according to the circumstances. The last foundation of elasticity is
the integration between the Armed Forces and the Nation. The unfolding of elasticity
reports back to the section of this National Strategy of Defense that concerns the
future of the Mandatory Military Service and of the national mobilization.

In order to be fully asserted, flexibility depends on elasticity. The potential of flexibility,
for dissuasion and defense, would be severely limited if it were not possible, in case
of need, to multiply the human and material resources of the Armed Forces. On
the other hand, the way of interpreting and effectuating the imperative of elasticity
unveils the more radical unfolding of flexibility. Elasticity is flexibility translated into the
engagement of the whole Nation for its own defense.


-----

2. Although the Army is used in a progressive way in crises and armed conflicts, it
must consist of modern means and very well trained troops. The Army will not have a
vanguard in itself. The Army, as a whole, will be the vanguard itself. The main practical
expression of the concept of the Army as a vanguard is its own reorganization based
on a brigade module, which is the basic combat module of the Ground Force. In the
current composition of the Army, the Rapid Reaction Strategic Force brigades are
those that better express the ideal of flexibility.

The composition model of the Rapid Reaction Strategic Forces does not need
or have to be strictly followed, without taking into account the typical operational
problems of the different theater of operations. However, all Army brigades should
adopt, in principle, the following elements so that the absorption of the concept of
flexibility can be generalized:

a) Highly motivated and with effective operational training human resources,
typical of the Special Operations Brigade, which makes up the strategic reserve
of the Army today;

b) Communication and monitoring equipments that allow them to network with
other Army, Navy and Air Force units and be supplied with information resulting
from the land monitoring from air and space;

c) Mobility equipments allowing them to move quickly by land, water and air
– to and within the theater of operations. By air and water, the mobility will
usually proceed through joint operations with the Navy and the Air Force;

d) Logistic resources capable of supplying the brigade, even in isolated and
inhospitable regions, during several weeks.

The qualification of the brigade module as a vanguard requires a wide spectrum of
technological means, from the least sophisticated – such as portable radars and
night vision instruments – to the most advanced forms of communication between
ground operations and space monitoring.

The knowledge on mobility has impacts on the evolution of armored vehicles,
mechanized resources and artillery. One implications of this knowledge is harmonizing
protection and movement technical characteristics while designing armored vehicles
and mechanized resources. Another implication – in armored vehicles, mechanized
resources and artillery – is to prioritize the development of technologies capable of
ensuring shot accuracy.


-----

3. The transformation of the whole Army with vanguard focus, based on the brigade
module, will take precedence over the strategy of presence. In the course of this
transformation, priority will be given to the equipment based on the completeness
and modernization of the operational systems of the brigades, providing them with
the capacity to being rapidly present.

The transformation, however, will be compatible with the strategy of presence,
especially in the Amazon region due to the obstacles to both movement and force
concentration. In all circumstances, the military units deployed at the borders will
function as advanced military detachments of surveillance and dissuasion.

In the strategic centers of the country – political, industrial, technological and
military –, the strategy of presence of the Army will also contribute to the objective
of ensuring the antiaircraft defense capacity at both quantity and quality, especially
using medium altitude antiaircraft artillery.

4. The Army will continue to maintain regional and strategic reserves coordinated
on standby. The strategic reserves – including parachutists and special operation
troops – will be established at the central region of the country, in order to contribute
to the capacity of rapidly concentrating forces.

5. Monitoring/control, as an important component of the imperative of flexibility,
will require the existence of a vector under full national domain, among the
space resources, despite the participation of foreign partners in its design and
implementation, including:

a) The production of satellite-launching vehicles;

b) The production of low and high orbit satellites, especially multiple-use
geostationary satellites;

c) The development of national alternatives to the positioning and locating
systems, of which Brazil depends, going through the necessary internal stages
of evolution of these technologies;

d) Air and ground means for high-resolution focused monitoring;

e) The necessary qualifications and cybernetic instruments to ensure
communication between air and space monitoring systems, and the ground
forces.

6. Mobility, as a component of the flexibility imperative requires the development


-----

of ground vehicles and air means for combat and transport. It will also require the
rearrangement of the relations with the Navy and the Air Force, in order to ensure
the capacity to act as a unified force, both at the summit level of the Armed Forces
Staffs and at the base of the operational contingents.

7. Within the brigade module, monitoring/control and mobility are complemented
by measures aiming to ensure the achievement of effective combat power. Some of
these are technological measures: the development of weapon and guidance systems
to allow shot of accuracy, and the development of the capacity to produce all kinds
of non-nuclear ammunitions. Other measures are operational: the consolidation of
a repertoire of practices and training activities that provide the Ground Force with
knowledge and skills for both conventional and non-conventional combat, in order
to make it capable of acting adaptively under the widely varied conditions of the
national territory. Other measures – even more important – are educational: a military
training that brings together qualification and roughness.

8. In the current phase of the History, the defense of the Amazon region will be
considered the concentration focus of the guidelines summarized under the label of
the monitoring/control and mobility imperatives. It does not require any exception
to those guidelines; it just reinforces the reasons to follow them. The necessary
adaptations will be those required by the nature of that specific theater of operations:
the intensification of technologies and of space, air and ground monitoring devices;
the priority to transform the brigade into a force with technological and operational
attributes; the logistical and air means to provide support to border units isolated
in remote demanding and vulnerable areas; and the training of combatants holding
the qualification and roughness that are necessary for the proficiency of a jungle
combatant.

The sustainable development of the Amazon region will, from now on, be also
seen as an instrument of national defense: it is the only thing that may consolidate
the conditions to ensure national sovereignty in that area. Among the sustainable
development plans for the Amazon region, land tenure legalization will play a major
role. In order to defend the Amazon region, it will be necessary to take it out from the
legal insecurity and widespread conflict conditions it has had to face due to the lack
of solutions for the land problems.

9. Meeting the imperative of elasticity will be an Army’s special concern, as it is the
Ground Force that will have to multiply itself in case of armed conflict.

10. The imperatives of flexibility and elasticity culminate in the preparation for an
asymmetrical war, especially in the Amazon region, to be sustained against a military


-----

enemy with a far superior power either by the action of a country, or coalition of
countries, insisting to disregard the unconditional Brazilian sovereignty on its Amazon
region, assuming alleged interests on behalf of mankind.

The preparation for such war does not consist only of helping prevent what today
is a remote hypothesis: Brazil’s involvement in a large-scale armed conflict. It also
consists of taking advantage of the useful discipline for the formation of its military
doctrine and its operational capacities. An army that has conquered the attributes
of flexibility and elasticity is an army that knows how to coordinate conventional
and non-conventional actions. The asymmetrical war, in the context of a nationalresistance war, represents an effective possibility of the doctrine specified here.

For successfully leading a resistance war, each one of the following conditions
should be interpreted as a guidance warning on how the Army’s responsibilities
should be performed:

a) See the Nation identified with the cause of the defense. The whole national
strategy rests upon the awareness of the Brazilian people about the central
role played by the problems of defense.

b) Bring together regular soldiers, strengthened by the attributes of the nonconventional soldiers, to the mobilized reserves according to the concept
of elasticity.

c) Count on resistant soldiers that, in addition to their qualification and
roughness tendencies, are also obstinate at the highest level. Their obstinacy
will be inspired by the Nation’s identification with the cause of defense.

d) Maintain the capacity of command and control of the fighting forces under
adverse and extreme conditions.

e) Maintain and build the power of logistical support to the fighting forces, even
under adverse and extreme conditions.

f) Learn how to take the most from the characteristics of the terrain.


-----

##### Brazilian Air Force: guiding surveillance, air superiority, focused combat, air strategic combat


1. Four strategic objectives rule the mission of the Brazilian Air Force and define
the place of its work within the National Strategy of Defense. These objectives are
concatenated in a specific order: each one of them conditions the definition and the
execution of the subsequent objectives.

a) The priority of air surveillance.

Exercising air space surveillance of the national territory and of the Brazilian
jurisdictional waters from the air, supported by space, ground and maritime
means, is the first responsibility of the Air Force, and the essential condition
to inhibit the enemy from flying freely over the national air space. The strategy
of the Air Force will be that of surrounding Brazil with successive and
complementary visualization layers, conditioning factors for its readiness to
respond. A practical implication of this task is that the Air Force will need to
count on its own platforms and systems to monitor, and not only to combat
and transport, particularly in the Amazon region.

The Brazilian Aerospace Defense System (SISDABRA), one of these layers, will
have in place a monitoring complex, including launch vehicles, geostationary
and monitoring satellites, intelligence aircrafts and their respective observation
and communication systems, all under full national domain.

The Brazilian Aerospace Defense Command (COMDABRA) will be strengthened
as the core of the aerospace defense, responsible for leading and integrating
all of the country’s means of aerospace monitoring. The national defense
industry will be instructed to give the highest priority to the development of the
necessary technologies, including those that promote independence from
the GPS system, or from any other alien positioning system. The potential to
contribute to this technological independence will be important in the selection
of the partnerships with other countries in terms of defense technologies.

b) The power to ensure local air superiority.

In any hypothesis of employment, the Air Force will be responsible for ensuring
local air superiority. The feasibility of the naval and inland ground force operations
will mostly depend on the fulfillment of that responsibility. The requirement of
the potential to ensure local air superiority will be the first step to affirm air


-----

superiority over the territory and the Brazilian jurisdictional waters.

As a result, it is of utmost importance to avoid any gaps of aerial protection
in the period 2015-2025, during which the current fleet of fighter aircrafts will
have to be substituted, as well as the bundled weapon and intelligent weapon
systems, including the inertial systems that allow directing the fire to the target
with accuracy and “beyond visual reach.”

c) The capacity to take combats to specific points of the national territory,
together with the Army and the Navy, establishing a single fighting force under
the discipline of the theater of operations.

The first implication is the need to have sufficient transport aircrafts to carry
a brigade of the strategic reserve from the central region of the country to
any point of the national territory within a few hours. The air transport units
will be based at the central region of the country, near the Ground Force
strategic reserves.

The second implication is the need to count on highly precise weapon systems,
capable of allowing the appropriate discrimination of targets in situations in
which the national forces could be intermixed with the enemy.

The third implication is the need to have sufficient and appropriate means of
transport to support the adoption of the Army’s strategy of presence in the
Amazon and in the Mid-West regions, especially the operational and logistical
activities being carried out by the Ground Force units deployed at the border.

d) The peaceful nature of Brazil does not eliminate the need to provide the
Air Force with the domain of a strategic potential that organizes around a
capacity, and not around an enemy. If the Air Force does not have full domain
of this air strategic potential, it will not be in a position to defend Brazil, not
even within the strictest limits of a defensive war. For such, it needs to count
on all relevant means: platforms, weapon systems, cartographic information
and intelligence resources.

2. In the Amazon region, the fulfillment of these objectives will require Air Force units
holding the technical resources to ensure the operation of the runways and flight
protection facilities in surveillance and combat situations.

3. The technological and scientific complex based in São José dos Campos will
continue to be the support of the Air Force and of its future. The following strategic
imperatives result from its key importance:


-----

a) Prioritize the training of technical-scientific, military and civilian personnel, in
Brazil and overseas, in order to reach technological independence;

b) Develop technological projects that stand out for their technological fecundity
(analog applications to other areas) and for their transformational meaning
(revolutionary modifications of the fighting conditions), and not only for their
immediate application;

c) Narrow the links between the Research Institutes of the Air Force
Technological Center (CTA) and private companies, always protecting the State’s
interests as far as the protection of patents and of industrial property is concerned;

d) Promote the development of appropriate test and evaluation conditions in
São José dos Campos and in other locations;

e) Face the problem of the strategic vulnerability caused by the concentration
of initiatives in the technological and business complex of São José dos
Campos. Prepare the progressive geographical deconcentration of some of
the most critical areas of the complex.

4. Amidst all the concerns to deal with, in Air Force development, the item that
inspires more active and pressing efforts is the way to substitute the current fighter
aircrafts in the period 2015-2025, as to extend their life by modernizing their weapon
systems, their avionics and parts of their structure and fuselage no longer exists.

Brazil, in that matter, faces the current dilemma all over the world: maintain the priority
of future capacities over the current expenses, without tolerating air unprotection. It
is necessary to invest in the capacities that ensure independent production potential
of its air defense means. It cannot, however, accept the lack of an air shield while it
gathers the conditions to gain such independence. The solution to be given to this
problem is so important, and exerts so different effects on the country’s strategic
situation in South America and in the world, that it transcends a mere discussion
on equipment acquisition and deserves to be understood as a part of the National
Strategy of Defense.

The generic principle of the solution is that of refusing extreme solutions – either
merely purchasing a “fifth generation” fighter aircraft in the international market,
or sacrificing the purchase to invest in the modernization of the existing aircrafts,
in unmanned aerial vehicle projects, in the joint development of a futurist manned
jet fighter prototype along with another country, and in the massive training of the
scientific and technical personnel. A hybrid solution seems to be convenient. A
solution that provides fighter aircrafts within the necessary time period, but doing


-----

this in a way to create the conditions for the national manufacturing of advanced
manned jet fighters.

This hybrid solution may meet either of two models. Although these two models may
theoretically co-exist, in practical terms one of them shall prevail upon the other. Both
exceed by far the conventional limits of purchasing along with technology transfer, or
“off-set”, and involve a substantial initiative in terms of design and manufacturing in
Brazil. They achieve the same goals via different pathways.

According to the first model, a partnership would be established, with one or more
countries, to design and manufacture in Brazil the substitute for a fifth-generation jet
fighter on sale in the international market, within the relevant timeframe. The substitute
would be designed and made in a way to overcome the significant technical and
operational limitations of the current version of that aircraft (its operation range, its
limitations in terms of vectored thrust, its lack of low radar signature, for example).
The solution in focus would provide simultaneous responses to both the problems of
technical limitation and technological independence.

According to the second model, a fifth-generation jet fighter would be purchased in
a negotiation involving the full transfer of technology, including the aircraft’s design
and manufacturing technologies, and their relevant “source-codes.” The purchase
would be made at the minimum necessary scale allowing the full transfer of these
technologies. A Brazilian company starts producing a substitute for that purchased
aircraft, under the guidance of the Brazilian State, authorized by prior negotiation with
the selling country and company. The solution in focus would occur in a sequence,
and not concurrently.

The choice of either model is a matter of circumstance and negotiation. Another point
that might be decisive is the need of choosing an option that minimizes technological
or political dependence related to any vendor that, by holding the aircraft components
to be purchased or modernized, may intend, because of this participation, to inhibit
or influence on defense initiatives unleashed by Brazil.

5. Three strategic guidelines will determine the evolution of the Air Force. Each one
of these guidelines, rather than a task, represents a transformation opportunity.

The first guideline is about the development of the repertoire of technologies and
capacities that will allows the Air Force to network not only with its own components,
but also with the Army and the Navy.

The second guideline is about the progress of unmanned air vehicles programs, first
for surveillance and then for fighting purposes. Unmanned vehicles may become core


-----

means – and not merely accessories – for air fighting – in addition to allow a more
demanding level of accuracy in terms of monitoring/control of the national territory.
The Air Force will absorb the implications of this surveillance and fighting mean for
its own tactical and strategic guidance. It will formulate a doctrine on the interaction
between manned and unmanned vehicles, that take advantage of this new mean to
radicalize the power of surprise, without exposing the lives of the pilots.

The third guideline is about the integration of space activities in the Air Force
operations. Space monitoring will become an integral part and an essential condition
for the fulfillment of the strategic tasks that will guide the Air Force: multiple and
cumulative surveillance, local air superiority and focused fire in the context of joint
operations. The development of launching-vehicle technologies will serve as a broad
instrument, not only to support the space programs, but also to develop national
missile design and manufacturing technologies.

##### The strategic sectors: cybernetics, space and nuclear

1. Three strategic sectors – space, cybernetics and nuclear – are essential for the
national defense.

2. In these three sectors, partnerships with other countries and the purchasing of
products and services abroad should be harmonized with the purpose of ensuring a
wide range of capacities and technologies under the national domain.

3. In the space sector, the following priorities apply:

a) Design and manufacture satellite-launching vehicles and develop
remote guiding technologies, especially inertial systems and liquid fuel
propulsion technologies.

b) Design and manufacture satellites, especially the geostationary ones, the
telecommunications ones and those used for high-resolution remote sensing,
multi-spectral and develop satellite altitude control technologies.

c) Develop technologies of communication, command and control from
satellites, along with ground, air, maritime and underwater forces so that
they become capable of network operating and oriented by the information
received from the satellites.


##### The strategic sectors: cybernetics, space and nuclear


-----

d) Develop technology to determine geographical coordinates from the satellites.

4. Capacity building on cybernetics will be focused on the widest spectrum of industrial,
educational and military uses. As a priority, it will include the technologies of communication
between to all contingents of the Armed Forces, in order to ensure their capacity to
network. They will consider the power of communication between the contingents of the
Armed Forces and space vehicles. As to cybernetics, an organization in charge of developing
cybernetic capacities on the industrial and military themes will be established.

5. The nuclear sector is of strategic value. On its own nature, it transcends the limits
between development and defense.

Due to a constitutional imperative and to an international treaty, Brazil was deprived
from the option of employing nuclear power for any non-peaceful purposes. This
was done under several premises, the most important of which was the progressive
nuclear disarmament by the nuclear weapon States.

No other country is more active than Brazil when it comes to the nuclear disarmament
cause. However, by forbidding itself from having access to nuclear weapons, Brazil
should not renounce to using nuclear technology. On the contrary, it should be
developed, including the following initiatives:

a) Regarding the nuclear-propelled submarine program, Brazil should complete
the full nationalization and the development – at industrial scale – of the fuel
cycle (including gasification and enrichment) and of the reactor construction
technology for exclusive use of the country.

b) Speed up the mapping, ore searching and utilization of uranium deposits.

c) Develop the potential of designing and building nuclear thermo power plants
with technology and capacities that may end up under the national domain,
even if they are developed by means of partnerships with foreign companies
and States. Use nuclear power with criteria and submit it to the strictest safety
and environmental protection controls as a way to stabilize the national energy
matrix, adjusting the variations in the supply of renewable energies, moreover
in the case of hydroelectric power; and

d) Increase the capacity to use nuclear power for a broad range of activities.

Brazil will watch to keep open the access pathways to the development of its own
nuclear power technologies. It will not adhere to amendments to the Treaty on the


-----

Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons extending the restrictions of the Treaty, until
the nuclear weapon states advance in the central premise of the Treaty: their own
nuclear disarmament.

6. The first priority of Brazil as to the policy of the three strategic sectors will be the
qualification of human resources on the relevant sciences. For this purpose, it will
support the funding of research and education programs in Brazilian universities
and in national research centers, and will increase the offer of Doctorate and postDoctorate scholarships in relevant international institutions. This support policy will
not be limited to applied sciences of immediate technological use. It will also benefit
speculative and fundamental sciences.

##### Reorganization of the national defense industry: independent technological development

1. Brazil’s defense requires the reorganization of the national defense industry,
according to the following guidelines:

a) Give priority to the development of independent technological capacities.

This goal will condition the partnerships with alien companies and countries to
the progressive development of research and production in the country.

b) Subordinate commercial considerations to the strategic imperatives.

This means organizing the legal, regulatory and taxation regimes of the national
defense industry, in order to reflect such subordination.

c) Prevent the national defense industry from biasing between advanced
research and routine production.

Care should be taken so that vanguard research serves the vanguard
production.

d) Use the development of defense technologies as a focus for the development
of operational capacities.

This implies seeking permanent modernization of the platforms, either by
their reassessment from the perspective of the operational experience, or by
incorporating the improvements deriving from technological development.


##### Reorganization of the national defense industry: independent technological development


-----

2. A special legal, regulatory and taxation regime will be established for the national
defense industry.

This regime will safeguard the private companies that manufacture defense products
from the pressures of mercantile immediacy, by exempting them from the general
bidding regime; they will be protected from the risk of budget restrictions, and the
continuity of government procurement will be ensured. As a counterpart, the State
will gain special power over these private companies, beyond the limits of its general
regulatory authority. These powers will be exerted either by the instruments of private
Law, such as the “golden share”, or by the instruments of public Law, such as the
regulatory licensing.

3. The state component of the defense industry will aim at producing what the private
sector is not able to design or manufacture, in the medium and short term, profitably.
It will, therefore, operate at the technological top, rather than at the technological
bottom. It will keep strong ties with the advanced research centers of the Armed
Forces and with Brazilian academic institutions.

4. The State will help to attract the foreign clientele for the national defense industry.
However, the continuity of production should be organized so as not to depend on
having to attract or retain such clientele. Therefore, the State will recognize that
in many production lines, that specific industry will have to operate in a “cost plus
margin” regime, thus, under strict regulatory regimen.

5. The future of national defense technological capacity building depends more on
the qualification of human resources and less on the development of an industrial
apparatus. Thence the preference for the policy of scientist qualifying on basic and
applied sciences, already mentioned in the discussion on the space, cybernetics and
nuclear sectors.

6. In the effort to reorganize the national defense industry, partnerships with other
countries will be attempted, aiming to develop a national technological capacity
in order to gradually reduce the need to purchase services and finished products
from abroad. Brazil will always make clear to the foreign parties that it intends
to be a partner, and not a client or buyer. The country is far more interested in
partnerships to strengthen its independent capacity building, than in purchasing
finished products and services. In principle, these partnerships should consider
that substantial part of research and manufacturing should be done in Brazil,
and will gain further importance when they are an expression of comprehensive
strategic associations.


-----

7. A Secretariat of Defense Products will be established in the Ministry of Defense.
The Secretary will be appointed by the Minister of Defense and nominated by
the President.

It will be up to the Secretary to perform the guidelines established by the Minister of
Defense and, based on these, to design and direct the defense products purchasing
policy, including weapons, ammunition, transport and communication means,
uniforms, products for individual and collective use, all to be employed in operational
activities. The Minister of Defense will assign, to the departments of the Armed
Forces, the power to run the policy established by the Secretariat as to the orders
and purchases of specific products for their branch, this all being subject to the
permanent evaluation of the Ministry.

The objective will be to implement, as soon as possible, a centralized defense
products purchasing policy that is able to:

a) Optimize expenditures;

b) Make sure that purchasing follows the guidelines of the National Strategy
of Defense and of its design over the time; and

c) Ensure, in the purchasing decisions, the primacy of the commitment to
the development of national technological capacity building in terms of
defense products.

8. The Secretariat in charge of the area of Science and Technology in the Ministry of
Defense, among other assignments, shall be responsible for coordinating advanced
research on defense technology developed by Navy, Army, and Air Force research
institutes, as well as by other organizations subordinated to the Armed Forces.

The purpose of this will be to implement an integrated technological policy that
prevents doubling efforts; shares staff, ideas and resources; and does its best to
build up links between research and production, without losing the progress of basic
sciences from sight. In order to ensure the accomplishment of these objectives,
the Secretariat will cause many research projects to be jointly conducted by the
advanced technology institutions of the Armed Forces. Some of these joint projects
could be organized under their own corporate entity, either as a company for specific
purposes, or under any other legal arrangement.

The projects will be chosen and assessed not only by their direct production potential,
but also by their technological fecundity: their usefulness as a source of inspiration
and of capacity building for similar initiatives.


-----

9. Joint initiatives of the Armed Forces research organizations, national academic
institutions and Brazilian private companies will be encouraged, as long as the State
security interests regarding information access are safeguarded. The objective will
be to promote the development of a military-university-entrepreneurial complex
capable of functioning at the technology frontier, which will almost always have a
dual – military and civilian – usefulness.

##### Mandatory Military Service: republican leveling and national mobilization

1. The national defense basis is the identification of the Nation with the Armed Forces,
and of the Armed Forces with the Nation. This identification requires that the Nation
understands that the causes of development and defense are inseparable.

Therefore, the Mandatory Military Service will be maintained and reinforced. This is
the most important guarantee of the national defense. It may also be the most effective
republican leveling mean, allowing the Nation to stand above its social layers.

2. The Armed Forces will limit and reverse the tendency to diminish the proportion
of recruits, and increase the proportion of professional soldiers. In the Army, setting
aside the need for experts, most of the troops shall always be composed by recruits
from the Mandatory Military Service. In the Navy and in the Air Force, the need
to count on specialists trained over many years shall have, as a counterpart, the
strategic importance of keeping open the recruitment channels.

The conflict between the advantages of professionalism and the values of recruitment
should be attenuated by means of education – technical and general, but following
an analytical and capacitating guidance – that will be delivered to recruits during their
service period.

3. The Armed Forces will move towards making Military Service really mandatory.
They will not be satisfied to let the lack of proportion between the higher number of
those obliged to apply for the Military Service and the lower number of vacancies and
needs of the Armed Forces to be solved by a self-selection criterion of those who
are willing to be enlisted. The predominant use of this criterion – although affected by
better financial appeals – limits the military service potential, and hinders its national
defense and republican leveling objectives.

The recruit selection will be based on two main criteria. The first will be the combination
of physical stamina and analytical capacity, measured apart of the recruit’s educational


##### Mandatory Military Service: republican leveling and national mobilization


-----

level or cultural background. The second criterion will be the representativeness of all
social layers and regions of the country.

4. In addition to the Mandatory Military Service, a comprehensive Civilian Service will
be established. This service may be progressively populated by the Brazilian youth
who was not engage to the Military Service. In this civilian service – designed as
a generalization of the Projeto Rondon’s aspirations – the engaged individuals will
receive training – according to their qualification and preferences – so that they could
participate in a social work. This work will aim at meeting the needs of the Brazilian
people and at reaffirming the unity of the Nation. It will also be given basic military
training to the participants of the Civilian Service, allowing them to be a part of the
reserve force, which can be mobilized if necessary. They will be registered, according
to their skills, for an occasional mobilization.

When the resources allow, the Civilian Service youth will be encouraged to serve in
a region of the country different from their original one.

Until the conditions to fully establish the Civilian Service are met, the Armed Forces
will – along with municipal mayors – reestablish the tradition of the Tiros de Guerra

[military training school for reserves]. In principle, all of the country’s town halls
should be able to take part in the renovation of the Tiros de Guerra, when the legal
restrictions that still limit the list of qualified townships are eliminated.

5. The Military and Civilian Services will evolve together with the measures to ensure
national mobilization in case of need, according to the National Mobilization Law.
Brazil will understand, at all times, that its defense depends on the potential to
mobilize large-scale human and material resources, far beyond the contingent of its
Armed Forces during peacetime. It will never consider the technological evolution
as an alternative to national mobilization; the former will be understood as an
instrument of the latter. By ensuring the flexibility of its Armed Forces, it will also
ensure their elasticity.

6. It is important for the national defense that all Brazilian society sectors be
represented in the military officer personnel. It is good that workers’ children join
military academies. However, an imperative of national security is that all social layers
are widely represented in the military academies. Two conditions are fundamental for
this objective to be achieved. The first one is that the military career be remunerated
with competitive wages compared to other valued State careers. The second
condition is that the Nation embraces the cause of defense, and identifies in it the
requirement for the aggrandizement of the Brazilian people.


-----

7. A State strategic interest is the training of civilian personnel to become specialists
in defense issues. In order to prepare them, the Federal Government should support,
in the universities, a broad range of programs and courses on the topic of defense.

The Escola Superior de Guerra [National War College] should serve as one of the main
instruments for this kind of training. It should also organize the permanent debate between
civilian and military leaders about defense issues. In order to better fulfill these functions,
the Escola Superior de Guerra shall be transferred to Brasília without decreasing its
presence in Rio de Janeiro, and start to count on the direct engagement of the Joint
Staff and of the Chiefs of Staff of the three service branches.

##### Conclusion

The National Strategy of Defense is inspired by two realities that ensure its feasibility
and indicate the direction to follow.

The first reality is the ability to improvise and to adapt, the tendency to create
solutions when no instruments are available, the disposition to face the hardships
of the Nature and the society; at last the almost unlimited capacity to adapt that
permeates the Brazilian culture. This is the fact that allows the consolidation of the
concept of flexibility.

The second reality is the sense of national commitment in Brazil. The Brazilian
nation was – and is – a project of the Brazilian people; it was them that have always
embraced the idea of nationality and that have fought to convert the leading and
erudite individuals into this idea. This fact is the deep guarantee of the identification
of the Nation with the Armed Forces, and of the Armed Forces with the Nation.

The National Strategy of Defense’s guidelines resulted from the meeting of these
two realities.


##### Conclusion


-----

-----

-----

##### Context


The second part of the National Strategy of Defense complements the systematic
formulation contained in the first one.

It has three purposes. The first one is to contextualize it, listing the circumstances
that help to precisely describe its objectives and to explain its methods. The second
one is to apply the Strategy to a broad and representative spectrum of the problems
currently faced by the Armed Forces, thus making even clearer doctrine and demands.
The third one is to list the transitional measures that indicate the pathway that will
take Brazil from where it is now to where it has to go, in terms of the organization of
its own defense.

The following can be considered as the main positive aspects of the present national
defense setting:

 - Armed Forces identified with the Brazilian society and enjoying high
reliability rates;

 - adaptability of the Brazilian people to new or unprecedented situations, creating
favorable conditions for a military culture based on the concept of flexibility; and

 - education excellence in the Armed Forces, when it comes to the methodology
and update in relation to the modern tactics and strategies for the employment
of military means, including the use of internally-created concepts, compliant with
the operational environments of possible employment.

On the other hand, the main vulnerabilities of the country’s current structure of
defense are:

 - little involvement of the Brazilian society in discussions on defense issues, and
lack of civilians specialists on these topics;

 - lack and discontinuity in the allocation of budget resources for defense;

 - obsolescence of most of the equipment of the Armed Forces; high degree of
dependence on foreign defense products; and absence of an unified direction for
the acquisition of these products;

 - inadequate distribution of the Armed Forces throughout the national territory to
reach an optimized coverage of the strategic needs;


-----

- lack of coordination of the main Brazilian institute of highly strategic studies – the
Escola Superior de Guerra – with the Federal Government and with the society in
the development and consolidation of the knowledge necessary to the planning
of defense, and to the assistance to the formulation of the relevant and strategies
arising from it;

- insufficiency or little appeal and dissemination of qualification on defense issues
courses for civilians; and lack of a career for civilians in the area of defense, despite
the fact that this is a State function;

- limited resources invested in scientific and technology research for the
development of materials for military use and defense products associated to
the incipient level of integration between the military research organizations, and
between the latter and the civilian research institutes;

- lack of national planning for the development of high-tech products with the
coordinated participation of the research centers of the universities, Armed Forces
and industry;

- absence in the government plans, of long-term defense products acquisition
programs, based on pluriannual programs and on the equipment plans of the
Armed Forces, prioritizing the national defense industry. This omission causes
the acquisition of defense products abroad, sometimes based on opportunities,
facing technological imbalances in relation to the “state-of-the-art” and generating
undesirable external dependence;

- lack of clear rules of priority for the national industry, in the case of defense
products manufactured in the country;

- duality of tax treatment between the defense products manufactured in the
country and those purchased abroad, with an excessive tax burden incurring on
the national products, which favors the choice of importing products;

- deficiencies in the financing programs to the national companies that supply
defense products, impairing them in both domestic and international markets;

- lack of guarantees to support possible supply contracts with the national defense
industry;

- technological blocks imposed by developed countries, delaying the strategic
projects conceived by Brazil;


-----

 - lack of a commercial, industrial and technological off-set clause in some defenseproduct import contracts, or even the non-participation of the national industry in
off-set programs; and

 - deficient national mobilization and logistical systems.

The identification and analysis of the main positive aspects and vulnerabilities allow
the anticipation of the following opportunities to be explored:

 - greater involvement of the Brazilian society in defense issues, as well as greater
integration of the different sectors of the three powers of the Brazilian State with
private or public national institutes of strategic studies;

 - regularity and continuity in the allocation of defense budget resources to increase
investments and ensure the financing of the Armed Forces;

 - equipment of the Armed Forces and professional qualification of its personnel, so
to provide them the military means necessary to the integrated prompt employment
with high tactical and strategic mobility;

 - optimization of the efforts in Science, Technology and Innovation for Defense by
means of the following measures, among others:

a) Greater integration between scientific and technological institutions –
civilian and military – and the national defense industry;

b) Definition of dual-use research; and

c) Stimulus to the research and development of products of interest to defense
area;

 - Greater integration between state-owned and private defense industries, with the
definition of a model of participation in the national production of defense means;

 - establishment of a special legal regime for the national defense industry that
enables the continuity and the preferential characteristic in the public purchases;

 - integration and centralized definition in the acquisition of defense products of
common use, compatible with the established priorities;

 - linking the purchasing of defense products overseas to the substantial technology


-----

transfer, including through partnership arrangements for the research and
manufacturing in Brazil of part of these products or their substitutes;

- organization and coordination of the Armed Forces, compatible with the
strategic and training needs of the Operational Commands, both by each branch
or jointly, capable of taking into consideration the requirements of each operational
environment, specially the Amazon and the South Atlantic ones;

- stimulating the aerospace activity in order to provide the country with the
necessary technological knowledge to the development of the design and
production satellites and satellite-launching vehicles, as well as the development
of an integrated system to monitor the air space, the territory and the Brazilian
jurisdictional waters;

- development of the necessary maritime, ground and aerospace infrastructures to
enable the defense strategies;

- promote State presence actions in the Amazon region, especially strengthening
the Programa Calha Norte defense approach;

- strengthen the cooperation among the South American countries and, by
extension, with those located at the Brazilian strategic interest surrounding area;

- valuation of the military profession in order to encourage personnel recruitment
in all social layers;

- improvement of the Mandatory Military Service in an attempt of further identification
of the Armed Forces with the Brazilian society, and development studies to enable
the establishment of a Civilian Service, to be regulated via specific rules;

- expansion of the combat capacity of the Armed Forces via mobilization of
personnel, materials and services to complement military logistics in case of the
country gets involved in a conflict; and

- optimization of the control over non-governmental actors, especially in the
Amazon region, aiming at the preservation of the national heritage, through a wide
coordination of the Armed Forces with the Brazilian government organs responsible
for authorizing the operation of these actors within the country, particularly those
with foreign links.


-----

##### Hypotheses of Employment (HE)


“Hypothesis of Employment” is understood as the preview of a possible employment
of the Armed Forces in a certain situation or area of strategic interest for national
defense. It is designated by taking into account the high degree of indetermination
and unpredictabily of threats against the country. Based on the hypothesis of
employment, the pertinent operational and strategic plans will be designed and
maintained updated, aiming to enable the continuous readiness of the Nation as a
whole, and particularly of the Armed Forces, to employed in the country’s defense.

##### Joint employment of the Armed forces Fulfilling the HE

The evolution of the Armed Forces’ structure from peace to an armed conflict or war
situation, will occur according to the peculiarities of the existing situation and in a
sequentially way, which could be schematized as follows:

a) Peace time

The military organizations will be organized to harmonize the fulfillment of the
Hypotheses of Employment with the need to optimize their maintenance costs
and to provide training in specific operational environments.

Intelligence activities will be conducted permanently to follow up the situation
and the actors who might represent a potential threat to the State, and to
provide an early warning before in the possibility that these threats become
real. The intelligence activities should observe safeguards and controls that
protect the constitutional rights and guarantees.

b) Crisis time

The Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces, after consulting the
National Defense Council, may activate a crisis management structure with
the participation of representatives of the Ministry of Defense and the Navy,
Army and Air Force Commands, as well as representatives from other Ministries,
if necessary.

The employment of the Armed Forces will be by a single branch or jointly, and
will happen in accordance with the issued guidelines.

Intelligence activities will be intensified.


##### Joint employment of the Armed forces Fulfilling the HE


-----

Political measures inherent to the crisis management will continue to be
adopted concurrently with military actions.

In the possibility that the crisis evolves to an armed conflict situation, the
following measures can be unleashed, among others:

    - the activation of the Operational Commands foreseen in the Military
Defense Structure;

    - the adjudication of forces belonging to the organizational structure of each
service branch to the Operational Commands activated;

    - the update and implementation, by the activated Operational Command, of
the campaign plans designed during peace time;

    - the replenishment of the structures;

    - the activation of a Defense Zone – areas where active troops and reservists
could be mobilized, including graduates from the Tiros de Guerra [military
training school for reservists] – to defend the inland of the country in case
of an armed conflict situation; and

    - proclaim National Mobilization, if necessary.

c) During the armed conflict or war

The unleash of the military campaign established in the prepared Campaign
Plan.

d) At the end of the armed conflict or war

The progressive demobilization of the unnecessary resources.

##### Fundamentals

The environments shown in the National Strategy of Defense do not allow envisaging
clear and concrete military threats, represented by antagonist forces of potentially
enemy countries or other non-state agents. Due to the uncertainty of threats against
the State, the readiness of the Armed Forces should be oriented to act fulfilling
varied missions, in different areas and scenarios, in order to provide the backing to
the State’s political actions.


##### Fundamentals


-----

The Hypotheses of Employment derive from the combination between the main
trends of the national and international scenarios evolution, and the political-strategic
orientations of the Country.

While developing the Hypotheses of Employment, the Military Strategy of Defense
shall include de employment of the Armed Forces considering the following aspects,
among others:

 - the monitoring and control of the air space, the terrestrial borders, the territory,
and the Brazilian jurisdictional waters during peace time;

 - the threat of penetration into the terrestrial borders or of approaches into the
Brazilian jurisdictional waters;

 - the threat of far superior military forces in the Amazon region;

 - the internal proceedings linked to the national defense resulting from a war in
another world region, overcoming the limits of a controlled regional war, with the
effective or potential employment of nuclear weapons;

 - Brazil’s participation in peace keeping and humanitarian operations, ruled by
international organizations;

 - the participation in homeland law and order enforcement operations, within the
terms of the Federal Constitution, and in attendance to the Electoral Justice
Courts requests;

 - the threat of an armed conflict in the South Atlantic region.

##### The structuring of the Armed Forces

In order to move effectively fulfill the Hypotheses of Employment, the Armed Forces
should be organized and coordinated so as to facilitate the accomplishment of joint
or single operations, which should be adequate to the unique characteristics of the
operations in each strategic area.

The main instrument, by means of which the Armed Forces will develop their tactical
and strategic flexibility, will be the coordinated work between the service branches,
in order to take advantage of the dialectics of concentration and deconcentration.
Thence, the Armed Forces, as a rule, will jointly define their operational orientations,


##### The structuring of the Armed Forces


-----

privileginf this joint vision as a way to enhance their capacities, and they will reject
any attempt of defining an isolated operational orientation.

The institutional agent for this unified work will be the cooperation between the Staff
of each service branch with the Armed Forces Joint, in establishing and defining the
front lines of joint action. In this sense, the educational system of each service branch
will provide courses and will conduct projects of research and of joint formulation
with the systems of the other branches, and with the Escola Superior de Guerra.

Likewise, the Armed Forces should be equipped, organized and trained, since during
peacetime, according to the guidelines of the Ministry of Defense, performing single
and joint exercises.

This way, based on the National Strategy of Defense and its resulting Military Strategy,
the Armed Forces will submit their Equipment and Organization Plans to the Ministry
of Defense, which should include a proposal of territorial distribution of the military
facilities and the quantification of the necessary means to the effective fulfillment of
the Hypotheses of Employment, in order to enable:

 - the combat power to provide credibility to the dissuasion strategy;

 - that the National Defense System has the means to allow the enhancement of the
surveillance; the control of the air space, the terrestrial borders, the territory and
the Brazilian jurisdictional waters; and the national strategic infrastructure;

 - the increase of the military presence in strategic areas of the South Atlantic and
of the Amazon regions;

 - the increase in the participation of military and civilian government organizations
in the plan to vivify and to develop the strip of the Amazon region border, employing
the strategy of presence;

 - the adoption of a process of organization that covers the aspects related to the
concentration of means, the operational efficiency, the swiftness of employment
and the optimization of costing during peacetime; and

 - the existence of highly mobile and flexible strategic forces, endowed with
technologically advanced means and capable of being immediately employed,
organized in a way to best fulfill the Hypotheses of Employment.

The Plans of each service branch, consolidated in the Ministry of Defense, should


-----

make reference to short-term (until 2014), medium-term (from 2015 to 2022) and
long-term (from 2027 to 2030) goals.

Regarding equipment, the planning shall prioritize, with commercial, industrial and
technological compensation:

 - in the scope of the three service branches, conducted by the Ministry of the
Defense, the acquisition of airlift, reconnaissance and attack helicopters;

 - in the Navy, the design and production of conventional submarines, allowing its
evolution towards the design and production, in the coutry, of nuclear-propelled
submarines, as well as of surface and air means prioritized in this Strategy;

 - in the Army, the necessary means to the operational systems of the brigades
completion; the increase of the Ground Force’s tactical and strategic mobility,
especially of the Rapid Reaction Strategic Forces and of the forces based in the
Amazon region; the so called “Cores of Modernity”; the new family of armored
vehicles on wheels; the anti-aircraf missile and radars systems (air defense);
the production of ammunition and the weapons, and the individual combatant’s
equipment, among others, bringing them closer to the needed technologies for
the combatant of the future; and

 - in the Air Force, the acquisition of fighter aircrafts that gradually replace the
existing ones, aiming the possible standardization; the acquisition and development
of weapons and sensors, seeking self-sufficiency in the integration of these items
to the aircrafts; and the acquisition of troop transport aircrafts.

Regarding the distribution of the Armed Forces throughout the national territory, the
planning consolidated in the Ministry of the Defense shall prioritize:

 - in the Navy, the need to establish a Fleet in the north/northeast regions of
the country;

 - in the Army, a distribution process that meets the following conditioning factors:

a) A flexible expectation system, due to the indefinite threats, which facilitates
the progressive employment of the troops and the selective presence in case
of a crisis escalation;

b) The retention of troops at the central region of the country, particularly the
strategic reserves, in a situation of operational readiness with mobility, allowing


-----

them to rapidly move to any location of the national territory or abroad;

c) The retention of troops at the central-southern region of the country in order
to ensure the defense of the main demographic, industrial and economic
concentration areas, as well as the infrastructure, specially the power plant
one; and

d) The concentration of the regional reserves in their respective areas; and

 - in the Air Force, the adequate location of the troop transport units, in order to
rapidly enable the transportation support to the strategic forces of employment.
This presumes that they should be based close to the strategic reserves of the
Army, at the center of the Country. In addition, their air defense and air space
control units will be distributed in order to allow an effective meeting of the current
needs, swiftly and promptly.

From the consolidation of the Equipment and Organization Plans prepared by the
Armed Forces, the Ministry of the Defense will propose to the President a “National
Defense Equipment and Organization Bill”, involving the Brazilian society in the
search of the necessary solutions.

The special characteristics of the Amazon environment, with implications on the
doctrine of employment of the Armed Forces, should demand special treatment,
with the increase of actions to strengthen the strategy of presence in that
operational environment.

As a result of these indefinite threats, the Armed Forces should dedicate to obtain
guiding skills on the measures to be planned and adopted.

During peacetime, or while the resources are insufficient, some capacities will
be temporarily maintained by means of expansion cores, consisting of flexible
structures, capable of rapidly envolvement, in order to attain appropriate combat
power in the operations.

The following capacities are desirable to the Armed Forces:

 - permanent operational readiness to fulfill the Hypotheses of Employment,
integrating joint forces or not;

 - maintenance of units capable of making up Readiness Forces, ready to act in
different operational environments;


-----

 - power projection in the areas of strategic interest;

 - consolidated Command and Control, and Intelligence structures;

 - continued action, provided by an appropriate logistical support, aiming at
maximum logistical integration of the service branches;

 - short-term increase of the combat power, by incorporating resources that can be
mobilized, according to the Law; and

  - interoperability in the joint operations.

##### Science, Technology and Innovation (ST&I)

The Science, Technology and Innovation for National Defense Policy is intended to
encourage the scientific and technological development, and the innovation, in the
interest of national defense.

This will happen by a national planning to the development of high-tech products,
with the coordinate involvement of the military and civilian scientific and technological
institutions (STI), the industry and the university, with the definition of priority areas
and their respective technologies of interest, and the establishment of instruments
to promote the research of materials, equipment and defense or dual use systems,
in order to enable technological and operational vanguard based on the strategic
mobility, on the flexibility and on the capacity to dissuade or to surprise.

In order to serve the purpose of this policy, the “Strategic Concept for Defense-Driven
ST&I” shall also be considered; this document was prepared in 2003, resulting from
a joint effort of the Ministry of Defense and the Ministry of Science and Technology,
and revised in 2008.

The Ministry of Defense, in coordination with the Ministry of Science and Technology,
will update the Science, Technology and Innovation for National Defense Policy, and
its resulting normative instruments. In order to meet the objectives of this Policy,
an adequacy of the existing organizational structures that operate in the fields of
Science and Technology of Defense must take place. The aforementioned documents
will include:

 - measures to maximize and optimize research efforts in the civilian and military
scientific and technological institutions, to the development of state-of-the-art
technologies to the defense system, especially devoted to the priority areas and


##### Science, Technology and Innovation (ST&I)


-----

their correspondent technologies of interest, based on the definitions of integrated
efforts from the Armed Forces researchers;

 - a defense-products research and development national plan, having as prior scope
the search of mastering the strategic considered technologies and the measures for
research funding;

 - the integration of the military research centers’ eforts, with the definition of
the common employment materials research priorities to each center, and the
participation of researchers of the three service branches in prior projects; and

 - the establishment of strategic partnerships with countries that may contribute to
the development of state-of-the-art technologies in the interest of defense.

Projects of common interest to more than one service branch shall have their research
efforts integrated, and an integration “hub” for each one should be defined in the
specified plan.

Regarding the use of the outer space as a defense activities support mean, the
geostationary satellites used for communication, air traffic control and meteorology
will play a fundamental role in the process of making viable several functions in
command and control systems. The readiness, surveillance, monitoring and
reconnaissance capacities may also be improved by the use of optical sensors and
radars on board of satellites or unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs).

In this context, developing platforms and space missions, for civilian purposes,
such as environmental and scientific monitoring satellites, or meteorology and
communication geostationary satellites will be taken into account, within the scope
of the National Program for Space Activities - NPSA.

In any case, the concept, the project and the operation of space systems should
follow the international law, the bilateral and multilateral treaties ratified by the country,
as well as the international regimes signed by Brazil.

The described measures are backed by the partnership between the Ministry of
Defense and the Ministry of Science and Technology, dating back to the “Concept
for Defense-Driven ST&I”, a document that was jointly prepared in 2003 and
revised in 2008. This partnership was strengthened with the release of the Science,
Technology and Innovation Action Plan (PACTI/MCT – Inter-Ministerial Agreement
MCT/MD no. 750, November 20, 2007), which has the purpose of making viable
scientific-technological solutions and innovations to meet the needs of the country,
concerning national defense and development.


-----

##### Defense Industry


The relation between Science, Technology and Innovation when it comes to defense
is strengthened with the Productive Development Policy (PDP), released in May,
2008. Under the general coordination of the Ministry of Development, Industry and
Foreign Trade, the PDP reaches 32 areas. The structuring program of the Defense
Industrial Complex runs under the management of the Ministry of Defense and under
the coordination of the Ministry of Science and Technology.

The goal of this program is to “recover and stimulate installed industrial base growth,
expanding its supply to the Brazilian Armed Forces and for export purposes.” It
poses four challenges for the achievement of the goal:

 - to increase investment in Research, Development and Innovation;

 - to promote tax equity regarding imported products/materials;

 - to expand the share in both internal and foreign markets; and

 - to strengthen supplier chain in Brazil.

The PDP also suggests a set of actions to overcome the identified challenges:

 - to increase national purchases;

 - to expand and adjust funding;

 - to promote the sales and the capacity building of the Brazilian companies; and

 - to strengthen the research, development an innovation base.

Based on these goals, challenges and actions, the PDP seeks to strengthen the bonds
between the development of the Science and Technology and of the production.
It aims to take advantage of the potential of the technologies employed in the country
and transform them into final goods, stimulating the national industry.

The projects to be supported will be selected and assessed according to the
following described strategic actions, and to the characteristics that consider the
public demand potential, the possibility of common use by the service branches, the
dual use - military and civilian - of the technologies, the technological by-products of
civilian use, the nationalization rate, the exporting potential, the presence of critical
raw materials that depend on imports, and the international embargo potential.


-----

The Ministry of Defense, in coordination with the Ministry of Science and Technology
and with the Ministry of Development, Industry and Foreign Trade will conduct
the analysis of the aforementioned characteristics, selecting in a coordinated way
projects and products that combine the defense activity needs and the technological
and productive potentials existing in Brazil.

In order to meet the new challenges of the country’s defense industry, the National
Policy for the Defense Industry must be updated.

##### Defense Intelligence

Accuracy is the fundamental principle of Military Intelligence. Through Intelligence, we
seek that all planning efforts – political, strategic, operational and tactical – and their
execution should be developed based on facts that become reliable and opportune
knowledge. Accurate information is an essential condition for the appropriate
employment of military means.

Intelligence should be developed since peacetime, as it is responsible for the
overcoming of uncertainties. Its best results proceeds from its prospective nature,
allowing the outlining of possible courses of action and their ramifications. The
identification of the threats is the first result of the Military Intelligence activity.

##### Strategic Actions

The strategic actions that will guide the implementation of the National Strategy of
Defense are listed as follows:

###### Science and Technology

To promote the research of materials, equipment, and military and civilian systems
that harmonizes scientific-technological priorities with the defense needs.

1. The Ministry of Defense, in coordination with the Ministries of Foreign Affairs,
of Finance, of Development, Industry and Foreign Trade, of Planning, Budget and
Management, of Science and Technology and the Secretariat of Strategic Affairs
of the Presidency, will propose the establishment of strategic partnerships with
countries that may contribute to the development of state-of-the-art technologies in
the interest of defense.


##### Defense Intelligence


-----

2. The Ministry of Defense, in coordination with the Ministries of Finance, of
Development, Industry and Foreign Trade, of Planning, Budget and Management, of
Science and Technology and with the Armed Forces, shall establish a legal proceeding
to guarantee the continuous allocation of specific financial resources to make viable
the integrated development and the completion of national defense-related projects,
each one with a clearly defined integration “hub””, emphasizing the development and
production, among others, of:

 - fighters and transport aircrafts;

 - conventional and nuclear-propelled submarines;

 - surface naval means;

 - intelligent armaments, such as missiles, bombs and torpedoes, among others;

 - unmanned aerial vehicles;

 - command and control and information security systems;

 - radars;

 - electronic warfare equipment and platforms;

 - individual equipment and communication systems of the combatant of the future;

 - armored vehicles;

 - airlift helicopters for the enhancement of tactical mobility, and reconnaissance
and attack helicopters;

 - ammunition; and

 - optical and electro-optical sensors.

3. The Ministry of Science and Technology, by means of the Brazilian Space
Agency, will promote the update of the Brazilian Space Program, in order
to prioritize the development of the space systems needed to expand the
communication, meteorology and environmental monitoring capacity, especially
for the development of:


-----

 - a national geostationary satellite for meteorology and safe communications,
among other applications; and

 - remote sensing satellites for environmental monitoring, with optical sensors and
synthetic aperture radar.

4. The Ministry of Defense and the Ministry of Science and Technology, by means of
the Air Force Command’s Institute of Aeronautics and Space and the Brazilian Space
Agency, will promote measures aiming to ensure the autonomy to produce, launch,
operate and replace space systems, through:

 - the development of satellite-launching vehicles and ground systems in order to
guarantee access to space in low and geostationary orbits;

 - activities to promote and support the development of the industrial capacity in
the space sector, with the participation of the Ministry of Development, Industry
and Foreign Trade, in order to guarantee the supply and the prompt replacement
of components, sub-systems and systems; and

 - personnel qualification activities in the areas of creation, design, development
and operation of space systems.

###### Human Resources

To value the military career, in compliance with its role in the Brazilian society, as
well as to encourage enlistment, selection, development and retention of civilian
personnel, in order to contribute to the defense efforts.

1. The enlistment of professional personnel for the Armed Forces shall be
representative of all social layers. The military career will be valued by the creation
of incentives compatible with the unique characteristics of the profession. In this
sense, the Ministry of Defense, advised by the Commands of each service branch,
will propose the necessary measures to the intended valuing of the career.

2. The enlistment of the temporary personnel of the Armed Forces should represent
the Brazilian society, and also enable the availability of workmanship adequate to the
new technological means of national defense. In this sense, the Ministry of Defense,
advised by the Commands of each service branch, will propose the necessary
changes to the Mandatory Military Service.


-----

3. The Ministry of Defense and the Secretariat of Strategic Affairs of the Presidency
will propose the creation and regulation of a Civilian Service, throughout the national
territory, to be rendered by citizens not assigned to carry out the Mandatory
Military Service.

4. The Ministry of Defense will conduct studies about the establishment of a corps
of civillian specialists in Defense, in addition to the existing careers in the military
and civilian administrations, in order to organize a workforce capable of acting in
the management of defense public policies, in programs and projects in the defense
area, as well as in the interaction with governmental organizations and with the
society, integrating both technical and political points of view.

###### Education

To promote further integration and participation of the civilian governmental sectors
in the debate about defense-related themes, as well as the effective participation
of the Brazilian society, via the academia and the institutes and entities linked to
defense strategic subjects.

1. The Ministry of Defense shall submit a plan to transfer the Escola Superior de
Guerra to Brasília, in order to enhance the exchange between the members of the
Federal Government and the aforementioned Institution, as well as to optimize the
qualification of human resources in defense issues.

2. The Ministry of Defense and the Ministry of Planning, Budget and Management
will propose a bill, changing the law that creates the Escola Superior de Guerra.
This bill will aim at creating directorate and high advisory positions to organize a
permanent corps, with renewing possibility to allow the exercise of academic
activities by attracting individuals with notorious specialization or recognized lore in
specific areas. This will allow an increase in the institutional capacity of the Escola
Superior de Guerra to develop academic and administrative activities, as well as to
enhance the exchange between the Federal Government members, the organized
society and that Institution.

3. The Ministry of Defense and the Secretariat of Strategic Affairs of the Presidency
will stimulate the organization of Meetings, Symposia and Seminars to debate
strategic issues, which includes the National Defense subjects. It should be given a
special attention to the participation of the society in these events.

4. The Ministry of Defense will intensify the publicity about defense activities, so that


-----

they become more visible to the society, and will implement actions and programs to
promote and disseminate research and the qualification of human resources, such
as the Program of Support to Education, Scientific and Technological Research on
National Defense (Pró-Defesa).

5. The Ministry of Defense will formulate an Education Policy with the following
purposes:

  - to expedite the interaction process of the military education, particularly at the level
of High Studies, meeting the guidelines contained in the first section of this
Strategy, and

 - to prepare military and civilians to work in the Central Administration of the
Ministry itself, and in other sectors of the Government, in the interest of Defense.

6. The education institutions of the three service branches will enlarge, in their
military curricula, subjects related to the basics on Constitutional Law and on
Human Rights, necessary to consolidate the identification of the Armed Forces with
the Brazilian People.

###### Mobilization

To accomplish, integrate and coordinate the planning, preparation, implementation
and control actions of the National Mobilization and Demobilization activities
established in the National Mobilization System (SINAMOB).

1. Until the change in the legislation of the National Mobilization System is not approved,
the Ministry of Defense will lead and coordinate the other ministries, secretariats and
organizations linked to the SINAMOB, in the establishment of programs, rules and
procedures related to the completions of the National Logistics, and in the adequacy
of the governmental policies with the National Mobilization policy.

2. The Ministry of Defense, in coordination with the Secretariat of Strategic Affairs of
the Presidency, will propose modifications in the Law no. 11.631, of December 27,
2007, which defines SINAMOB’s central entity.


-----

###### Logistics

To expedite the integration process between the three service branches, especially
in the fields of basic industrial technology, logistics and mobilization, command and
control and joint operations.

1. The Ministry of Defense will propose the modification its by-law structure, in order
to create a subordinate entity in charge of formulating and guiding the defense
products procurement policy.

2. The Ministry of Defense will propose the creation of a subordinate structure in
charge of coordinating the processes of certification, metrology, standardization and
industrial promotion.

###### Defense Industry

To harmonize the governmental effort to expedite the country’s growth with the
National Defense needs.

1. The Ministry of Defense, after consulting the Ministries of Finance, of Development,
of Industry and Foreign Trade, of Planning, Budget and Management, of Science and
Technology, and the Secretariat of Strategic Affairs of the Presidency, shall propose
modifications in the legislation regarding the special legal and economic regime for
the purchases of defense products in the national companies; with to modify Law no
8.666 of June, 1993.

2. The Ministry of Defense, in coordination with the Ministries of Finance, of
Development, Industry and Foreign Trade, of Transport, of Planning, Budget and
Management, of Science and Technology, and the Secretariat of Strategic Affairs of
the Presidency, shall propose modifications in the legislation related to the taxation
on the national defense industry, through the establishment of a special legal regime
to allow incentives and tax exemption to the private initiative in the production of
priority defense products for the Armed Forces and for export purposes.

3. The Ministry of Defense, in coordination with the Ministries of Finance, of
Development, Industry and Foreign Trade, of Transport, of Planning, Budget and
Management, of Science and Technology, and the Secretariat of Strategic Affairs of
the Presidency, shall propose modifications in the legislation related to the special
line of credit for defense products, by means of the National Bank for Economic and
Social Development (BNDES), similar to the ones already granted to other activities.


-----

4. The Ministry of Defense, in coordination with the Ministries of Finance, of
Development, Industry and Foreign Trade, of Transport, of Planning, Budget and
Management, of Science and Technology, and the Secretariat of Strategic Affairs of
the Presidency, shall propose modifications in the legislation to making viable, by the
Ministry of Finance guarantee proceedings to defense products export contract of
great significance, in accordance with the Decree-Law no. 1.418, of September 03,
1975, and the Law of Fiscal Responsibility.

###### Command and Control

To consolidate the National Defense command and control system.

The Ministry of Defense will improve the Defense Command and Control System to
include the use of Brazil’s own telecommunications satellite.

As a result of its sensors of monitoring and control ling the Brazilian terrestrial,
maritime and air spaces, the Defense Command and Control integrated system shall
be able to make data of interest to the National Public Security System available,
according to its specific constitutional attributes. Likewise, the National Public
Security System shall make available, to the national defence system data of interest
for border control, which is also performed by the Armed Forces, especially the ones
related to those activities linked to transnational crimes through the borders.

###### Training

To update the operational planning and train joint staffs.

The Ministry of Defense will define cores of joint staffs, coordinated by the Joint Staff,
to be activated, since peacetime, within the organizational structure of the Armed
Forces, in order to allow the continuity and update of the operational planning and
training that meet what was established in the strategic plans.

###### Defense Intelligence

To improve the Defense Intelligence System.

The System shall receive the necessary resources to formulate a conjunctural


-----

diagnosis of the current scenarios, with a political-strategic prospective, considering
the national and international environments.

The human resources will be trained on the analysis and techniques in the scientific,
technological, cybernetic, space and nuclear fields, with emphasis on the monitoring/
control, on the strategic mobility and on the logistical capacity.

In the Ministry of Defense, a structure compatible with the military intelligence bodies’
integration needs will be created.

###### Doctrine

To promote the improvement of the Doctrine of the Joint Operations Doctrine.

The Ministry of Defense will conduct studies related to the improvement of the
Joint Operations Doctrine, mainly focusing the operational environment and the
improvement of the defense means, the experience and the knowledge acquired
from running joint operations and the guidelines of the National Strategy of Defense,
regarding the assignments of the Armed Forces Joint Staff and the Staffs of each
service branch.

###### Peacekeeping Operations

To promote the increase of the Armed Forces’ training and participation in
peacekeeping operations, taking part in UN’s or regional multilateral organization’s
Peacekeeping Forces.

1. Brazil shall expand its participation in peacekeeping operations, under the aegis
of the UN or of a regional multilateral organization, according to the national interests
stated in international commitments.

2. The Ministry of Defense will promote actions aiming to increase the activities of
a Peacekeeping Operations Instruction Center, in order to stimulate the training of
civilian and military, or of Public Security contingents, as well as guests from friendly
nations. For this purpose, the Ministry will provide the necessary support in order to
make the Center a regional reference in the joint training for peacekeeping operations
and for humanitarian demining.


-----

###### Infrastructure

To harmonize the current governmental efforts to expedite the country’s growth with
the National Defense needs.

1. The Ministry of Defense, in coordination with the Secretariat of Strategic Affairs
of the Presidency, will propose to the apropriate ministries the necessary initiatives
to the development energy, transport and communications infrastructures in the
interest of defense, according to the strategic planning for the employment of
the Armed Forces.

2. In the design of the Military Interest Aerodrome Development Plan (PDAIM), the
Ministry of Defense will prioritize the deployment aerodromes established in the
Amazon region’s defense related planning.

3. The Ministry of Defense will submit to the Ministry of Transport, on an agreed date,
a medium and long-term investment program, as well as its priorities linked to the
transport routes needs, in order to meet the strategic planning resulting from the
Hypotheses of Employment. The Ministry of Transport, on its turn, will include the
aforementioned priorities in the National Plan of Logistics and Transport (PNLT).

4. The Ministry of Transport, in coordination with the Ministry of Defense, will
install – at the Supreme Commander Operation Center (COCS) – a terminal of the
Georeferenced Transport Data Base to make the information related to the transport
infrastructure, from that system, available for the planning and strategic management
of crises and conflict situations.

5. The Ministry of Defense and the Ministry of National Integration will develop
joint studies aiming to make the Programa Calha Norte and the Border Strip
Development Promotion Program (PDFF) compatible, and to assess the feasibility
of structuring Local Productive Arrangements (APL) with social and economic
infrastructural actions to meet the occasional needs to vivify and develop the
border region, identified in the strategic planning resulting from the Hypotheses
of Employment.

6. The Ministry of Communications, in the context of the Electronic Government
Program – Citizen Care Service (GESAC), shall plan the installation of community
telecenters with broadband connection at the existing military border facilities, as
well as the ones to be implemented as a result of the Decree no. 4.412, of October
7, 2002, amended by the Decree no. 6.513, of July 22, 2008.


-----

7. The Ministry of Defense, with the support of the Armed Forces on whatever
is deemed pertinent, and the Ministry of Communications will promote studies
aiming to coordinate incentive actions to the licensing of community radio stations
in the townships of the border areas, in order to lessen the effects of undesirable
radio emissions.

###### Law and Order Enforcement

To harmonize the legislation and train the specific means of the Armed Forces for an
occasional employment in the Law and Order Enforcement under the terms of the
Federal Constitution.

1. The Ministry of Defense will propose modifications in the Complementary Law no.
97 of June 09, 1999, amended by the Complementary Law no. 117 of September 02,
2004; and to the Law no. 9.299, of August 07, 1996, which enable the employment
of the Armed Forces in the Law and Order Enforcement under the terms of Federal
Constitution, efficiently and safeguarding its members.

2. The training of the Armed Forces shall include the qualification of the troops
to fulfill the Law and Order Enforcement missions, under the terms of the Federal
Constitution.

###### Regional Stability

To contribute to the regional stability maintenance.

1. The Ministry of Defense and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs will promote the increase
of the activities regarding the regional stability maintenance and the cooperation in
the border areas of the country.

2. The Ministry of Defense and the Armed Forces will strengthen their strategic
partnerships in the cybernetics, space and nuclear areas and the military exchange
with the Armed Forces of friendly nations, particularly with those within the
Brazilian strategic interest surroundings area and those of the Portuguese-speaking
Country Communities.

3. The Ministry of Defense, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Armed Forces
will seek to actively contribute towards the strengthening, the expansion and the
consolidation of the regional integration, emphasizing research and development of
common projects on defense products.


-----

###### International Participation

To increase the support to the Brazilian participation in the Antarctic activities.

1. The Ministry of Defense, other involved ministries, and the Armed Forces should
increase the necessary support to the Brazilian’s participation in the decision-making
processes regarding the Antarctic Region’s destiny.

###### National Security

To contribute to the rise of the National Security level.

All State’s instances should contribute to the rise of the National Security level,
particularly emphasizing:

 - the improvement of crisis management processes;

 - the integration of all National Intelligence System (SISBIN) bodies;

 - the prevention of terrorist acts and of massive attacks against the Human Rights,
as well as the guiding of counter-terrorist operations, under the responsability of
the Ministries of Defense and of Justice, and the Institutional Security Cabinet of
the Presidency (GSI/PR);

 - the security measures for the critical infrastructure areas – including services –
especially regarding energy, transportation, water and telecommunications,
under the responsability of the Ministries of Defense, of Mines and Energy, of
Transport, of National Integration and of Communications, and the coordination,
assessment, monitoring and risk mitigation works performed by the Institutional
Security Cabinet of the Presidency (GSI/PR);

 - the measures of chemical, biological and nuclear defense, under the
responsibility of the Presidential Staff Office, the Ministries of Defense, of Health,
of National Integration, of Mines and Energy, of Science and Technology and the
GSI-PR, to the protection of the population and the national territory facilities, from
the possible effects resulting from the employment of these kinds of weapons.

 - the actions of civil defense, under the responsibility of the Ministry of
National Integration;

 - the actions of public security, under the responsibility of the Ministry of Justice
and of the public security states bodies;


-----

 - the improvement of the security devices and procedures that reduce the
vulnerability of the systems related to the National Defense against cybernetic
attacks and, in case that occurs to allow their immediate reestablishment, under
the responsibility of the Presidential Staff Office, the Ministries of Defense, of
Communications, of Science and Technology, and the GSI-PR;

 - the execution of studies to enable the establishment of a tropical disease research
center for the Amazon region, under the responsibility of the Ministries of Defense,
of Science and Technology, of Health, and states and townships health agencies;

 - defense measures against pandemics; and

 - the fulfillment of international commitments related to the protection of human life
in the sea, and to the international air traffic, under the responsibility of the Ministry
of Defense, through the Commands of the Navy and Air Force, respectively, and
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs;

##### Final Provisions

The complementary documents and the ones resulting from the current National
Strategy of Defense, whose needs in terms of design or update meet the requirements
of this Strategy, should be prepared according to the table given below:


##### Final Provisions


-----

|DEADLINE dd/mm/yyyy|TASK TO PERFORM|RESPONSIBLE|
|---|---|---|
|31/12/2010|Strategic Plans that will serve as the basis for the Campaign Plans of the Joint Commands, for each HE.|MD|
|30/06/2009|Equipment and Organization Plans of the Armed Forces (2009-2030)|MD and Armed Forces|
|30/09/2009|Proposed Law on Equipment and Organization of the National Defense to be submitted to the President.|CC and MD|
|31/03/2009|Update of the Science, Technology and Innovation Policy for National Defense and resulting normative instruments.|MD and MCT|
|31/03/2009|Update of the National Policy for the Defense Industry.|MD, MF, MDIC, MPOG,|
|31/03/2009|Proposal for the establishment of strategic partnerships with countries that may contribute to the development of state-of- the-art defense technologies in the interest of defense.|MD, MRE and SAE|
|31/03/2009|Proposal for the establishment of a legal act that guarantees the continuous allocation of specific financial resources to enable the integrated development and the completion of national defense- related projects.|CC, MF, MD, MPOG and SAE|


###### DEADLINE TASK TO PERFORM RESPONSIBLE
dd/mm/yyyy


-----

|DEADLINE dd/mm/yyyy|TASK TO PERFORM|RESPONSIBLE|
|---|---|---|
|30/06/2009|Proposal for the necessary devices to enable investiments in the Armed Forces from the revenues occasionally generated by State’s properties, managed by the service branches.|CC, MD, MF and MPOG|
|30/06/2009|Proposal of specific legislation to allow the investment in the Armed Forces of financial resources resulting from the collection of fees and charges.|CC, MD, MF and MPOG|
|30/06/2009|Proposed Law with the new Defense Military Structure including the structuring of a core of joint staffs linked to the Ministry of Defense.|CC and MD|
|30/06/2009|Submission of a feasibility study to create and regulate a Civilian Service, throughout the national territory, to be rendered by citizens who are not assigned to carry out the Mandatory Military Service.|CC, MD, MPOG and SAE, MEC and SAÚDE|
|30/06/2009|Proposed law on the creation of a specific corps of Defense Experts to be included in the Unified Career Plan of the defense area servants, complementing the existing careers in the civilian and in the military administration.|CC, MD and MPOG|
|30/06/2009|Plan to transfer the Escola Superior de Guerra (ESG) to Brasília, and proposal of the necessary complementary measures.|MD|


###### DEADLINE TASK TO PERFORM RESPONSIBLE
dd/mm/yyyy


-----

|DEADLINE dd/mm/yyyy|TASK TO PERFORM|RESPONSIBLE|
|---|---|---|
|31/03/2009|Proposed law changing the Law that created the ESG, and allowing the creation of directorate and advisory group (DAS) positions.|CC, MD and MPOG|
|30/06/2009|Proposal of an Education Policy for the Armed Forces, especially at the level of high studies.|MD and MEC|
|31/03/2009|Proposal to change the Law of the National Mobilization System.|CC, MD and SAE|
|30/06/2009|Proposed law with a new structure for the Ministry of Defense, with the creation of an entity in charge of the defense products procurement process, properly integrated to the material catalogation.|CC, MD and MPOG|
|31/03/2009|Proposal for the creation of a structure subordinated to the Ministry of Defense, responsible for coordinating the processes of certification, metrology, standardization and industrial promotion.|MD, MDIC and MPOG|
|31/03/2009|Proposal of modifications in the Law no. 8.666 and in complementary legislation, enabling a special legal and economic regime for the defense products purchase in national industries.|CC, MD, MDIC, MT, MPOG and SAE|


###### DEADLINE TASK TO PERFORM RESPONSIBLE
dd/mm/yyyy


-----

|DEADLINE dd/mm/yyyy|TASK TO PERFORM|RESPONSIBLE|
|---|---|---|
|31/03/2009|Proposal of modifications in the legislation regarding taxation on the national defense industry through the establishment of a legal regime that allows incentives and tax exemption to the private initiative in the manufacturing of priority defense products for the Armed Forces.|CC, MD, MDIC, MF, MT, MPOG and SAE|
|31/03/2009|Proposal of modifications in the legislation to making viable, by the Ministry of Finance, guarantees proceedings for considerable defense products export contracts of great significance.|CC, MD, MF, MT, MDIC and SAE|
|30/06/2009|Proposal of change to the Complimentary Law no. 97, Complimentary Law no.117 and Law no. 9.299, to adequate them with the National Strategy of Defense.|CC and MD|


###### DEADLINE TASK TO PERFORM RESPONSIBLE
dd/mm/yyyy


THE NATIONAL STRATEGY OF DEFENSE AND ITS RESULTING DOCUMENTS
WILL BE COMPLEMENTED BY ATTACHMENTS.
THESE ATTACHMENTS WILL DESIGN PLANS FOR VARIOUS
HYPOTHESES OF EMPLOYMENT OF THE ARMED FORCES.
THEY WILL BE PREPARED, BY THE ARMED FORCES JOINT STAFF,
AND BY THE STAFFS OF THE THREE SERVICE BRANCHES UNDER THE
DIRECTION OF THE MINISTER OF DEFENSE.


-----

|Col1|Abbreviations|
|---|---|
|CC|Presidential Staff Office|
|MCT|Ministry of Science and Technology|
|MD|Ministry of Defense|
|MDIC|Ministry of Development, Industry and Foreign Trade|
|MEC|Ministry of Education|
|MF|Ministry of Finance|
|MPOG|Ministry of Planning, Budget and Management|
|MRE|Ministry of Foreign Affairs|
|MT|Ministry of Transports|
|SAE|Secretariat of Strategic Affairs of the Presidency|
|SAÚDE|Ministry of Health|


##### Abbreviations


-----

###### Ministry of Defense


-----

