## MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
 Sofia 1606, no.3 Dyakon Ignatiy str.

# THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA’S 
 ARMED FORCES’ DEVELOPMENT PLAN 

## Sofia
 2010


-----

|CONTENTS|Col2|
|---|---|
|Preface|p 3|
|I. Background|p 4|
|- Fundamentals|p 4|
|- Purpose|p 4|
|- Aims|p 4|
|- Scope|p 5|
|- Assumptions|p 5|
|- Principles and approaches for development of the Armed forces|p 5|
|- Bulgarian Armed forces` missions and tasks|p 6|
|- Level of Ambitions|p 7|
|- Minimum military requirements|p 8|
|- Doctrine|p 8|
|II. Structure of the Armed Forces|p 9|
|1. Development of the functional structure of the Armed Forces|p 9|
|2.Organisational structure of the Armed Forces|p 11|
|2.1 Joint Forces Command|p 11|
|2.2 Land Forces|p 12|
|2.3 Air Force|p 13|
|2.4 Navy|p 13|
|2.5 Structures directly subordinated to the Minister of Defence|p 14|
|III. Management, Command & Control|p 16|
|IV. The number of the Armed Forces and distribution of personnel by structures|p 19|
|V. Providing the Armed Forces with main armaments and equipment|p 20|
|VI. Logistics support|p 21|
|VII. Communications support|p 22|
|VIII. Military education, science and training|p 25|
|IX. Information Policy and strategic public communication|p 26|
|X. Development of INFOSEC units|p 27|
|XI. Disposition and infrastructure|p 27|
|XII. Built-up of new capabilities and development of existing ones|p 28|
|XIII. Phases of reorganisation of the Armed forces up to 2014|p 34|
|XIV. Resources in support for Armed forces reforms|p 35|
|List of used terms and acronyms|p 36|


-----

### Introduction 
 The contemporary strategic security environment, the significant build-up of imbalances between planned capabilities and the resources allocated for their creation and maintenance, the ineffective defence management and the negative impact of the global economic and financial crisis – those factors recently forced a Force Structure Review (FSR). The review started in February 2010 and in the course of the process we reviewed and actualised the structure, size, roles, missions and tasks of the Armed Forces[1]. The main objective was to determine what defence capabilities Bulgaria needs to develop, taking into account existing and actually foreseeable resources the public can spare for defence in the context of our place in NATO’s collective defence system and EU’s Common Security and Defence Policy. The goal is to achieve a real transformation of defence capabilities, rather than another set of technical reductions. The Armed Forces Development Plan (AFDP) is a result of the FSR. The conceptual part of
 FSR ended with the writing and publication of the White Paper on Defence and Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria[2] as a development program for the Armed Forces adopted by resolution in the National Assembly. This program will be put into practice through this AFDPAFDP and the Long-Term Investment Plan (LTIP). Unlike before, different modernising matters will be discerned in the Long-Term Investment Plan. The two plans are interrelated, the latter being crucial for the achievement of the first.
 The purpose of the FSR, which will be practically implemented through the AFDP, is to build and maintain a single set of forces balanced for all tasks, with a unified command & control system for peacetime and during crises, with the organisation, size, armament, equipment and training adequately corresponding to its role, missions and tasks. This will be a modern Armed Forces, backed with the required resources, which will prioritise in the development of capabilities so as to participate in expeditionary operations with the forces of other NATO and EU countries. As for the need for detailed regulations and a specification of the rights and duties of the citizens and the authorities directing the Armed Forces’ reserve, the public relations of the reserve, the employment in it and the military accountability to the citizens – this will be regulated by a separate Law on the Reserve, forseen to enter into force on 01/01/2012, whereby reserve regulations defined in the Law on Defence and the Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria will be countermanded.
 The creation of a new Law on Military Police, which shall extend the Military Police Service’s (MPS) functions and powers prescribed to the Minister of Defence, aims at getting it in closer interactions and relations with national police authorities. It will also countermand relevant texts in the Law on Defence. MPS companies will be developed, equipped and trained with elements from Special Forces’ training.

 I. General Principles

 Legal basis The AFDP is to be adopted by the Council of Ministers pursuant to Art. 22, paragraph 2, section 6 of the Law on Defence and the Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria[3], in accordance with the Armed Forces’ development parameters, defined by the National

1 The Armed Forces include all military personnel in Bulgaria’s defence system
2 Hereafter referred to as White Paper
3 Hereafter referred to simply as ‘Law on Defence’


-----

### Assembly in its decision to adopt the White Paper as a development program for the Armed Forces determining their size, adopted on 28.10.2010, publ. SG №.88/09.11.2010.

 Function
 The AFDP secures the building a single set of forces with balanced capabilities across all components, to address the entire spectrum of tasks arising from developed scenarios and analyses of the strategic security environment and its progression.

 Plan goals
 - To provide the mechanism to bring the current structure to the parameters entrenched in the White Paper.
 - To guarantee fulfilment of the Army’s constitutional obligations and to ensure adequate contributions to Allied operations using a single set of forces;
 - Тo create an integrated system for the effective management of defence under constant public scrutiny with a flexible planning and effective-response potential.
 - To secure the preservation of existing necessary capabilities, the installation, maintenance and development of missing capabilities, the discarding of unnecessary capabilities and the creation of conditions for the evolutionary progression of the Armed Forces.
 - The building of Armed Forces, deployable according to a single peacetime and crises personnel establishment, under a single set of training programmes, using a single set of doctrines, operational procedures and methodologies, and a single command & control system.
 - To achieve balance between necessary skills and available resources.
 - To reach the cost allocation at ratio of 60:25:15 for maintenance of personnel, for ongoing maintenance and for capital expenditure respectively.
 - The transformation of combat maintenance and support.

 Plan Scope
 The plan covers the main activities on the development of the Ministry of Defence (MoD) and Armed Forces in the 2011-2014 period, apart from the section on creating new capabilities, modernisation and rearmament, which continues post 2014. The Plan is open to change, so as to be fully responsive the developments in the security environment and to accord with NATO’s defence planning cycle. Reviewing and actualising the plan is carried out every 2 years. In accordance with the parameters of the plan approved by the Council of Ministers and with the Law on Defence, the Minister of Defence, or officials designated by him, approve the personnel establishment for the appropriate structures.

 Assumptions
 - Legislative amendments to ensure the implementation of the parameters set in the White Paper and of changes in the Armed Forces have been planned.
 - The adoption of the Law on the Reserve will introduce a voluntary reserve service to staff and equip the Armed Forces’ peacetime structures. The reserve’s size will be no more than 10% of the personnel from the Ministry of Defence, the Bulgarian Army and structures directly subordinate to the Minister of Defence.


-----

### - The constant share of the state’s budget for the Ministry of Defence until 2014 is to be no less than 1.5% of GDP.

 Principles and approaches for the Armed Forces’ development

 Principles
 - Effective democratic and civilian oversight of the Armed Forces. - The development of the Armed Forces in accordance with changes in the security environment, with capabilities relevant to emerging risks and challenges.
 - The establishment and development of the Armed Forces is based on: integration; sufficiency; prioritising; interoperability; adaptability/modularity in military units; unity of forces; accounting and consideration of resources; undivided authority and organisational subordination; continuity and consistency, transparency.
 - The National Targets of the Armed Forces (or their equivalent, as agreed in NATO’s defence planning process) are a key element / starting point for capability-building.
 - To achieve the optimal balance between capabilities planned for the Armed Forces’[4] and the actual resources the state can afford.

 Approaches
 - Capabilities planning adequate to the set of plausible and most probable military tasks in peacetime and in crises, with priority to forces capable of participating in joint and expeditionary operations.
 - Armed Forces’ restructuring carried out "top-down" and beginning with strategic level command structures (the integrated Ministry of Defence - IMoD) and operational level command (the Joint Operational Command – JOC – and the headquarters of the Armed Forces).
 - Gradual and continuous increase in the troops’ combat effectiveness during the transition period till 2014.
 - A prioritised development of forces and means of intelligence, surveillance and early warning systems for command & control, and deployable forces mainly focused on immediate response and special operations forces.
 - The reforming of military unit structures to go hand-in-hand with reducing the number of garrison and barracks areas.
 - The maintenance and support tasks to be carried out only with already established capabilities.
 - Increasing the efficiency and effectiveness in defence resource management and the optimal use of limited budgetary resources.

 Missions and Tasks of the Armed Forces
 The Armed Forces are assigned the following missions:
 - Defence:
 - Support to international peace and security;
 - Contribution to the National Security in Peacetime.

4 In accordance with their role, missions and tasks.


-----

### Mission Defence covers tasks linked to guaranteeing the state’s sovereignty and independence, defence of the territorial integrity of the state and of NATO member-states through article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty.

 Mission  Support to international peace and security includes carrying out international and coalition commitments to participate in NATO and EU crisis-response operations; partaking in missions of the UN, the OSCE and other coaltion structures; arms control related activities; the nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), impedingtheir media of proliferation and materials for production; international military partnerships; the provision of humanitarian relief; and the consolidation of trust and security.

 Mission Contribution to the National Security in Peacetime includes: developing/maintaining early-warning capabilities for potential risks and threats; control of sea and air space activities; deterrence operations; neutralising terrorist, extremist and criminal groups; protection and defence of strategic sites; protection and support of the populace in case of natural disasters, industrial accidents and ecological crises; unexploded ordnance disposal; providing humanitarian relief; support to migration control; search and rescue activities; support, when necessary, to other government organisations and local authorities to prevent and overcome the consequences of terrorist attacks, natural disasters, industrial accidents, ecological crises and epidemics.

 Level of ambition in the missions of the armed forces

 Mission Defence In accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, the Armed Forces defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country with all available forces and means. This defence is realised in terms of activating article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty – the Armed Forces carry out the defence with the joint forces and means of NATO’s collective defence, according to NATO’s Common Defence Planning System. Part of NATO’s forces would be temporarily deployed on Bulgarian territory.
 Upon the activation of Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty and ensuing action on the territory of NATO member-states, the Armed Forces are to provide land, naval and air forces, of a predetermined set negotiated in NATO’s defence planning framework. The core component of this set is a tactical group from the Land Forcesbased on a medium mechanised brigade.
 In this mission the Armed Forces execute/establish: surveilance, control and defence of air-space, including sole air policing, through NATO’s Integrated Air Defence System (NATINADS) and perspectively through NATO’s Missile Defence System; sea surveillance and defence; maintaining readiness of early warning and command & control systems; and maintaining national capabilitiesin the allied collective defence system.

 Mission Support to International Peace and Security
 The Armed Forces maintain a readiness for participation in multinational allied and coalition operations conducted by NATO, EU, UN or other coalitions of allied states for crisis-response outside the country (outside the terms of Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty). The Bulgarian Armed Forces involve forces and equipment with total personnel of


-----

### up to 10% of the Land Forces. In terms of quantity, this contribution is expressed by the participation in prolonged operations with rotations of:
 - a reinforced battalion, or a matchingnumber of smaller units from different military services, corresponding to the resource equivalent to the level of ambition (on average about 1000 men).
 - the Air Force participates with helicopters and all necessary personnel, without rotation, for a period of six months per year.
 - The navy participates with declared forces, with resources equivalent to the required for one frigate, for a period of three to six months per year.
 - The logistics elements for our participation in operations are ensured accordingly.

 Mission Contribution to National Security in Peacetime
 In this mission, the Armed Forces assist other government agencies and organisations’ activities by consigning trained units within the existing capabilities framework, in accordance to developed plans.
 On Bulgarian territory the Armed Forces stand ready to provide forces with the appropriate readiness-level and resources. The size of personnel and resources will correlate to the threat level (or the type of crisis) within the existing organisational structure. 

 Minimum military requirements

 The minimum military requirements are the forces and resources ensuring the successful implementation of tasks in each mission. They are defined on the basis of ten planning scenarios that illustrate possible situations requiring the use of the Armed Forces and on the concepts and profiles developed from the planning scenarios. The minimum military requirements to perform the missions and consequent tasks are in Appendix № 1.

 • Doctrines
 The conclusions on the strategic environment and our NATO and EU membership lead to conceptual and doctrinal changes in the use of the Armed Forces. Those are central to the new structure. We are in need of a change in concept development, combat training and use of our Armed Forces, based on manoeuvrable battle groups fully equipped and trained to defend the state as well as to participate in missions outside its territory.
 Some essential points of reference for developing future doctrines, as imperatives for capabilities, are: focus on capability development and their effective use in the combat area; a high readiness level; training activities for joint and multinational environment operations; high usability and flexibility; modular force building. 
 In developing operational capabilities, the Armed Forces are building manoeuvrable and expeditionary units, capable of performing tasks in the full spectrum of operations, supplied with modern technological equipment, supported by integrated logistics, capable of operating in a network environment, able to quickly switch from one functional state to another, interoperable with allied forces, able to interact with civilian authorities and NGOs, and comprised of highly trained professional personnel.
 Using the conceptual conclusions from Force Structure Review and taking into account outlines in the National Security Strategy, the National Defence Strategy and the White Paper on Defence and Armed Forces, by June 2011 we will review the set of doctrines and draft new documents for approval, ministerial order and implementation by the end of


-----

### 2011. The most important doctrinal document is the Doctrine of the Armed Forces. It will serve as the basis for other doctrines.

 II. Armed Forces Structure

 1. Development of the Armed Forces’ functional structure The Republic of Bulgaria builds and develops its Armed Forces so as to secure necessary defence capabilities, to make the adequate efforts for the country's commitments as a NATO and EU member and to other international multilateral and bilateral treaties, in strict compliance with the country’s means and resources.
 The Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria are building the single set of forces and capabilities necessary to ensure national defence and our commitments in NATO’s collective defence system, the Common European Security and Defence Policy and other international arrangements, in strict compliance with the country’s means and resources.
 In accordance with missions and tasks, with the political commitments to provide forces for the purpose of collective defence and NATO’s defence structures (MS - 317 / 1), the Armed Forces, in the functional and ‘single set of forces’ sense, builds Deployable Forces (DP) and In-Place Forces (IPF): (Appendix № 2)

 A. Deployable Forces are military units in the Armed Forces with high mobility, with high and lower levels of readiness, capable of carrying out missions on the territory of NATO member-states and beyond (accordingly for Article 5 of the Washington Treaty for the former, and operations outside Article 5, in response to crises, for the latter).
 Deployable Forces also comprise of formations for collective defence, regarding Bulgaria’s commitments and responsibilities as a NATO member.

 B. In-place Forces are formations of the Armed Forces with limited mobility, higher and lower levels of readiness, contributing to national security in peacetime, countering potential asymmetric threats, capable of conducting operations to defend the territorial integrity of Bulgaria or neighbouring states in the collective security and defence system. They protect the air and sea sovereignty of countries with systems integrated in NATO’s common defence system.
 The number of high and lower readiness IPF formations is determined by the requirements set in capability planning documents, by developments in the security environment, by the defence tasks and by real means for securing resources.
 The Forces comprise of formations from the Land Forces, the Navy, the Air Force and units providing and securing logistics and communications directly subordinated to the Commander of the Joint Force Command.

 The In-place Forces also include the structures directly subordinate to the Minister of Defence, whose capabilities are directed towards:
 - Acquiring, storing and disseminating information. - Maintaining order and security in military units of the Armed Forces. - Adequate health insurance. - Equipping, training and the readiness of personnel.


-----

### - Securing the prerogatives of the Minister of Defence as set in the Law on Defence and the other special laws.
 - Securing the activity of other government bodies. - The rehabilitation and recreation of Armed Forces personnel.

 Readiness deadlines for the use of the Armed Forces: The readiness deadlines for Armed Forces’ formations aim to achieve the necessary flexibility in planning and conducting operations.
 The accepted categorisation of the Armed Forces’ military formations is consistent with NATO’s established system and includes 11 categories, with readiness periods from 2 to over 365 days, in accordance with Annex № 3.
 The Armed Forces’ formations from categories 1 to 9 make up the Gradual Readiness Forces (GRF). The formations from categories 10 and 11 make up the Long Term Build-up Forces (LTBF).

 The GRF are divided into: - High Readiness Forces; - Forces with Lower Readiness.

 High Readiness Forces are formations in the Armed Forces (Joint Force Command, the three branches of the Armed Forces, the structures directly subordinate to the Minister of Defence) in categories 1 to 8 and ready to use within periods from 2 to 90 days.
 Part of the high readiness formations form the Immediate Action Forces (IAF). The composition of IAF required for the execution of national tasks is determined annually by the Minister of Defence.
 The Forces with Lower Readiness are Armed Forces’ formations (from the Joint Force Command, the three branches of the Armed Forces, the structures directly subordinate to the Minister of Defence) in category 9 and ready for use within a period of up to 180 days.
 The number of formations with high and low readiness from the In-place Forces is determined by the requirements set in capability planning documents, by developments in the security environment, by the defence tasks and by real means for securing resources. Bringing the formations from one readiness level to another is carried out by established procedures and approved plans on increasing the Armed Forces’ readiness.
 The personnel allocation, equipping, weapons and material resources depend on the category of readiness.

 The LTBF are military formations in the Armed Forces whose formation and assembling occurs over a long period, in case of the activation of the worst and most distant- in-time scenario and for large-scale operations activated by Article 5 of the Washington Treaty. 
 Currently the Bulgarian Armed Forces do not maintain structures with personnel, weapons and material resources to generate formation with readiness for the activation of Article 5. This is due to the fact that, as a result of positive developments in international relations, the likelihood of such a large-scale conflict between countries is significantly reduced and unlikely. The likelihood of the Republic of Bulgaria, as a member of NATO and the EU, to get involved in such a conflict is virtually non-existent. If there were such a threat,


-----

### through of NATO’s collective defence mechanisms Bulgaria would be able to make use far greater military resources than those which it could provide on its own. Bulgaria providing military capabilities for NATO operations or for coalition operations is much more likely than the mass-mobilisation of forces to respond to conventional threats to the state.

 2. Organisational Structure of the Armed Forces (Appendix № 4)

 2.1 Joint Forces Command (JFC)
 The JFC is a functionally integrated structure at the operational level of command & control of the Bulgarian Army, which executes the full range of missions of the Armed Forces of Bulgaria. In this structure, the dominant feature is ‘jointness’[5]. The commanders of the Armed Forces’ services are subordinate to the Commander Joint Force Command.
 The Commander of the Joint Force Command executes the command and operational control of directly subordinate military units and the command of the Bulgarian Armed Forces’ military formations in joint operations.
 Compatibility and functional integration at the operational level allows for the optimisation of human resources and of the organisational-establishment of the services’ headquarters (HQs).
 The Joint Force Command integrates and implements only those functions and activities that are common to all three commands - joint intelligence, joint operations, joint logistics, communication and information support. Organisationally, the Joint Force Command consists of a Commander of the JFC with the HQ and units directly subordinate to the Commander of the Joint Force Command.

 The formations directly subordinate to the Commander of the JFC are:

 - The ‘Logistics’ Brigade.
 - The HQ for movement control.
 - A Mobile Communications and Information System (CIS).
 - Centre for Documentary Support.
 - Military Command Centre (MCC).
 - Centre for Security.
 - Monitoring and Control Centre for CBRN.
 - The ‘Charalitsa’ National Military Training Complex (NMTC).
 - The operational archive of the Bulgarian Army.
 - The ‘Novo Selo’ Training Area.

 The organisational structure of the Joint Force Command is set in Appendix № 5. The disposition of formations under the Joint Force Command is listed in Annex № 6.
 Structural schemes of the formations subordinate to the Joint Force Command – the Mobile CIS and ‘Logistics’ Brigade are listed in Appendix № 7.

 2.2 Land Forces
 The Land Forces participate in the defence of the state to ensure the security and territorial integrity independently or in joint task forces. This is done within the collective

5 in the sense of compatibility of capabilities of the military branches in operations


-----

### security and defence system, by maintaining the capabilities needed to participate in the execution of Armed Forces’ missions and tasks. The Land Forces maintain constant readiness, conduct training and participate in international operations to ensure peace and security and to respond to crises outside the country. The Land Forces execute tasks: in the defence of key infrastructure; to assist the state and local authorities in preparing, supporting and protecting the population, the national economy and the country, so as to respond to crises and overcome related consequences; on arms control and non-proliferation of WMDs, the means and materials for their proliferation; for the application of measures to strengthen trust and security. The Land Forces maintain capabilities for planning and participation in independent and joint operations.
 For the completion of the Land Forces’ tasks and to achieve the stated level of ambition, the necessary organisational structure is as follows:

 - Land Forces Command - The Centre for Documentary Support - Two mechanised brigades - ‘Special Operations’ regiment - An artillery regiment - An engineer regiment - A logistics regiment - A special mechanised battalion
 - A reconnaissance battalion
 - A CBRN battalion - The CIMIC Geographical Information Support and PsyOps battalion - A specialists training centre - A single basic training centre - The ‘Koren’ Training Area - A military band

 The brigades also comprise of Military Police companies.  The organisational structure of the Land Forces is given in Appendix № 8.  The disposition of the formations under the Land Forces Command is listed in Appendix № 9. The structural diagrams of formations are listed in Annex № 10.

 2.3 Air Force
 The Air Force guarantees the sovereignty of the Republic of Bulgaria by executing surveillance, protection and defence of its air space, and executing tasks in the defence of key infrastructure and strategic sites on national territory. This is done within the collective security and defence system, by maintaining the capabilities needed to participate in the execution of Armed Forces’ missions and tasks. The Air Force maintains a state of constant readiness, leads the preparations and partakes in the execution of operations. It exercises aerial navigation control and secures the inviolability of the state’s airspace within NATO’s air defence system.
 The Air Force executes tasks: to aid the state and local authorities in preparing, supporting and protecting the population, the rural economy and national territory, to respond


-----

### to non-military crises and to overcome related consequences; to assist other ministries and fire fighting agencies; and to carry out air surveillance and air transport of personnel and cargo.
 The Air Force maintains capabilities for planning and participation in independent and joint operations.
 The Organisational structure of the Air Force comprises of: - Air Force Command - Two air bases - A forward operations base - An air defence base - A Command, Control and Surveillance Base - A Specialised Equipment Base - A Centre for Documentary Support - A Military Police company

 The organisational structure of the Air Force is given in Appendix № 11.
 The disposition of the formations under the Air Force Command is listed in Appendix № 12.
 The structural diagrams of formations are listed in Annex № 13.

 2.4 The Navy
 The Navy guarantees the sovereignty and defends the interests of the Republic of Bulgaria in its sea space, and in combination with the other services of the Armed Forces ensures the security and territorial integrity of the country. This is done within the collective security and defence system, by maintaining the capabilities needed to participate in the execution of Armed Forces’ missions and tasks. Outside national territory it partakes in collective defence actions with a specified force – anti-terrorist operations, patrolling of sea regions, embargo operations, escorting exceptionally valuable ships and cargos, and mine- clearing operations. The Navy executes constant surveillance and reporting on sea space conditions, control of naval navigation, and defence of naval communications and the economy at sea. 
 The Navy maintains a state of constant readiness, leads the preparations and executes tasks: to aid the state and local authorities in preparing, supporting and protecting the population, the rural economy and national territory; to respond to non-military crises and to overcome related consequences; to contribute to the defence of key strategic sites and sea infrastructure; to fight organised crime and human, drugs and weapons trafficking; to participate in the search & rescue of people at sea and in humanitarian and evacuation operations. The Navy maintains capabilities for planning and participation in independent and joint operations.

 The organisational structure of the Navy consists of:
 - Naval Command - A Helicopters Naval Base - Spec. Recon. Squad - Naval Electronic Warfare and Recon. Squad - Maritime Intelligence Squad - Maritime CIS support system


-----

### - Hydrographical Survey Service - Naval Operational Centre - Technological property storage facilities; - Combat Support Units - Support formations - Naval Base consisting of: Base personnel; two base stations for vessel squads and equipment; a repairs station and a warehouse for weapons and equipment; ship squadrons; coastal missile and artillery squadron and CIS units.
 - A military band; - A Military Police company.

 The organisational structure of the Navy is given in Appendix № 14. The disposition of the formations under the Navy Command is listed in Appendix № 15. The structural diagrams of formations are listed in Annex № 16.

 2.5 Structures directly subordinate to the Minister of Defence
 The organisation and activity of the structures is determined by the interior regulations of each structure.

 • Military Intelligence Service
 The Military Intelligence Service acquires, processes, analyzes, stores and provides intelligence in the interest of national and collective security and defence, in terms and conditions set out in the Rules of Procedure of the Service. The Service provides information to appropriate users at national level in the MoD, the Bulgarian Army and to structures directly subordinate to the Minister of Defence.

 • Military Police Service
 The Military Police Service is a structure of the Armed Forces that maintains order and security in the Ministry of Defence, in the structures directly subordinate to the Minister of Defence and in the Bulgarian Army.

 • Military Medical Academy
 Military Medical Academy is a hospital for outer and inner-hospital care, for military research, training and for expertise development. The Academy is part of the Bulgarian national health service system and provides medical support to the MoD personnel, the Bulgarian Army and personnel in the structures directly subordinate to the Minister of Defence. Its main objective is protecting, supporting and restoring the health of personnel.

 • The G.S.Rakovski Military Academy, the V.Levski National Military University and the N.Y. Vaptsarov Naval College are higher military schools that perform the following activities:
 - Higher education in the accredited professional areas
 - Postgraduate studies
 - Professional training of soldiers with secondary education
 - Research


-----

### - Training in security and defence related to different tasks assigned by the Minister of Defence

 • Ceremonial Guard Unit
 The National Guard Unit is a representative military formation, a legal entity subordinate to the Minister of Defence.

 • Military Geographical Service
 The Military Geographic Service is a military formation in the Armed Forces, outside the Bulgarian Army, and directly subordinate to the Minister of Defence. It is a legal entity directly subordinate to the Minister of Defence, the administration of which falls outside the terms of the Administration Act.

 • Stationary CIS
 The Stationary CIS military unit of the Armed Forces is outside the composition of the Bulgarian Army; a structure directly subordinate to the Minister of Defence, a legal entity, the administration of which falls outside the terms of Administration Act.
 The Stationary CIS unit is created with the reorganisation of the Command and staff of the CIS Brigade.
 The formation also comprises of the fixed CIS junctions that support strategic and operational level HQs, the structures executing inter-ministerial and inter-agency synergy, the stationary CIS, the integrated CIS management structures for state control (CAS) and supporting units.
 The organisational structure of the Stationary CIS includes the stationary communications network, Communications and Information Centre, the CAS Support Centre, Operational Centres and the Engineering and CIS recovery Centre.

 III. Management, Command & Control 
 Management, command & control of the Armed Forces covers the following levels: strategic, operational and tactical. The list of levels of command & control is shown in Appendix № 17.

 1. At the strategic level:
 The Defence Minister manages and is responsible for implementing government policy in defence of the country. The MoD supports the Minister of Defence in exercising his prerogatives as a central body of executive power and due to its role in the management and command of the Armed Forces.

 2. At the operational level:

 2.1. The Commander of the JFC and the Commanders of the Land Forces, Air Force and Navy, supported by HQs, form a functionally integrated structure with clearly defined functions and responsibilities. In this structure, the dominant feature is ‘jointness’. The Commanders of the Armed Forces are subordinated to the Commander of the JFC.


-----

### At the HQ of the JFC capabilities are maintained for organising and managing the processes of subordinate structures, in particular:

 - The management of daily activities, collection of data on the situation and the conditions of the troops and forces of the Bulgarian Army; the training of subordinate command, troops and forces; the maintenance of combat and mobilisation readiness; operational management of on-duty forces and assets; and the deployment of contingents outside the country and their management.
 - The planning, preparation and conduct of joint operations for crisis-response at the operational command & control level, in accordance with strategic guidelines, with developed plans and the strategic concepts for the use of the Armed Forces.
 - Maintaining a permanently operational operations centre (OC) to support to the on- duty personnel in the ministries, the agencies and in the Armed Forces in the administrative management of the contingents outside the country and in the operational management of rescue efforts and resources in peacetime. Also, maintaining the possibility of the OC to redeploy as a command post for the operational management of subordinate forces and for conducting operations in response to crises (until getting into defended posts, if it be decided to maintain such in time of war).

 2.2. The commanders and HQs of the Land Forces, Navy and Air Force organise and manage: the overall daily activities; the carrying out of permanent operational duty; the collection of data on the situation and condition of subordinate formations; the command, management and direct training and logistics support; and the carrying out of activities that maintain combat readiness. They plan the participation and use of their subordinate formations, components and subdivisions in joint or independent operations. They build and maintain the HQs’ capabilities for control and management of independent operations and for the participation in joint operations planning under the leadership of the JFC. They build and maintain the capability to deploy, support and maintain their own forces & equipment and train & provide units for missions abroad.
 In conducting independent operations the commanders of the Armed Forces’ services manage their subordinate tactical units. In joint operations, they form the HQ elements of land, air and naval components, for the control of forces and equipment in joint operations.
 Operational level command functions of the Joint Forces Command, Land Forces Command, Air Force Command and Navy Command are listed in Appendix № 18

 2.2.1. The HQ element of the Land Forces component is built with the capability to occupy a field control post beyond its permanent disposition, with capabilities for the Commander of the Land Forces to carry out control of subordinate units involved in joint operations, so as to ensure the deployment and combat-readiness of the core of the Land Forces and the logistics support units. The HQ element, together with the forces and resources of the Joint Forces Command, can function as a forward command post for the Joint Forces Command.
 The Land Forces’ staff forms the HQ element for the control of Special Operations Forces’ (SOF) operations.


-----

### 2.2.2. The HQ element of the Air Force component maintains constantly operational capabilities for the carrying out of aeronautical tasks. It plans and controls air strike missions, territorial and zone air defence, airborne reconnaissance, close air support and zone isolation. It participates in combat and non-combat search & rescue, electronic warfare and intelligence (EWI), early warning and tactical transport in the zone of operation. The main Air Force control post in peacetime and during crises is the Aviation Operations Centre (AOC) with the ASOC/ASBE. For control of the Air Force component in operations a command & control system is set up. It is incorporated in and uses the peacetime system and other additionally set-up centres.

 2.2.3. The HQ element of the naval component plans and carries out control of forces in naval navigation-control operations, the defence of sea territory and the state’s coast, the protection of naval communications and sea economy, the patrolling and escorting at sea, humanitarian, evacuation, rescue and mine-clearing operations, protection of strategic sites and critical maritime infrastructure, and operations to protect population affected by natural disasters.

 The HQ of the naval component, depending on the joint operation’s nature (e.g. when the main operation zone is not at sea) should be able to function as a remote control post, by presenting naval use-of-force options to the commander of the joint operation. It consequently participates in their control.

 3. At the tactical level:

 3.1. The commanders of formations, units and subdivisions control their subordinate tactical units.

 3.2. The commanders of formations, units and subdivisions subordinate to the Commanders of the Armed Forces’ services organise and manage the daily troop activity of subordinate staff and units.

 3.3. The commanders of logistics and communication support units directly subordinated to the Commander of the JFC manage and organise the activity of their subordinate staff and units and are responsible for building and maintaining capabilities necessary for the functioning, deployment and maintenance of the logistics support systems, mobilization resources support; and the Bulgarian Army’s communication support.

 IV. Size of Armed Forces and distribution of personnel in the Services’ structures

 The total personnel of the Armed Forces up until 31/12/2010 is 44,100 people, of which:
 - 34 700; - 34,700 are military personnel; - 9 400. - 9,400 are civilian personnel.


-----

### Following the Armed Forces’ transformation by 31/12/2014, the total personnel of the MoD, the structures directly subordinate to the Minister of Defence, and the Bulgarian Army, would be no less than 37,100 people and 3,400 reservists. The personnel will be categorised as follows:
 - military personnel - no less than 29,000 - Civilian personnel - up to 8100 - Reservists - up to 3400

 By 31/12/2010, the reduction of peacetime personnel in the MoD, the structures directly subordinate to the Minister of Defence, and the Bulgarian Army (excluding the voluntary reserve) will come to a total of 7,000, of which:

 - up to 5,700 will be military personnel - no less than 1,300 civilian personnel

 MoD is being reorganised during 2011 – personnel is being reduced from 980 to 750.
 Following the reorganisation of the structures directly subordinate to the Minister of Defence and the transfer of Bulgarian Army units in them, by 31/12/2014 their total personnel of 8,620 will reach up to 10,250 and up to 250 reservists – military personnel will be not less than and civilian personnel up to 5,280.
 The Bulgarian Army personnel up until 31/12/2010 is 34,500, of which:
 - 30,400 are military personnel - 4,100 are civilian personnel

 Following the reorganisation of the Bulgarian Army’s staff and military units, its personnel will be no less than 26,100 and 3,150 reservists. The personnel will be categorised as follows:
 - military personnel – no less than 23,720 - civilian personnel – up to 2,380 - reservists – up to 3,150

 The allocation of (peacetime) personnel in the MoD, the structures directly subordinate to the Minister of Defence, and the Bulgarian Army is shown in Appendix № 19

 By 31/12/2014, the share of peacetime personnel (without the voluntary reserve), in civilian and military categories will be as follows:
 - Military – 78% / civilian personnel – 22% - Categories of military personnel: officers – 22% / officer candidates and sergeants – 28% / soldiers – 50%
 - Officers by rank - Colonels – 6% / Lieutenant Colonels – 13% / Majors – 21%  / junior officer ranks – 60%s


-----

### V. Manning with main armaments and military equipment
 Manning the Armed forces with main armaments and military equipment (A&Е)

 Main Armaments and equipment  Up until 31.12.2014 
 Land Forces
 Tanks  80
 Combat armoured vehicles 280

 artillery systems over 100 mm / without mortar artillery 96
 Air Force
 Military aircraft* 16
 Transport aircraft 7
 Training aircraft  12
 Combat helicopters  6
 Transport helicopters ** 16
 Training helicopters  4
 Air defence battalion 5
 Radar systems  20
 Navy
 Combat ships 6
 Combat support ships  6
 Auxiliary ships 5
 Floating crafts and installations 18
 Helicopters  3
 Notes:
 * After 2014 the Air Force are acquiring up to 20 main fighters of a new type/ generation. ** Transport helicopters Ми-17 will operate till the expiration of their technical resource. The training Armaments and equipment of Vasil Levski National Military University and of Nikola Vaptsarov Naval Academy are not included  in the main Arms and Equipment list. 

 A&E for the replacement of operation-ready vehicles for planned repairs, the replacement of obsolete models and for spare parts will be stored in the Land Forces’ and Navy’s A&E bases and storage facilities and in Air Force bases and the Navy’s naval base, . Airplanes and helicopters operating in reserve take part in current platforms for outstanding resources until the end of their life-cycle. The three 205U missile boats are to be removed from operational readiness by 31/12/2012, along with the acquisition of an anti-ship missile complex for the first E-71 frigate.

 The distribution of armaments and equipment in the Armed Forces’ structures is listed in Annex № 20.

 VI. Logistics support
 The FSR made evident the need to transform the existing logistics support system into an integrated, mobile, unified system for peacetime and during crisis – a system adequate to

|Main Armaments and equipment|Up until 31.12.2014|
|---|---|
|Land Forces||
|Tanks|80|
|Combat armoured vehicles|280|
|artillery systems over 100 mm / without mortar artillery|96|
|Air Force||
|Military aircraft*|16|
|Transport aircraft|7|
|Training aircraft|12|
|Combat helicopters|6|
|Transport helicopters **|16|
|Training helicopters|4|
|Air defence battalion|5|
|Radar systems|20|
|Navy||
|Combat ships|6|
|Combat support ships|6|
|Auxiliary ships|5|
|Floating crafts and installations|18|
|Helicopters|3|


-----

### the structure, missions and tasks of the forces and capable of effectively and efficiently use of defence resources.
 To achieve this, the priority of the logistics system will be the capability to optimally combine independent logistics support with centralised logistics support, with multinational logistics and with the capabilities of the host nation. This requires improving the structures for logistics support at all levels and the optimisation of their activities.
 Mainly the operational and tactical level of the logistics will be reorganised. At the operational level the Supply and Support HQ will be disbanded. Centralised logistics will be provided to military units through the logistics of the JFC and the commanders of the branches within the Armed Forces.
 To meet the challenges facing this adaptation of the logistics system to the requirements of modern expeditionary operations, several organisational and structural changes will be carried out at the tactical level.
 Brigade “Logistics”, as the main logistics executive structure at the tactical level is to build and maintain the capability to provide logistics formations for missions and tasks execution. For this purpose, within the brigade, two types of entities are to be functionally differentiated: mobile and stationary.
 To support the increasing flow of military transportation and the transit of allied forces through Bulgarian territory for NATO operations, it is necessary to reorganise staff and movement control groups into individual sectors, in order to improve performance and minimise costs. Single executive logistics structures will operate at the tactical level of formations, components and subdivisions in the Armed Forces’ services, as follows:
 - Logistics Battalion - brigades and their equivalent. - Logistics Company - regiments, battalions and their equivalent.

 At the tactical level, directly subordinate units are differentiated as follows:
 - Logistics Regiment - command of the Land Forces. - Base for Specialised Technology (BST) - command of the Air Force. - Technical property storage database - command of the Navy. - Navy (two workshops and two armaments and ammunition warehouses) – command of the Naval Base.

 Medical support is a comprehensive service aimed at preserving, restoring and improving the health of Armed Forces personnel and is the responsibility of the Military Medical Academy (MMA). As part of the medical support procedure, MMA collaborates with MoD’s insurance planning authority and medical sectors in the operational HQs. At the tactical level, a medical advisor position is created in the formation and filled by a medical support planning officer. Medical support is administered by a range of medical professionals (doctors, nurses, clinical laboratory assistants, etc.) from the MMA’s quota and according to the personnel establishment of military hospitals to which medical posts in military units are allocated, as well as non-medical staff (drivers, attendants and paramedics without medical education) from the personnel establishment of these units. Medical support planning bodies are expected to operate at the HQ of the JFC and the HQs of the three services of the Armed Forces.


-----

### The inclusion of veterinary specialists in the MMA’s Applied Science Centre for Military Epidemiology and Hygiene (ASCMEH) is consistent with the medical service structure of NATO countries and provides cohesive hygiene and epidemic control.
 The outline of the logistics system’s structure, to be implemented by 31.12.2014, can be found in Annex № 21.

 VII. Communications support
 The communications system of the Armed Forces provides support for the established command & control system for all missions and tasks and consists of control posts and communication networks. The core forces and resources are concentrated in the CIS Brigade, which is envisaged to be divided into two units in 2011 – Stationary CIS and Mobile CIS. The stationary unit - subject to the Minister of Defence - will provide communications support at the strategic level. The mobile unit is subject to the JFC and performs tasks for it.
 Stationary control posts, in which integrated CIS operational centres for state control are deployed, will continue to be maintained at the strategic level, providing secure connectivity and working conditions for the operating groups of bodies for state control in wartime.
 Stationary control posts will be maintained in the interest of Armed Forces units at the operational level. To control forces during operations, DCM & HNSs for the deployment of field control posts will be created and sustained in 2011 for the JFC, for the Land Forces, and for the national support element in the deployment of NATO forces on Bulgarian territory and conducting operations outside it. 
 A priority in the development CIS is to increase the capabilities of mobile units for communications support.
 It is envisaged that four DCM & HNSs are formed under the Mobile CIS corps to provide communications support to the forces subordinate to the Joint Force Command during missions, in accordance with planning scenarios. In order to provide flexibility and independence, their application comprises connection and logistics modules, while the formation of a support subdivision ensures constantly active information networks.
 Active efforts towards the deployment of a DCM will begin in 2011, funded primarily through NATO programmes. It is expected that the necessary infrastructure in the deployment area will be complete within the 2011-2012 period, while the provision of technical equipment and preparations for the implementation of tasks will begin in the fourth quarter of 2012. The completion of the module with personnel will be assumed by Mobile CIS unit personnel. 
 Baseline data for the acquisition of new equipment for DCM & HNSs for Armed Forces missions abroad will be obtained as early as 2011. Core activities towards the acquisition of equipment are expected to be carried out in 2012 within the allocated financial resources, with a view to prepare the modules for use in live missions in 2013 – 2014.
 The phased modernisation of the connection and control field-post building modules is scheduled for the 2012 – 2014 period. Once the new technology is fully mastered, unnecessary old equipment will be disposed of. 
 The full modernisation of Mobile CIS modules and the mobile CIS modules of the Armed Forces’ services will be carried out during 2012-2020 period. The capabilities of existing and newly acquired technical equipment in the Stationary CIS in the services of the


-----

### Armed Forces, as well as existing and newly acquired combat platforms, will be noted during the modernisation process in order to build a single CIS.
 In conjunction with equipment modernisation, we are planning on adopting armament for single communications systems for group work, covering operational and tactical levels to support and automate the planning and conducting of operations.
 The MoD’s Stationary CIS will maintain the connection and exploitation readiness of stationary communications junctions, thus providing for HQs at strategic and operational levels, for structures necessary for the cooperation of the MoD with other ministries and agencies, for structures necessary for building an integrated CIS for state control, as well as supporting units. Stationary CIS will maintain readiness to deliver and draw from communication resources belonging to telecommunications operators or coalition forces, and secure the connection and support of JFC and Armed Forces field modules’ communication resources throughout the country.
 The development of the Stationary CIS by 2014 is geared toward creating an optimal structure that will reduce the MoD’s communications costs. It is envisaged to connect the network of the Electronic Communications Networks and Information Systems executive agency (ECNIS) to that of the Council of Ministers’ administration, the Ministry of the Interior and of other ministries and agencies related to national security. The mutual provision of services will enhance the sustainability of the country’s control system. The use of a single information environment will significantly reduce the maintenance cost of communication systems. It will allow for the broader usage of commercial software products, as well as minimise the costs of developing expensive specialised army software.
 Building a single information environment is to be viewed as an integral part of the transformation process, ensuring the smooth running of the command & control system. Several information system development projects related to the automation of the control processes and enhancement of information security have been launched in the Armed Forces. The completion of these projects by 2014 will allow for the formation of a single information environment, reducing documentation, time and costs. The MoD and Armed Forces’ information environment is based on existing segments from the Internet and the Bulgarian Army’s Automated Information System (BA’s AIS) intranet for the exchange of classified information. It offers a set of general access standard services (e-mail, WEB, etc.) and access to internal information systems.
 From 2011, BA’s AIS will be enabled to support a public key infrastructure and all standard functions based on digital certificates and electronic signatures.
 We are planning the development of a NATO-standard military communications system, at the core of which is a wholly functional e-mail service.
 It is imperative to review the CIS development project in the 2012-2013 period to reflect new priorities in the employment of Armed Forces and to revise it accordingly. Further CIS progress should focus on building a single information environment and the development of mobile capabilities.
 The prospect of using a single information environment is a prerequisite to increasing the possibility of the command & control system being influenced by cyber-attacks on information resources. In 2011 we are planning organisational staff changes in the communications services’ structures, to obtain the capability to protect and recover from cyber-attacks. This capability consists of performing preventive actions, detection of


-----

### computer incidents from unauthorized access to computer networks and system recovery following cyber attacks.
 A Chief Information Manager of the Armed Forces (CIM) will be appointed to ensure consistent CIS control, improved coordination to achieve flexible use of available resources, and increased immediate responsibility. 

 VIII. Education, Science and Training
 The higher military schools maintain their institutional and program accreditation, optimise their structures mainly through administrative and staff reductions and provide new opportunities for the maximum range of candidates.
 To enable higher military schools to attain their capability priorities by developing existing and acquire new ones, the following activities are carried out:
 1. Actualising the requirements for acquiring a Bachelor and Masters degree in the subjects in the area of war studies.
 2. Developing new teaching documentation for the training of cadets to acquire a professional bachelor's degree in courses of the war studies professional direction without civilian specialisation (training period – 3 years).
 3. Developing new training documentation for training courses for civilians with higher education willing to acquire a military qualification and officer rank, to be appointment in the Armed Forces within the "professional" career field, i.e. in specialisations that are not conducted in higher military schools (training period of 1,5 years).
 4. Developing new training documentation to enable the attainment of the “junior sergeant" and “sergeant rank II" military ranks after completing a course on the training of professional soldiers, so as to ensure the career development of staff sergeant.
 5. The development of a new element of the military education system for education of personnel in the reserve.
 6. Effective application of the accumulation and transfer of credits system in higher education as well as in professional training.
 7. To more fully exploit the potential for integration with other universities (Erasmus and Military Erasmus).
 8. Changing to a 14 months of training of lecture attendees - a regular form. 9. The implementation of state requirements for the degree Professional Bachelor of War Studies, with a 3 years course period.
 10. The drawing up of a specification for the profession "officer" and inclusion in the list of professions in Bulgaria.
 11. The development of a new regulatory basis to fill academic positions in the military academies and higher military schools.
 12. Placing higher criteria for the selection of scientific personnel - military and civilian personnel: possessing foreign language qualities at a level no lower than the 2-2-2-2 in STANAG, having practical and combat experience from participating in union and coalition operations and missions (for military).
 13. The opening of an "instructor" position for active military, professional and practical training in military academies and higher military schools in order to closely link education with the practical training of cadets and lecture attendees.


-----

### 14. The development of a new regulatory basis to govern the training and acquisition of doctorate degrees in military academies and higher military schools.

 IX. Information policy and strategic public communication
 The MoD builds new capabilities to increase the quality of work with the public. Conceptually, the new information policy of the institution is the spread of standardised and consistent information at all levels. To achieve this goal, new public relations structures will be added the existing ones, as follows: in the Joint Forces Command - one officer; in the Land Forces, Air Force and Navy commands a Public Relations sector, not less than two people; in the brigade HQs (bases) - two people (one officer and one civilian); in the regiment HQs - one officer or civilian; in battalions HQs, one civilian placed in separate garrisons.
 In accordance with the planning scenarios and the "Public Relations Conception", the following new capabilities will be created:
 - The possibility for deployment of up to 3 joint media operations centres - 1 for each service of the Armed Forces, depending on the scenario.
 - The organisation of the 3 mobile media groups - 1 for each service of the Armed Forces.
 - The possibility of organising media pools at 1 to 3 different locations in the operation zone.
 - The ability to provide housing and work conditions to 15 to 20 journalists. - The ability to organise up to 3 journalists for units involved in operations.

 The Joint Forces Command and HQs of the Armed Forces’ services develop and maintain the capability to deploy a Centre for Civil-military cooperation in the operation area.

 X. Development of security of information units

 There are two approaches used for the organisational built-up of the units for information security in accordance with the Law on Protection of Classified Information. According to the first approach the whole personnel of the unit, including the classified information registries, would be a part of the management staff of each unit. As far as JFC and the three services of the Armed Forces constitute separate organisational units, within them the second approach is applicable. According to it the registries for classified information, both national and foreign, cryptographic registries, typing and copying offices, archives and etc. shall be detached in a separate organisational unit/link apart from information security units within the framework of the organisational unit. Within the JFC HQ and the three services’ HQs, information security units are established consisting of no less than 2 experts who are directly subordinated to the Commander.

 XI. Disposition and infrastructure
 Organisational structures of the armed forces are stationed in military areas, virtually evenly distributed throughout the country. In these areas there are elements of the defence infrastructure (buildings, warehouses, workshops, garages and military airports, ports, firing, driving and tactical ranges, training centres, etc.) maintaining daily activities and combat


-----

### training of military units. Total items of basic infrastructure for defence amounted to about 8 500 units with a total built up area (TBA) about 3.45 million square meters.
 In the course of the restructuring, at the end of 2014 military areas will be significantly reduced. This will lead to a reduction of basic infrastructure units, with the number 800-900, and substantial savings of funds for maintenance and repairs.

 The Land Forces are deployed in 17 garrisons, in which a total of about 30 separate military areas are established. At the end of 2014 garrisons will be reduced to 14 and military areas to 28. Infrastructure (mainly buildings and warehouses) no longer needed for the Land Forces is situated mainly in garrisons set for closure (Musachevo, Vratsa and Gorna Oryahovitsa).
 . Existing infrastructure of the Air Force is located in 67 military areas, and their respective parts, 35 of which are basic and others are located in facilities providing the military activity (short and long range starting stations, communication facilities, power stations, pumping stations). At the end of 2014 the Air Force will operate 22 major military areas to meet its needs. The release of 11 military areas will be completed in 2011 (7 pcs.) and 2012 (4 pcs.). By those means, unnecessary Air Force infrastructure by the end of 2012 will be about 380 pcs. of various buildings and other service infrastructure.

 The infrastructure facilities of the Navy are stationed in 40 military areas: 20 barracks, 6 storages, 2 ports and 12 other service buildings. The total number of buildings (of different types and for different purposes) is 839.

 The JFC will take the authority over some of the subordinated units from the Maintenance and Support Staff after its dismissing. Others will be re-subordinated directly under the Minister of Defence. The total number of buildings and warehouses (2950 pcs. with area 1,161,854 m[2]) is maintained. They are stationed in 134 military areas.

 The defence infrastructure of the other structures (Military Police, Military Intelligence, the elements of the Military education system and the training centres) will not undergo significant changes in terms of dislocation and TBA of the basic infrastructure.

 According to estimates, the TBA of the needless infrastructure by the end of 2014 will reach approximately 310,154 m[2]. Throughout the 2011-2014 period this infrastructure will be getting divested. In connection with the re-dislocation of part of the military units and the release of military areas, the majority of infrastructure facilities (primarily buildings) will be divested in 2011 and 2012. With priority in 2011 we will divest circa 34%, in 2012 circa 35%, and in 2013 and 2014 - 15.1 % of excess infrastructure.

 Both necessary and unnecessary infrastructure will require substantial financial resources. The necessary infrastructure will need funds for repairs, maintenance and modernisation, and the unnecessary - funding for security, taxes, maintenance, etc.

 Guidelines for the development of defence infrastructure during the period 2011 - 2014, were listed in Annex 22.


-----

### XII. The creation of new and development of existing capabilities.
 In the process of transformation in the short term, the main efforts will be aimed at maintaining existing and building new capabilities, necessary for the implementation of the Missions and tasks of the Armed Forces. The contemporary security environment is characterized by the absence of a clear military threat to the state and dynamic security risks beyond its borders. This required the use of a new planning approach based on capabilities. This force planning process focuses on priority development of specific capabilities in response to existing challenges and threats.
 A priority for Bulgaria is the participation of units from its Armed Forces in multinational joint expeditionary operations and, along with the countries from NATO and the EU. Therefore, the focus of efforts is to provide capabilities that are of primary necessity in order to counter asymmetric threats and risks to the security of the Euro-Atlantic area.

 Taking into account the limited financial resources for defence and the parameters of the contemporary security environment, the Armed Forces will not be able to develop the full range of necessary capabilities for conducting independent operations under Art.5 on national territory. In operations of this nature, the Armed Forces will largely rely on joint actions with coalition forces to neutralise threats to sovereignty and territorial integrity. The development of capabilities will be based on ability to plan and conduct joint operations, force protection and interoperability.
 To succeed in fulfilling its missions and tasks and in reaching the level of ambition, the Armed Forces require an adequate account of capabilities defined and grouped into seven areas.

 Timely forces availability This capability requires an increase of the units’ level of readiness in response to the changing strategic security environment as well as possibility for rotation in continuous operations. Within the capability development framework for military units, related standby times are described in section II - "Armed Forces Structure”.

 Effective intelligence: Capabilities for the timely acquisition, analysis and dissemination of reliable information, in real time, in order to promptly detect hostile intentions and concrete hostile actions, to give an adequate response to threats and minimize the risks to national security.

 A. Capabilities that need to be maintained and developed:
 - Capability of radar surveillance at altitudes over 3000 meters and a defined direction below 3000 m – until 2016.
 - Capability to detect and follow up various air targets at all altitudes in all weather conditions in the presence of electromagnetic interference and land-based interference.
 - Capability to passively detect, analyse and identify enemy radar emissions from air and ground threats in an environment of enhanced electronic interference.
 - Capability to conduct a NBC reconnaissance and surveillance - until 2014.


-----

### - Capability to conduct HUMINT – until 2011.
 - Capability to detect and identify improvised explosive devices - initial operational capability - until 2014, full operational capability – until 2018.

 B. Capabilities to be acquired:
 - Capability to build a reconnaissance system, surveillance and target acquisition in mechanised brigades with the use of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) – by 2019.
 - Capability to build a system for reconnaissance, surveillance, detection, identification and determination of the location of targets (targeting); transmission of encrypted targets’ data and sharing common operational picture to subordinate units down to battalion level - by 2016.
 - Capability of aerial reconnaissance and surveillance in real time using a new basic model fighter jet and UAV – by 2018.
 - Capability of optic-electronic reconnaissance, aerial photography and aerial photo- reconnaissance by technical means during day and night.

 Deployability and mobility In general this is the capability to concentrate necessary forces at the necessary place at the right time (deployability), and rapid movement within the area of operations (mobility). It requires capabilities to transport forces, proper equipment and adequate logistics supplies, infrastructure, appropriate organisation and resources.

 A. Capabilities that need to be maintained and developed
 - Capability to equip and maintain airports for deployment – after 2014. - Capability for air transport to and within the area of operation and across the country
 - fully operational capability by 2014.
 - Capability for building, improvement, repair and maintenance of airports and main supply routes – by 2014.
 - Capability to plan and execute operations for the placement of bridges (bridge forges) in accordance with existing standardisation agreements in support of Allied Forces in the execution of the full spectrum of operations.
 - Capability to conduct engineering combat support at brigade level – by 2014.

 B. Capabilities to be acquired:
 - Capability of adoption, deployment and onward movement: transport control and railway transport load-unload abilities, traffic management - until 2018.

 Effective impact The meaning is the effective use of forces in complex conditions. This includes the presence of a clearly regulated operational planning system (OPS), capabilities for reliable identification and exchange of targets’ data, organisation of coordination and interaction, execution of effective manoeuvres and use of appropriate platforms, weapons and equipment.


-----

### A. Capabilities that need to be maintained and developed:
 - Capabilities for multi-national joint expeditionary warfare and tactical deployment of one battalion (up to 700 personnel) in the on-going coalition operations - till 2014.
 - Capabilities for multi-national joint expeditionary warfare and tactical deployment of one battalion (up to 700 personnel) in current coalition operations carried out in dry and hot climate - by 2016.
 - Capability to conduct joint operations in urban environment – till 2018.
 - Capability to prevent and control riots.
 - Capability to cover a separate operational direction of the national territory by participating in allied operations under Article 5.
 - Capability of naval navigation control.
 - Capability to conduct naval combat operations in sea areas (combat afloat, air and undersea opponent).
 - Capability to conduct naval combat afloat beyond the direct radar range (supply frigates with a missile complex of new generation) – by 2016.
 - Capability to autonomously search and intercept small low-speed aerial targets at a low altitude and from great distance, and to provide consistent impact on them.
 - Capabilities to provide adequate air-defence of critical infrastructure.
 - Capability to neutralise land/sea threats to aviation support to the other services, protection of the critical infrastructure, combating terrorism and ensuring air and maritime sovereignty.

 B. Capabilities to be acquired:
 - Capability to provide a light infantry battalion battle group ready for deployment and rotation for the needs of NATO – by 2014.
 - Capability to immediately neutralise time-sensitive ground/sea/air targets with PGW in any weather conditions, day and night – after 2014.
 - Capability to simultaneously impact multiple targets beyond visual sight; tactical command and coordination of groups of aircraft and performing tasks with a large action radius of.
 - Capability to impact on sites and targets with a wide range of PGW with various sensors and control systems.
 - Capabilities to fight asymmetric threats at sea.
 - Capability to use deck helicopters to perform tasks in remote sea space (construction of frigate helipads project E-71) – by 2015.
 - Capabilities for network-centric operations – by 2018.

 Command, Control and Communications: Effective political and military leadership based on principles of undivided authority and the personal responsibility down the chain of command and of all commanders in on-going operations. It requires deployability, interoperability, survivability, sustainability, a high speed data transmission and sufficient capacity, adequate structure and organisation.


-----

### A. Capabilities that need to be maintained and developed:
 - Capability for adequate-to-the-risk information security and cyber protection of automated information systems and networks – by 2021.
 - Capability to maintain a sustainable and interoperable with other services and NATO’s C4ISR system (including the required infrastructure) – by 2021.
 - Capability to build and maintain a full and authentic picture of the area of operation – by 2021.
 - Capability to build and maintain a full and authentic picture of the airspace - by 2014. - Capability to receive automated (encrypted) ID information from the “Friend or Foe” system, from ground and air control stations, by NATO standards.
 - Capability to build and maintain a full and authentic picture of sea space - by 2016. - Capabilities to coordinate interdepartmental support, interaction with governmental and nongovernmental organisations.
 - Capability to build and maintain crypto and satellite communications - up to 2024.

 B. Capabilities to be acquired:
 - Capability of C2 for the Air Force in the NATO’s Integrated Air Defence System. - Capability to exchange information between centres for C2 by NATO’s Tactical Data Link (TDL) (Link11 and Link 16) - in 2011.
 - Operational capability of DCM – formation by 2013. - Capability to identify own forces, military formations and/or activities in a single information environment - by 2019.
 - Mobile, secure and flexible CIS based on IP protocol - ACNR – till 2018.

 Logistics: Providing on-time and effective logistics support in the course of action of each operation; availability of sufficient logistics support, also in terms of missing host nation support; pre-planning capabilities; maintenance of personnel; adequate inventory of equipment and food, of fuels, oils lubricants; transportation; coordination with allies; national interagency coordination; standardization; efficient organisation and management.

 A. Capabilities that need to be maintained and developed:
 - The capability of the “Bulgarian Army Logistics” information system. - The capability of an automated system for human resources management. - The capability to provide for medical support at the “Role 2 – light” level. - The capability to perform aero-medical evacuation. - Capability of customer support to aviation equipment, anti-aircraft missiles and equipment, radars, CIS and navigational equipment.
 - The capability to conduct CIMIC. - Capability to support other government agencies, including international NGOs. - Capabilities implementing measures to eradicate consequences of natural disasters and catastrophes.

 B. Capabilities to be acquired:
 - Capability to provide for medical support at the “Role 2 – reinforced” level - after 2014.


-----

### - Capability to provide logistics support in joint expeditionary operations – 2018.

 Survivability and force protection: Complex capabilities for active and passive protection of personnel, weapon systems and infrastructure, for constant surveillance, reconnaissance and early warning.
 A. Capabilities that need to be maintained and developed:
 - Capability to plan and implement a system of measures to protect formations in operations.
 - Air-defence of the state’s critical infrastructure. - Combat search & rescue and aero-medical evacuation. - Search & rescue capability. - Capability to check and arrest offending vessels. - Escort of commercial and military ships capability. - Capability of non-combat evacuation of civilians. - Capability to conduct demining operations - after 2014. - Capability to assist the population in case of disasters. - Capability to protect combat vehicles against mines and improvised explosive devices
 - after 2014.
 - Close engineering support capability to ensure the mobility of its own forces and counter mobility of opposing forces.
 - Capability to eliminate the consequences of disasters and to protect the critical infrastructure.
 - Capability to neutralise conventional munitions, improvised explosive devices, clearing explosive munitions.
 - Capability of individual NBC protection in operations, under the conditions of use of WMDs – 2016.
 - Capability for specialized NBC processing of vehicles, equipment (including aircrafts) and personnel - by 2014.
 - Capability of collective NBC protection - until 2014.

 B. Capabilities to be acquired:
 - Capability to dispose of ammunitions, explosives and improvised explosive devices in accordance with existing standardisation agreements in support of allied forces in the execution of the full spectrum of operations - initial operational capability - in 2014, full operational capability – 2018.
 The process of the armed forces’ development will continue to be supported in accordance with NATO’s defence planning and the capability development process in the EU. Building and maintaining capabilities to implement Force Goals remains a priority for the Armed Forces. (Annex 23).

 XIII. Stages in the process of reorganisation of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria by 2014.

 The transition from the current to the new structure of the Armed Forces is to be performed in the period 2011-2014.The main events in it are, by years:


-----

### In the first half of 2011, the main activities will focus on restructuring HQs at the strategic and operational level, re-subordinating the three services’ HQs (each with its own command set of units) to the Commander of the JFC and the re-subordination (and in some cases reorganisation) of formations under the Support and Supply HQ.

 The units at a tactical level (brigades and bases) will mainly be restructured in 2012.
 In the first half of 2013 we will mainly be restructuring brigade “Logistics”, as all warehouses and storage bases are to be consolidated under a single structure.

 For the first half of 2014 we have planned to decommission weapons, warehouses, vehicles and equipment storages as part of them will be deconstructed after the realisation of their material resources. (Annex 24).

 XIV. Resources for the Armed Forces’ reforms. (1 lv. = 0.5 Euro approx.)

|Col1|Necessary funds by years (lv.)|Col3|Col4|Col5|Total (lv.)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||2011|2012|2013|2014||
|TOTAL RESOURSES NECESSARY FOR THE REFORMS|93 751 152|147 317 445|81 887 002|45 988 987|368 944 586|
|1. Expenditure for personnel|15 893 803|50 457 305|44 075 685|7 904 032|118 330 825|
|Compensations|15 039 043|49 489 985|43 467 685|7 262 032|115 258 745|
|2. Deployment of military formations|71 566 625|87 624 879|29 360 000|25 155 000|213 706 504|
|Utilisation|45 000 000|60 000 000|6 000 000|3 000 000|114 000 000|
|3. Release of the obsolete armaments, equipment and infrastructure.|5 690 820|6 235 740|1 852 370|931 870|14 710 800|
|||||||
|Expenditure for Personnel and the on- going maintenance of the Reserve|599 904|2 999 521|6 598 947|11 998 085|22 196 457|


-----

### 1. Expenditure on compensating personnel to be released from the Armed Forces, in the period 2011-2014, conforms to the size of the Armed Forces and their distribution in structures under the Reorganisation Schedule.
 2. Funds for compensation of personnel are calculated in accordance with the “Proceedings of norms and limits for personnel, weaponry and equipment expenditure”, valid as until 2010.
 3. For calculating the financial resources needed for utilization of the redundant weapons, equipment, etc., an assumption that they will not be moved from their place of location has been made.

 TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

|Съдържание|Съкращение|Content|Abbreviation|
|---|---|---|---|
|Военен комитет|ВК|Military Committee|MC|
|Гражданско-военно сътрудничество|ГВС|Civil-Military Co- operation|CIMIC|
|Електронна война|ЕВ|Electronic Warfare|EW|
|Защита от импровизирани взривни устройства||Countering Improvised Explosive Devices|CIED|
|Импровизирани взривни устройства||Improvised Explosive Devices|IED|
|Извън зоната на визуалната видимост||Beyond Visual Range|BVR|
|Информационни операции||Information operations|INFOPS|
|Кибер защита||Cyber Defence||
|Командване, управление, комуникации, компютри, разузнаване и наблюдение||Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance|C4ISR|
|Kритични спрямо времето земни/морски и въздушни цели||Time Sensitive Targets|TST|
|Логистика/ логистичен||Logistics|Log|
|Медийни операции||Media operations|MEDIAOPS|
|Мобилен комуникационен модул||Deployable Communication Module and Host Nation Support|DCM&HNS|
|Обезвреждане на бойни припаси и взривни вещества||Explosive Ordnance Disposal|EOD|
|Оперативен център за въздушен суверенитет/център за управление от новата система за командване и управление на ВВС на НАТО||Air Sovereignty Operations Center/Ars Soft Base Element|ASOC/ASBE|
|Поддръжка от страна-домакин||Host Nation Support|HNS|
|Преден авио насочвач|ПАН|Forward Air Controller|FAC|


-----

|Съдържание|Съкращение|Content|Abbreviation|
|---|---|---|---|
|Приемане, разполагане и по- нататъшно придвижване||Reception, Staging аnd Onward Movement|RSOM|
|Психологически операции|ПсО|Psychological Operations|PSYOPS|
|Публичен ключ|||PKI|
|Разузнаване/разузнавателна информация - продуктът, произлизащ от обработването на информация, която касае чуждите държави, силите на реалния или потенциалния противник или елементи, или зони на действителните или потенциални операции. Терминът също се използва за обозначаване на дейността по изготвяне на разузнавателен продукт и структурите, ангажирани с него||Intelligence||
|Разузнаване - мисия, предприета за получаване чрез визуално наблюдение или други методи на информация за мероприятията и ресурсите на противника или потенциалния противник, или за обезпечаване на данни относно метеорологичните, хидрографските или географските характеристики на определен район||Reconnaissance|RECCE|
|Разузнаване с хора||Human Intelligence|HUMINT|
|Разузнаване, наблюдение, откриване, разпознаване и определяне местоположението на цели||Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition And Reconnaissance|ISTAR|
|Сили за специални операции|ССпО|Special Operations Forces|SOF|
|Сили за развръщане||Deployable Forces|DF|
|Сили за отбрана||In-place Forces|IPF|
|Сили с нарастваща готовност||Graduated Readiness Forces|GRF|
|Сили с висока готовност||High Readiness Forces|HRF|
|Сили с по-ниска готовност||Forces with Lower Readiness|FLR|


-----

|Съдържание|Съкращение|Content|Abbreviation|
|---|---|---|---|
|Сили с голяма продължителност на нарастване||Long Term Build-up Forces|LTBF|
|Система за обмен на военни съобщения по стандарт на НАТО||Military Message Handing System по STANAG 4406 ed.2|MMHS|
|Стандартизационно споразумение в НАТО||NATO Standardization Agreement|STANAG|
|Страна-домакин||Host Nation|HN|
|Структура на силите на НАТО||The NATO Force Structure|NFS|
|Щаб||Headquarters|HQ|
|Ядрена, химическа и биологична защита|ЯХБЗ|Chemical, Biological, Radiological And Nuclear Defence|CBRN Defence|


-----

