-----

### The National Defense Strategy was developed under Article 85, Paragraph 1,

 Item 4 of the Law on Defense and Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria and in

 implementation of Order № R-94/18.03.2010 by the Minister of Defense. The team

 working on it comprised: Vice Admiral Minko Kavaldjiev – Head of Team; Commodore

 Georgi Fidanov - Deputy Head of Team; Col. Rumen Assenov; Col. Dimitar Strehchev;

 Col. Geno Chipilski; Col. Dimitar Velchev; Col. Atanas Temelkov; Col. Tzvetan

 Dimitrov; Col. Nikolai Dotsev; Col. Nedelcho Minchev; Col. Stephen Dzhorgov; Col.

 Plamen Kostov; Prof. Georgi Bahchevanov DScMil; Ass. Prof. Dr. Boris Bogdanov;

 Col. Kiril Daskalov; Col. Emil Simeonov; Col. Peter Mollov; Captain(N) Ivelin

 Kaloyanov; Colonel Stanimir Karatoprakliev; Col. Ivan Popov.

 The document is in accordance with ministries and administrations concerned

 with the national security and defense of the country.


-----

### The National Defense Strategy is an important

 part of the overall package of documents relating to

 security and defense of the country. It is a natural follow

 on of the National Security Strategy of the Republic of

 Bulgaria.

 This is the first National Defense Strategy of the

 country as a member of NATO and the European Union.

 The former Military Strategy of June 2002, called

 "Strategy of the preparation for NATO membership and of the military reform”,

 achieved its primary objective. Bulgaria is already a member of NATO and the EU.

 Considerable work for building and developing the Armed Forces and the defense

 capabilities has been done and the strategy has achieved its purpose.

 The present National Defense Strategy, called "Strategy for development of a

 single set of efficient forces for modern defense”, provides a basis for building the

 necessary defense capabilities in the next ten years with further perspectives for their

 development. It defines the conceptual framework for fulfillment of the main tasks on

 the country’s defense by the Armed Forces and the non-military component and their

 contribution to NATO’s and EU’s collective defense.

 It is our duty to follow this strategy so that the Armed Forces can guarantee the

 national security and become a reliable partner in NATO and the EU collective security

 systems.

_General SIMEON SIMEONOV_

_Chief of Defense_


-----

### R E P U B L I C  O F  B U L G A R I A
 C O U N C I L  O F  M I N I S T E R S

 D E C I S I O N  № 239
 April 14[th] 2011

 on adoption of the National Defense Strategy

 Pursuant to Art. 22, Para. 2, Item 3 of the Law on Defense and Armed Forces of

 the Republic of Bulgaria, 

 T H E  C O U N C I L  O F  M I N I S T E R S 

 D E C I D E D

 1. Adopts the National Defense Strategy in accordance with the Annex. 

 2. Revokes the Military Strategy of the Republic of Bulgaria adopted by decision
 under Item 37 of Record of Proceedings № 25 of the meeting of Ministers, June 27[th]

 2002.

 3. Suggests to the National Assembly to revoke the Military Doctrine of the
 Republic of Bulgaria adopted by decision of the National Assembly, April 8[th] 1999, as
 amended by decision of the National Assembly, February 22[nd] 2002 

 PRIME MINISTER: / s / BOYKO BORISOV 

 SECRETARY GENERAL OF 

 THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS: / s / ROSEN ZHELYAZKOV


-----

### CONTENTS
 I. Introduction  4

 II. Strategic security environment 4

 III. Fundamentals of defense policy 8

 IV. Fundamentals of defense strategy 9

 V. Role, missions and tasks of the Armed Forces and of the non-military 


### defense components


### 11


### VI. Employment of the Armed Forces  13

 VII. Building up and development of the Armed Forces  16


### VIII. Defense resources

 1. Human

 2. Material

 3. Information

 4. Financial 


### 18

 18

 19

 20

 21


### IX. Conclusion 22


-----

### І. Introduction
 1. The National Defense Strategy is based on national security priorities and
 national interests’ protection as defined in the Constitution and the National Security Strategy of the Republic of Bulgaria. It is in compliance with the NATO Strategic Concept, the EU Security Strategy and the international agreements to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party. This is a new document incorporating the current Military Doctrine of the Republic of Bulgaria and the Military Strategy of the Republic of Bulgaria.
 2. The National Defense Strategy assesses the military strategic environment,
 determines the national defense goals and outlines the ways to achieve them.
 3. The National Defense Strategy is focused on the establishment, development
 and employment of the defense capabilities of the country.
 4. The National Defense Strategy describes the activities of the ministries and
 administrations bearing responsibilities to the national defense. It specifies the Armed Forces’ missions and tasks, as well as the forms and ways of their implementation, and identifies the means and resources to this end. It serves as a basis for the development of the Doctrine of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria, the operational concepts and doctrines. 

 ІІ. Strategic security environment
 Factors shaping the strategic environment  5. The strategic security environment is complex and dynamic and its dimensions
 are difficult to predict. Its formation is influenced by: the globalization; financial and economic crises; proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the means of their delivery; climatic and health problems; demographic, ecologic and energy problems; asymmetric risks and threats; information security threats; failed states; internal and regional conflicts; European and Euro-Atlantic integration; efforts of the international democratic community for supporting peace and stability.
 6. The globalization processes have a multi-directional influence on the formation
 of the different security environment aspects. They not only create conditions for developing relationships between the states but also intensify the economic and social inequality and misbalance in the states’ development and demographic disproportions. The global financial and economic crises have a negative impact not only upon the states’ internal stability and international relations but also upon their security and defense sector.
 7. The risks of weapons of mass destruction proliferation increase as a result of
 the grown interest of certain countries to acquire such weapons, the expanding access to their production and delivery technologies, and also due to problems related to the storage of nuclear weapons and radioactive materials.
 8. Endangering the government and the stability of the state, the climatic changes,
 natural disasters and wide-spread dangerous diseases additionally aggravate the existing problems: poverty, social tension, ecological situation. They create prerequisites for


-----

### internal conflicts and humanitarian crises requiring allocation of substantial civilian, financial and military resources for their solution.
 9. The danger to ecological security stems from climatic changes and their
 consequences, natural disasters and catastrophes, industrial accidents involving leakage of dangerous substances, trans-border pollution of air, waters and coastal area, nuclear contamination of particular areas as well as from increased international terrorist activities. It also creates risks to the military contingents participating in missions and operations beyond the borders of the country.
 10. The problems related to the deficiency of energy and natural resources
 become an increasingly serious challenge to all countries. In this context, the energy security acquires new dimensions, and the risks and threats in this area result from the intensified conflict of interests, the actions of terrorist groups and armed formations and the existence of unsolved conflicts in areas of obtaining and transportation of resources.
 11. The transnational organized crime and the illegal trafficking of people, drugs
 and arms threaten both the states’ stability and the global economic system. They complicate the strategic security environment as well.
 12. The asymmetric and the other transnational risks and threats, particularly
 terrorism, make a key impact on the strategic security environment. Terrorist organizations decentralize their structures, which hampers localizing and countering their elements. There are more possibilities for the terrorists to employ radioactive materials as well as chemical and biological agents.
 13. The information security risks and threats of cyber attacks against strategic
 civilian and military communication and information systems and against forces participating in missions and operations beyond the borders of the country are increasing. They are emerging from the dynamic technologies development, the enlarged range of criminal and extremist organizations and hackers trying to gain an unauthorized access to classified information, created, processed, stored and transmitted within automated information systems or networks.
 14. The threats to the maritime communications and to the humanitarian aid in
 certain regions in the world are increasing due to the activation of pirate groups. Countering them necessitates commitment of military forces and assets as well, including those of NATO and EU.
 15. There is a growing threat of attacking strategic installations on the territory of
 the Republic of Bulgaria and its population with ballistic missiles from remote countries. 
 16. Failed states considerably impact the formation of the strategic security
 environment. At the same time, the role of various non-state structures (economic and financial groups, non-governmental organizations, tribal societies, radical religious communities, trans-border criminal networks, extremist groups, etc.) attempting to influence the global order, the situation and the type of military actions in the crisis regions is growing.
 17. The military aspects of the security environment acquire new dimensions due
 to political changes in the world, including Europe, the enlargement of the scope of asymmetric risks and threats, and the decrease of the significance of certain factors which used to influence the missions and the armed forces training. The threat of a


-----

### large-scale international military conflict is considerably reduced due to the absence of block opposition and the necessity of interaction among the states for counteracting modern risks and threats. However, there still are points of regional tension and instability also requiring military resources.

 Global, regional and national context 18. The establishment of multi-lateral partnership, the process of transformation
 of the leading international organizations (UN, NATO, EU and OSCE) in accordance with the changes to security environment and the comprehensive approach based on political, economic, defense, information, technological and civil instruments and efforts positively influence the strategic security environment.
 19. The strategic dialogue and partnership of the USA, NATO and EU with
 Russia on the issues of anti-terrorism, arms proliferation and control are of great importance to the global security environment. The establishment of well-balanced relationships among these important international factors will permanently be influencing the development of the strategic security environment.
 20. NATO remains a Euro-Atlantic Alliance for robust collective defense and a
 basic forum for consultations and resolutions in the security area among its member- states. The fundamental and lasting goal of the Alliance is safeguarding the freedom and security of its members by political and military means based on solidarity, common ideas, shared democratic values in compliance with the international law.
 21. In NATO and EU, the principles of indivisibility of security and allied
 solidarity and support are affirmed. The development of the integration processes, transatlantic cooperation and partnership with states from different world regions are of great importance to the settlement of key international issues and to strengthening international security.
 22. In Europe, the establishment of a common political, economic, social, defense
 and legal space becomes a stable trend. The European and the Euro-Atlantic integration, the active bi-lateral and multi-lateral cooperation in the defense area, internal security and human rights’ protection activities, enhanced arms control mechanisms contribute to all this. The EU’s role for strengthening trust and security beyond its own borders is increasing. The Lisbon Treaty provides the EU the required legal framework and instruments for implementation of the European policies, including those in the common security and defense policy area. 
 23. In South-Eastern Europe, the further stabilization and adequate integration of
 the region into the Euro-Atlantic space is a key tendency. The reduction of the states’ military capabilities, the adoption of new defense strategies with priorities on asymmetric threats counteraction and bi-lateral and regional cooperation, contribute to all that.
 24. In the Western Balkans, the positive tendencies prevail thanks to the active
 commitment of the international community to problem solving and due to the common foreign policy priorities of the countries – integration into the European and Euro- Atlantic structures. However, the challenges to the democratic and stable development and asymmetric risks and security threats counteraction are grave. Nevertheless, a regional armed conflict is unlikely to be provoked.


-----

### 25. The importance of the Black Sea region to the international security,
 including that of the Republic of Bulgaria, is growing due to its role as a link between Europe, the Middle East and Asia. The existence of the so-called “ongoing conflicts” and the terrorist structures activities increase the vulnerability of the region, including that of the transnational energy and transport routes crossing it. This is even of greater importance to our country because of its commitments to safeguarding the external borders of NATO and EU.
 26. The security environment in the Middle East and North Africa is of
 paramount importance to the strategic security environment due to unsolved conflicts, economic and political issues, terrorist organizations activities, a risk of the presence and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, illegal trafficking of people, arms and drugs as well as illegal transferring of financial resources. The dynamic changes in this region considerably increase the risks and threats to the regional and global security.
 27. The situation in Central Asia, especially in Afghanistan, is of great
 significance to the international security, including that of the Republic of Bulgaria, since it requires a permanent political and economic stabilization of the region as well as counteracting both terrorism and illegal drug and human trafficking. 
 28. The unsolved conflicts in Central Africa, the separatist and terrorist groups’
 activities, humanitarian crises and organized crime create transnational risks and threats to global security. The piracy, especially in the Gulf of Aden and along the shores of Somalia during the last years, represent a challenge to the international community as a response of which the EU and NATO conduct operations as part of the measures for solving this problem.

 Conclusions 29. The considerable and dynamic changes in the strategic security environment
 require transformation of the security and defense systems.
 30. The NATO and EU membership of the Republic of Bulgaria and the fact that
 none of its neighboring countries considers it a potential adversary are determining for the country’s national security and defense. They prevent any long-term immediate military threat to the Republic of Bulgaria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. 
 31. The trends in the strategic security environment indicate that conflicts and
 crisis situations are possible to emerge in different parts of the world in the future as well which will necessitate a response to the risks and threats to the Republic of Bulgaria’s national security and defense wherever they occur, including remote locations beyond the borders of the country. This will require the armed forces to build and develop, by priority, capabilities for participation in missions and operations of NATO, EU, UN, OSCE or other international organizations as well as their harmonization with the civilian and public efforts and dispositions.
 32. The increased commitments of the Republic of Bulgaria to provide
 international security guarantees put our military contingents participating in missions and operations beyond the borders of the country under potential threat of terrorist attacks and increase the force protection requirements.
 33. The dynamic and complex geostrategic environment enhances the
 responsibilities of the foreign intelligence for early warning against risks and threats to


-----

### the country’s security and defense, for timely intelligence provision to the state and military leadership and support to the contingents of the Bulgarian Armed Forces as well as for the fulfillment of their NATO and EU commitments.
 34. The military strategic environment will continue to develop and will be
 influenced by unpredictable and dynamic political, social, technological and military processes. The conflicts will be more complex and difficult to predict and manage. This requires a flexible development of the policy, the organization, the doctrines, the operational concepts and, above all, of the capabilities, the future strength and the command structure of the Armed Forces.

 III. Fundamentals of defense policy
 35. The Republic of Bulgaria has no aspirations to other countries’ territories and
 does not recognize any aspirations by other states to its territorial integrity.
 36. To protect and assert its national interests, the Republic of Bulgaria pursues a
 firm and consistent defense policy based on the following goals:

 - protecting the sovereignty, the security, the territorial integrity and the
 independence of the country by applying the collective defense mechanisms; 

 - participating in the creation of favorable environment for asserting the national
 interests;

 - sharing the responsibilities as NATO and EU member by effective contribution
 to collective defense, by participation in conflict prevention and crisis management in non-Article 5 operations and by active engagement in determining and implementing the EU Common Security and Defense Policy; 

 - contributing to the International Community’s efforts for strengthening the
 peace and security in the region and in the world;

 - establishing and maintaining of a modern and effective defense system as well
 as armed forces’ capabilities and structure adequate to the national interests, the dynamic security environment and the available resources;

 - providing support to the population, the state and local government authorities
 in times of crisis.
 37. The defense policy goals are achieved through:
 - bringing the defense system into a status ensuring effective functioning and
 cooperation of the national institutions with those of NATO and EU.

 - establishing and continuously developing appropriate defense capabilities for
 counteracting contemporary challenges, risks and threats;

 - achieving defense capabilities for effective participation in the full spectrum of
 NATO- and EU-led operations;

 - contributing to the international community’s actions for combating terrorism,
 WMD proliferation, conflict prevention and crisis management in areas of instability all over the world.
 38. The defense system, being part of the national security system, comprises the
 leadership, command and control authorities, the armed forces, the respective infrastructure, the assets of the ministries and institutions of the central administration,


-----

### the specialized services, the territorial administration, local government authorities, the business companies, the state enterprises, the organizations and the civil population.
 39. The development and the improvement of the defense capabilities is a
 necessary prerequisite for establishing a modern and effective defense system High priority will be given to the development of collective defense capabilities and participation in expeditionary operations, within a single balanced set of forces, whit respective allocation of adequate resources.

 IV. Fundamentals of the defense strategy
 40. The defense of the country integrates the activities of the state bodies,
 institutions, organizations and the population for building up and employing defense capabilities for detecting, deterring, preventing and countering a possible threat to the national interests. The defense is a multi-faceted, state activity with an integrated leadership, planning, financial and resource provision.
 41. The country’s defense is planned, prepared and realized within the framework
 of NATO Collective Defense and EU Common Security and Defense Policy and by applying their mechanisms, effectively using the national defense capabilities, including the military and non-military capabilities of the country.
 42. The establishment and development of the defense capabilities is in
 compliance with the tasks related to the protection of the national interests, and with the implementation of the allied and coalition commitments, and the contribution to national security in peace-time is realized by employing already established capabilities. The Armed Forces serve as a basis for the defense capabilities. 
 43. The National Defense Strategy is based on the following principles:
 - building, modernizing, training and employing the Armed Forces in accordance
 with the provisions of the Constitution as well as the role, missions and tasks set by the political leadership of the state under efficient democratic and civilian control;

 - providing defense in the context of the collective security and defense systems
 by fully engaging the national capabilities and resources;

 - extending the bi-lateral and multi-lateral partnership with the Armed Forces of
 the countries in the region;

 - maintaining the Armed Forces’ operational readiness and participating in
 missions and operations of NATO and EU, as well as of UN, OSCE and other international organizations and coalitions, observing the principles of the UN Charter when there is a political decision for participation.
 44. NATO’s collective defense is a reliable defense instrument and the Armed
 Forces are being prepared for implementation of their constitutional duties within its context. On its part, the Republic of Bulgaria assumes its share of responsibilities for the allies’ security and defense and for protection and realization of the common security interests of NATO and EU. 
 45. The efforts and resources in the defense strategy implementation are focused
 on preventing, and, if required, countering a military threat, as well as on actively forming a favorable security environment. 


-----

### 46. A key priority of the National Defense Strategy is the development of an
 modern defense institution, based on an integrated system for effective and transparent defense management with a potential for institutional flexibility, timely planning and effectively responding. That requires: 

 - modern defense management;
 - capabilities-based planning;
 - education and training of the personnel following modern standards;
 - technological re-armament of the Armed Forces and the defense system,
 applying the lessons learned from operations and the results from defense research activities;

 - increasing the share of structures, programs and projects, jointly realized with
 our allies and partners in NATO and EU framework;

 - integrating into a system the resource and investment planning and the material 
 resources allocation;

 - updating the concepts and doctrines for development and employment of the
 military and civilian defense components.

 V. Role, missions and tasks of the Armed Forces and of the non-military
 defense components

 47. The Armed Forces’ role is to contribute to defending national interests,
 guaranteeing the country’s territorial integrity, sovereignty and security, deterring, together with the allied forces, any opposing forces and achieving victory, keeping threats beyond the borders of the countries as well as safeguarding international peace and security.
 48. The Armed Forces’ missions are:
 - Defense; 
 - Support to international peace and security;
 - Contribution to national security in peace time. 49. The “Defense” mission covers tasks related to guaranteeing national
 sovereignty and independence, to protecting the territorial integrity of both the country and the NATO member nations in compliance with Article 5 of the Washington Treaty. 
 50. Implementing this mission, the Armed Forces carry out: surveillance, control
 and defense of the air and the space within the framework of NATO Integrated Air Defense System (NATINADS), including independent Air-Policing, and in the future, participating in the NATO Missile Defense System (MDS) in Europe; surveillance and protection of the territorial sea, contagious zone and exclusive economic zone; maintaining the readiness of the early warning and control system; maintaining the required national capabilities in an operational state for the needs of the allied collective defense system.
 51. In case of an armed conflict, when the countries’ sovereignty and territorial
 integrity is threatened, the full potential of the Armed Forces and the non-military component of the countries’ defense is involved. The collective defense mechanisms under Article 5 of the Washington Treaty are activated. This is planned, organized and


-----

### trained in advance through exercises on the basis of common Alliance contingency plans.
 52. In case of activation of Article 5 of the Washington Treaty and actions carried
 out on other NATO member countries’ territories, the Armed Forces are to provide land, air and maritime forces from the pool designated and agreed upon in advance within the NATO defense planning process. The main component of this pool is a brigade tactical group from the Land Forces on the basis of a medium-size mechanized brigade. 
 53. For the “Defense” mission, the armed forces and the non-military component
 of the defense system establish and maintain capabilities for implementation of the following tasks: providing civilian resources to the interest of defense; maintaining, recovering and providing technical cover of the national infrastructure; providing ports, airports and stations for concentrating NATO assets on the territory of Bulgaria; safeguarding the state borders with neighbor countries not participating in the military conflict, whenever and wherever necessary; safeguarding and defending critical infrastructure on the countries’ territory; countering adversary’s landing, intelligence- sabotage and terrorist groups; maintaining public order and internal security, providing assistance in disasters, accidents, and catastrophes, reconstruction of destroyed areas, etc.  
 54. The “Support of International Peace and Security” mission includes
 international and coalition commitments for participation in NATO and EU operations and missions for crisis response, conflict prevention, combating terrorism, participation in operations and missions of the UN, OSCE and other coalition formats, arms control activities, non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their delivery means and materials for their production, international military cooperation, humanitarian aid provision, strengthening of trust and security. 
 55. The level of ambition in executing this mission for the Armed Forces is to
 participate with one augmented battalion (battle group) or more small units and assets from the Armed Forces’ services. The total number of personnel involved in them shall not exceed 1000, and the contingents’ rotation shall take place in six months’ periods. The Navy is to participate with its declared forces within the resource equivalence for participation of one frigate, for a period of three to six months, within one year. The Air Force is to participate with helicopters, without rotations for a period of six months, within one year and with the adequate personnel. Logistic and supporting elements are provided for participation in the operations, as needed. 
 56. The Armed Forces contribute to strengthening peace and stability through
 participation in military activities and other forms of bi-lateral and multi-lateral cooperation, including exercises within the framework of bi-lateral, regional and multi- lateral programs and initiatives. The military cooperation is being developed by priority with NATO, EU and neighbor countries participating in the Partnership for Peace initiative and in the South Eastern Defense Ministerial process by establishing, preparing and maintaining multinational military forces. The development of a strategic partnership and mutually beneficial bi-lateral military cooperation with the US Armed Forces is of a key importance.


-----

### 57. For the implementation of this mission the non-military component of the
 defense system builds and maintains capabilities that would ensure its active involvement in such fields as diplomacy, internal order, justice, civil administration, infrastructure development and support, medical support, sanitation, provision of food, electricity, water, etc.
 58. “Contribution to National Security in Peace Time” mission includes:
 maintaining capabilities for early warning against possible risks and threats; conducting activities in support of the maritime and air space control; protection of strategic installations, including systems for production, delivery and distribution of energy resources; conducting operations on deterring and countering terrorist, extremist and criminal groups; protecting endangered strategic installations; defending and supporting the population in cases of natural disasters, accidents and ecological catastrophes; explosive ordnance disposal; providing humanitarian aid; assisting in migration control; rescue and evacuation activities; assistance, if required, to other state structures and organizations.
 59. The elimination of the consequences of terrorist attacks, natural disasters,
 ecologic and industrial catastrophes, dangerous spread of infectious diseases and other types of risks to the Bulgarian citizens’ security and national valuables is realized with the assistance of the Armed Forces complementing the efforts of the respective state institutions. They contribute to the overall effort through preventive warning and humanitarian actions.
 60. The level of ambition for the Armed Forces is to provide available trained
 units within the already established capabilities, in accordance with the developed plans. 
 61. The Republic of Bulgaria’s Armed Forces also participate in the preparation
 of the population for defense and for actions in non-military and military crises through: developing patriotic awareness; training of personnel from the central and local administration; voluntary military training of citizens and their preparation for response in case of emergency situations; maintaining in good condition the MoD’s and Armed Forces’ properties that are no longer in use till their transfer to other organizations or municipalities or till their utilization as temporary lodgings in case of disasters; training for actions in the area of civil protection and humanitarian aid; treatment of wounded and diseased people; care for the disabled military men and for the victims of military actions and preparing the infrastructure for crisis response situations.

 VІ. Employment of the Armed Forces 
 62. The Armed Forces are employed in compliance with the provisions of the
 Constitution and national legislation, and those of the International Law.
 63. Basic forms of the Armed Forces employment are the campaigns and the
 operations.
 64. The employment of the Armed Forces is based on the following general
 principles: clear goals formulation; unity of control in goals achievement; comprehensive and reliable support and sustainment; concentration of force; economy of effort; flexibility; initiative; maintenance of high morale; surprise; force protection; simplicity and clarity of actions; and interoperability.


-----

### 65 Besides the general principles, in peace-keeping operations, the following
 principles are also observed and applied: impartiality; consent; restraint in the use of force; consistency; legitimacy; credibility; mutual respect; humane attitude towards indigenous population in compliance with the International Humanitarian Law and applicable UN Resolutions; transparency; freedom of movement and environmental protection.
 66. The Armed Forces’ employment abroad is accomplished in accordance with
 the goals and grounds indicated in the corresponding decision for their deployment and in the plans for the respective operations. The type of the actions as well as any change in the mission employment and duration parameters is determined by the legally empowered authorities who make the decisions about force deployment and employment. 
 67. In peace time, the Armed Forces participate in crisis response operations,
 crisis situations and accidents occurring within the territory of the Republic of Bulgaria related to: protecting the national air space, navigation control and critical infrastructure protection; assistance in migration control; protection of the population in case of disasters, consequences management after disasters, accidents, catastrophes and terrorist acts.
 68. The Armed Forces maintain capabilities and carry out tasks for protecting and
 defending the airspace and maritime surveillance and control. As part of the NATO Integrated Air Defense System (NATINADS), together with the allied forces, they conduct regular air surveillance and create a common recognized air picture. They maintain and employ duty forces and assets for air space protection against unauthorized air intrusion and violation of the national sovereignty in the territorial sea, contagious zone and exclusive economic zone. They conduct and participate in operations for provision and re-enforcement of the country’s air defense as part of NATINADS. They participate in NATO Common Missile Defense System in Europe.
 69. The Armed Forces, jointly with the allied forces, neighbor countries and the
 civilian organizations, conduct maritime surveillance and create a common recognized maritime picture of the Republic of Bulgaria. In case of violation of the legal status of the territorial sea by military vessels, they deter the intruders and respond adequately to the threat. If required, they support the structures of the Ministry of the Interior in their coastal guard responsibilities and in countering non-military vessels violating national or international legal regulations.
 70. In cases of violations of the country’s air and maritime sovereignty, the armed
 forces use weapons in compliance with the legal provisions, allied and national Rules of Engagement (ROE) stated in the adopted plans for campaigns and operations.
 71. In critical infrastructure protection operations, the armed forces execute tasks
 on protection of critical infrastructure installations, strategic installations and, if required, they provide military formations and resources for enhancing physical protection measures according to the conditions and order, stipulated in the operational plans. 
 72. When rendering assistance to the national migration control authorities and
 receiving foreign citizens seeking refuge on the territory of the Republic of Bulgaria, the Armed Forces provide personnel for deploying temporary reception centers. They


-----

### provide assistance, if required, to the migration control authorities of the Ministry of Interior. 
 73. When protecting the population in disasters, managing the consequences from
 disasters, accidents, catastrophes and rendering humanitarian aid, the Armed Forces, within the framework of the existing capabilities, in cooperation with the integrated Search and Rescue (SAR) System authorities, participate in SAR activities, in the provision of first and specialized medical aid, evacuation of distressed population, life- saving transportation activities, escorting and guarding, assisting the activities of supporting the population and managing the consequences in accordance with the Bulgarian legislation, the international and humanitarian law and the developed plans. 
 74. The coordination and the stipulation of the order for employing military
 formations in operations for protection of the population, management of disaster consequences and provision of humanitarian aid on the country’s territory is carried out by the Minister of Defense.
 75. The Armed Forces contribute to the counter-terrorist efforts through rendering
 assistance to the specialized national structures on the country’s territory, and through fulfilling their allied commitments abroad. In assisting national structures on the country’s territory, the Armed Forces’ formations can be involved in all phases of counter-terrorist efforts: threat prevention, management of crisis due to terrorist actions and elimination of consequences from these acts. For the fulfillment of their allied commitments, they participate in NATO-led anti-terrorist operations, and in other counter-terrorist initiatives of the Alliance.
 76. To guarantee the country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity in the context
 of an escalating military and political crisis and immediate threats for involving the country in a military conflict, the Armed Forces conduct operations as part of allied actions for defending the country. The operations are planned, prepared and conducted in compliance with the respective allied and national planning procedures applied in the Bulgarian Armed Forces.
 77. The Armed Forces’ activities in the context of an escalating military and
 political crisis and immediate threats for involving the country in a military conflict are as follows: enhancing the readiness of the early warning and control system; enhancing the readiness of the Armed Forces as well as the forces and assets of the defense system’s non-military component in accordance with the military threat level; adequate increase of the defense and deterrence forces and groups, preparation for hosting and positioning of allied forces on the territory of the country.
 78. In case of conflict escalation, the Armed Forces undertake military actions to
 deter the invasion of the country and ensure the deployment of the allied forces and forces of the Alliance for the conduct of allied defensive operation. If necessary, war- time formations, complementing the Armed Forces formations are to be established by decision of the Parliament following a proposal by the Council of Ministers. 
 79. In the ultimate and most severe for the Bulgarian state type of scenario of a
 surprise armed attack against the territory of the country, the collective defense mechanisms are immediately activated, the Armed Forces take all necessary measures to counter the aggression, without waiting for a state of war to be declared; all duty forces and assets and high level readiness forces are activated; the allied forces and


-----

### assets deployment is ensured for the conducting an allied defensive operation. State authorities, in close interaction with NATO and EU authorities, make all necessary political, diplomatic, economic and military readiness enhancement efforts to restrain and avoid the possibility of surprise armed attack, as well as to achieve its termination.
 80. After the deployment of the allied forces and assets, the national elements
 planned for participation in a defensive operation are transferred under the command of the Alliance. Their command and control is conducted by the appointed by NATO operation commander. The remaining part of the Armed Forces carries out activities for supporting the allied forces and assets and executes activities related to the host-nation support.

 VІІ. Building up and development of the Armed Forces 
 81. The Republic of Bulgaria is constantly developing its Armed Forces’
 capabilities in compliance with the changes in the security environment.
 82. Their building and development is based on the following principles:
 integration; sufficiency; prioritization; compatibility; adaptability; military units’ modularity; unity of forces; heeding the available resources; unity of command and organizational subordination; consistency and continuity; transparency. 
 83. Operational capability is the ability of executing an action/actions to achieve a
 definite goal/goals or a desired end state, under certain conditions and in accordance with the standards agreed. It is an aggregate of: doctrines and concepts; organizational structure; training; materiel; personnel; command and control; infrastructure and interoperability. Each element of the armed forces’ establishment can have more than one capability and each capability can be made available by more than one structural element.
 84. The acquisition of new operational capabilities by the Armed Forces or the
 disposal of existing capabilities is instrumented in the defense planning process. 
 85. The defense planning includes decision-making with different time-frame and
 recurrence which in its entireness ensures comprehensiveness, flexibility and timely response to the changes in the environment within which the allied and national defense policy is formed and carried out. This planning is predicated on a capability-based approach. National defense planning is harmonized with the political guidance and strategic directives of the North Atlantic Council and NATO common defense planning.
 86. The Armed Forces’ structure and strength are closely linked to the Required
 Operational Capabilities defined in the defense planning process, thus ensuring effective fulfillment of the assigned tasks.
 87. The Republic of Bulgaria builds up a single set of forces, adequate to the new
 threats, with the same structure for execution of tasks in peacetime, in crises and in wartime.
 88. The Armed Forces’ peacetime manning is done on a professional basis. For
 further manning and equipping of the Armed Forces a Reserve is established and maintained on a volunteer basis. 


-----

### 89. If required, the Parliament makes a decision for increasing the Armed Forces
 strength in accordance with the nature and parameters of the emerging threats to national security. 
 90. To provide a high level of flexibility in meeting the requirements for an
 effective conduct and functional support to the operations the Armed Forces include Deployable Forces and In-place Forces.
 91. In order to achieve the required operational level of combat capabilities,
 adequate to the needs, the formations of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria maintain High Readiness Forces and Lower Readiness Forces depending on their designation, missions and position within the overall force structure.
 92. Part of the High Readiness Forces’ formations form the Immediate Action
 Forces, which develop and improve their capabilities, including through the process of contribution to NATO Response Force and EU Battle Groups.
 93. Developing their operational capabilities the Armed Forces build formations:
 maneuverable and expeditionary by nature and structure; capable of accomplishing tasks across the full spectrum of operations; provided with up-to-date technological equipment; supported by integrated logistics; with network-enabled capabilities; rapidly transformable from one functional state into another; interoperable with the allied forces; capable of cooperating and interacting with civilian authorities and non- governmental organizations; with well-trained professional personnel.

 I. Defense resources
 1. Human resources
 94. The human resources are the most important element of the defense
 capabilities and the fundamental asset of the Armed Forces. As a response to the new challenges, the Republic of Bulgaria is building up smaller, up-to-date, mobile and professional Armed Forces which are to substitute the large territorial conscript armed forces from the past. The new type of Armed Forces are created to possess capabilities for operating jointly in coalition environment within NATO, EU, UN and other organizations in support of authorized operations both on national territory and away from its borders. They require a new type of military culture, different abilities, training, education and management.
 95. The manning of the Armed Forces with trained and motivated personnel is
 achieved by implementing a Human Resources Management System which ensures a more effective and efficient management.
 96. The new process of the human resources management ensures: organizational
 and structural building of the Armed Forces and designing and planning of job positions; building of the human resources management system structures; building and training of the reserve; attracting, recruiting and selecting the personnel; training; assessing/attesting; career development; payment; social partnership; resettlement of the military who are discharged from the armed forces.
 97. In order to meet the requirements of the permanently changing strategic
 environment, the growing need of professional military education and the new technologies applied, the military education system is maintained at an up-to-date level. The military education and training system is developed as a flexible system,


-----

### completely developing in parallel with the civil education system without duplicating it. The Armed Forces’ human resources training system comprises individual military training, collective training in the organizational units and formations, and joint training in the established national or multinational military formations for combat employment.
 98. A system of volunteer civilian courses for basic and special military training
 and training for action in extreme situations is established and maintained in the public institutions of higher education and high schools.
 99. The balance between the individual dispositions and capabilities of the
 military personnel and the needs of the organization is achieved through creating adaptive models for career development of the human resources.
 100. To improve the attracting, motivating and retaining of the manpower, a just,
 financially provided for and transparent extra-pay system is being created.
 101. The Reserve is being established with the aim of complementing and
 increasing the operational capabilities of the Armed Forces and maintaining their manning and equipment level in long-lasting operations. Two categories of reserve are being created: a voluntary peace-time reserve and a mandatory war-time reserve.
 102. The Armed Forces maintain an up-to-date resettlement system, which
 ensures a successful transition to the civilian life of the servicemen who have been discharged from the Armed Forces.

 2. Material resources

 103. In order to meet the increased requirements to the Armed Forces provision
 with material resources and services, the Republic of Bulgaria completely changes its military logistics system. The system used by now, based on a top-to-bottom detailed planning, is replaced by a new integrated system, which is more flexible and user- centered. The purpose is to achieve greater effectiveness and efficiency.
 104. The military logistics system is in compliance with the economic potential of
 the country, the defense resources planned and the Armed Forces structure. The main principles of the system’s functioning are: 

 - balance between the system’s requirements and the country’s potential;
 - goal orientation of the acquisition system and the logistic support;
 - inter-relation between the logistic support plans and the operational plans;
 - taking into account the current situation of the defense industry, the scientific,
 technological and information capacity of the country and the Armed Forces;

 - coordination of the efforts in accordance with the integration processes in the
 military-technological and technological cooperation;

 - meeting the demands for the Required Operational Capabilities and 
 contribution to the execution of the Armed Forces missions and tasks;

 - transparency. 105. Within the military logistics, the provision of the Armed Forces with
 material resources and services is realized by a unified system of planning, designing, developing, testing, procuring, introducing, operating, logistic support and disposal.
 106. The material resources are provided by the national economy or by import,
 in compliance with the national legislation provisions and NATO and EU procedures. In


-----

### peace time, the Armed Force very often use services offered by civilian organizations and companies.
 107. The Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgarian create material resources
 reserves, meeting national and allied standards for medium and long-term deployment in cases of potential threats.
 108. The investment policy and the acquisition of defense-related products are
 conducted after a comprehensive technological and economic analysis of their effectiveness for the Required Operational Capabilities development, taking into consideration the lessons learned from the current operations as well.
 109. To ensure the logistic support of the Bulgarian Armed Forces, up-to-date,
 mobile, modular, well-equipped and provided for logistic formations are established, which are capable of supporting the forces in their missions and tasks execution both inside and outside the country.
 110. A priority in the logistic support development is the establishment of
 capabilities for supporting the forces participating in multinational joint operations conducted at remote distances with a partial or none host-nation logistic support.
 111. The mission of the medical support as part of the logistic support is to
 protect the health of the servicemen by maintaining and constantly improving their physical and mental condition, by prevention of diseases and injuries, treatment and rehabilitation of already existing diseases.
 112. The military logistics system is subject to a continuous assessment,
 renovation and improvement in order to be able to provide whatever, to whomever, whenever and wherever necessary.

 3. Information resources

 113. The execution of the tasks evolving from the Armed Forces missions
 depends, to a great extent, on gaining information superiority and on effective cooperation. To provide accurate, timely and secure information guaranteeing the effective and precise management and interaction between the controlling authorities, the Republic of Bulgaria establishes, maintains and develops systems for surveillance, intelligence and automated data exchange supporting the establishment of a full recognized picture of the situation. These systems operate within an integrated communication and information system as a single integrated organizational and technological set of bodies, communication and information resources (human, technological and software resources), procedures, doctrines and documents for information collection, exchange, processing, storing and securing, including from cybernetic attacks.
 114. The surveillance, intelligence and early warning systems consist of
 stationary and mobile observation points equipped with integrated radio, radar, optoelectronic and other types of equipment, as well as points for information collection, processing, analysis and exchange at national and allied levels. The integrated real-time data help for the creation and maintenance of a full recognized air, ground and maritime picture which is made available to the users in real time. 
 115. A communication and information system of the Armed Forces is


-----

### established on the basis of the stationary and mobile communication and information systems and it is part of the country’s integrated communication and information system. It is maintained in peace time and ensures the management of the structures and formations in different types of crises.
 116. The stationary communication and information system comprises the
 stationary CIS nodes of the secured command and control points at the strategic and operational levels and the stationary backbone communication network, incorporated into an integrated communication and information system providing the information exchange for governing the country and the Armed Forces.
 117. The mobile communication and information system comprises mobile
 modules which are specialized for providing information exchange for the command and control needs of the Bulgarian Armed Forces’ formations and coalition forces inside and outside the country. It is designated to meet the requirements of the Bulgarian Armed Forces formations participating in missions and operations.
 118. A priority in the development and upgrading of the communication and
 information system are the mobile tactical communications providing interoperability and command and control of the formations in the contemporary combat environment. This is achieved by a digitalization of the system as a whole providing a high-speed real-time information exchange, as well as by the establishment of capabilities for modular deployment and provision of long-range communications.
 119. The success in current operations depends on the employment of modern
 information technologies. The network-enabled operations steadily become a basic effective and efficient means of achieving the goals, and the protection from cybernetic attacks is an important prerequisite for their successful execution. These operations are based on the integrity of the main command and control subsystems, sensors, means of creating effects and communication and information systems for providing real-time information required for the command and control needs. In this connection, the Armed Forces will develop operational capabilities for operating within a network-enabled information environment.
 120. In order to assure a permanent and unlimited access to the cyber-space and
 to secure the integrity of its critical systems, the Republic of Bulgaria continues to develop national capabilities for prevention, detection, protection and recovery from cyber-attacks and jointly with the allies takes part in the process of establishment of a common integrated cyber-threats detection, warning and response system.

 4. Financial resources

 121. A key prerequisite for the effective achievement of the views set forth in this
 Strategy is the long-term guaranteeing of the financial defense resources as a percentage of the Gross Domestic Product. At the same time, the defense resources available represent a restricting circumstance, which the process of required operational capabilities development and maintenance and the Armed Forces modernization should by all means take into account by setting priorities.
 122. The process of operational capabilities development and maintenance, and
 Armed Forces modernization goes beyond one budget year and is accomplished in a


-----

### long-term which necessitates its planning and resource provision. The planning of this process is carried out on the basis of a three-year budget prognostication annually approved by the Council of Ministers and the financial parameters stipulated in it are annually updated.
 123. The enhancement of the efficiency of the long-term planning and spending
 of the financial resources will continue to be a priority in the Armed Forces management. Taking into account both the above priority and the engagements undertaken by the Bulgarian government in relation to the country’s NATO membership, the expenditures of the Ministry of Defense should be maintained at a relatively permanent level not less than 1.5 % of the GDP and with the inclusion of the other defense expenditures and the expenditures for pensions of the military – not less than 2 %.

 II. Conclusion

 124. The National Defense Strategy of the Republic of Bulgaria is developed
 within the overall process of adapting the key national documents related to the country’s security and defense. It is an open document. Its updating depends on essential political, conceptual and military strategic changes. 
 125. The strategic goals set forth in the National Defense Strategy cover a 10 year time-frame. In 2015, an interim review, and in 2020, a final review and re- publishing of the Strategy are envisaged to be carried out.


-----

