#### KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

## NATIONAL

 DEFENCE POLICY

# 2022


-----

-----

###### The Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) firmly supports

 the defense policy defined in the Defence White Paper 2022

 (DWP22) in order to safeguard peace; and ensure security,

 stability, and comprehensive national development. The newly

 formulated defence policy serves as a strategic guideline for the

 Royal Cambodian Armed Forces (RCAF) to undertake its role and

 duty as outlined in the Constitution of Cambodia.

 For the sole purpose of sustainable development of the

 defence sector, the Ministry of National Defence (MoND) and the

 High Command Headquarters (HCHQ) alike must implement in
 depth reforms. This effort would produce highly competent and

 capable servicemen and servicewomen to serve for the cause of

 safeguarding peace; ensuring security and stability; participating in


-----

###### national development efforts; and representing RCAF on the

 international stage. 

 “Defend our motherland. We, together, for the defence”.

 Building the defence foundation is a top priority which RCAF must

 fulfill in order to protect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of

 Cambodia. The armed forces are formed by the people, thus, the

 relationship between the people and the armed forces is crucial in

 bolstering the defence foundation of our nation. 

 I would like to extend my compliments and recognition to

 the leadership of MoND and RCAF for the great efforts in

 formulating the defence policy and defence strategy documented in

 DWP22. I would like to affirm that this priceless and valuable

 document has been attentively written in accordance with the

 government policy on the future of the defence sector. Finally, I

 believe DWP22 will be an essential strategic directive for RCAF

 in fulfilling its role and duty for the cause of the defence and

 development of our motherland. 

 Phnom Penh 

 Prime Minister

 Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo Hun Sen


-----

###### RCAF is obligated to protect Cambodia’s sovereignty and

 territorial integrity and plays a key role in safeguarding peace; and

 ensuring security, stability, and social order which are the bedrock

 of national development in every sector. 

 It is indeed undeniable that Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei

 Techo Hun Sen’s win-win policy has brought about peace and

 political and social stability to Cambodia which proves to be a

 reliable foundation of sustainable development of the nation. In

 light of the local, regional, and global shifting security

 environment, RCAF is committed to implementing the government

 policy on the defence sector in order to duly protect the

 Constitution and the government of Cambodia at any price as well

 as to participating in national development efforts in the future. 


-----

###### Aligning with involvement with the civil sector in national

 development efforts, RCAF must pursue in-depth reforms in order

 to develop and enhance its capability and capacity for the

 effectiveness of the defence. RCAF must also promote

 international cooperation especially in peacekeeping operations

 under the United Nations framework. 

 My primary intent is to strengthen the defence foundation

 via a bonding connection between our defence personnel and the

 populace. This method would prove effective and timely in

 responding to all forms of threats from both internal and external

 adversaries. 

 To effectively achieve every strategic objective that has been

 set in the government policy on the defence sector, RCAF must

 duly adhere to the defence policy and defence strategy defined in

 DWP22. Eventually, I would like to call on every leadership

 hierarchy and all servicemen and servicewomen of RCAF to

 profoundly make use of this DWP22 as a strategic guideline to

 fulfill every assigned role and duty henceforth. 

 Phnom Penh, Deputy Prime Minister
 Minister of National Defence

 Samdech Pichey Sena Tea Banh


-----

###### Contents

Preface page I

Summary page III

Introduction page 1

Section 1: The Outlook on National Defence Policy

Implementation Page 5

Chapter 1: The Review of National Defence Strategy Page 7

Border Security Page 7

Military Reform Page 9

Training and Education Page 10

Peacekeeping Operations Page 11

Counter-Terrorism Page 13

Maritime Security Page 14

Humanitarian Assistance and

Disaster Relief Page 16

International Cooperation Page 18

Defence Resource Management Page 21

Contribution to National Development Page 21

Chapter 2: Strategic Vision Page 23

Security Environment Analysis Page 23

National Security Threat Assessment Page 26

Chapter 3: National Defence Policy Page 31

Safeguard Peace Page 31

Protect National Interests Page 32

Enhance International Cooperation Page 32

Promote the Value of Military History

and Win-Win Policy Page 32


-----

Section 2: National Defence Strategy Page 35

Chapter 4: Border Defence Page 37

Land Border Page 37

Maritime Border Page 38

Air Border Page 38

Chapter 5: National Security Protection Page 39

Combating Colour Revolution Page 39

Counter-Terrorism Page 40

Transnational Crime Prevention Page 40

Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster

Relief Page 41

Epidemic and Pandemic Response Page 42

Cyber Security Page 44

Chapter 6: Military Reform Page 48

Organisational Structure and Command

and Control System Adjustment Page 48

Personnel Affairs Page 48

Defence Budget Management Page 49

Defence Industry Page 49

Training and Education Page 50

Chapter 7: Defence Cooperation and International

Security Engagement Page 53

Principles for Bilateral and Multilateral

Cooperation Page 53

Ream Naval Base Modernisation Policy Page 54

Regional Framework Cooperation Page 55

United Nations Peacekeeping Operations Page 58


-----

Section 3: Implementation Page 61

Chapter 8: National Defence Priority Management Page 65

Chapter 9: Defence Technology and Innovation Page 67

Chapter 10:National Defence Budget Page 69


-----

-----

###### PREFACE

In the early stages of the establishment of defence policy document,

also known as the defence white paper, there were numerous difficulties

emerging during the formulation process. In late 1998, the Department of

Policy and Planning, MoND, envisioned the importance of long-term defence

policy and defence strategy. This finally led to the initiation of the formulation

of the first defence white paper in 2000. Despite discord among the leadership

at the beginning, H.E Tea Banh, who was the Co-Minister of Defence at that

time, presented the significance of the defence white paper to Prime Minister

**Hun Sen. Consequently, the prime minister approved the formulation process**

via a Defence White Paper Working Group to kick start Cambodia’s first ever

defence white paper.

DWP22 is the third published strategic document preceded by the

Defence White Paper 2000 and the Defence White Paper 2006. The

formulation of these documents was demanding and time consuming—

requiring great efforts of collective teamwork and constant support from the

government. Furthermore, to guarantee the sustainability and flexibility of the

formulated defence policy, defence strategic review documents were

subsequently developed in 2002 and 2013.

DWP22 will prove to be significant in the realm of international

defence cooperation and particularly for Cambodia’s defence sector as a

whole. It lays out the long-term strategy in terms of defence and security of

the nation. It also promotes cooperation and mutual support between the

military and relevant civil institutions and ministries—aiming to strengthen

the foundation of national defence in order to safeguard peace, social stability,

i


-----

and sustainable development under the wise leadership of **Samdech Akka**

**Moha Sena Padei Techo Hun Sen, Prime Minister of Cambodia. DWP22**

will provide instrumental defence strategy to promote transparency in

international cooperation with regional partner nations in the realms of

defence and security.

The accomplishment of instituting DWP22 reflects on the wise

leadership of **Samdach Pichey Sena Tea Banh, Deputy Prime Minister,**

Minister of Defence, and collective efforts of every leadership of MoND and

RCAF. Moreover, the involvement and contribution from various key partners

and national stakeholders are key factors in making this defence white paper

formulation a success. Therefore, sincere appreciation and utmost recognition

are dedicated to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation;

Ministry of Economy and Finance; Ministry of Social Affairs Veteran and

Youth Rehabilitation; Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Interior, General

Commissariat of National Police; and last but not least, Asian Vision Institute

(AVI).

Other entities behind this great achievement are the Department of

Defence of Australia; Australian Defence Attaché in Cambodia; General

Department of Research and Intelligence, MoND; National Council for Khmer

Language of the Royal Academy of Cambodia; and College of Social Sciences

and Languages, National Defence University. Their continuing and

unconditional support and assistance in terms of financial and technical are

undeniably priceless.

ii


-----

###### SUMMARY

The 2022 National Defence Policy document is outlined into three main

sections:

**Section 1 reviews and evaluates the implementation of the previous**

strategic approaches of the defence policy in a number of key areas, including

border defence, military reform, counter-terrorism, training, maritime

security, humanitarian assistance and disaster relief, peacekeeping operations,

international cooperation, defence resources management, and other

contribution to national development. This section also reflects the vision set

forth for the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces (RCAF), focusing on analysis

and assessments of the security threats to the Kingdom of Cambodia until

2030, including land, maritime, and air security, internal security, terrorism,

cyber security, disaster, and pandemic. As such, our national defence policy

has been set reinforcing line of efforts to **“preserve and safeguard lasting**

**peace, protect national interests, and enhance international cooperation.”**

**Section 2** sets out the national defence priorities based on the level of

important and by order of priorities as follows:

**1.** **Border Defence.** It focuses on securing and resolving border

issues through diplomacy on the basis of law and order,

strengthening bilateral and tripartite relations mechanism. By

maintaining military presence, it helps to reinforce the sense of

security and facilitate the development of the border area.

**2.** **Internal Security.** This focuses on the necessary strategies and

measures to combat against colour revolution, terrorism,

transnational crimes, and any threatening cyber related activities.

iii


-----

**3.** **Military Reform. This presents measures for restructuring,**

personnel management, improving the training quality of reserve

personnel, and improvement on defence resource management.

**4.** **International Cooperation. This identifies directions for**

expanding and strengthening bilateral and multilateral relations,

enhancing capacity in peacekeeping operations, and reaffirming

Cambodia’s firm stance on Ream Naval Base modernisation.

**Section 3** provides recommendations to enhance the effectiveness of the

implementation of national defence policy, including the commitment of

leaders, cooperation and mutual supports from ministries and institutions

related to the national defence affairs and the proposal on basing national

defence budget on national GDP.

iv


-----

**INTRODUCTION**

RGC has always prioritized the defence sector as one of key factors

that contribute to the ensuring of peace; security; and stability; and the

promotion of Cambodia’s image and prestige on the international stage.

Cambodia’s security landscape faces noticeable changes as the international

geopolitics and security environment are evolving rapidly. Consequently, it is

indeed critical for MoND to thoughtfully put together defence policy and

defence strategy that are applicable and relevant in order for RCAF to be able

to respond to threats, challenges, and opportunities at present and in the future.

RCAF has fulfilled its duty by defending and preventing effectively

and timely activities that are conducive to inflicting terror and instability,

whilst, also playing a huge part in national infrastructure development and

taking a leading role in HADR operations and during the Covid-19 pandemic.

RCAF is fully committed to successfully executing the government’s policy

in the fields of defence and will continue to act as a core and leading actor in

safeguarding peace, security, stability, and national interests as well as

pursuing regional and global peace. Defence vision for the next 10 years

predominantly focuses on capability development, armed force

modernization, and enhancing international cooperation.

**1.** **Peace as the Foundation of Nation-Building and Development**

Under the wise leadership of **Samdech Techo Hun Sen, Prime**

Minister, Cambodia has transformed from a country embroiled in decades of

internal conflicts into a peaceful nation. Independence, sovereignty, and

1


-----

territorial integrity are the defining factors in achieving peace, nation
building, and development.

After the general election in 1993 under the organization of UNTAC,

Cambodia did not obtain peace until 29[th] December 1998 of which the Win
Win Policy by Samdech Techo Hun **Sen was successfully implemented. This**

marked the country’s first total achievement in peace until this very day. This

achievement has set a cornerstone for sustainable development and left a good

model in the world stage.

The Win-Win Policy had ended decades of armed conflicts and fully

restored peace through national reunification and non-discriminatory

integration which served as building blocks for nation-building and

development. Former battlefields have been transformed into developing areas

which help drive economic growth rapidly and improve the living standard of

the people. Cambodia is committed to safeguarding peace at all costs for the

legacy and the sake of the future generation.

Win-Win Memorial: A symbol of peace and national unity (Picture by Sena Techo Unit)

2


-----

**2.** **What is Defence White Paper?**

Defence White Paper is a key national policy document published by

MoND of the Kingdom of Cambodia. This document reflects on the

government’s vision, policy, and strategy on defence with thorough analysis

and comprehensive reviews. Defence White Paper is an open document

representing transparency by informing the public of the purpose and strategic

objectives of the government’s vision on defence by outlining defence policy

and defence strategy for the future of RCAF.

The sole purpose of DWP22 is to demonstrate the government’s

unwavering will and ability to develop and strengthen its defence capability.

As peace, security, and stability still stand as a foundation for nation- building

and development, the provision of defence policy in this document will help

create awareness and understanding of the policy of which RCAF will boldly

fulfill their duty to protect lives and safeguard peaceful livelihood of the

people.

3


-----

4


-----

### Section 1:

 The Outlook on National Defence

 Policy Implementation

5


-----

6


-----

###### Chapter 1

 The Review of National Defence Strategy

The Defence White Paper 2006 (DWP06) and the Defence Strategic

Review 2013 (DSR13) outlined the strategic priorities and measures for

RCAF’s reforms and key activities, of which past implementations have

resulted in significant achievements and desired outcomes. There are,

however, gaps that need to be reviewed, revised, and supplemented.

**1. Border Security**

RCAF has implemented the 3-point strategy and the 10-point

operational activity and development from DSR13 focusing on the protection

of territorial integrity based on commitment, responsibility, strong will,

discipline, and flexibility to safeguard peace and security along border areas.

Simultaneously, RCAF has been implementing strategies in accordance with

government guidelines for the development of borders to promote peace,

friendship, cooperation, and development. Cambodia maintains utmost

restraint and strives to use diplomatic and legal measures to resolve issues.

These aspects have convinced regional and international communities to gain

a better understanding of Cambodia’s policy - prioritising peace, peaceful

resolutions, and abiding by national and international law.

Cambodia has always been committed to maintaining good relations

with its neighbouring countries and always seeks peaceful resolutions to any

potential conflicts. However, the border dispute in July 2008 escalated into

skirmishes, which inevitably resulted in damages and casualties on both sides.

Under the wise leadership of **Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo**

7


-----

**Hun Sen, Cambodia, based on firm national unity and a position of protecting**

territorial integrity, simultaneously employed a variety of strategies to resolve

disputes including diplomacy, legal measures, and military (as the last resort).

With regards to diplomatic and legal measures, Cambodia sought to address

bilateral and multilateral mechanisms through ASEAN, the United Nations

Security Council (UNSC), and the International Court of Justice (ICJ).

Cambodia intends to employ RCAF in a posture of self-defence against any

violations of Cambodia’s sovereignty with utmost restraint and responsibility.

In implementing its defence strategies, RCAF encountered great

difficulties in the early stages of the conflict due to its belief in the spirit of

peace and friendship. Nevertheless, with the fervent leadership of Samdech

**Techo, a great force of national unity and a surge of support for post-battle**

forces, enabled the armed forces to sustainably defend its territorial integrity

under the rights of self-defence. This lead to a diplomatic solution with

international support.

By employing **Samdech Techo's mixed strategies, combining**

diplomatic and military approaches, the situation returned to normalcy, and

the spirit of building good relations between neighbouring countries and

communication mechanisms at all levels have been restored and strengthened.

Furthermore, RCAF has been actively contributing to national mechanisms in

demarcation along the borders with adherence to legal and legitimate law and

regulations.

Recently, border areas have faced an unprecedented threat—the

COVID-19 pandemic, which has impacted development, security, and

stability along the border areas. During these high-risk circumstances, RCAF

has been actively involved in containing the spread of COVID-19 nationwide.

Under the directive of RGC, RCAF has become a key actor in implementing

8


-----

the COVID-19 prevention strategy—controlling cross-border movements;

managing quarantine centers; providing transportation means; and more

importantly, leading the COVID-19 vaccination campaign in the designated

Red Zone areas and areas with high prevalence of the virus.

**2. Military Reform**

RCAF has implemented military reform plans in line with the

government’s policy, defence strategy, and requirements based on challenges,

opportunities, and changes in national and international contexts. However,

situations at the borders have hindered the military reform process, especially

with regards to defence capability and capacity building.

The implementation of military reform has achieved remarkable

results in defence, security, stability, and public order, focusing on several

priorities. This includes force stationing; strengthening command and control;

technical capacity; administration; strengthening legal work in formulating

law and regulations; education on psychological well-being; information

dissemination; military foreign affairs; and organisational structure to meet

actual needs of the current situation.

In line with the requirements, military reform focuses on the

restructuring of the Army Headquarters—transferring relevant units from

HCHQ to the command of Army Headquarters—further modernising the

border forces, air and naval capabilities, and enhancing human resources.

Capability and capacity building for disaster relief is being carried out through

the enhancement of skills as well as the provision of additional equipment and

means, and exercises on disaster relief with partner nations.

9


-----

The reform process has faced some challenges due to complicated and

overlapping structures between MoND, HCHQ, Army, Navy, Air Force, and

Royal Gendarmerie. Additionally, the conscription law, which came into force

in 2006, has not been fully implemented yet. Furthermore, COVID-19

hindered the military reform process due to a large sum of resources being

allocated to the fight against COVID-19.

**3. Training and Education**

RCAF has strengthened and enhanced education and training

institutions through upgrading teaching facilities. These efforts aim to build a

strong foundation for human resources develoopment and promote

professional military educational institutions in accordance with national and

international education standards.

RCAF has defined training as a strategy for human resources

development and capacity building for personnel at all levels. In this process,

military educational institutions are still researching and developing doctrines,

emphasising curriculum developments, and enhancing the quality of education

and training to strengthen the professionalism of RCAF personnel. In addition,

RCAF’s specialisation training must align from strategic to tactical level and

focus on capacity building for trainers through progressive education and

training courses locally and abroad.

MoND carefully selects personnel who are qualified to undertake

training courses locally and internationally. Additionally, RCAF has

strengthened its relations with partner nations in order to increase educational

exchange programs to enhance defence capability. As a result, the military

10


-----

education system has made significant progress in producing competent and

capable junior officers.

Although military education has progressed significantly over the

years, the COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted RCAF training and education

plans, including annual exercises. For instance, for the last two years (2020
2021), the annual selection of new military personnel was temporarily

suspended, and most forms and methods of training and education have been

modified to effectively adapt to the new normal.

**4. Peacekeeping Operations**

Cambodia, which was once a host nation of a peacekeeping operation

known as the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC),

has become an active peacekeeping troop contributing country, aiming to

promote peace, security, stability and development in various regions globally.

Cambodia is committed to contributing resources, knowledge, and

experiences in the interest of peace and development, especially for those

nations in turmoil.

11


-----

Cambodian peacekeepers deployed in Central Africa

Since 2006, RCAF has actively been involved in peacekeeping

operations under the framework of the United Nations in a number of countries

in Africa and the Middle East. These operations ranged from engineering,

demining, and field hospital among others. RCAF has earned international

recognition due to its experiences and contributions to national development

via demining and developing infrastructure. As a result, there has been an

increase in UN requests for RCAF participation in future peacekeeping

operations. The National Centre for Peacekeeping Forces, Mines and

Explosive Remnants of War Clearance (NPMEC) has continued to enhance

its capability and capacity to meet with the UN requests for future operations.

Cambodia has thus far deployed its peacekeepers to nine countries in

Africa and the Middle East, with a remarkable increase in female

peacekeepers. In 2020, Cambodia was ranked 13[th] out of 122 countries in the

world and ranked 2[nd ] among ASEAN member states (AMS) for female

peacekeepers being deployed to UN peacekeeping operations. This

12


-----

achievement was obtained through RGC’s clear vision and setting appropriate

frameworks for the promotion of women in the defence sector.

Within the international peacekeeping framework, Cambodia has also

strengthened and enhanced cooperation with other countries, both bilaterally

and multilaterally. Cambodia has received support from partner nations,

including material and technical assistance. Moreover, Cambodia has shared

experience with partner nations, particularly related to demining skills. From

2014-2017, RCAF co-chaired the ADSOM-Plus Expert Working Group

(ADSOM-Plus EWG) on peacekeeping operations with the Republic of Korea

and is co-chairing ADSOM-Plus EWG on Humanitarian Mine Action with

China from 2021 to 2024.

Cambodia’s participation in UN peacekeeping operations has brought

forth positive results and has been commended by the leadership of other

international peacekeeping forces. However, Cambodian peacekeepers still

face a number of challenges and threats, such as shortages of technical

equipment, and security factors in mission areas. As a consequence, Cambodia

has suffered some casualties with its peacekeepers during previous missions.

In response, Cambodia has enhanced the quality and intensity of training to

enhance human resource development and resilience in order to respond to

challenges and threats more effectively in the future.

**5. Counter-Terrorism (CT)**

Terrorism remains a threat to national and global security. RCAF has

demonstrated its commitment to strengthening its CT forces through

increasing and enhancing training both domestically and abroad in order to

13


-----

prevent and respond to all acts of terrorism; to safeguard peace; and to protect

security, and stability.

**Samdech Pichey Sena Tea Banh, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of**

Ministry of National Defence, once stated that **_“It is better to prevent_**

**_terrorism from happening rather than fighting against it. We shall not_**

**_attract terrorism”. In this sense, Cambodia clearly understands that peace,_**

development, and improvement of people's livelihoods are crucial in

preventing homegrown terrorism and extremism. Moreover, RGC embraces

freedom of religion; adherence to various political positions; and respect for

individual indigenous traditions without discrimination. Additionally, RGC

encourages harmony among different ethnic groups in Cambodia. These

efforts to encourage social harmonization have been instrumental in making

Cambodia a safe place from terrorism.

RCAF is increasing its cooperation with relevant units, civilian

stakeholders, and international partners to prevent homegrown and

transnational terrorism by focusing on sharing information, researching, and

exchanging experiences with each other. CT forces have effectively carried

out tasks to prevent and tackle all forms of terrorism. For instance, Cambodian

CT forces have eradicated local terrorist networks in the country to disrupt

opportunities and planning which could cause insecurity, instability, and

inflict fear within the society. This demonstrates the effectiveness of the

training and readiness of CT forces and close cooperation of RCAF with

relevant authorities locally and internationally.

**6. Maritime Security**

In line with RGC’s strategic objectives to strengthen the management

of Cambodia’s maritime domain, the National Committee for Maritime

14


-----

Security (NCMS) was established in December 2009 in order to combat

piracy; human trafficking; drug trafficking; transnational crimes; illegal

fishing; and to promote the conservation of natural resources, and emergency

response in the vicinity of Cambodia’s maritime domain.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, tourists on board the Westerdam were welcomed by

Samdech Techo Prime Minister (Picture by the Royal Cambodian Air Force)

Within the national framework, NCMS has strengthened cooperation

with relevant ministries and institutions involved in maritime security by

coordinating forces and effective exchange of information during operations.

NCMS has performed its core role of conducting operations; managing issues;

coordinating and enforcing the law to protect, prevent and suppress all kinds

of threats and crimes, in addition to participating in various humanitarian

assistance operations. Notably, through inter-ministerial cooperation,

Cambodia exhibited a historical humanitarian compassion by allowing the MS

Westerdam cruise ship to dock at Sihanoukville port on 13 February 2020.

15


-----

The ship’s port calls were rejected by several countries due to concerns of the

spread of COVID-19 during the initial outbreak. In contrast, **Samdech**

**Techo’s decision to allow entry of the cruise ship demonstrated Cambodia’s**

goodwill. Although Cambodia is a small country with limited resources, it was

able to make a significant contribution to a humanitarian endeavor.

Subsequently, Cambodia received huge support and recognition from national

and international media and from other countries around the world.

Within the international framework, NCMS promotes bilateral and

multilateral cooperation with international partners to enhance the

effectiveness of interoperability. NCMS has actively participated with

maritime agencies from different countries, such as ADMM-Plus's Expert

Working Group (ADMM-Plus EWG) on Maritime Security and the Southeast

Asia Maritime Law Enforcement Initiative (SEAMLEI). In addition, NCMS

has formulated several key documents including National Maritime Security

Policy, National Maritime Strategy, and Guidelines on Maritime Security

Cooperation.

Along with these developments, NCMS also faces several challenges

that need to be addressed urgently, such as sharing timely information and

resources to ensure effective operations. These challenges can be addressed

through the modernisation of RCAF and support from partner nations.

**7. Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HA/DR)**

RCAF plays a crucial role in humanitarian assistance and disaster relief

(HA/DR) operations. In the event of a disaster, RCAF has the obligation to

cooperate with all relevant authorities, particularly the National Committee for

Disaster Management (NCDM), which is the national coordinating body on

16


-----

disaster relief. For example, the Royal Gendarmerie was a leading force in

cooperating with other units in relief and search and rescue operations during

the severe drought in 2016 and the severe flood in 2020. This has become a

traditional task for the Royal Gendarmerie in addition to its core roles.

In the fight against COVID-19, RCAF has provided a wide range of

assistance including medical assistance; transportations for repatriated

migrant workers; operating quarantine centers; and vaccination campaigns for

all, regardless of their political opinions, especially in the designated Red Zone

and high-risk areas. In bilateral and multilateral cooperation, RCAF has also

engaged with other countries, particularly neighbouring ones, in exercises and

training related to humanitarian assistance and disaster relief operations.

RCAF is still in need of necessary means, equipment, and expertise in

several areas, such as rescue operations in building collapse and landslides

among others. These shortcomings must be addressed swiftly in order to

ensure effectiveness in future operations.

HADR operation during a building collapse (Picture by General Department of Defence

Services)

17


-----

DSR13 highlights RGC’s intent to send rescue teams to regional

countries in case of disasters. However, the lack of logistics capability and

practical experiences remain an obstacle. It requires a clear strategic plan for

RCAF to enhance its capability to enable its participation in regional search

and rescue operations in the future.

**8. International Cooperation**

International cooperation is one of the key priorities of Cambodia’s

defence strategy, which was clearly identified in DWP06 and DSR13, stating

that RCAF must strengthen its defence cooperation with partner nations,

regardless of their political ideology, and based upon equality and mutual

interests. In line with this defence priority, RCAF has significantly

strengthened and enhanced its defence cooperation with other nations

regionally and globally.

Since 2006, defence cooperation with foreign countries has expanded

remarkably, especially in capacity building and technical assistance. For

instance, MoND has sent officers to attend training courses at all levels abroad,

and vice versa. The aims of international training are to strengthen ties with

partner nations and to exchange experiences, knowledge, and skills.

In bilateral defence cooperation, RCAF follows existing mechanisms

and legal agreements, namely the annual agreement of defence cooperation

with China; the convention with France; the annual protocol with Vietnam;

the memorandum of understanding (MOU) with Russia, Japan, and the

Republic of Korea; and defence cooperation mechanisms with Australia and

the United States among others.

18


-----

In terms of defence cooperation within the region, RCAF has actively

participated in various cooperation activities within the framework of the

ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting (ADMM), ASEAN Defense Ministers’

Meeting-Plus (ADMM-Plus), ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), etc. In

addition, Cambodia played an active role in promoting the establishment of

practical cooperation of the ADMM-Plus EWG and the establishment of the

Southeast Asia Maritime Law Enforcement Initiative (SEAMLEI). The

participation in the establishment of these mechanisms aims to promote

practical cooperation and strong partnerships with regional countries, and to

enhance interoperability to jointly respond to current and future security

challenges. Furthermore, defence cooperation also aims to enhance RCAF

capability based on the principles of equality, independence, sovereignty, and

mutual interests.

RCAF leadership has always been instrumental in sharing views on

defence and security in high-level international defence dialogues, such as the

Shari-La Dialogue, Beijing Xiangshan Forum, Seoul Defence Dialogue, and

Tokyo Defence Forum. In addition, RCAF has also shared its best practices

on the implementation of Samdech Techo’s Win-Win Policy, which put an

end to the three-decade long civil war and brought about peace and

development to Cambodia.

19


-----

Samdech Pichey Sena Tea Banh, representing Samdech Techo Hun Sen, bringing COVID-19

supplies to Laos (Picture by Lao PDR)

While defence cooperation has increased, the emergence of COVID
19 in the last two years has disrupted this progress, suspending exchange

visits, joint exercises, and cooperation activities. At the same time,

international meetings and dialogues have shifted the format of interactions,

specifically from physical to virtual forms.

Despite these issues, RCAF’s cooperation at all levels has contributed

to promoting confidence building; developing capability; and safeguarding

peace, security, and stability in the region. It is undeniable that global

challenges cannot be addressed by any country alone. It requires

comprehensive and collective efforts and cooperation among partner nations.

20


-----

**9. Defence Resource Management**

Defence resources are fundamental for RCAF to effectively perform

its duty. These include armored fighting vehicles, armaments, administrative

equipment, machinery, logistics, and other physical infrastructure. It requires

a comprehensive strategic plan to ensure that these resources are being

effectively and efficiently acquired and sustained.

In addition, RCAF has achieved key goals such as the new

administrative building of MoND, tactical command headquarters, the

expansion of communication systems for regional military headquarters, and

the upgrading of air defence radar systems, etc. Furthermore, a significant

amount of equipment has been acquired to meet specific needs, namely

transport trucks, medical equipment, and tactical equipment among others.

**10. Contribution to National Development**

RCAF has actively contributed to national development and improving

people’s livelihood via the construction and restoration of physical

infrastructure nationwide. RCAF has played a crucial role in demining and

clearing lands off unexploded ordnance (UXO). In collaboration with national

and international stakeholders and agencies, over the past 29 years (1992
2021), RCAF has cleared 2,325 square kilometers of landmine contaminated

land—which subsequently reduced landmine casualties from 4,320 to 44 in

2021.

RCAF has strengthened and enhanced civil-military relations with

civilian institutions, which is an important part of supporting defence efforts

in demining. Collaborations with civilian partners must be maintained to

ensure continued effectiveness in safeguarding peace, security, and stability.

21


-----

Ministry of National Defence


22


-----

###### Chapter 2 

 Strategic Vision

RCAF must develop a strategic vision in response to rapid changes in

the regional and global defence sector. Numerous factors such as security, and

geopolitical competitions have complicated the global security environment.

Challenges and threats to security, including, but not limited to, environmental

security, are also a major concern. As a direct implication of these

complications, RGC must tactfully develop a strategic plan in order to

safeguard peace, protect national interests, and promote national development

through strategic research and analysis.

**1.** **Security Environment Analysis**

**a. Global**

The complex and fast evolving global security situation has affected

and will continue to influence both regional and global security and stability.

This has been shown through fierce competition between superpowers as well

as direct and indirect involvement of middle and regional powers. This

competition could result in a more distinct and realistic presence of a multi
polar world. These developments can present opportunities, challenges, and

threats to the security and national interests of Cambodia.

The geopolitical shifts and competitions between superpowers will

continue to exist in all domains and regions, directly affecting the global

economy, trade, and technology. In addition, the growth of military power

around the world has become a major concern including the lack of

23


-----

transparency and cooperation. The current and future global security

environment will encounter threats and challenges posed by both non-state

actors and non-traditional threats including transnational crimes, terrorism,

pandemics, cyber security, and artificial intelligence (AI) among others.

Additionally, the world must recognise long-term impacts of climate

change that results in the rising of sea levels, droughts, freshwater shortages,

and severe natural disasters. Overall, the threats of environmental security

could possibly endanger social order, political stability within the region, and

could even lead to armed conflicts. This requires constant alertness and

readiness in order to respond at all times.

**b.** **Regional**

Constant changes and fluctuation in global security have a direct

correlation to regional security. Roles and relations between superpowers

while expanding their spheres of influence and geopolitical dominance remain

major challenges for Southeast Asia as a whole. Additionally, existing

regional security challenges and threats will lead to complex and unpredictable

changes. Utmost attention from nations within the region as well as

cooperation are required to peacefully resolve disputes.

The South China Sea (SCS) has become a potential flashpoint where

superpowers compete for regional influence and dominance. The SCS is now

the focus of a tug of war between nations with competing claims; the aim of

which is to assert control over maritime sovereignty and natural

resources. The competition between superpowers, and territorial disputes

between claiming nations have exacerbated the complexity of the issue which

requires mutual understanding and complete focus on a peaceful resolution.

24


-----

With regard to the Korean Peninsula issue, a potential measure to ease tensions

and to prevent nuclear escalation is to take peaceful approaches, including

self-constraint and negotiation. Furthermore, the Indo-Pacific Initiative (IPI)

would gain profound support if it remains true to its main purpose of

promoting peace, stability, cooperation, and prosperity in the region.

Terrorism, cyber security, natural disasters, and pandemics among

others remain challenges and threats to regional security. Although numerous

terrorist organisations and networks in the Middle East have been neutralized

and dissolved, the threats continue to persist. The remnants of foreign fighters

from the destruction of terrorist organisations and networks pose grave

concerns. The return of foreign fighters to their home countries could cause

great risks to the region in the form of recruiting and planning for other attacks

in the future. Apart from terrorism, cyber-crimes also pose a major concern

for the region, due to Southeast Asia becoming a hub of economy, trade,

defence cooperation, and technology. These areas of activities are the main

targets of cyber-attacks by both state and non-state actors. Attacks on key

institutions will impact the economy enormously. The security, stability, and

common interests of the region as a whole will inevitably be impacted by these

developments.

The fast pace and never-ending development and innovation in

biological experiments and gradual degradation of the environment are

conducive to other forms of non-traditional threats including pandemics and

natural disasters. They present various challenges to the populace; health

sector; and food security. In this sense, a well-designed strategy is required to

respond effectively and in a timely manner in order to mitigate calamity.

25


-----

**2. National Security Threat Assessment**

**a. Subversion**

Subversion can happen in numerous forms such as colour revolution;

racial and religious discrimination; social class discrimination, incitement to

oppose the government; and dissemination of false news and disinformation.

The interference of Cambodia’s internal affairs continues to exist

through the provision of financial and political support from external parties

in the guise of social and environmental activities. The main goal of these acts

of interferences is to keep in check the neutrality of the armed forces.

Furthermore, false reports on human rights and freedom violations could incite

social unrest and violence. These forms of activities undermine the legitimacy

and image of the government which can be regarded as a threat to national

security.

**b. Land Border Security**

Land border security requires a great deal of efforts and commitment

in order to ensure security and stability, which are the core foundation of full
scale national development. Incidents such as illegal border crossings and

transnational crimes among others are viewed as potential threats to border

security and national security as a whole.

The inconsistency of land border demarcations; the use of unilateral

unofficial maps; the shifts of political agendas; and extreme nationalism could

lead to border disputes between neighbouring countries. These factors are

conducive to territorial and sovereignty violations in various ways, including,

but not limited to, illegal settlements, and illegitimate occupation by military

forces. Additionally, transnational crimes in the form of trafficking, and illegal

26


-----

border crossings, lead to difficulties in immigration control, especially with

the challenges during the COVID-19 pandemic.

**c. Maritime Security**

Maritime passages have become significant to the economy in terms

of transportation and trade routes. In addition, the abundance of natural

resources provides strategic significance to the economy. Cambodia must

protect its maritime sovereignty and security, especially the protection of

strategic routes related to the economy and natural resources.

The ambiguity of maritime border which subsequently leads to illegal

fishing; maritime territorial disputes; and illegitimate occupation of natural

resources sanctuaries could impact Cambodia’s national interests.

Furthermore, maritime crimes such as piracy, smuggling, and other maritime

incidents in the form of shipwrecks, and oil spills could possibly pose threats

to Cambodia’s maritime security. Therefore, Cambodia must strengthen its

capability and readiness to prevent and respond to these threats effectively and

in a timely fashion.

**d. Airspace Security**

Airspace security is vital for Cambodia in protecting its sovereignty,

promoting national interests, and expanding national economic potentials.

Challenges and threats to airspace security can be defined by the lack of

management capability, in terms of human resources and technical equipment

such as radar and air surveillance systems.

Threats that are considered harmful to Cambodia’s airspace are those

of hijackings or crimes that could be carried out by terrorists or criminals.

Inevitable threats that are also worrisome come in the form of unauthorized

entry into airspace including foreign surveillance and reconnaissance aircrafts,

27


-----

unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV), or drones, etc. This indicates the priority of

airspace security protection that requires Cambodia to make necessary

modernization in air defence capability.

**e. Cyber Security**

Cyber threats and attacks are happening everywhere around the world.

With the advancement of modern telecommunications and information

technology, including Internet of Things (IoT) and 5G technology, the

opportunity and capability for criminals to launch cyber-attacks have

significantly increased. Furthermore, it presents opportunities for organised

crime groups such as human and drug traffickers, and arms smugglers to

obtain intelligence from public and private institutions for criminal purposes.

Cyber threats affect national security through threatening, attacking,

and undermining national security and social stability. This includes the

economy, intelligence, and key infrastructure such as hospitals,

telecommunications entities, power plants, water supply systems, shelters,

transportation systems, etc. Strengthening cyber security is crucial for

preventing cyber warfare, cyber terrorism, espionage, and scams.

**f. Terrorism**

Terrorism will always remain a major threat to regional and global

security. Cambodia must raise awareness of all forms of terrorism, including

homegrown and transnational terrorism, which pose threats to national

security and stability. Although terrorism has never greatly affected

Cambodia, strategic measures to prevent and respond to these threats are

significantly required.

28


-----

**g. Natural Disasters**

Non-traditional security threats such as man-made and natural

disasters have increased as a result of environmental degradation and climate

change. Floods, droughts, earthquakes, typhoons, and wildfires are serious

threats to humanity worldwide, and they will remain so in the future.

Since Cambodia is an agricultural dependent nation, floods and

droughts are classified as severe challenges and threats to the local populace.

RCAF’s readiness and preparedness is a top priority for Cambodia's strategic

plan for dealing with the increasing intensity of natural disasters. Hence, it is

very important for RCAF as the leading force in search and rescue operations

to strengthen its capability to respond effectively and in a timely manner. In

addition, this endeavour will be achieved through international cooperation

with partner nations, especially among AMS.

**h. Pandemics**

The growth of connectivity and globalisation has demonstrated that

pandemics are more than just a threat to public health, but also a threat to

national and global security. The spread of COVID-19 is clear evidence that

pandemics also affect the economy, trade, tourism, education, national

security and more. These matters require an international cooperative

mechanism to rapidly respond as well as to recover socio-economically in the

post COVID-19 phase of the pandemic.

Although there was misinformation and distortion of the actual

situation during the COVID-19 community outbreak in Cambodia, RGC, with

strong support from RCAF, successfully contained the spread of COVID-19

and prevented it from getting worse.

29


-----

The leading role of RCAF in joining RGC in battling the pandemic is

in line with the government’s strategy of quarantine management; the setting

up of medical centres; transportation of repatriated immigrant workers;

installation of COVID-19 analysis laboratories; and the launch of COVID-19

vaccination campaigns nationwide. Vaccines have been provided to

Cambodians and foreigners alike without discrimination. Moreover, RCAF

has produced and distributed vaccination cards to those who have been

vaccinated. Through all these efforts, Cambodia has achieved significant

positive outcomes in the battle against COVID-19.

Future pandemics cannot be foreseen and cannot be predicted. As such,

RCAF must skillfully define a defence strategy composed of feasible, suitable,

and acceptable approaches for coping with pandemic threats in order to ensure

readiness, preparedness, and effectiveness.

30


-----

###### Chapter 3

 National Defence Policy

Cambodia adheres to the principles of neutrality, non-alignment, and

peaceful coexistence with every nation. Cambodia does not permit foreign

military bases on its sovereign territory, nor will it establish military bases

abroad, except under the United Nations Peacekeeping Operations (UNPKO)

framework. Cambodia firmly believes in the spirit of respecting common

interests among nations and employing peaceful solutions in accordance with

both national and international law. Cambodia strongly opposes foreign

interference in its internal affairs under any circumstances and vice versa.

Based on the security analysis and threat assessment stated in chapter

2, Cambodia has mindfully identified a set of defence policies that serve as a

top-level national guidance for RCAF to fulfill its role and duty.

**1. Safeguard Peace**

Peace has always been the bedrock of national unity and development

in all fields. It is the reflection of personal sacrifices and merits of Samdech

**Techo Hun Sen, Prime Minister of Cambodia, in the cause of the national**

salvation from a three-decade long civil war and armed conflicts. In this sense,

Cambodia recognises distinctly the value of the history that it has gone

through. At the same time, Cambodia promotes the value of military history

as a testament to the struggle and devotion of those who have given the

ultimate sacrifices for the cause of peace. To safeguard peace, Cambodia will

exercise its sovereign rights as a legitimate state to implement the most

31


-----

appropriate and just methods and mechanisms based on national and

international law. RCAF has the role and duty to protect the legitimate

government; defend the Constitution; and ensure safety, security, stability, and

public order to safeguard peace, which is the foundation of national harmony

and prosperity.

**2.** **Protect National Interests**

Cambodia recognises independence; sovereignty; territorial integrity;

national security and stability; developed border areas; and strategic economic

routes as national interests. In this sense, within the boundary of national and

international law, Cambodia upholds the rights to self-defend against internal

and external threats that could affect national interests.

**3. Enhance International Cooperation:**

Cambodia upholds a defence policy that strengthens and enhances the

capability and image of RCAF. Cambodia welcomes all initiatives that

promote peace, security, stability, and prosperity through bilateral and

multilateral cooperation based on mutual benefits and respect.

**4. Promote the Value of Military History and Win-Win Policy:**

Cambodia maintains and promotes the value of military history by

reflecting the great sacrifices and merits of Samdech Techo in the salvation

of Cambodia. This includes building peace, ensuring stability, development,

harmony, and the prosperity of the nation.

32


-----

**Samdach Techo’s Win-Win Policy saved Cambodia from the brink of**

destruction and brought about peace, national unity, and development. The

peace and national unity of Cambodia are critical factors in building and

promoting peace and stability in the region. Therefore, it is important for

military personnel and civilians alike to understand military history and the

Win-Win Policy. Preserving historical evidence, especially the construction of

the Win Win Memorial, is a symbol of remembrance and gratitude to the

Samdech Pichey Sena Tea Banh oversees the development of military history sites along

border areas.

founders of the Win-Win Policy and its practitioners who brought peace and

national unity. Initiation and construction of military historical sites along the

border areas are also one of the main approaches of Cambodia’s border

defence strategy.

Sharing experiences and best practices on the successful implementation

of Win-Win Policy is also an important contribution to promoting peace and

33


-----

stability within the region. The concept of reflecting on military history to

build lasting peace is becoming a topic of dialogue in regional forums now

and in the future.

**“Only victors shall write history. And in return history will write about**

**victors”**

**~ Samdach Techo Hun Sen**

34


-----

### Section 2:

 National Defence Strategy

35


-----

36


-----

###### Chapter 4 

 Border Defence

**1. Land Border**

Cambodia has a strong commitment and a clear policy regarding the

development of neighbouring borders to promote peace, friendship, cooperation, and

development. Establishing various infrastructure and community development along

the borders has been a core strategy to actively defend Cambodia's borders. As part

of the border defence strategy, RCAF will continue establishing and developing

military history sites.

Border disputes shall be resolved using bilateral and multilateral mechanisms

and in accordance with international law to ensure stability and peace. The existing

mechanisms of cooperation at all levels shall be maintained to strengthen border

cooperation with neighbouring countries.

Relevant institutions involved in border defence will continue to use existing

mechanisms to set both short-term and long-term plans in bilateral cooperation with

neighbouring countries. Furthermore, the completion of border demarcations is an

effective way to reduce hostility along the borders. Local units must communicate

regularly with higher command to provide each other with timely information to

resolve any potential issues. Regular joint border patrols along the borders with

neighbouring countries shall be conducted accordingly and shall be expanded based

on the availability of resources.

Despite the key principle of defending the border by employing diplomacy

and maintaining good relations, RCAF must enhance the capability of local units

along the borders. The development of defence capability focuses on strengthening

force presence and consistent border patrols; promoting readiness and preparedness;

enhancing logistics support; and modernising border defence systems.

37


-----

**2. Maritime Border**

Maritime joint border patrols with neighbouring countries must comply with

existing cooperation agreements and can be further expanded as necessary.

Additionally, the focus on maritime awareness and management is vitally important.

This focus includes the development of strategic naval infrastructure such as Ream

Naval Base, bases in other strategic locations, and the development of workshops for

repairing and naval asset maintenance. Modernisation must include radar stations;

acquisition of modern destroyers and patrol vessels; and other defence systems which

provide necessary capability for RCAF to respond effectively and promptly.

**3. Air Border**

The strategic goal of defending Cambodia's air border requires human

resource development and materials, especially air defence systems capable of

intercepting fighter jets, reconnaissance aircrafts, drones, etc. It also requires strategic

force positions to enhance the effectiveness of monitoring, defending, and preventing

air threats.

RCAF must look into enhancing cooperation and communication with the

Secretariat of State of Civil Aviation (SSCA), and relevant institutions for the purpose

of capability and capacity building, as well as bolstering cooperation in order to

protect air sovereignty and national security.

38


-----

###### Chapter 5

 National Security Protection

Besides the core principle of protecting national sovereignty, the

legitimate government, national interests, and defending the Constitution,

RCAF has a primary duty to safeguard peace; ensure security, stability and

public order; and to participate in humanitarian assistance operations.

Additionally, RCAF plays a vital role as a military diplomat to maintain good

relations and cooperation with neighbouring countries and other countries

around the world. Cambodia has passed a law on managing the state of

emergency, which requires RCAF to be ready to enforce the law when critical

moments arrive.

**1.** **Combating Colour Revolution**

Subversion is the activity of extremist and biased groups who seek to

overthrow the legitimate government that emerged from free and fair

elections. Therefore, RCAF cannot be neutral in this regard and will be ready

to cooperate with relevant authorities to prevent, control, and suppress all

forms of subversion.

Cambodia's historical moment of peace and national unity was threatened

by the colour revolution instigated by hostile foreign forces. At the heart of

the colour revolution is the ambition to place RCAF in a neutral position so

the legitimate government can be overthrown without any resistance. RCAF

must be robust and loyal without any conditions to the nation, the religion, and

the King. Also, RCAF must defend the Constitution and protect the

39


-----

government. Ultimately, RCAF will take immediate action to combat any

activity related to the colour revolution to safeguard peace, ensure national

unity, harmony, and the prosperity of the people of Cambodia.

**2.** **Counter-Terrorism (CT)**

Although there is no indication that Cambodia has been a target for

terrorist attacks, security concern with terrorism is still a threat to peace,

security, and social stability.

Consequently, RCAF must have appropriate strategies to promptly deal

with all forms of terrorist activities and to the highest standard possible. In

addition, it is an important consideration to set a high quality for professional

development and resources for CT units and other relevant units which focus

on broader cooperation with other institutions. Meanwhile, RCAF needs to

cooperate with partner nations to share information, conduct professional

training and joint exercises, and receive other aids.

Notably, the policy of social harmonisation is the most effective approach

to prevent terrorism in Cambodia. According to Samdech Pichey Sena, “It is

**_better to prevent terrorism from happening rather than fighting against it._**

**_We shall not attract terrorism”._**

**3.** **Transnational Crime Prevention**

Human and drug trafficking and other illegal border crossing activities are

still problematic and a cause of concern for Cambodia. These activities require

RCAF to promote and strengthen inter-institutional mechanisms and

international cooperation to increase the capability to prevent, share, and

40


-----

exchange information promptly. The objective will be to effectively prevent

and crack down illegal activities along the borders.

RCAF must increase cooperation with national institutions, including the

National Police, Customs Office, and other relevant agencies, as well as

enhance cooperation with partner nations in the region and internationally to

share information; to prevent, protect and respond to transnational crimes.

Simultaneously, RCAF will also enhance the development of specialised

forces by expanding and enhancing training both locally and internationally.

**4.** **Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HA/DR)**

RCAF will always be ready and prepared to respond to humanitarian

assistance and disaster relief operations under the coordination of NCDM. The

Royal Gendarmerie is the leading force in making strategic plans and

conducting joint operations with relevant units and civil agencies. On this

note, other RCAF units must be prepared and ready to deploy forces, means,

equipment, command, and cooperate with the Royal Gendarmerie and other

relevant agencies to operate in disaster relief operations within respective

designated locations. Both unilateral and multinational training with partner

nations is crucial for enhancing RCAF capability and interoperability in future

operations.

41


-----

Royal Gendarmerie in HADR (Picture by General Department of Defence Services)

**5.** **Epidemic and Pandemic Response**

RCAF has gained considerable awareness and experiences from the

Covid-19 pandemic through its involvement in the government’s efforts to

prevent and address public health issues. The armed forces will be a leading

force when dealing with pandemics, especially in areas that are most affected.

Along with relevant authorities, the armed forces are tasked with cooperating

with neighbouring countries to implement national and international measures

which deal with pandemics across the borders. If Cambodia is placed under a

state of emergency, RCAF will become the main force to enforce the law.

42


-----

Vaccination campaign (Picture by Royal Cambodian Army)

Future epidemics or pandemics cannot be predicted and are unforeseen.

Therefore, RCAF must always enhance its preparedness and readiness to be

able to respond effectively in the future. To do this, significant efforts are

needed for this to be achieved:

   - Increase and strengthen RCAF medical corps personnel capacity and

capability

   - Enhance RCAF medical corps capability by developing an annual

budget plan

   - Constantly raise situational awareness related to epidemics and

pandemics in accordance with national health protocols

43


-----

**6.** **Cyber Security**

Currently the military is utilizing sophisticated technology in various

realms including command and control, intelligence, and communication

systems, from strategic down to tactical level. In this sense, cyber security

must not be neglected since it provides precise, rapid, secure, confidential, and

highly effective means for the aforementioned realms.

Alongside its immense benefits, there are also more complex and

sophisticated cyber threats which are considered one of the most concerning

topics among international communities as well as Cambodia. RCAF must set

a clear strategy and robust strategic plans to respond to this matter accordingly.

In this context, RCAF will put forward the following strategies:

**A.** **Legal Framework**

The establishment of a legal framework on cyber security is one of the

crucial elements in providing a solid foundation and guiding principles to

develop a national strategy on cyber security. The objective of establishing a

legal framework is to ensure that cyber activities in all forms which present

threats to national security can be prevented and tackled effectively. In order

to effectively develop this framework, three guiding principles are outlined:

standardization; laws, both national and international must be in alignment.

This also includes regular reviews to identify areas for amendment in order to

keep up with the developing pace of technology need to be implemented.

The legal framework for RCAF cyber security is considered to be a priority

task which requires attention and needs to be addressed promptly in

accordance with the rapid evolution of technological globalisation.

44


-----

**B. Organisational Structure**

All units are to amend their organisational structure to suit the current

technological evolution which enhances the units’ ability to monitor; conduct

surveillance and reconnaissance; analyse, and ultimately tackle any cyber

security threats promptly. Additionally, all units need to establish cooperation

across all stakeholders on all levels from national, sub-national, private

sectors, and NGOs. This should be carried out at both strategic and operational

level through information sharing dialogues, and experience and strategic plan

exchange programs.

**C. Human Resources**

Human resources cannot be overlooked, despite units and institutions

being equipped with the latest technology, updated organisational structure,

and applicable legal framework. The people still stand as the core element in

the development of cyber security. With that, capability development,

knowledge, and capacity building of RCAF on cyber security has become one

of its top priorities.

In order to develop effective human resources to serve as valuable assets

to RCAF in cyber security, every relevant unit must have a clear strategy

which includes establishing cyber security training centers; planning for

recruitment and retention of specialists and technical experts, as well as RCAF

training and cyber security awareness campaigns to raise baseline knowledge

and improved computer literacy.

**D. Technical Capability**

45


-----

The strengthening of technical capability is a key factor in responding

to rapid technological advancement and the increase in cyber threats in the

present and the future. Furthermore, the modernisation of operating systems,

software and core networks is fundamental to protecting against cyber-attacks.

Therefore, regular updates of both software and hardware need to be

maintained in the future to enable technological infrastructure to be more

sustainable and more capable to protect against all forms of threats.

**E.** **Cooperation**

Any cyber related activities that can destabilise national security have to

be prevented at all costs. RCAF requires practical cyber security cooperation

with both national and international operations. In addition, cooperation with

the private sector is considered one of the main focal points in relation to

capacity building through international partners.

National cooperation includes inter-ministerial and intra-sectoral

cooperation, including MoND and relevant units under RCAF, institutions,

technology research institutes, major universities, local technology

companies, and specialised units.

Regional cooperation requires participating in, contributing toward, and

exchanging defence strategies which concern telecommunication technology

and information technology bilaterally and multilaterally. Furthermore, it is

crucial to expand cooperation at the international level with partner nations

who have more advanced technology and extensive experience in cyber

security.

46


-----

**F.** **Research and Development**

Research and development on cyber security is a critical factor for a

nation or organisation to achieve efficient technological advancement with

confidence. This can be achieved through support from relevant ministries or

institutions to the successful research and development of cyber security. This

support will enable expert teams to research and develop intelligent

technology to ensure the suitability of cyber security in the future. In addition,

establishing a platform where governmental organisations, NGOs, and private

sectors can facilitate the exchange of information, knowledge, experience, and

technological development is essential to research and development.

47


-----

###### Chapter 6

 Military Reform

Despite some significant challenges, RCAF will continue to

implement military reform plans in greater depth. Future reforms focus on the

following key measures:

**1. Organisational Structure and Command and Control System**

**Adjustment**

Organisational structure and command and control systems must be

optimised to meet necessary needs of actual tasks in order to avoid structural

overlap between MoND, HCHQ, and the four services. This optimization will

ensure efficiency and effectiveness in the long run. Force hierarchical

structure will need to be reformed to strengthen the command and control

systems; technical standards; and administrative affairs to mitigate complexity

and to comply with the role and duty of each institution and unit.

**2. Personnel Affairs**

Institutional and organizational frameworks need to be updated to meet

specific needs and circumstances. At the same time, new recruitments will be

carried out in accordance with government plans and resources. This process

will be conducted with transparency and efficiency.

RCAF will continue the process of new recruitments along with

intensive training and education domestically and abroad for the newly

48


-----

qualified recruits. This effort will guarantee the production of professional,

competent, and capable servicemen and servicewomen.

Meanwhile, RCAF must look into the implementation of military

conscript law in order to prepare and build sustainable armed forces for the

future and to build a strong defence foundation among the people. Also,

enforcement of the pension law will be bolstered in order to encourage

voluntary early retirement and to achieve the annual desired retirement rate.

RCAF must set a fair and transparent post-retirement strategy in line

with the government’s policy. This is to ensure the value of the retirees and

veterans in society. Equal opportunities, welfare, and recognition must be

outlined in the strategy in order to guarantee a comfortable life in post
retirement.

**3. Defence Budget Management**

MoND needs an appropriate annual defence budget to build human

resources; enhance in-depth defence modernisation; improve physical

infrastructure, etc. Defence budget allocation must be prioritized based on

strategic needs and requirements such as RCAF capability and capacity

building; and defence technology among others. In this sense, defence budget

allocation must align with defence strategy to ensure a successful and effective

execution.

**4. Defence Industry**

A defence industry initiative is key for MoND to enhance the defence

capability and keep pace with technological advancement and innovations.

49


-----

The main goal of establishing a defence industry is to support necessary

defence needs by encouraging self-reliance on domestic defence products over

the long term. This approach will guarantee sustainability through increasing

the production volume of small-sized and medium-sized weaponry and

military equipment and provide opportunities for RCAF to engage

internationally in terms of defence industry cooperation and collaboration.

When self-reliance is ensured, RCAF will no longer be dependent on foreign

procurements.

The long-term goal of improving RCAF self-reliance will prove that

the defence industry is key in contributing to supplying defence demands for

both actual operations and training and exercises, and most importantly to

achieve RCAF modernization plans.

**5. Training and Education**

Higher educational and training institutions in the field of defence must

focus on improving strategic and defence studies and research. In order to

bring the defence education system in line with international quality and

standards, every defence educational establishment must update training

curriculums, upgrade facilities, and develop doctrines paralleled with the

progress of defence advancement regionally and globally. Additionally, it is

also of vital interest that the expansion of professional training and education

exchange programs with partner nations must be taken into high consideration.

General understanding and knowledge on military history and the Win-Win

Policy is important so that all servicemen and servicewomen grasp the value

of what the foundation of today’s armed forces is, and what has brought about

peace and development to Cambodia. Therefore, every defence educational

50


-----

and training institution must include the subjects of military history and the

Win-Win Policy into relevant curriculums.

The transformation of the Naval Training School to the Naval Training

Institute has been a success. This achievement will deepen and expand

capability, knowledge, and skills of the Navy in order to operate and respond

effectively in the future. At the same time, NPMEC will develop itself into a

recognized regional center of excellence. This transformation will build and

promote RCAF’s reputation, capability, and contribution to peacekeeping

endeavors in the future under UNPKO framework.

Finally, adequate financial and technical support are instrumental in

these reform efforts. They define the successful achievement of developing

quality human resources, based on subject matter and specialty.

Training is one of the main priorities in capability development (Picture by Training

Headquarters – High Command HQ)

51


-----

###### Chapter 7

 Defence Cooperation and International Security Engagement 

**1. Principles of Bilateral and Multilateral Cooperation**

RCAF has a clear and consistent principle in defence cooperation with

partner nations to enhance solidarity, defence capability, and friendship based on the

principles of independence, neutrality, non-political ideology, and mutual respect in

line with the government's strategic direction to promote sustainable international

relations. Based on political, security and economic development and as part of the

strategic goals of the defence policy towards 2030, RCAF will strengthen and

broaden cooperation and good relations with countries within the region and the

world.

To ensure the sustainability of international engagement, RCAF will

continue to deepen bilateral cooperation with security partners through defence

diplomacy. This will be achieved by increasing Cambodia’s defence attaché offices

overseas and vice versa. RCAF is also committed to further promoting cooperation

in mutual military assistance, increasing memorandums of understanding with

partner nations, facilitating exchange visits, conducting joint exercises, exchanging

experiences, and sharing information. These allow RCAF to develop its capabilities

and contribute to safeguarding national and international peace and security.

Cambodia's defence policy is transparent and open to all friendly countries

that are willing to strengthen defence and security cooperation with Cambodia based

on equality, mutual respect for independence, and sovereignty. Notably, all forms of

defence cooperation must respond to the needs of Cambodia and must be based on

the spirit of solidarity and mutual interests.

52


-----

**2- Ream Naval Base Modernisation Policy**

Like other countries, RCAF has to develop its capabilities. The

modernisation of Ream Naval Base, which has been in motion for many years, is an

integral part of the Royal Cambodian Navy's capability modernisation plans. Ream

Naval Base modernisation is essential to the sovereign rights of Cambodia to serve

its interests and security of the region. This modernisation aims to effectively control

Cambodia’s maritime domain and fully participate with other countries in

safeguarding peace, and strengthening stability, and security in the region. This

modernisation does not threaten any particular nation in the region while Cambodia

does not permit any foreign military base on its sovereign territory.

This clear position is based on Article 53 of the Constitution of the Kingdom

of Cambodia, which states:

“The Kingdom of Cambodia adopts a policy of permanent neutrality and non
alignment. The Kingdom of Cambodia follows the policy of peaceful co-existence

with neighbouring countries and with all other countries worldwide”.

“The Kingdom of Cambodia shall not invade any country nor interfere

in any other countries’ internal affairs and shall solve any dispute peacefully

with due respect for mutual interests”.

“The Kingdom of Cambodia shall not join any military alliance or

military pact unparalleled with its neutrality policy”.

“The Kingdom of Cambodia shall not permit any foreign military base

on its sovereign territory. It shall not have its military base abroad, except under

the framework of the United Nations requests”.

“The Kingdom of Cambodia reserves the rights to receive foreign

assistance in the form of military equipment, armaments, and ammunition. The

Kingdom of Cambodia profoundly welcomes foreign assistance in training and

53


-----

education, and other forms of assistance in capability and capacity building for

maintaining public order and security within its sovereign territory”.

**3- Regional Framework Cooperation**

RCAF will continue to play an active role in safeguarding peace, security,

and stability in the region, which is key to sustainable development and prosperity

regionally, through continuing to actively participate in practical cooperation under

the framework of ADMM and its related mechanisms. Cambodia clearly understands

that sustainable development depends on the stability and peace of the whole region.

Therefore, strengthening the role and cooperation of ADMM is an essential factor in

building trust and confidence in the region and enhancing ASEAN collective

response to the rapid change of the security environment in the Asia-Pacific region.

Indeed, as the chair of ADMM in 2022, MoND has set strategic priorities to promote

practical defence cooperation among AMS, such as 1-Promoting defence cooperation

in response to global pandemics and 2-Enhancing participation of ASEAN female

peacekeepers in UNPKO.

Chairmanship of the Asean Defence Senior Officials’ Meeting – Working Group (Picture by General

Department of Policy and Foreign Affairs)

54


-----

RCAF will continue its active participation in ADMM-Plus, particularly

RCAF participation in defence dialogues and consultations; joint exercises; and other

working group meetings at all levels. Moreover, RCAF will further contribute to the

development of new defence and security initiatives which aim to promote solidarity

and cooperation among AMS and the Plus Countries. This endeavour has the purpose

of enhancing capacity building, mutual trust, and confidence in accordance with

ASEAN core principles, centrality, and unity. This serves to strengthen ASEAN

collective response to the fast-changing security environment in Asia-Pacific.

Cambodia will continue to co-chair ADMM-Plus EWG in order to contribute to

capacity building in the region by sharing experiences, best practices, etc. At the same

time, RCAF will actively participate in security and defence dialogues and other

multilateral security platforms, including ARF, to discuss defence cooperation and

address regional security concerns.

Cambodia believes that practical cooperation within ADMM framework at

present is sufficient and effective to bolster interoperability in response to common

regional challenges. Cambodia supports the sustainment of the current participants to

continue the sustainability of this mechanism. Concerning regional disputes,

Cambodia adheres to dispute resolution by peaceful means and exercises utmost

restraint in accordance with international law. As a signatory of the Treaty on the

Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW), the Chemical Weapons Convention

(CWC), the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC), the Southeast Asia Nuclear

Weapons-Free Zone (SEANWFZ) and other relevant international treaties, Cambodia

adheres to these agreed principles as they are significant for safeguarding peace,

stability and promoting prosperity in the region. As for the recent security alliances

and partnerships between superpowers in the region under the pretext of common

interests, Cambodia sees some controversy that seems to be conducive to

confrontation and initiating an arms race.

55


-----

Cambodia and Vietnam Defence Ministers strengthen bilateral defence cooperation (Picture by General

Department of Policy and Foreign Affairs)

The recent development of the global security environment is of great

concern for the region and the world as a whole, especially the hostilities that are

taking place in Asia-Pacific and Europe. Although Cambodia is a small country, it

experienced a long decade of war and conflict termination that led to peace and

development. Samdech Techo Prime Minister, the founder of the Win-Win Policy,

emphasised that "We certainly cannot end war with war. The most appropriate way

to end war and armed conflicts is through negotiation and peaceful means. Parties

who choose war as a solution will suffer severe consequences. Cambodia is fully

engaged with other countries in the region in promoting the resolution of all conflicts

with utmost restraint; the use of diplomatic means and dialogues; and efforts to reduce

tensions in accordance with international law and mutual understanding in order to

prevent escalation".

56


-----

**4- United Nations Peacekeeping Operations (UNPKO)**

RCAF must innovate to become a Smart Pledge and a multi-disciplinary

force to comply with the United Nations Standard Operating Procedures (SOP). In

this regard, RCAF must be ready promptly in human resources, facilities, and

equipment according to UN requirements, including the United Nations

Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System (UNPCRS) that is ready to be deployed

within 90 days of a formal request. In addition, RCAF will continue its joint training

programs with partner nations to strengthen and expand foreign language skills and

other technical skills such as heavy machinery operation, demining and UXO

clearance, engineering, information technology, and medical expertise in accordance

with UN norms and regulations.

**Samdech Techo Hun Sen solemnly announced at the 73rd, 74th, 75th and**

76th United Nations General Assembly that Cambodia will continue its commitment

to participate in UNPKO in accordance with RCAF capability and capacity.

According to the statement of **Samdech Pichey Sena Tea Banh,** Deputy Prime

Minister, Minister of Defence, stated during the Defence Ministerial Meeting among

Troop Contributing Countries at the First Session at the UN Headquarters in New

York, the Second Session in the United Kingdom, and the Third Session in the

Republic of Korea, that Cambodia is committed to deploying more than 20% of

female peacekeepers in the future in response to the United Nations formal requests.

57


-----

Cambodian women deployed in peacekeeping operations in Central Africa – Lebanon and South Sudan

(Picture by NPMEC)

Under regional cooperation, Cambodia will:

   - Host a tripartite project organised by the United Nations, Cambodia,

and Japan to provide heavy engineering training to peacekeepers in the

ASEAN community and the region.

58


-----

- Host a Tripartite Gender Training Project on enhancing the readiness

of RCAF women peacekeepers for UNPKO

- Upgrade the Multinational Peacekeeping Training Centre to become

ASEAN or Regional Peacekeeping Training Centre.

- Post 2025 plan, strengthen, enhance, and modernise RCAF capability

through providing training and equipping modern facilities to all units

in the area of UXO clearance.

- RCAF will continue fulfilling its duty in demining under the National

Strategic Plan on “Mine-Free Cambodia 2025” (Letter of **Samdech**

**Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo Hun Sen, Prime Minister of the**

Kingdom of Cambodia on February 1, 2022, delivered on the occasion

of the 23rd Anniversary of the Commemorating National Mine

Awareness Day on February 24, 2022).

59


-----

### Section 3: 

 Implementation

60


-----

61


-----

This defense white paper expresses Cambodia’s vision on defence as

well as providing a strategic guideline for RCAF to perform its role and duty

in line with the defence policy as stated in chapter 3. A clear defense policy

and defense strategy are critical foundations for a comprehensive development

and prosperity of the nation which will bring forth harmony to the people of

Cambodia.

A strong commitment and support for the whole-of-government is

greatly required in order for the defence policy and defence strategy defined

in DWP22 to be successfully implemented. RGC will give every effort and

take strategic requirements into high consideration to ensure a feasible and

transparent implementation.

Beyond the successful release of DWP22, a strategic defence review

in approximately three to five years’ time, or even a formulation of another

defence white paper, will likely be required. This is because RCAF must

follow and anticipate the complex, fragile, unpredictable, and dynamic

evolution and change of the global security environment.

A joint effort of every RCAF relevant unit in implementing the defence

policy and defence strategy will be instrumental for creating stronger, more

competent, and more capable armed forces in the near future. In this sense,

key strategic measures that require RCAF’s focus are safeguarding peace,

stability, national unity; developing the bond between the people and armed

forces; enhancing military modernization; and improving international

cooperation.

Leaders at all levels must uphold DWP22 to the highest value. Proper

and swift monitor and review mechanisms are necessary to ensure successful

implementation of DWP22’s defence policy and defence strategy. Every

62


-----

relevant unit must develop their respective mechanism to evaluate process and

progress including challenges to guarantee effective implementation.

Formulation of National Defence Policy (Picture by DWP Working Group)

Strategic planning requires consensus and clarity from every unit

across every service of RCAF—from MoND level down to tactical level for

the main purpose of successful execution. On that note, based on the

evaluation of strengths and weaknesses, relevant units must define strategic

objectives and strategic plans for the short term, medium term, and long term.

63


-----

###### Chapter 8

 National Defence Priority Management

An in-depth military reform is crucial for RCAF to implement the

defence policy and defence strategy, especially regarding the enhancement of

military professionalism and modernisation. The success of military reform

relies on consistent plans and support from all relevant units, organisations,

and civil stakeholders. In this regard, the implementation process based on

defence priorities will require effective, efficient, and transparent resource

allocations. RCAF will focus on the following priorities towards 2030:

**Border Security:**

RCAF aims to strengthen border defence capability through increasing

the presence of armed forces stationing or shows of force; training; technical

equipment acquisition; and infrastructure development along the border areas.

**Samdech Techo Hun Sen once asserted, highlighting a broader vision, “We**

shall build borders of peace, friendship, development, and cooperation. We

shall transform former battlefields into areas of trade and commercial;

development; production; and tourism".

**Internal Security:**

In this aspect, RCAF focuses on protecting security, safety, stability,

and public orders. Furthermore, neutralising all potential activities in the form

of color revolution is another duty of the armed forces. RCAF prevents any

insecurity and instability arising from terrorism and transnational crime to

ensure security and harmony in society. Additionally, RCAF continues to

provide assistance to the populace in times of critical emergency support.

64


-----

**Military Reform:**

Although the threat of the pandemic remains problematic, military

reform stands as one of the top priorities. RCAF seeks to adjust and improve

its force structure and obtain sufficient capability to best serve the defense

policy: safeguard peace; protect national interests; and enhance international

cooperation. Alongside the force restructuring and personnel management,

RCAF must promote the enhancement of military professionalism and

modernisation of the armed forces.

**International Cooperation:**

The purpose of this aspect is to expand and strengthen defence

cooperation with partner nations based on the principle of mutual respect. This

effort aims to promote national interests and common interests with nations in

the region through constructive bilateral, multilateral, and regional

frameworks. RCAF reserves the rights to uphold military development via

good cooperation with partner nations under the basis of independence,

sovereignty, and decision-making process with loyalty and transparency.

Furthermore, capacity and capability building in peacekeeping operations is

among the top priorities in which Cambodia’s reputation precedes.

Most importantly, resource allocation for supporting defence

cooperation is critical for RCAF to effectively supplement this effort and to

meet specific requirements of defence cooperation in the context of

globalisation.

65


-----

###### Chapter 9

 Defence Technology and Innovation

Defence technology and innovation will prove to be key in the defence

of Cambodia in the sense of deterrence and armed conflict prevention.

Emerging sophisticated technology such as AI, robotics, and advanced

computing among others, have leveled up defence capability worldwide

including communication systems; data collecting and analysis; intelligence;

etc. Superpowers and developed countries around the world have long been

integrating these advanced technologies into their respective defence

capability. Meanwhile, the advancement in these sophisticated technologies

and its utilization within defence capability will significantly boost RCAF

fighting power in coping with both traditional and non-traditional security

threats. Thus, in this sophisticated technology era and in line with the defence

strategy, RCAF must associate current technology with innovative

technology.

Every scientific and technological development as well as innovation

never fails to present strategic competitions as opportunities. Therefore,

RCAF shall exploit these opportunities to harness potential advantages for the

sole purpose of enhancing defence robustness, sustainability, and flexibility.

To achieve what has been mentioned above, RCAF must follow four

strategic approaches outlined as follows:

**1. Human Resource Development**

Investing in human resources has always been the foundation of RCAF

defence capacity and capability building plans. A skilled workforce in certain

66


-----

areas is required, such as in technological and scientific research and

development; strategic analysis; etc. Training and education quality must be

enhanced by all means necessary.

**2. Technology Utilisation**

This approach focuses on boosting RCAF capability to better serve

both domestically and internationally via utilization of advanced technology

which meets RCAF standards.

**3. Defence Industry Development**

Robustly invest in defence industry to guarantee sustainability, self
reliance, advancement, and to minimize foreign procurements.

**4. Partnership with Civil Sector**

Encourage a good partnership between the defence and civil sector,

both public and private, through enhancing cooperation and collaboration.

This approach aims at developing defence technology and innovation for the

purpose of advancing RCAF capability in communications; and in exchanging

accurate information and experience in a timely fashion.

67


-----

###### Chapter 10

 National Defence Budget

The defence budget is the essential element and crucial factor in the

implementation of the defence white paper. Moreover, it is also vital that the

budget is being spent under the principle of transparency and accountability

with regards to the military reforms and modernisation, which aims to deliver

more competent and more capable armed forces to meet with medium and

long-term strategic plans.

Based on the defence policy and defence strategy outlined in section 1

and 2, MoND, first and foremost, needs the defence budget of around 2.5% of

GDP over the next five years. Secondly, the defence budget is expected to

increase to 2.7% of GDP by 2030 in order for RCAF to guarantee sustainable

development and modernisation. This budgeting model will enhance the

progress of the military reform and modernisation plans based on national

economic growth. The proposal was once outlined in DWP06 and according

to a report by the Ministry of Economy and Finance, the defence budget

allocation amounted to 1.78% of GDP from 2011 to 2020. Nevertheless, RGC,

particularly **Samdech Techo Hun Sen, has always expressed high**

consideration in supporting and financing RCAF to duly execute their duty.

The allocated defence budget will be spent wisely based on priorities

aligned with the defence policy and the four defence strategies—border

defence, internal security, military reform, and international cooperation. The

defence budget allocation plans will be developed and approved under

relevant units to strike a balance between specific requirements and available

resources. The implementation will be carried out in phases which are flexible

68


-----

and open for review accordingly. Any adjustment to the defence budget

allocation plans will be implemented through a defence strategic review

process.

Having a proper mechanism for monitoring and evaluation is

instrumental in ensuring the effectiveness and efficiency of the defence budget

allocation aligned with the set strategic plans. Every relevant unit must

develop comprehensive action plans and performance indicators in order to

assess the progress and desired outcomes. This mechanism is significant for

implementing any outlined strategy, and especially for top-level decision

makers to be profoundly transparent and accountable in defence budget

expenditure.

69


-----

**Senior Advisor**

Gen. Nem Sowath

###### Defence White Paper Working Group

**Chairman**

LTG. Suon Samnang

**Vice Chairman**

LTG. Samchhorn Sopheaktra LTG. Phat Vibolsopheak

LTG. Khiev Saphat MG. Sin Sokha (Permanent)

**Members**

LTG. Var Mony LTG. So Sam Orn

LTG. Nem Sowathey LTG. Chab Samrang (Retired)

LTG. Oeur Savorn (Retired) MG. Heu Dara

MG. Tang Chanponleu MG. Sokun Visal

MG. Kosal Sovann Visal MG. Sar Sambothon

MG. Kao Sokhorn MG. Pen Sokrethvithyea

MG. Sam Sophea MG. Piv Vanndy

RADM. Moeung Vannoeun BG. Meach Horn

BG. Ngor Sopheap BG. Koeng Phira

BG. Phorn Rithysak BG. Phan Dararith

BG. Khiev Sereyratha BG. Pha Chanra

BG. Phan Yinyoura BG. Thoeun Panharith

Col. Sear Tin Col. Ung Phalkun


-----

Col. Srun Bunnato Col. Khorn Mao

Col. Inn Bunthorn Col. Cheav Sovanndara

Col. Pen Chansoy Col. Pho Makara

Lt Col. Suon Witu Lt Col. Mel Kunpiseth

Lt Col. Som Pross Lt Col. Chhorn Borey

MAJ. Yin Piseth Lt. Phan David


-----

###### Glossary

|No.|Full Form|Acronym|
|---|---|---|
|1|ASEAN Defence Senior Officials’ Meeting-Plus Expert Working Group|ADSOM-Plus EWG|
|2|ASEAN Defence Senior Officials’ Meeting-Plus|ADSOM-Plus|
|3|ASEAN Defence Senior Officials’ Meeting|ADSOM|
|4|ASEAN Member State|AMS|
|5|ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting Expert Working Group|ADMM EWG|
|6|Artificial Intelligence|AI|
|7|Counter-terrorism|CT|
|8|Defence White Paper|DWP|
|9|Defence Strategic Review|DSR|
|10|Gulf of Thailand Initiative|GOTI|
|11|Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief|HADR|
|12|High Command Headquarters|HCHQ|
|13|International Court of Justice|ICJ|


-----

|14|Indo-Pacific Initiative|IPI|
|---|---|---|
|15|Ministry of National Defence|MoND|
|16|Memorandum of Understanding|MOU|
|17|National Centre for Peacekeeping Forces, Mines, and ERW Clearance|NPMEC|
|18|National Counter-Terrorism Special Force|NCTSF|
|19|National Committee for Maritime Security|NCMS|
|20|Non-commissioned Officer|NCO|
|21|National Committee for Disaster Management|NCDM|
|22|Royal Cambodian Armed Forces|RCAF|
|23|Royal Government of Cambodia|RGC|
|24|South China Sea|SCS|
|25|Southeast Asia Maritime Law Enforcement Initiative|SEAMLEI|
|26|State Secretariat of Civil Aviation|SSCA|
|27|United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia|UNTAC|
|28|United Nations|UN|


-----

|29|United Nations Peacekeeping Operations|UNPKO|
|---|---|---|
|30|Unexploded Ordnance|UXO|


-----

