# Security and Development   


# Security and Development   


-----

## “…National defense of the Kingdom of Cambodia is based on the
people, with the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces as the core in
implementing defense tasks. We must build the Royal Cambodian
Armed Forces into an armed force which is absolutely loyal to the
nation, respects the Constitution, is well disciplined, is polite, is
morally clean, respects and loves the people, is capable of fulfilling
the defense of independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity, and
of maintaining and strengthening peace, stability and social security
order. The reform of the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces must be
enhanced so that it can be a well organized armed force with
appropriate size, decent wages and allowances, and sufficient ability
to perform its defense duties by contributing to national construction
and development, and provision of assistance to people suffering
from various disasters. This Defense White Paper clearly defines
political guidelines for the RCAF in implementing its roles and tasks
in an effective and useful manner. This document also represents
Cambodia’s commitment to the establishment of transparency, and
efforts to build confidence in a peaceful and prosperous region...”

**Hun Sen**
**Prime Minister**
**Royal Government of Cambodia**


-----

### Message From The Co-Ministers of National Defense

Because Cambodia has just emerged from numerous periods
of instability, peace and social security have become vital to the
Government’s policy of ensuring the success of national
development. This important Defense White Paper presents a score of
pragmatic concepts and strategies drawn from the government’s
security guidance, defines new roles and responsibilities for the Royal
Cambodian Armed Forces, and determines major objectives for future
force development.

The important principle in this Defense White Paper is the
emphasis placed on the close relationship between “Defense and
Development of the Kingdom of Cambodia” an emphasis that is
essential to the nation both in presence and in the future. The RCAF
is greatly committed to ensuring that these two aspects are
concurrently and successfully developed. The key role of the RCAF is
to actively safeguard national independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. It also consists of other contributions in order to
maintain peace, stability and cooperation with neighboring and
regional nations.

This Defense White Paper will benefit the following target
audiences:

      - All RCAF personnel who will be required to implement
their roles and responsibilities in accordance with the
principles of law, and the Government’s policy guidelines
on defense and security.

      - The Government in order to allow it to supervise the
implementation of a national defense policy and develop
that policy in accordance with the regional and
international political and security situation.


-----

      - The Cambodian people so that they may understand more
about the obligations and duties of the RCAF, establish
transparency for the use of national resources in defense,
and promote people’s confidence in the nation’s armed
forces.

      - Neighboring and regional nations to allow them to
understand Cambodian security perspective, and to
encourage the efforts of mutual confidence building.

      - Donor countries/agencies so that they are more satisfied
with Cambodia’s efforts for common security and the
development of the RCAF towards a qualified and
professional armed force.

We hope that this achievement will not only serve the national
interests, but will also reflect our commitment to taking part in
building a region of peace, security and development.

We wish to congratulate and thank the Working Group and
our friends who contributed to the success of this invaluable project,
and the many analysts both inside and outside the military who
actively reviewed the draft of this document.

Tea Banh Sisowath Sirirath
Co-Ministers of National Defense


-----

## Message from The Commander-in-Chief  of the RCAF

In light of the more complex challenges facing the RCAF
during this decade, and in a time of severe budgetary constraints, we
need to carefully examine our strategic policy in order that both
national and defense objectives can be achieved concurrently,
efficiently and effectively. As Commander-in-Chief I accept that the
successful implementation of the government’s security policy relies
heavily on a number of factors including strong commitment from all
leaders, great sacrifice from all RCAF personnel and the existence of
a clear and pragmatic strategic defense policy.

This strategic policy document, the Defense White Paper,
represents one of the above mentioned factors. It provides clear
guidance for reform and professionalization of the armed forces. It
also contributes to efforts for promoting confidence and transparency
between Cambodia and its immediate neighbors and countries in the
region.

Together with the recently released RCAF Five Year Plan,
this Defense White Paper provides a realistic and affordable approach
to taking Cambodia’s defense into the future. We in Cambodia are
very much aware that defense comes at a cost to the Royal
Government and that we cannot move from our current state to a
modern armed force overnight. We also clearly recognize the
constraints on the national budget and the need to reduce defense
spending in accordance with the Prime Minister’s direction.
Objectives and recommendations are clearly defined and portrayed in
such a manner as to achieve real but incremental change.


-----

The challenges we face are many. I am confident however,
that with a commitment from all, that in the years to come we will
look back and agree that the production of this Defense White Paper
was the key turning point in the maturing the RCAF for achieving
national defense.

General Ke Kim Yan
Commander-in-Chief
Royal Cambodian Armed Forces


-----

## CONTENTS

**_Preface_** _i_

**_Chapter One:_** **_The Impact of History_**
**_on the Cambodian Defense Posture 1_**

**_Chapter Two:_** **_Cambodia’s Strategic Outlook_** _9_
_Global Security_ _9_
_Asia-Pacific Security_ _10_
_The Effects of Regional Social and_
_Economic Crises on Cambodia’s_
_Security_ _13_

**_Chapter Three:_** **_Building a Secure Region_** _15_

_ASEAN Cooperation_ _15_
_Bilateral Initiatives_ _16_
_Engagement with Global Nations_ _19_
_Relations with the United Nations_ _23_

**_Chapter Four:_** **_Cambodian Defense Policy_** _25_

_Factors Shaping Defense Policy_ _25_
_Assessment of the Threats to_
_Cambodian Security_ _27_
_National Defense Objectives_ _29_
_Organization of the Armed Forces_ _30_

**_Chapter Five:_** **_Roles of the RCAF_** _35_

_Defending the Kingdom of Cambodia 35_
_Promotion of National Development 37_
_Support for Peace, Stability and_
_Social Order_ _39_
_International Security Cooperation_ _41_
_Cambodia’s Military Strategy_ _42_

**_Chapter Six:_** **_Reforming and Restructuring the RCAF_** _45_

_Demobilization_ _45_
_Command, Control and Communication46_
_Training and Education_ _47_
_Mobility_ _49_
_Force Development_ _51_
_Support and Maintenance_ _53_
_Development of Defense Bases_ _54_


-----

_Conditions of Service_ _55_

**_Chapter Seven:_** **_The Future of the RCAF_** _57_

_The Army_ _57_
_The Navy_ _58_
_The Air Force_ _59_
_Policy and Planning_ _60_
_Management of Defense Resources_ _61_


-----

## PREFACE

As a result of national reconciliation and the end of the Khmer
Rouge’s political and military organs, the Kingdom of Cambodia has
achieved a complete peace. Political tensions and military
confrontation in the nation have come to an end. This is the first time
within the past decades that Cambodia has regained peace, following
periods of sustained armed conflict. From the success of the Win Win
policy which has brought full peace to the country, Samdech Hun
Sen, the Prime Minister of the Royal Government of Cambodia,
continues to put forward new visions to strengthen the country’s
stability, national reconciliation and development.

The integration of Cambodia into the international community
is moving forward with a vigorous pace. A policy of strengthening
political stability and social security is being focused on. A new order
has been established to ensure that national resources are used more
effectively. The national economy is improving, generating a stable
environment for national development, and promoting greater
confidence within the nation as well as among other nations and
international institutions.

A reform policy is being undertaken by the Royal Government
in order to improve all areas of Cambodian society. Of these, military
reform, including the roles, structure, size and quality of the Royal
Cambodian Armed Forces (RCAF), is important. The RCAF is an
important instrument given its task of defending the nation and its
interests against external aggression. With its significant skills, the
RCAF can actively and broadly contribute to ensuring stability and
national development.

Changes in political regimes resulted in limited opportunity
for Cambodia to develop its military force. Consequently, the RCAF
relied on its own initiatives in order to promote strong will, courage
and public confidence. The linking of the military with the nation’s
interests also establishes good traditions. The process of developing
the defense concepts by the Ministry of National Defense
(MINADEF) and High Command Headquarters (HCHQ) at the
present, and in the future must continue, based on experiences and
lessons learned, clear objectives of the reform program and the two
government principles for developing defense policy:


-----

1. The RCAF must be capable of reforming its armed forces
and developing the Royal Government objectives of
peace, stability, democracy and the development of
Cambodia in this new stage. Reform means the reduction
of personnel and proper transfer of those people to civilian
livelihood where they are to engage in farming and other
productive activities. It also means the possession of
appropriate active military personnel, effective equipment
and reserves in readiness.
2. The RCAF must continue to maintain a good attitude,
morals, courage and public confidence. At no time will the
nation downplay the development of the armed forces and
at no time will the armed forces themselves ignore the
importance of their role in defending the nation and its
interests. It is clear that in this new situation, where
Cambodia has to maintain a sustained peace and stability,
the virtue of the armed forces will not be forgotten. In this
context, building the armed forces with quality, value,
dignity, confidence and love from the people is a primary
task for the RCAF and society as a whole.

_Initiated by the Cambodian Ministry of National_
_Defense, the Defense White Paper Seminar was_
_organized in September 1999 with the support_
_from the Australian Department of Defence and_
_Australian National University. (Picture: DAO)_


-----

Cambodia’s defense policy is a national defense bulwark
relying on the commitment of the entire people of Cambodia. All
Cambodian people have an obligation to participate in nation building
and defending their motherland. Therefore, selective compulsory
military service will be applied according to the rule of law. This
means that selective compulsory military service will be carried out
under suitable circumstances to ensure the sustainability of the
RCAF.

Cambodia’s strategic defense policy, as portrayed in this
White Paper, reflects the efforts of Cambodia’s MINADEF and
HCHQ to demonstrate transparency and a spirit of promoting security
cooperation. This White Paper will also provide guidelines for reform
of the RCAF and determine the roles and tasks of the force in the new
millennium. As the first defense policy to be published by the
Kingdom of Cambodia, this White Paper marks the achievement of
all Cambodian people, clearly indicates the determination of the
Royal Government and MINADEF to serve the nation, and will
benefit the region as a whole.


-----

**CHAPTER ONE**
## THE IMPACT OF HISTORY ON THE CAMBODIAN DEFENSE POSTURE

Over its relatively short history, Cambodia’s defense posture
has been influenced by a number of factors including external direct
dominance by foreign powers, indirect dominance as a result of Cold
War hostilities, internal conflict, doctrinal tendencies and leadership
shortcomings. Each of these influences has helped to restrict a
maturing process generally reflected in other nations of the region,
resulting in manpower intensive, poorly equipped and an ill-trained
force.

Prior to its independence in 1953, Cambodia received military
assistance in the form of training and equipment from France.
Defense structures and military norms were modeled on the French
style.

Commencing about 1955, Cambodia began to provide training
for reserve officers. This was then followed by the initiation of
training of reserve non-commissioned officers. Both categories were
volunteers selected from high ranking and mid-level government
officials. Practically, although a number of reserve cadres were
trained particularly in the 1960s, the _Forces_ _Armées Royales_
_Khmères’ (FARK) structure did not include reserve units and_
formations. Consequently, many of the reserve cadres, after their
short period of training, simply remained in the regular force, never
returning to their civilian positions in government departments.
Exacerbating this failure, certain reserve cadres were given priority to
assume additional civilian appointments, including provincial
governors and district chiefs. Reserve service disappeared with the
advent of the Khmer Republic and has not been instituted since that
time. The lack of a precise plan for the organization of reserve units
resulted in force development encountering immovable obstacles,
particularly because at this time, a large number of the regular force
was reaching the end of service life and was ready for retirement.

Then came the US with its more diversified military
assistance. The FARK now became subjected to transformation in
many areas to meet the standard of American equipment – including


-----

attempts to change the organization of the force. Unfortunately, the
quantity of equipment provided by the US was not sufficient to
modernize and support the reorganized FARK. When the US aid was
terminated in 1963, the FARK found itself stranded halfway through
modernization and military reform. During this same period,
Cambodia received military assistance from other socialist countries –
the Soviet Union and China. Consequently, the FARK encountered
serious problems, and the divergence of materials affected the
training of combat and technical personnel, maintenance and the
supply of spare parts and ammunition.

During the period 1963 to 1969, a period that has been
described as the ‘time of the great economic leap’ in Cambodia, the
armed forces participated in the building of the economic livelihood
of the nation. The majority of the armed forces’ activities, and much
of the equipment of the FARK, was devoted to supporting projects in
the economic sector including construction of roads, dykes, dams etc.
Military personnel also participated in administrative and territorial
organizations throughout the country.

Prior to the coup d’etat in March 1970, the FARK General
Staff was under the command and control of the Supreme
Commander of the Armed Forces, and the Head of State. At that time,
His Majesty the King, Preah Bat Samdech Preah Norodom Sihanouk
held both titles. The General Staff controlled the three Services with
its headquarters also serving as headquarters and staff for the Army.
The Ministry of National Defense was a government institution under
the Prime Minister and in charge of only the technical and
administrative services. The Ministry had no control over operations.
These distinct responsibilities continued until the end of the Khmer
Republic regime in 1975, then reemerged and have continued to be
applied to the current defense organization. Within the same period,
Cambodia was divided into six military regions, with each military
region commander having responsibility for the conduct of operations
within his own region.

The military situation dramatically changed following the
coup d’etat in March 1970. Because of its previous deterioration and
lack of combat readiness, the newly renamed _Forces Armées_
_Nationales Khmères (FANK) of the Khmer Republic encountered_
serious difficulties as it commenced to undertake operations in the
‘real’ war spreading throughout the nation. Beginning with less than


-----

35,000, the FANK was forced to conduct a risky military conscription
program under the banner of ‘general military service’. In response to
a declared state of emergency, and the requirement to expand the
force to 210,000 as demanded by the leaders of the Khmer Republic,
the size of the force became dramatically inflated, bypassing most
training procedures. The armed forces were eventually comprised of a
mixture of students, civil servants and villagers who had received
very little or no basic military training. However, some combatant
and specialist units, and a number of military personnel, did receive
overseas training with the support of the US, South Vietnam,
Thailand, Laos, Indonesia, the Philippines etc.

In part, the increased effort to raise the combatant capability
of the FANK stemmed from the bombing by US aircraft. From March
1969 to August 1973 the US dropped 539,129 tons of bombs on
Cambodian soil, with just under half of this tonnage, approximately
257,465 tons, being dropped during the period 24 February to 14
August 1973. The bombing not only took the lives of thousands of
Khmer people, but it also pushed the Viet Cong movement deeper
into Cambodia’s territory. One of the bitter tragedies of this bombing
campaign occurred on 7 August 1973 when a flight of US B52s
dropped approximately 20 tons of bombs on the crowded public
markets and hospital of Neak Loeung; killing 137 and wounding 298
people, mostly combatants and their families.

Full dependence on the US, and unrecoverable corruption and
the deadlock in political solutions resulted in the Khmer Republic
facing a heavy social crisis. Approximately 2 million refugees poured
into the cities, resulting in malnutrition, chaos and inflation. Serious
corruption in the military encouraged ghost, irregular and unpaid
soldiers with low morale, which resulted in the regime collapsing
hastily.

The absence of development of force capability was clearly
evident in the Khmer Rouge regime’s defense posture. During the war
against the Khmer Republic (1970-1975), most of the Khmer Rouge
military cadres who joined the movement voluntarily were not given
sufficient military training. Strategy was designed on a war of the
masses and through political motivation. Their victory in April 1975
was generally achieved through political advantage and
overwhelming support of the people; and because of deteriorated
popularity, corruption, anarchy and internal rifts within the Khmer


-----

Republic regime, rather than through the skilful application of
military force.

After it came to power in 1975, no effort was made by the
Khmer Rouge regime through training and modernization, to develop
its armed forces, known as the National Army of Democratic
Kampuchea (NADK). There are a number of reasons why the Pol Pot
regime did not develop these programs. Firstly, large numbers of the
NADK were forced to work on farms under reeducation programs,
while others were involved in the regimes brutal internal security
measures. Secondly, by the time the Khmer Rouge began to rule the
country, Cambodia having been severely damaged by war, the first
relaxed two years had not given the regime sufficient time to develop
its forces. Soon after though, the regime began to wage war against its
neighbor, and faced internal conflict, factors that led to mass purges
and massacres of their own kind that resulted in millions of innocent
people losing their lives.

At that time Pol Pot's policy first focused on resolving the
internal security issue, especially the so-called purge of his social
enemies. This genocidal policy applied to Khmer Rouge military
personnel and cadres and forced some Khmer Rouge Units and
members to flee to Vietnam. Pol Pot then commenced to consider
Vietnam as his real enemy. Where previously the regime had
eliminated those accused of being US CIA or Soviet KGB, now
groups of families of innocent people accused of having Vietnamese
blood, or being hostile agents, were brought to be killed. In 1977,
because of land disputes and a clash of ideologies, the Khmer Rouge
began a campaign to claim disputed territory, resulting in military
tension on the border. Confrontation, with no attempt at a diplomatic
solution, ignited into fill-scale war when the Khmer Rouge troops
launched several attacks approximately 70 kilometers deep into
Vietnam at the end of 1977 and throughout 1978. Subsequently, with
an increase in the anti-Khmer Rouge movement, the Kampuchean
Solidarity and National Salvation Front being established on 2
December 1978 at Kratie's Snoul District, and in accordance with the
appeal from the Cambodian people, the Kampuchean Solidarity and
National Salvation Armed Forces together with the Vietnamese
People’s Armed Forces toppled the Khmer Rouge on 7 January 1979.
For the above reasons and because of the implementation of the
policy of killing its own kind, the Khmer Rouge lost support from the
nation and was defeated abruptly.


-----

From early 1979, the effect of the Cold War brought about a
new security dimension to Cambodia: an increased effort to prevent
the return of the genocidal regime, and a movement against the
Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia. The Kampuchean People's
Revolutionary Armed Forces, which later changed its name to the
Cambodia People's Armed Forces (CPAF) of the Phnom Penh
government, was rebuilt consistent with the socialist system, and with
the support of Vietnam, the former USSR, and other socialist
countries. The Army evolved from battalions to divisions. Besides
this simple reorganization of military structure, the Phnom Penh
government also set up other command and coordinating systems
such as military regions and provincial unified commands. Further, to
support its security plans across the country, and to fill out regular
units during operations, the government established armed militia in
communes and villages. The USSR and Vietnam provided various
material and training. In addition, before its final withdrawal from
Cambodia in 1989, the Vietnamese troops helped to strengthen the
fighting spirit and combat techniques of the CPAF.

The creation of the Coalition Government of Democratic
Kampuchea (CGDK) on 22 June 1982 – based on the Khmer Rouge
Constitution, having the Khmer Rouge as the core force, and as a
government recognized by the UN – extended armed conflict in
Cambodia, and allowed the Khmer Rouge to exist until early 1999.

Because of the factors described above and the influence of
the Cold War’s ideological contest, and the interference of some
global powers, Cambodia became bogged down in a disastrous
tragedy within an insecure environment. This remained the case for
the more than 20 years after 1970, and was only resolved through the
free and democratic elections of 1993. Cambodia was forced to accept
the consequences of the spread of the Second Indochina War, which
saw the nation’s towns, rural communities and farmlands become
fields for new weaponry tests, as well as the frontline for Super Power
ideological competitions.

External warring powers were also responsible for leaving
another insidious legacy to the people of Cambodia, landmines and
unexploded ordnance. With no care and no responsibility, these
warring powers imported these criminal weapons into the nation free
of charge, leaving behind them maimed and destroyed human lives,


-----

and a crippled economy and national infrastructure. Estimates suggest
that Cambodia will need many years to remove such obstacles, and
only at immense financial expense to the nation.

A legitimate national armed force, the Royal Cambodian
Armed Forces (RCAF), was reestablished in 1993 following the
creation of a democratically elected First-Term Government. The
formation of this government was a great achievement stemming
from the Paris Peace Accords, UN peacekeeping operations in
Cambodia (UNTAC), and the noble leadership of His Majesty the
King Preah Bat Samdech Preah Norodom Sihanouk in achieving
national reconciliation and unity. A formula whereby the armed
forces of all parties were integrated into one national armed force was
agreed. This new RCAF comprised 60% of the armed forces of State
of Cambodia (SOC), 30% of the _Front Uni Nationale pour le_
_Cambodge_ _Independent,_ _Neutre,_ _Pacifique_ _et_ _Cooperatif_
(FUNCINPEC) force, and 10% the Khmer People’s National
Liberation Front (KPNLF) force. Although stubbornly boycotted by
the Khmer Rouge hardliners, and a failure of UNTAC to disarm and
demobilize 70% of each armed force, this establishment was truly
reinforced by an effective political solution as well as the peaceloving will of a large Cambodian circle.


-----

Cambodia was rushed to formulate a professional military
institution. Despite strong efforts in the initial stages, the process was
hindered by a number of crises. The expansion of the crisis of ghost
soldiers and political tendencies within the RCAF were some of the
major obstructions that caused a number of well-intended measures to
fail.

The internal security situation of the nation also contributed to
the jamming of the force development process. As the outlawed
Khmer Rouge rebels intensified their anti-government activities
throughout the country, the RCAF was obliged to control this
rebellion. The fact that the RCAF was constantly on operations meant
that training, which is so important for developing military capability,
was minimized and little maintenance of military equipment was
undertaken.

Within the period of the second-term government, the political
and security environment has been the most stable in recent history;
indicating that Cambodia may have finally achieved total peace. This
environment has been achieved through a policy of national
reconciliation and unity under the rule of His Majesty the King, Preah
Bat Samdech Preah Norodom Sihanouk, Samdech Prime Minister
Hun Sen's initiated ‘win win’ policy of the Royal Government, and
goodwill of the Cambodian people. This achievement has been gained
through a change in government systems, disappearance of violent
political confrontation (that had previously resulted in the application
of military force), and the total disintegration of the political and
military organs of the Khmer Rouge.

The RCAF now has to reactivate its reforms consistent with
the Government’s political guidelines. These guidelines direct the
armed forces to demobilize to an acceptable size, achieve sound
capability, and inculcate high ethics and dignity and advancement
towards international standardization in the future. The RCAF now
has to plan for its agenda to include security cooperation for the
common benefit of the whole region. Instead of combating internal
strife, the RCAF is now extending its relationships in the international
arena. Just as importantly, the Government is desirous of reducing
expenditure on defense and security and channeling the savings to
other social development issues.


-----

Having achieved security advantages, commitment of the
nation’s top leadership, and assistance from friendly countries, the
Ministry of National Defense and High Command Headquarters are
now embarking on producing their strategic defense policy. The aim
is to achieve the desired outcomes of the Royal Cambodian
Government and the people of the nation.


-----

**CHAPTER TWO**
## CAMBODIA'S STRATEGIC OUTLOOK

**Global Security**

Following the collapse of the Soviet Union in the 1990s, major
ideological, political and economic confrontations that had plagued
the world for over 40 years since World War Two have almost
disappeared. However, that change has not led to a benign strategic
environment. A number of regions in the world continue to witness
uncertainty in their security outlook and new security concerns have
subsequently reemerged. This uncertainty stems from many causes.
These include the creation of many new nations, the changing role of
major powers, internal unrest due to racial prejudice and religious and
ethnic differences, and disputes over territory, both on land and in the
maritime areas.


-----

A number of regions have witnessed security problems, mostly
ethnic crises. Military intervention, and a combination of military
and negotiated efforts, has been used to resolve these problems.
Often applicable solutions have been seen as reconciled negotiations.
These means have been developed through bilateral and multilateral
approaches, and through the UN or regional mechanisms. Military
means alone could not ensure success in these settlements.

The strategic outlook is thus very complex. Hegemonic policies
remain. These include the development of nuclear weapon’s
capability, strengthening of military alliances and the use of economic
resources so that the modern technologies can be included in defense
domains.

The new security agenda is, however, much wider than
traditional balance of power issues. At present, the world is focusing
its attention on a variety of security issues. Environmental security is
promoting a great deal of influence on world societies. Environmental
contamination with no controls, decreases in natural resources and
changes to the environment have been drawing people's attention to
consider their detrimental affects on security considerations. The
world must acknowledge that pollution of the global environment and
global warming resulting in rising sea levels are on the increase.
Deforestation and destruction of various natural resources, lack of
water and nuclear waste are the real threats to economic development.
Environmental threats cause a danger to the social and political order
and may ultimately lead to military conflict.

As the world struggles to free itself from conflict and tries to
avoid economic crisis, other issues such as the production of lethal
chemical and biological weapons, drug and human trafficking and
international crimes and terrorism are spreading, especially in those
countries facing social crisis. These illegal activities can lead to
military confrontation or international economic sanctions.

**Asia-Pacific Security**

Despite an end to the Indo-China War that witnessed SouthEast Asia being used as a contesting field for ideological powers, the
future security situation in the Asia-Pacific similarly remains a major
concern. Both during and after the Cold War, Cambodia suffered the
effects of ideological contests, plunging the nation into nearly three


-----

decades of war and domestic crisis. While Cambodia has never been
an opponent in such contests, nor will she initiate any problem in the
region, she does have concerns about future regional security. These
concerns have gained particular significance following her
membership of ASEAN.

Of primary concern is that Cambodia may be indirectly affected
by a protracted Spratly Islands dispute in the South China Sea. On the
surface, this situation is a contest between powerful China and some
members of ASEAN. ASEAN claimants appear to be searching for a
solution that calls for self-restraint for the sake of regional stability
and security. The ARF is playing a mediatory and mechanistic role,
although it has been unable to contribute any positive solutions so far.
ARF has been lobbying countries involved in this dispute to remain
patient and not use military force. Because she maintains a very
healthy relationship with China and is a member of ASEAN,
Cambodia has adopted a cautious view towards how this crisis should
be resolved. As a country attempting to maintain the interests of both
sides, Cambodia will continue to advocate that a peaceful solution
must remain the highest priority, whether through the ARF, or any
form of bilateral or multilateral approaches.

Cambodia is concerned about the spread of any dispute in the
South China Sea that may affect her own economic development.
Economic development, especially in the field of trade, is
significantly dependent on a good trading relationship with countries
in the region. Any blockage in maritime lines of communication will
affect Cambodia's economic development. Cambodia has to maintain
her neutral position over the Spratly Islands and is willing to see an
increased and more effective role for the ARF in solving this dispute.

In the future, military confrontation between nations will not
arise simply due to military issues. As mentioned previously,
mankind will continue to struggle with natural resources to maintain
livelihood. Of these resources, those under the sea are of major
concern. The present problem is to resolve overlapping Maritime
Economic Exclusion Zones (MEEZ). Unfortunately, the problem
appears to be growing, especially in the region of the South China
Sea. Cambodia believes that solving such disputes between nations
should be by way of peaceful bilateral negotiation as she has done
with her neighbors when similar disputes have arisen. Joint
cooperation is the only way to share such natural resources.


-----

An additional security issue facing Cambodia is the use of the
Mekong River system. Countries through which this river flows
exploit this river considerably for their economic development.
Worryingly, the physical condition of this river is in a dilapidated
state. Cambodia remains concerned about the continuing construction
of dams on this river by China, the absence of management in the
irrigation systems and the contamination of its water due to industrial
waste. Her people rely on the river to harvest food, drink and irrigate
their crops. Cambodia believes that only through an effective Mekong
River Basin Commission, providing mutual understanding and
respect of the laws of water between countries situated along the
river, which will result in the sustainment of all areas of the river
resources, can this vitally important ecosystem be maintained into the
future.

Environmental issues are, and will remain, an essential topic of
interest in the region. Dumping of nuclear and toxic waste, pollution
of the atmosphere with toxic gases, air pollution caused by smoke
from deliberately lit forest fires in South-East Asia, deforestation and
destruction of aquatic animals are major threats to regional security.

Increasing crime is also cause for concern. Unfortunately,
Cambodia is witnessing a variety of illegal international activities as
she recovers from the effects of internal crisis. These activities
include acting as a transit point for drug and human trafficking,
kidnapping, and money laundering. Cambodia’s limited capability to
control her maritime borders, primarily due to the Navy’s lack of state
of the art equipment and training, has allowed criminals with
international abilities to conduct their illegal activities. Further, illegal
immigration, principally due to the economic crisis, is also having an
adverse effect on regional security. The uncontrolled illegal
movement of people between nations across the region is on the
increase and is bringing about a social crisis that includes sexually
transmitted diseases and criminal activities.

In the past, Cambodia had little experience in dealing with drug
trafficking, and drug abuse was not common. Currently, international
drug dealers are using Cambodia as a transit point for their
businesses. Illegal entry into Cambodia is often linked to an increase
in illegal drug and human trafficking. These illegal practices are not
only of concern to the Cambodian society, but may also produce a


-----

detrimental affect on Cambodia’s relations with countries that are
final destinations for these illegal commodities.

Besides illegal immigrants from neighboring countries who are
residing in Cambodia, there are many other illegal immigrants whose
countries do not border Cambodia. They are using Cambodia as a
staging post prior to movement to a third country. Illegal
transmigration is threatening Cambodia’s social security and
controlling them is proving difficult. Often during their short stay
they use Cambodia as their personal killing and kidnapping field.
What is more, as they intend to live in a third country Cambodia has
an international obligation to the security of that target country.
Finding a diplomatic solution is sometimes the subject of complicated
discussions.

**The Effects of Regional Social and Economic Crises on**
**Cambodia's Security**

While Cambodia was less affected by the recent financial
crisis than a number of its neighbors, those events showed clearly
how a robust economy is the essential underpinning of an effective
security policy. It provides the resources and skills to develop a
strong military force to protect national interests. It provides
commitment and unity among the people. It ensures that there will be
much less scope for external forces to promote division or instability,
whether through military activities, as in the past, or the new
challenges of transitional crime.

For this reason, Cambodia must improve her ability to put in
place economic systems that will ensure such a crisis does not deal a
severe blow to her emerging economy. Military expenditure must be
targeted at the primary security objectives and be maintained at a
level compatible with overall national objectives. The capacity of the
armed forces to contribute to those wider development objectives and
to support the people in an emergency is a priority. Military
capabilities that strengthen Cambodia’s national infrastructure have
particular value.


-----

**CHAPTER THREE**
## BUILDING A SECURE REGION

The changing nature of the security environment demands the
nations work closely together to promote stability and to tackle shared
concerns. The key to Cambodia’s efforts in this area will be its
membership of ASEAN.

**ASEAN Cooperation**

In a speech delivered by Samdech Prime Minister Hun Sen in
the opening of Cambodia's entry into ASEAN on May 5, 1999, he
raised four points on Cambodia's interests when admitted into
ASEAN. Summarized, these points are:

- ASEAN has established security, peaceful and stable
environments in the region, which are helping to boost economic
growth. Peace and stability can be achieved through a framework
of effective cooperation and consultation based on the principles
of the 1967 Bangkok Declaration especially the principle of noninterference in the internal affairs of other countries. Cambodia
believes that this principle is an excellent rule with which
relationships and disputes within the circle of ASEAN can be
strengthened and solved.

- ASEAN is a region for cooperation that helps foster community
spirit among its members. The principle of "CONSENSUS" in
decision-making is a strong foundation for the spirit and culture of
cooperation in the community. Although some differences may
arise, the spirit of cooperation in ASEAN will not allow the
undermining of the group. While difficult to implement, ASEAN
will try to maintain such an important principle.

- ASEAN’s economic growth over the past two decades is famous.
Although suffering from recent financial crisis, Cambodia
believes that this will fade away in the near future. ASEAN's
position will not only firm once again, but also its improvement
will be double.


-----

- ASEAN is a forum for diplomacy and a major international
gateway. Over the past 30 years, ASEAN has established a
mechanism for cooperation and consultation by maintaining a
close relationship with its partners through ARF, APEC, ASEM
and ASEAN Dialogue Partners. This mechanism has set up an
effective network in foreign cooperation and relationship between
ASEAN and its partners in the important political and economic
fields throughout the world.

**Bilateral Initiatives**

Cooperation within ASEAN is complemented by enhanced
relations between Cambodia and its neighbors.

**Thailand.** Thailand shares its sea and land borders with
Cambodia in the north and west. Its population is six times more than
Cambodia's and its military power is much more modern than
Cambodia's. It also has close military relations with the USA and
conducts annual military exercises, such as Cobra Gold, with this
country. Recently, and especially prior to the financial crisis,
Thailand accelerated its military modernization program. Although
some critics suggest that this modernization lead to a regional arms
race, Cambodia believes that because of her economic improvement
and her military relations with the USA, Thailand required such a
military modernization program.

_General Mongkol Ampornpisit, Supreme Commander of the Royal Thai Armed_
_Forces (center) and General Surayud Chulanont, Commander- in-Chief of the_
_Royal Thai Army (left) pay a courtesy call to Samdech Hun Sen, Prime Minister_
_of Cambodia, during their official visit in October 1999. (Picture: Minadef)_


-----

Cambodia has never thought of Thailand as a military threat to
Cambodia's security. This opinion is premised on the view that
Cambodia is not a competitor with Thailand, nor is there any
evidence of a potential crisis that would cause Thailand to use
military force against Cambodia.

In 1997, the two countries sought a solution to their overlapping
economic areas. Through subsequent negotiations, both countries
have indicated the possibility of establishing a joint venture in order
to make possible the use of overlapping economic areas in the Gulf of
Thailand. However, a question mark hangs over exploration for
natural gas. While ever a lack of agreement remains about gas
exploration, economic development in this area will remain out of
reach, especially to Cambodia.

Land border disputes between the two countries have rarely
arisen over the past two years with only minor incidents occurring.
Because of wars and internal security concerns, Cambodia has not
been able to maintain permanent control over the border. The
continuing border defensive system established by Thailand in the
1980s, and other factors, resulted in the border line in some areas
being unclear and needing to be inspected and resolve through
negotiation. Because of these continuing border concerns the two
countries agreed in 1996 to create a joint General Border Committee
working from the local to the national level. This committee has
worked tirelessly in an attempt to resolve border issues. As a result of
the committee’s efforts, security on the border is now stable, and
trade corridors between the two countries are being opened regularly
and securely.

In recent times, there have been numerous examples of effective
cooperation between the two countries. Cambodia and Thailand
through effective cooperation solved the problem of Cambodian
refugees located in Thailand. Repatriation to their native country of
all Cambodian refugees was conducted successfully. In mid-1999,
Thailand approached the Cambodian Ministry of Foreign Affairs
suggesting joint maritime patrol along the sea border. The purpose of
this patrol was to prevent the destruction of natural resources and
clamp down on piracy. Cambodia welcomed the approach and hopes
that it can respond positively in the future.


-----

**Vietnam.** Like Thailand, Vietnam, which lies to the east of
Cambodia, also shares common land and sea borders. Relations
between Cambodia and Vietnam are generally good apart from
uncertainty over some border demarcations and overlapping maritime
economic areas that need to be resolved through negotiation. A
Border Committee, whose task is similar to that established between
Cambodia and Thailand, has been established by the two countries.
Recently, the National Commission on Border Issues of the two
countries held talks in an attempt to seek a formula for solving
existing border problems. The two sides agreed on an approach that
should put an end to their border problems as soon as possible.

_Gen. Ke Kim Yan (fifth from left), C-in-C 0f the RCAF, led a high level delegation to visit_
_Vietnam in 1999 with a view to strengthening relations between the two Armed Forces._
_(Picture: Minadef)_

The population of Vietnam is seven to eight times more than
Cambodia's and the country maintains a large defense force. The
defense force inventory includes large quantities of weapons and
equipment. Although border disputes and illegal immigrants are of
concern to Cambodia, there is no evidence to support military tension
occurring between the two countries in the foreseeable future.
Cambodia is drawn to this conclusion because the Cold War is over,
Vietnam is a member of ASEAN and the priority for Vietnam now is
to develop its own market economy.

**Laos.** Relations between Cambodia and Laos are generally
good. Despite some uncertainties occurring in the northern border


-----

regions of Cambodia, these issues are currently being resolved in a
peaceful manner.

_Cambodian delegation pictured with_
_Laotian counterpart during the visit to Laos_
_in July 1999. (Picture: Minadef)_

**Engagement with Global Nations**

Security cooperation with the major Asia-Pacific powers is
similarly important to Cambodia’s future. Cambodia's relationship
with the **USA remains a priority in the field of economic**
development. The Most Favored Nation (MFN) Status and
Generalized System Preference (GSP) boosts Cambodia's major
industrial exports. In addition, the USA assists Cambodia in human
resource development and other forms of humanitarian assistance. In
relation to national security, Cambodia will continue to extend her
cooperation with the USA in both the military and social security
fields (such as the fight against drug trafficking).

In the past, the RCAF received assistance through the
International Military Education and Training (IMET) scheme and the
Title 10 Program of the USA. This assistance focused on human
resource development through education, training, seminars and
conference attendance. Additionally, the RCAF received assistance
under the Military-to-Military Contact Program, which helped to
increase the ability of the RCAF in the fields of engineering, mine
clearance, health care, legislation and human rights. Following the


-----

political differences in July 1997, all of these remain suspended
except for tropical medicine research.

_Lt-Gen. William Steele, Commander of the USA Pacific Command, accompanied by_
_Col. Victor Raphael, Army Attaché to Cambodia, visit flood-affected areas in Kampot_
_in 1996. (Picture: Chea Chheang – AKP)_

Through a sequence of diplomatic and military consultations,
the Cambodian Ministry of National Defense has tried to have the
above-mentioned US military assistance resumed. This assistance is
considered most important for the development of the RCAF’s ability
to perform its tasks and to participate in national reconstruction. The
Cambodian Ministry of National Defense trusts that because of
Cambodia's positive attitude towards reform of the RCAF, the above
mentioned military assistance will be resumed and further extended.

**France has had traditional cooperation with Cambodia in**
many areas. France maintains active military cooperation in the fields
of training of cadet officers, training of the Royal Gendarmerie and
the offer of training for the Ministry of Interior. Currently, France and
the European Union are focusing on the reconstruction of Cambodia.
Cambodia believes that this increase in France and European Union
assistance will be of benefit to the whole nation as well as Ministry of
National Defense.


-----

_Gen. Tea Banh (left) and_
_Gen. Tea Chamrath, former_
_Co-Ministers of National_
_Defense (right) and French_
_Ambassador, Gildas De_
_Lidec, during the handover_
_ceremony of French_
_Equipment to the RCAF._
_(Picture: Chea Chheang –_
_AKP)_

The Cambodian Ministry of National Defense signed a
memorandum on bilateral military cooperation with **Russia in 1995.**
But as this powerful country encountered domestic economic crisis,
cooperation so far has produced no outcomes. Russia’s view is that
defense cooperation should occur in the near future. The Cambodian
Ministry of National Defense will always welcome defense
cooperation with Russia given that most of the military equipment
and materials used by the Cambodian military was secured from the
former Soviet Union.

_Co-Ministers of National_
_Defense, Gen. Tea Banh_
_and HRH Prince Sisowath_
_Sirirath meet with Russian_
_Ambassador, HE. Victor V._
_Samoilenco. (Picture: Chea_
_Chheang – AKP)_

**China has long traditional relations with Cambodia. China’s**

investment in the Kingdom of Cambodia has reached a high level in
such fields as light industry and agriculture. Recently, trade relations
also increased. In the military field China is also attempting to build
closer relations with Cambodia. This includes granted non-refundable
assistance for training, shelters, health, engineering and
transportation. In the area of human resource training, China has
accepted RCAF personnel for training in the strategic, tactical,
technical and medical fields. The Cambodian Ministry of National


-----

Defense will attempt to strengthen its relations, especially in the areas
of engineering and specialized training.

_Gen. Zhang Wan Nian,_
_Vice Chairman_
_of the Military Central_
_Commission of the PLA, is_
_welcomed by Cambodian_
_high ranking officers during_
_his visit to Cambodia in_
_April 1996. (Picture:_
_Chea Chheang – AKP)_

**Australia continues to provide assistance programs to many**
areas such as human resource education, agriculture, health care,
criminal justice, mine clearance, and DCP. Resuming defense
assistance in mid-1999, Australia changed the objective of its DCP by
focusing on the development of strategic policy documents including
the Defense White Paper, professional military education and
training, English-language training and military medical assistance.
Cambodia's Ministry of National Defense will continue its close
relations with Australia in order to extend military cooperation in
other fields such as military skills training, and other mutually agreed
possibilities for Cambodian military servicemen, thereby allowing
participation in international cooperative activities in the future.

_English training is an important component of current Australian_
_defense assistance to the RCAF. Lt-Gen. Pol Saroeun, Chief of_
_Joint Staff (fifth from left), and Australian Ambassador, Dr. Malcolm_
_Leader (third from left), preside over the opening ceremony of the_
_language Laboratory at Reussey Keo Language Training School._
_(Picture: DAO)_


-----

**Relations with the United Nations**

From 1991 onwards, the image of the United Nations remains at
the forefront of the minds of the Cambodian people. With the clearsighted leadership of the King of the Kingdom of Cambodia, the UN
helped to bring about peace and democracy to Cambodia by way of
the 1993 general election. Having concluded its mandate, which at its
peak included more than 20,000 personnel, the UN left in place its
systems of assistance including the bureau of human rights and other
functional agencies to help restore Cambodia's infrastructure,
economy and legislative system. Cambodia intends to act as a
responsible international nation and will retain strong links with the
UN.

_The Co-Ministers of National Defense meet with_
_Special Representative of the UN Secretary General_
_for Cambodia. (Picture: Chea Cheeg – AKP)_


-----

**CHAPTER FOUR**
## CAMBODIAN DEFENSE POLICY

Cambodia’s new stability, the importance of providing a secure
environment for development, and the nation’s reemergence into the
international community demand a coherent and well founded
defense policy.

According to Article 49 of the Cambodian Constitution, all
Cambodian people have an obligation to contribute to the building
and defense of the nation. The national defense strength
fundamentally depends on people force, and the RCAF is the core in
the implementation of this defense responsibility. The RCAF is born
from the people and must implement the Royal Government’s
political guidelines of defending the nation and maintaining security,
of engaging in nation building and to save people from disasters.

In a state where the nation has just recovered from war, national
defense and nation building are major strategic responsibilities for the
RCAF, and the entire population must work cohesively to achieve this
end, resulting in a prosperous Kingdom of Cambodia.

**Factors Shaping Defense Policy**

The framework for defense policy is clearly defined in Chapter
Four (Article 51-55) of the Cambodian Constitution. Article 53
stipulates that The Kingdom of Cambodia adopt a policy of
permanent neutrality and non-alignment. Cambodia shall not invade
any country, nor interfere in any other country's internal affairs,
directly or indirectly. Cambodia shall not join in any military alliance
or military pact that is incompatible with its policy of neutrality.
Cambodia shall not permit any foreign military base on its territory
and shall not have military bases abroad, except within the framework
of a UN request. Cambodia reserves the right to receive foreign
assistance by way of military equipment and training of its armed
forces, and other assistance for self-defense, and to maintain public
order and security within its territory. Article 54 states that the
manufacturing, use and storage of nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons shall be absolutely prohibited.


-----

The Royal Government’s political guidelines, declared by
Samdech Prime Minister Hun Sen on 30 December 1998 placed the
emphasis on building the RCAF to become an armed force that has
full allegiance to the nation, respects the Constitution, is well
disciplined, has good ethics and politeness, respects and loves the
people and has enough capability to safeguard national independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity as well as maintaining and
strengthening stability, security and social order. The RCAF is to be
transformed into a professional armed force with appropriate size,
having better pay and capability to defend the country, engaging in
national development, and offering relief and rescuing those people
suffering from disasters. Efforts should be made to reduce defense
spending and to increase expenditure on other social affairs. Good
control is to be maintained over weapons and ammunition by
eliminating arms trade in the black markets, confiscating illegal
weapons and destroying unneeded weapons and explosives.

_(Picture: Chea Chheang- AKP)_

The RCAF is to comply consistently with the Royal
Government’s foreign policy principles of neutrality, peace,
friendship, cooperation, non-alignment, and non-interference in its
relations with countries in the world. The RCAF maintains a position
of solving problems with its neighbors by peaceful means. The use of
force and a military response will only be applied in cases of any
encroachment on Cambodian territory and when peaceful solutions
have produced no results.


-----

Within the current environment whereby Cambodia has recently
emerged from a chronic bonfire of war, continues to face numerous
difficulties, and centers all efforts on rehabilitating and developing
the country, the RCAF is incapable of joining any bilateral or
multilateral military exercises. Further, the RCAF is currently
incapable of providing military forces to participate in any UN
peacekeeping operation. The RCAF is limited to participating in
seminars and workshops to enhance ability and experience.

Since 1993, the RCAF has been manned on the basis of an
amalgamation of the military forces of the previous factions in
accordance with the Paris Peace Accords. There has been no new
personnel recruitment except for a small number of officer cadets. In
the meantime, the RCAF’s reform plan requires the demobilization of
55,000 soldiers over five years in accordance with directions from the
Royal Government. Because of the need to maintain the RCAF’s
manpower within authorized ceilings, and in accordance with Article
49 of the Constitution, selective compulsory military service might be
needed under certain circumstances so that the RCAF’s defense
capability can be sustained. Without this option, the RCAF’s human
resources could fall short of requirement and the armed forces could
end up with only commanders and aging officers with no fit, strong
and young soldiers to perform their roles and responsibilities.
Although Cambodia is not at war, the national defense obligation
remains essential and must not effect reconciliation, multi-party
democracy, respect for human rights and national development. The
implementation of selective compulsory military service will, apart
from maintaining the military force, result in a number of positive
impacts such as the promotion of knowledge, a spirit of awareness
and nationalism among Cambodia’s youth, and will also heighten
discipline, ethics and national values in the society.

**Assessment of the Threats to Cambodian Security**

A comprehensive approach to defense and security is important
because of the wide range of challenges that Cambodia faces now and
in the immediate future.

**Military Threats. The military threat to Cambodia in the near**
term is low. This assessment is based on the following three factors:


-----

    - Successful implementation of the Government's national
reconciliation policy as a result of which the country has
enjoyed peace and stability;

    - The adherence of "an amity policy" with the countries in the
region. Cambodia fully intends to use peaceful conflict
resolution measures to avoid physical confrontation; and

    - Commitment to Trust and Confidence Building Measures,
which are major objectives for the ARF.

**Economic Threats. The successful emergence of the Asia**
Pacific region from its recent economic crisis, Cambodia’s
membership in ASEAN, the assistance from the world community,
and its political stability and internal security are supporting the
possibility of the country's economic prosperity for the next
millennium. However, internal peace and security is vital to the
Government's economic development. Cambodia must maintain
border security by upgrading safety at the border crossing points, and
ensuring the safety and security of its sea-lanes of communication.

**Demographic Threats. The current Government's concern is**
to improve the people's well being. Part of the Government's effort is
to build and enhance infrastructures in the remote countryside to
allow the people the opportunity to develop their economy. This
policy requires a strong promotion of national cohesion and a
commitment to develop lines of communication. Any shortcoming in
security maintenance, therefore, could create advantages for rebellion
and disrupt economic development.

Another demographic concern is the spread of the HIV/AIDS
disease. A recent survey has indicated a high rate of infection exists
among the armed forces personnel. Without immediate and effective
measures being taken, this "enemy" will not only endanger the human
resources in the society but will cripple the efforts of developing the
armed forces' capability as well.

**Geographic Threats.** Cambodia acknowledges that the current
border questions and the issue of overlapping Exclusive Economic
Zones require an urgent diplomatic solution. Cambodia, Vietnam, and
Thailand have recently shown their commitment to resolve the
problems. General Border Committees have already been established


-----

with Thailand and through these mechanisms the matters can be
resolved either on the ground or at the national level. Nevertheless,
border issues are sensitive and need to be resolved effectively.

**Environmental Threats.** Because of a long period of social
disruption, Cambodia has suffered a severe destruction of its national
resources. About 40% of its forests have been destroyed; wildlife and
marine and fresh water resources are endangered, and national
properties such as artifacts have been looted. Understanding this
serious threat, and placing all effort to stop these illicit activities at a
high priority of national security measures, is essential. The lack of
adherence to national security responsibilities will seriously
undermine the country's culture and national values.

**National Defense Objectives**

Managing these security challenges effectively will not be an
easy task and it will take some years to achieve a comprehensive
outcome. National resources are not unlimited and the right balance
must be maintained between expenditure on defense and security, and
the resources devoted to overall national development. The clear
national objective is to achieve security and development together.

To support this national goal, Cambodia’s defense policy needs
to pursue several key objectives in coming years. These are to:

    - maintain the capacity to ensure stability and social order
within Cambodia in support of national interests;

    - protect the nation’s borders against transnational crimes
such as the unauthorized movement of people, drugs,
criminal activity, firearms and other goods that may be
detrimental to national security;

    - reshape the RCAF into a smaller, more professional military
force able to defend Cambodia’s national interests;

    - contribute to national development through the provision of
specialist skills and services (e.g. engineering,
communications, transport and medical);


-----

    - develop over time an enhanced capacity to protect
Cambodia’s interests in surrounding maritime areas;

    - engage in confidence building measures with Cambodia’s
neighbors including meeting of senior officers and
development of security dialogues.

The RCAF has an essential part to play in promoting national
cohesion and development in support of other Government agencies.
The specific initiatives set out subsequently in this White Paper
provide a clear agenda for realizing that potential.

**Organization of the Armed Forces**

Effective implementation of the policy depends on the
introduction of appropriate command, policy and administration
arrangements. The responsibilities of each element in the defense
organization must be clear and all areas fully committed to the
national defense policy objectives. Recent initiatives have made
important progress in this direction. As described in Chapter One, the
current defense organization is structured along lines similar to the
one that Cambodia had in the 1960s. In 1993, the First-Term
Government reestablished the defense organization composed of three
major institutions: the Ministry of National Defense, the High
Command, and the General Staff. In accordance with the
Constitution, the King remained Supreme Commander of the Armed
Forces.

Under this structure, the Ministry of National Defense was a
government institution in charge of policy, logistics and finance, and
external relations only. The High Command Headquarters, which was
established shortly after the formation of the RCAF, was commanded
by the Co-Commanders-in-Chief of the Cambodian National Armed
Forces (this varied from the 1960s organization which saw the
Cambodian National Armed Forces include the National Police). The
High Command was the highest echelon in the military command
hierarchy, and both Prime Ministers were appointed to hold the titles
of Co-Commanders-in-Chief. The General Staff commanded the three
Services; Army, Navy, and Air Force, and was delegated temporary
control of the newly formed Royal Gendarmes. Of significance, the
General Staff had specific responsibility for operations, training, and


-----

more importantly, the military’s involvement in social security and
public order.

The command structure of the defense organization was
significantly revised in early 1999 – the time when the Second-Term
Government commenced with only one Prime Minister. The Prime
Minister relinquished his title as the Commander-in-Chief of the
Cambodian National Armed Forces, and a new Commander-in-Chief
of the RCAF was appointed. The current Commander-in-Chief no
longer has command or control over the National Police.

_Gen. Ke Kim Yan became Commander-in-Chief of the RCAF after the_
_Prime Minister gave up his commanding role over the Armed Forces_
_in January 1999. (Picture: Chea Chheang – AKP)_

At the same time that changes were made to the national
command and control structure, the Ministry of National Defense also
changed its structure. Evolving from its previous organization where
Departments were the main structural components, the Ministry
upgraded its immediate subordinates to General Departments. There
are now three General Departments in the Ministry and each General
Department has a number of Departments under immediate control.
The Ministry of National Defense retains powerful management over
logistics and finance.


-----

The High Command Headquarters continues to manage military
training. The Research and Intelligence Department is also located in
the High Command Headquarters. Although this Directorate
primarily serves as the Defense Intelligence Agency, it performs
additional roles in national intelligence activities. It routinely reports
to the Commander-in-Chief, but the Director reports to the Prime
Minister in circumstances involving special or sensitive issues.

Importantly, the General Staff was completely dismantled at the
same time, and all three Services are now under direct command of
the Commander-in-Chief of the RCAF. In addition to the normal
chain of command, the Commander-in-Chief will have direct
command over a number of units and formations. This has been
detailed in the latest Five Year Plan.

_Lt-Gen. Pol Saroeun, Chief of Joint Staff, meet with the New Zealand Defense_
_Attaché to Cambodia, GPCAPT J. McMillan. (Picture: Chea Chheang – AKP)_

A significant change has been the creation of the Joint Staff.
Structurally, the Joint Staff has responsibility for coordination
between the Services. As the Chief of the Joint Staff is also a Deputy
Commander-in-Chief of the RCAF, the Joint Staff has assumed
broader roles in the High Command Headquarters. The Chief of the
Joint Staff oversees all working staff within the Headquarters, and
automatically becomes acting Commander of the RCAF during the
absence of the Commander-in-Chief.

These revised command and organizational arrangements will
serve Cambodia well in the coming years. To be fully effective,
however, they will need to be complemented by:


-----

- enhanced professional training for senior and middle level
officers in command positions; and

- the development of specific planning and management skills
to ensure that the Government’s reform objectives are
carried out.


-----

**CHAPTER 5**
## ROLES OF THE RCAF

To achieve the nation’s defense policy objectives, the RCAF
must be capable of performing four basic roles:

    - the direct defense of the nation and its strategic interests;

    - promotion of national development;

    - cooperation with the Interior Ministry in the maintenance of
peace, stability and social order; and

    - participation in international cooperation.

**Defending the Kingdom of Cambodia**

While the prospect of a significant direct military threat to
Cambodia is currently assessed as unlikely, the defense of the nation
and its direct strategic interests remains the RCAF’s primary role. It is
the ultimate defender of the constitution, and the freedoms and rights
that the constitution provides for the people of Cambodia. It is
essential that those rights are protected in the future and that the
Royal Cambodian Government can pursue its policies free from
external pressures. The constitution provides the essential guarantees
that the policies of reconciliation and renewed national commitment
can be maintained.

Importantly, substantial security challenges do remain in the
possibility of illegal cross border activity, including transnational
crime (the unauthorized movement of drugs and other goods,
weapons and people) and possible low level military incursions.
These challenges may have a disproportionate effect while the nation
is rebuilding its economy and political cohesion. In addition, action is
required to manage and protect Cambodia’s interests in controlling
movement through, and activities in, its maritime areas.

In current circumstances, the first priority is to strengthen the
nation’s control over border areas. This must be matched with the
ability to respond quickly to events that do occur and to work closely
with neighboring countries to prevent unauthorized movement. This


-----

gives operational effectiveness to the work of the Joint Border
Committees.

In capability terms, the key initiative has been the tasking of
some regular units at battalion level with responsibility for border
operations in each military region. These battalions will be able to
gain a detailed knowledge of their operating area, establish links with
the local community, and be located within the immediate response
area.

These battalions will work closely with the police and other
government agencies, including the Ministry for the Interior, in their
areas of responsibility. Where additional personnel, mobility, supplies
or weapons are required to support battalion operations, these will be
available from the forces of the military region commander. The
presence of these battalions will often allow situations to be contained
while a political settlement is sought.

_(Picture: Minadef)_

In the event of more significant military activity in the border
area, the initial response will be from forces assigned to the military
region. These will be reinforced as required by additional units and
firepower available from the Army and High Command
Headquarters. Should a broader threat emerge, the High Command
Headquarters would coordinate the campaign and be able to redirect
units and supplies from other areas of the country as appropriate.

Protection of the coastal areas and adjacent waters will be
enhanced in several steps. First, knowledge of activities along the


_(Picture: Minadef)_


-----

coastline and the inshore islands will be improved by a greater
military presence including manned observation posts. This will then
be complemented by the changes in the Royal Cambodian Navy away
from its riverine emphasis to inshore patrol operations. This will
involve either refurbishment of existing patrol craft or the acquisition
of several additional vessels for patrol and transport activities.
Offshore patrols will be added after these initial steps have been taken
and will be supported by the use of maritime surveillance radar,
cooperative intelligence exchanges and operational coordination with
Cambodia’s neighbors.

**Promotion of National Development**

The RCAF is an important instrument of wider national policy.
It is available to support the nation both in a crisis situation and in
larger scale development initiatives. Additionally, the presence of the
force throughout the nation, and its network of linkages to the central
government, allows it to support a range of activities of other
government agencies.

These national development activities are valuable to the armed
forces. They provide good relations with the people that are essential
to effective operations and the gathering of intelligence. They support
military operations and supply by improvement of the national
infrastructure. They help promote a stable political environment that
allows the force to concentrate on external security challenges. Largescale activities such as disaster relief provide valuable experience in
command and control, planning and force deployment. The main
areas of national development assistance are set out below.

**Engineering.** The tasks of the RCAF engineers not only meet
the needs of national defense, but also play an active role in
improving landlines of communication, economic development and
supporting provincial businesses. In cooperation with the Cambodian
Mine Action Center (CMAC), RCAF engineers help clear landmines
thus improving the living condition of the local people.

RCAF engineers are rebuilding and fixing roads and bridges,
thereby enhancing land lines of communication for people living in
the remote border regions. These improvements assist the RCAF in
controlling border areas and help to prevent illegal smuggling.


-----

_Engineer units are currently engaged in rehabilitating national infrastructure_
_particularly landlines of communication. In this picture, Lt-Gen. Kun Kim,_
_Deputy C-in-C, inspected one of the road construction areas. (Picture: Chea_
_Chheang – AKP)_

**Medical Assistance Program.** The Royal Government, with
assistance from international organizations, has focused on improving
the health services available to the people of Cambodia. The RCAF,
especially the units deployed to remote areas, has not only improved
health standards in military units, but has also assisted with the
provision of health care to local people whenever possible.

**Protection of Natural Resources.** Because of the Royal
Government concerns with deforestation, the RCAF in cooperation
with other Government agencies is tasked with preventing illegal
forestry activities. This approach has been strongly supported by
national and international opinion. The RCAF is committed to
continuing this task until the Royal Government’s requirements are
achieved.

Protecting resources under the sea, and national property on
land allows the RCAF to participate in national economic
development. While some natural resources remain available, large
quantities have been lost due to internal conflict and delays in
resolving border disputes with neighboring countries. Effective
enforcement of regulations controlling activities in maritime areas
will largely fall to the RCAF’s developing maritime capabilities.
Efforts and cooperation will be made with neighboring countries so
that disputes can be solved peacefully, and management made as
efficient as possible.


-----

**Relief Operations in Natural Disasters.** The most common
natural disasters in Cambodia are those resulting from flood, severe
storms, forest fires and drought. These disasters require the RCAF to
provide emergency assistance to the people in the effected areas. The
RCAF assists by helping with rebuilding homes following
destruction, conveying emergency supplies to the victims and, if
possible, helping to replant lost crops.

_Cambodia suffered a severe flood in 1996. The RCAF was placed under state of_
_emergency and soldiers worked all day and night to maintain flood protecting_
_systems, rescue and bring food and materials to the people. (Picture: Chea_
_Chheang – AKP)_

For future capability in this area, the RCAF needs to be more
prepared, trained with the essential skills and obtain additional
necessary equipment to support this type of operation.

**Support for Peace, Stability and Social Order**

The policy of national reconciliation, especially the ‘win-win’
policy of the Royal Government, remains effective. Further, under the
clear-sighted leadership of the King of the Kingdom of Cambodia as
the father of national reconciliation, results in social stability and
security environment are improving.

The RCAF, in cooperation with the national police assists with
combating illegal activities such as armed robbery and kidnapping.
As a result, security and social law and order are improving.

Although some difficulties exist in controlling weapons and
ordnance following more than two decades of instability, the Royal


-----

Government takes this issue seriously in order to maintain peace,
stability and public law and order. The RCAF continues to cooperate
with the police in preventing and suppressing criminal activities, and
investigating and confiscating illegal weapons, and encourages local
people to turn in their unlicensed weapons.

_Well-trained Royal Gendarmeries have significant roles_
_in ensuring security and social order, and preventing_
_other unlawful and criminal activities. (Picture: Minadef)_

As the internal security situation improved, primary
responsibility for these operations was passed to the local/provincial
authorities and other Government agencies. However, the RCAF
continues to provide assistance to the police and will be able to offer
support with mobility and communications as required. Distribution
of the force throughout the military regions will continue to support
cooperation and early response.

It is important to recognize that an effective, professional force
for the defense of Cambodia against external threats will depend on
the strong support of the people. Both intelligence and the provision
of non-military support will be greatly improved through public
confidence in the political neutrality and heightened external focus of
the RCAF.


-----

**International Security Cooperation**

International cooperation is an important element in
Cambodia’s security. It can:

    - help to provide a stable environment within which national
development can occur;

    - prevent problems crossing the nation’s borders;

    - ensure good relations with Cambodia’s neighbors, allowing
them to work together on issues of common concern;

    - foster the nation’s prestige and influence, demonstrating its
commitment to regional affairs and to wider international
objectives; and

    - provide important avenues for the nation to attract new
skills and facilitate equipment acquisitions.

_H.E. Hor Nam Hong (eighth from left), Minister of Foreign Affairs and international_
_Cooperation and H.E. Tea Banh, Co-Minister of National Defense (on H.E. Hor Nam_
_Hong’s left) with diplomatic Representatives in front of Preah Vihear Temple._
_(Picture: Minadef)_

It is particularly important to Cambodia for a number of
reasons. These include the nation’s membership of ASEAN and the
sense of responsibility that goes with this, and the range of common
security challenges which face South-East Asian nations. These
include the new challenges of transnational crime and environmental


-----

protection together with development issues of common interest.
These include the development of maritime zones in the Gulf of
Thailand and the Greater Mekong Sub-Region. Wider United
Nations’ initiatives may also require support.

International cooperation is not inexpensive. Accordingly,
initiatives must be introduced progressively in parallel with the new
capabilities offered by the restructuring and reform of the RCAF. The
first step is to promote effective management of the nation’s borders
and the coordination of intelligence and operations required by the
Joint Border Committees. The second step is the promotion of
individual officer exchanges with other countries to enhance skills in
command, planning and specialized military activities.

**Cambodia’s Military Strategy**

All these different operational commitments for the RCAF are
drawn together in the military strategy of **flexible and controlled**
**response. This is the overall concept for the structure and deployment**
of the force. It has been developed to ensure the most effective use of
available resources in a variety of roles, to serve all areas of the
nation, and to restore close links between a politically neutral force
and the people.

The strategy has several layers:

    - At the center is the High Command Headquarters. This is
responsible for the overall coordination of military activities
and distribution of support throughout Cambodia. It also
works closely with the Ministry of National Defense in the
development of policy and with other government agencies
in coordinating responses to instability or unauthorized
activities in the border areas. The High Command
Headquarters will retain a surge capability of a limited
number of formations under direct command together with
specialist capabilities being developed on a nationwide
basis.

    - The core of operations will be the Military Region
Headquarters. These will be responsible for oversighting
operations and national development tasks within their
region, and for developing effective linkages with the local


-----

community. They will have significant infantry resources at
their disposal together with centralized communication and
mobility assets. They will coordinate regional intelligence
and operations, and will provide a rapid response or
reinforcement capability when necessary in contingencies
and natural disasters. The strategic bases, when constructed,
will provide a focus for training and the storage of weapons
and supplies.

    - The third layer will be the patrol and presence operations
spreading out from the Military Region Headquarters. The
priority for developing this layer will be first in the border
areas with the tasking of the battalions mentioned
previously in this chapter. Extension of this approach to
coastal regions will follow. Their tasks will include:

� responsibility for providing a presence in the
community to support stability and development,

� responsibility for the collection of intelligence on
potential security challenges,

� initial responsibility for crisis response operations,

� operating cooperatively with other government
agencies charged with the control of movement,
and

� the regulation of specific activities on behalf of the
Royal Government.

    - Over time, an additional maritime patrol and response layer
will be added. This will begin with inshore capabilities for
protection of the sea approaches and islands and
subsequently be extended to offshore patrols in support of
Cambodia’s maritime interests.

The aim of this strategy is to ensure a wide presence throughout
the nation in support of stability and development and to provide
intelligence on issues of security concern. Additional surge capacity,
both in terms of numbers and specialist capabilities will be deployed
as required form either the Military Region Headquarters or the High


-----

Command Headquarters depending upon the location and scale of the
task.

Using the force in this way will ensure the most effective use of
the small number of higher level capabilities available within the
force, and provide the most flexibility to respond to natural disasters
and other crises, while not disrupting the overall military contribution
throughout the country. This strategy will help deter those who are
interested in promoting instability or disobeying national regulations
(such as forestry controls). The strategy is set out in the diagram
following.


-----

**CHAPTER SIX**
## REFORMING AND RESTRUCTURING THE RCAF

To strengthen its prestige in ASEAN, Cambodia will pay
greater attention to developing its armed forces consistent with
strategic concepts. Improving its armed forces to an acceptable
quality and appropriate size, based on the ability of the state
economy, will ensure a high level of combat readiness, thus
preventing the possible encroachment on Cambodia’s land borders,
maritime areas and air space. The Cambodian forces will, in
cooperation with other relevant national security forces, maintain
peace, security and social order, and participate in national
development, which is the prime task set out by the Second-Term
Royal Government. It will also play an important role in maintaining
peace and stability in the region.

The specific actions necessary to achieve this objective are set
out in the following paragraphs. They will involve a significant
transformation of the RCAF and cannot be accomplished quickly.
Priorities have been identified to ensure that the most important
initiatives are taken as soon as possible.

**Demobilisation**

The reform process is dependent on a substantial reduction in
current manpower levels. This will free many soldiers to return to
productive civil employment. It will reduce the burden of defense
spending on the national budget. Within the RCAF it will lead to a
better balance between expenditure on manpower, equipment and
operations. It is important that demobilisation is undertaken in a way
that is sensitive to the needs of the nation, the interests of the
individual soldier, and the future strength of the RCAF.

The numbers to be demobilised, (55,000 by 2002-2003), and the
reductions in particular unit strengths have already been identified.
The majority will occur in the provincial forces whose role has been
significantly reduced by the return to stability within Cambodia itself.


-----

**Command, Control and Communication**

The downsizing of the force must be matched by a clear vision
of the more streamlined and effective organization that is to replace it.
The cornerstone of the future RCAF will be robust command, control
and communications arrangements. The unified direction and control
provided by the High Command Headquarters will be complemented
by more effective Military Region Headquarters. These will have the
primary responsibility for defense activities in their areas, carrying
out the directions of the High Command Headquarters and providing
that headquarters with a detailed understanding of security
developments.

The chain of command will be simplified between High
Command Headquarters, Military Region Headquarters and units.
The introduction of reliable and secure communications between the
High Command Headquarters and the military regions is an important
priority. It will provide intelligence on developments of national
concern, support timely response operations (including in the event of
natural disasters), and be available to support wider government
initiatives and communication with the people.

Improved tactical communications will be necessary as the
RCAF give greater emphasis to protecting the nation against external
challenges. The priority should be to equip forces patrolling in border
areas with a reliable means of passing information to Military Region
Headquarters including along the southern coastline. The relevant
Military Region Headquarters should in turn establish links with other
border control agencies, including the police, customs and
immigration.

The breadth of the new security challenges that Cambodia is
facing demand close coordination between the RCAF, the police and
other security related agencies. This may involve exchanges of
specific intelligence, operational coordination and a more integrated
approach to policy development on issues of security concern.
Regular meetings of planners from each area will promote this
cooperation. Liaison officers might be designated to support
intelligence exchanges. Cooperation with international partners will
also be of value, particularly in supporting intelligence exchanges and
providing early warning to any significant problems.


-----

**Training and Education**

Improved training and education will be essential to a more
professional and effective RCAF. It is also important to build up the
respect of the people in a force that is politically neutral and able to
support national development and stability and defend the national
interests.

Much emphasis and efforts should be placed on education and
awareness of national patriotism. The committed spirit in defending
territorial integrity, dignity, good discipline, capability development,
specialised skills, tactics and techniques should also be instilled at all
levels. This will ensure that their duty, to protect the lives and
properties of people, to defend territorial integrity and participate in
the national development will be achieved successfully.

The objective is to develop a comprehensive professional
training program with four levels to support personnel as they move
through their careers.


-----

The four levels of professional military education will be:

    - **Comprehensive Recruit Training to instil high standards**
of discipline and pride in membership of the RCAF and to
improve understanding, patriotism, and neutrality. Standards
must be improved in accordance with the motto: Nation,
Religion and King. This training will primarily be the
responsibility of the commanders in each military region.
While the current downsizing means that there will be little
new recruitment for some time, commanders should provide
refresher courses for their non-commissioned officers and
soldiers to lift standards and promote public confidence.
Emphasis should also be given to physical training and sport
to improve the stamina and resilience of soldiers.

_Co-Ministers of National Defense Visited the Cadet School at Tmat Pong_
_(Picture: Chea Chheang – AKP)_

    - Development of the courses at the **Junior Officer School**
to strengthen the leadership and values of all newly
commissioned officers. The emphasis will be on discipline,
command responsibilities, organisational skills,
humanitarian law and community awareness.

    - **The Establishment of a Command and Staff Course for**
middle level officers. Training of these officers is currently a
major gap in the training of RCAF officers. Apart from
limited opportunities overseas, they have not received the


-----

training required to exercise more senior command
positions.

Full establishment of a Command and Staff Course will take
some time. The early introduction of in-country training in
these areas for existing and newly promoted officers is,
however, essential. Cambodia’s strategic partners will be
approached for assistance in this area.

    - **Senior Officer Training at the Officer Academy. This is**
important to ensuring that commanders develop high level
skills in command, leadership and management. In the short
term, it is not realistic to extend this training beyond the
current three-month course. Selected senior officers should
be identified for training overseas and encouraged to share
these skills upon return to Cambodia. Education gained at
this level will allow these officers to liaise effectively with
senior members of the local community.

Training in **specialist** areas such as communications,
engineering, medical support and information technology will be
important to the RCAF in the future. Initially, these skills will also be
acquired with the support of Cambodia’s strategic partners. It might
involve a combination of overseas training courses and, where
possible, short in-country training sessions to develop a basic level of
skills more broadly in the force.

If this new approach is to be sustained, attention should be
focused on improving the ability of instructors, preparing training
documents, learning from past experience and tactics, and extending
tactic contents by cooperating with specialised units for their modern
programs.

**Mobility**

Force mobility remains a major problem for the RCAF. Land
movement is made difficult by the lack of national road infrastructure,
the mountainous terrain to the south-west and the nation’s river
system in the centre and to the east. Off the coastline lie many small
islands. During the rainy season, many roads and tracks become
unusable.


-----

Current military transport capabilities are limited. The majority
of the military fleet of trucks is aging and unreliable. Maintenance
difficulties, brought about by a lack of repair facilities and spare parts,
have grounded aircraft and helicopters, and the Navy’s patrol craft are
in a poor state of repair. The Army’s mechanised capability has also
become eroded.

_(Picture: Chea Chheang – AKP)_

These problems cannot be overcome quickly. The first priority
should be to equip each of the military regions and the strategic
reinforcement force with a small group of vehicles able to deploy
troops and materials on operations and for reinforcement in response
to specific incidents and natural disasters. These vehicles should be
normal civilian vehicles to contain costs and minimise support
requirements.

The second priority should be to introduce 3-4 patrol craft for
inshore maritime patrol and transport operations. Again, these should
be of simple civilian design although it may be possible to refurbish a
few of the existing patrol craft. Judgements must be made however,
about the costs of doing so, the difficulty of supporting a mixed fleet,
and the remaining operational life of the existing vessels.

Air transport may be very useful in the rainy season, but the
costs and complexity of maintaining an operational helicopter force
do not make this a priority. Civil aircraft may be used where
available, for rapid movement between the major regional centres in


_(Picture: Chea Chheang – AKP)_


-----

emergencies. However, the national civil capability is limited and
movement will normally be by road or river. The disposition of forces
to the various regions, and the more stable political environment
should however, makes this need less frequent.

With economic growth in the future, the Air Force may
consider the acquisition of a small number of short-range transport
aircraft, possibly under a lease arrangement, including maintenance
support. Resource expenditure on repairing the current fleet will, as
with the case of the Navy’s patrol craft, only be considered after the
costs and future operational effectiveness of those aircraft have been
carefully considered.

Engineering capabilities will contribute significantly to the
improvement of roads and bridges in their local areas and on priority
national tasks. These activities should be carefully coordinated to
assist military movement and development across the country.

**Force Development**

The costs of retaining very large manpower numbers within the
RCAF, and continuous internal strife, have left no scope for the
development of the forces’ capabilities. With the demobilisation
process and the strengthening over time of the national economy,
opportunities will exist to enhance these capabilities. It will be
important that new initiatives are controlled in an orderly manner.
They must give priority to the areas that will most quickly improve
the operational effectiveness of the force and be in accordance with
overall national development priorities.

A significant transformation of the force will be achieved in the
short term. It will be primarily on light scales, mobile and possess a
number of specialist capabilities. The first steps must be improving
the communications and mobility of the force, particularly close to its
land and maritime borders.

The second priority concerns the development of certain
specialist capabilities within the force. These are, in particular:

    - improvement in the Army’s engineering capabilities in
relation to roads, bridges, building construction and the
repair and maintenance of equipment.


-----

    - strengthening of the nation’s mine detection and clearance
capability to match the efforts of Cambodia’s strategic
partners. This is a national task that will be ongoing and the
need for a national capacity able to support military
operations is important.

    - the development of health and medical skills within the
force both to support day to day needs, disaster relief and
combat operations.

_(Picture: Chea Chheang – AKP)_

The third priority relates to enhancement of the force’s
surveillance and reconnaissance skills. Given Cambodia’s varied
terrain, the ability to identify and engage a potential target as early as
possible is essential to effective operations. Many of the required
advantages can be achieved by a high standard of training and
concept of operations. These would be significantly enhanced by
employing a range of equipment, from simple binoculars to maritime
radar. In time, the use of remote sensors including satellite
information will be introduced.

Cambodia’s capabilities in the maritime environment are very
limited, particularly in relation to the need to manage, and if
necessary protect, its offshore interests. Depending upon available
resources, the acquisition of several small patrol craft and maritime
radar would greatly increase the nation’s coastal and maritime
protection capabilities.

The final priority is the gradual rebuilding of the Army’s
firepower. The ability to be able to deliver a decisive blow, if


_(Picture: Chea Chheang – AKP)_


-----

required, is central to success on the battlefield. Similarly, armoured
vehicles to provide protection in close quarter combat is important to
troop survival and manoeuvre operations. These capabilities are not
however, inexpensive. They are expensive to buy and maintain, and
require extensive support.

The first steps, once the national economic situation permits,
should be to enhance core training of light artillery and armoured
vehicles. As the artillery and armour capability develops, it could be
deployed as required to the military regions. The permanent
deployment of such capabilities to each of the military regions,
starting with those closest to the nation’s land borders, is a longer
term objective.

**Support and Maintenance**

Logistic support for the RCAF, and the repair and maintenance
of its equipment remain a major problem. This is due to the mix of
weapons systems (which are aging, costly to repair and have poor
availability), the lack of national infrastructure, and the limitations on
civil support in remote areas or during more intense operations.

_(Picture: Chea Chheang – AKP)_

To improve this situation, a number of initiatives would be of
value in addition to the improvements proposed in force deployment
and mobility. There should be a move to greater use of common
systems across the Services. These should be based, where possible,
on normal civil specifications and any purchase should include


_(Picture: Chea Chheang – AKP)_


-----

provision for follow up maintenance. As development in Cambodia
proceeds, leasing from the larger civilian companies might also be
considered.

In addition, consideration will be given to the establishment of a
small, mobile repair unit that deploys regularly to the various military
regions to repair and maintain a range of military equipment. During
a larger military operation, this unit would be located temporarily in
that area. As the RCAF’S specialist skills increase, small maintenance
detachments may be attached permanently to each military region.

The resources do not exist currently to stockpile significant
supplies of fuel, spares, food and other equipment against the
possibility of a short-term increase in operational activity. Several
measures are being considered to ease this problem. Military regions
will be tasked with their ordering and resupply to progressively build
up an additional month’s operational supplies (rather than letting their
stores run very low).

With the establishment of the Strategic Reinforcement Force a
small pool of additional resources will be set up for deployment to the
military regions if necessary. Agreements might also be reached with
large commercial businesses and, possibly, Cambodia’s neighbours,
to provide additional support in a crisis, including during natural
disasters.

**Development of Defence Bases**

Command, operational effectiveness and the maintenance of a
sense of commitment is greatly enhanced where soldiers work side by
side, developing good personal relationships and an awareness of
each other’s role.

The existence of integrated military bases and barracks
accommodation supports overall control of force conduct and
operations, facilitates the delivery of single service and common
training, and can improve the conditions of service of individual
soldiers including administrative, health-care and family support.
They may also assist with the secure storage of weapons and
equipment. Over time, they may also be developed to provide basic
repair and maintenance services. For these reasons, a series of


-----

strategic bases and barracks is to be constructed progressively to
support each of the military regions.

**Conditions of Service**

For a professional military force to develop, the conditions of
service must encourage commitment to the force, support healthy and
well-trained soldiers, and deter the possibility of soldiers becoming
involved in other activities that compete with their military duties.
The downsizing of the force offers the opportunity to improve the
working conditions, training and accommodation of the RCAF.

The commanders and chiefs of institutions will be responsible
for the living conditions of soldiers under their command. The
establishment of bases and barracks in the military regions will
provide a focus for training and support services, including medical
and administrative services.

The salary for soldiers will be paid regularly and, if possible,
increased. With national stability, self-reliant living conditions based
mainly on agricultural crops might be made, perhaps by allowing
soldiers to cooperate with investment units in the agro-industrial field.
However, any trade corporation or abuse of regulations will be
prohibited. The practices of corruption and graft affecting the living
condition of soldiers will be observed and action will be taken
accordingly.

The supply system must be reformed, with supplies properly
distributed to the armed forces according to their rank and
hierarchical levels, so that their living costs, accommodation and
health care can be enhanced in conformity with their allowances
provided by the RCAF’S policy.

In addition, measures should be taken to review the pension
allocation to the remaining invalids. Responsibility for these invalids
should then be transferred to the Ministry of Women’s and Veterans
Affairs. Pension entitlements and allowances for the wounded, the
invalid and the disabled must be implemented thoroughly. Leadership
at all levels must be improved so that control of pension entitlements
and allowances can be carried out properly as determined by the
Royal Government.


-----

**CHAPTER SEVEN**
## THE FUTURE OF THE RCAF

This White Paper represents a watershed in the development of
the RCAF. The new stability and national priorities introduced by the
policies of the Second-Term Government have created the
opportunity for the RCAF to set aside the history of politicization and
neglect of its primary rolethe defense of the nation and its direct
interests. Through the processes of demobilization and reform, it will
be transformed into a well-trained and equipped military force able to
meet national defense objectives and contribute to a stable regional
and international security environment.

Economic circumstances demand that the changes be
introduced progressively. Accordingly, the White Paper establishes a
carefully ordered set of priorities for achieving these goals. The
priorities match the downsizing and restructuring of the force with a
reassertion of its standing among, and value to, the Cambodian people
and the gradual introduction of a more comprehensive range of
capabilities for national defense.

**The Army**

_(Picture: Minadef)_

Enhancements to the Army will begin with its reorganization
around the general strategy of flexible and controlled response. The


_(Picture: Minadef)_


-----

role of the Military Region Headquarters will be strengthened.
Communications will be improved between the High Command
Headquarters, the Military Region Headquarters and the forwarddeployed force. Initial priority will be given to those battalions
responsible for controlling border areas. Transport capabilities within
the military regions will be upgraded.

These changes will be complemented by more effective
professional education and skills development. Both initial training
and middle level command and management courses will have a high
priority as they provide the basis for maintaining the new
professionalism and efficiency within the force. The development of
skills in engineering, communication, transport and medical support
will underpin effective operations, contribute to national development
and promote popular confidence in the armed forces.

More advanced combat capabilities will be developed
gradually. The early focus on surveillance and patrolling skills will be
followed by a core of light artillery and armored vehicles under the
control of the High Command Headquarters. More significant
strengthening of these capabilities if required and their permanent
training in the military regions will only be considered when the
national economy is much stronger.

Should additional manpower be required at some future time,
the preferred approach would be to reintroduce selective compulsory
military service. It can provide a significant pool of trained manpower
to reinforce the Army in times of crisis, with relatively low costs. To
be successful, it would need a comprehensive recruit-training
program and close cooperation with government and private
institutions and companies to ensure employees were available when
necessary for both training and operations.

**The Navy**

The transformation of the Navy will take place in several steps.
The first will be a shift in priority from riverine operations to
patrolling of the coastline and nearby islands. It will involve the
establishment of observation posts at key strategic locations, followed
by the possible acquisition of coastal surveillance radar and
dedication of several craft to inshore patrolling. The latter may
involve refurbishment of existing craft or, subject to resources, the


-----

lease or purchasing of several patrol boats of a relatively simple
design that can be supported in-country. An improved repair and
maintenance capability should follow, including in the longer term,
the construction of a ship lift or dry dock facility.

_(Picture: Minadef)_

Developing offshore patrol capabilities is more complex. It
requires vessels with improved sea keeping and a wide range of
sensors and weapon’s systems. It would also be most efficient when
the systems are in place to coordinate closely with neighbors. The
potential value of the offshore resources to the economy and the
opportunities for regional cooperation suggest that these initiatives
should be pursued as soon as funding permits.

**The Air Force**


_(Picture: Minadef)_


-----

Developments in Air Force capabilities generally do not occur
quickly. This reflects the high costs of acquiring fixed or rotary wing
aircraft and the training and support required to introduce and
maintain them in service. Air transport is, however, valuable in
supporting the rapid deployment of troops and supplies, and
providing access to remote areas. Cambodia’s limited national
infrastructure strengthens their value.

The important decision that must be made is whether the
existing squadron of utility helicopters can be repaired and
maintained, and their operational availability assured, at a reasonable
cost. If that is possible, available Air Force resources should be
focused on achieving that operational output. The maintenance of
pilot training skills is also important. Should existing equipment not
be supportable, the purchase of new rotary wing aircraft and
associated maintenance and support arrangements will be considered.
Resources are, however, most unlikely to be sufficient to pursue such
a purchase in the short term. In the longer term, the demands of force
mobility and the potential advantages of aerial surveillance suggest
that Cambodia should consider the acquisition of a small number of
short range, tactical lift, fixed-wing aircraft. These would be based on
normal civilian specifications and may be equipped with surface
surveillance radar to assist maritime patrolling. While trainer aircraft
may be equipped with weapons systems to provide fire support for
ground forces, the maintenance of a significant air combat capability
cannot presently be justified.

**Policy and Planning**

Preparation of the Defense White Paper and the policy
objectives that it establishes is just the beginning of the process. For
its recommendations to be carried through effectively, there is a need
to ensure that the Ministry of National Defense and the RCAF:

    - strengthen their skills in policy and planning; and

    - develop specific studies and implementation plans to carry
through the new initiatives.

The professional development of selected senior officers will be
pursued in areas such as strategic policy development, international
relations (to support Cambodia’s enhanced regional role), and


-----

capability analysis and resource programming. The RCAF must be in
position to make informed judgments in relation to the development
of new capabilities and effective management of the available defense
resources.

The Ministry of National Defense will continue to take
responsibility for the development and oversight of defense policy. It
will coordinate the range of studies necessary to support the
implementation of the recommendations of this White Paper. Initial
studies may include detailed plans for the new professional education
system, and the enhanced communication network, establishment of
bases in the military regions and options for improving support to the
force. Army, Navy and Air Force will each be tasked with developing
plans to introduce changes and new capabilities identified in this
White Paper.

**Management of Defense Resources**

Effective resource management is no less essential to the future
of the RCAF. A critical aspect of the reform of the RCAF has been to
bring defense expenditure into line with overall national development
priorities while enhancing operational effectiveness. This is not an
easy task.

The recent history of the RCAF has resulted in it becoming a
numerically large force with a large proportion (50%) of expenditure
devoted to salaries and the daily living costs. The remainder is spent
on uniforms, fuel, maintenance and equipment, training and
accommodation. It is insufficient to support effective defense
operations or to provide for the acquisition and maintenance of any
significant military equipment. Conditions of service for soldiers
continue to be inadequate. At the same time, the defense proportion
(23.7%) of national gross revenue is a major diversion of resources
from development, even though the actual size of the defense budget
is much less than some nations of comparable size.

There is a need to reduce this proportionally and to link future
growth in defense expenditure to the overall growth in the national
economy. Progress has already been made through reductions in rank
structures. Demobilization of a significant part of the RCAF’s
manpower and the reintegration of these people, appropriately trained
into the productive labor force, will be the next step. These initiatives,


-----

together with holding down defense expenditure as the economy
expands, will progressively allow scope to improve conditions of
service and transform the RCAF into a more streamlined and efficient
force.

The focus of the policy proposals set out in this White Paper is
to give emphasis initially to those reforms that will increase the
effectiveness of the current force. Major capability enhancements will
occur later in the development program as the strengthening of the
national economy provides more resources for such initiatives.


-----

-----

