The Right Honourable Paul Martin
Prime Minister of Canada


###### MAKING A DIFFERENCE

 Introduction: The Need to Review

Foreign policy is how a nation best expresses itself to the world. Our policies as a
government, reflecting our beliefs as Canadians, are articulated through the
words we speak, the decisions we make and the actions we implement in the
name of Canada.

Over the course of the past year and a half, my government issued our country’s
first National Security Policy, launched the Canada Corps with its work in
Ukraine, led the International Mission for Iraqi Elections, commanded the
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan and the multinational
force in Haiti, negotiated a new Security and Prosperity Partnership with our
counterparts in North America, pursued modern trade and science and
technology agreements with India, Japan and Korea, and demonstrated our
leadership in combating HIV/AIDS in the developing world and encouraging
debt relief for the poorest of countries.


We are proud of these accomplishments. But we also understand that from time to
time, a government needs to take a hard and comprehensive look at what is
working and what is not in its foreign policy; at how the world is evolving and whether Canada is prepared; at how
best to project Canadian values and interests into the world and make a real difference in the lives of its embattled
peoples, now and in the future.

This is the right time to review our foreign policy.

Why? Because the world is changing, quickly and radically, and these changes matter to Canada—not in abstract
terms, and not only to students of international relations, but tangibly and to everyone. Our security, our prosperity
and our quality of life all stand to be influenced and affected by these global transformations and by the challenges
they bring—from the spectre of international terrorism to the threats of virulent disease, climate change and
disappearing fish stocks. It is through our foreign policy that Canada must and will act to ensure that we as a nation
overcome the trials and embrace the opportunities of the 21st century.

Make no mistake: We are in the midst of a major rebalancing of global power. New nations are rising as military and
economic forces. Many established powers are striving to maintain their influence through regional integration and
new alliances. In a world of traditional and emerging giants, independent countries like Canada—countries with
small populations—risk being swept aside, their influence diminished, their ability to compete hampered. That may
sound dramatic, but the stakes are that high. We will have to be smart, focused, agile, creative and dogged in the
pursuit of our interests.

Why is the time right for a foreign policy review? Because we want to make a real difference in halting and
preventing conflict and improving human welfare around the world. This may sound naively altruistic, but it’s not.
Rather, it’s a doctrine of activism that over decades has forged our nation’s international character—and will serve us
even better in today’s changing world. The people of our country have long understood that, as a proud citizen of the
world, Canada has global responsibilities. We can’t solve every problem, but we will do what we can to protect
others, to raise them up, to make them safe.

Such intentions can be frustrating, for the world does not lack for a supply of grinding poverty, murderous conflict
and abject despair. There is only so much that we, as one nation, can accomplish. But that fact must not dissuade us.
Instead, it must inspire us—inspire us to rally cooperative action to address major concerns; inspire us to focus on
countries and conflicts within which we can truly make a difference; inspire us to keep at it and to follow through, to
understand that real progress means not only keeping the peace but doing the hard work of building the systems of
health, education and justice that will enable people to grow, to succeed, to thrive.


-----

Remember: There is no contradiction between Canada doing well and Canada doing good. Canada benefits directly
when the world is more secure, more prosperous, more healthy, and more protective of the natural environment. If
we are to take our responsibilities seriously to ourselves and the Canadian generations to follow, then we must take
our responsibilities to the global community seriously as well, not only with noble sentiment and rhetoric—we must
also earn and perhaps re-earn our way. This will take effort and it will take dedication.

Why is the time right for a review? Because we are now in a position to reinvest in our international role. For
decades, there was a slow erosion in Canada’s commitment to its military, to international assistance and to our
diplomatic presence around the world. Then, during the nineties, there were more cutbacks as our government made
tough decisions to save the country from financial calamity. As a result, our international presence has suffered. But
thanks to the sacrifice and resolve of Canadians, we have restored our fiscal sovereignty and have spent the past year
renewing our investments in domestic priorities, such as health care. Now is the time to rebuild for Canada an
independent voice of pride and influence in the world. It won’t be easy. We will have to earn our way in defence and
security. We will have to earn our way in international assistance and global commerce. And we will have to
understand that we can’t simply recreate what we once had. Instead, we must build today for the world of tomorrow.
That is what we are dedicated to doing.

###### Canada in North America

Our security, our prosperity, our quality of life—these are all dependent on the success with which we help to
manage the North American continent. All Canadians understand that our most important relationship is with the
United States. As a government, we treat it that way, devoting energy and effort to ensuring the relationship remains
strong, sophisticated, productive and focused on common goals, such as the security of our borders, the health of the
North American economy and the free flow of trade between our nations. The fact that most of our trade crosses the
border each day free from dispute does nothing to shake our determination to improve the existing dispute resolution
mechanism, which has come up short too often.

Living in proximity to the world’s only superpower has engrained in Canadians both a pride in our friendship and a
determination to set our own course in the world. We share many goals, both within our continent and within the world,
but our societies are different. Our perspectives and our values sometimes diverge. It is natural that even the closest of
friends have their respectful differences. Indeed, Canada has always chosen its own way, and it will continue to do so.

More broadly, we understand that within North America, Canada, the United States and Mexico each face unique
challenges, and they each look at the world in their own way. What is increasingly obvious in the 21st century,
however, is that there are more and more challenges that affect all of North America—challenges that require North
American solutions that respect our differences as sovereign countries, but that also recognize our profound
interdependence as neighbours on this continent.

Thus, on March 23, President Bush, President Fox and I signed the Security and Prosperity Partnership of North
America that establishes the way forward on our continental agenda for security, prosperity and quality of life. It is a
partnership that respects the past but is devoted to building for the future, to ensuring that we as North Americans
are able to continue to thrive in a world in which China and India have emerged as economic giants.

###### Defence and International Security

The first duty of government is to protect its citizens. That responsibility today has been complicated by the
emergence of new threats: rogue states, failed and fragile states, international criminal syndicates, weapons
proliferation, and terrorists prepared to act with no concern for the cost in human lives, including their own.

The Statement sets out the steps we are taking and will take to defend Canada against all threats, to protect the
northern portion of our continent and to preserve our sovereignty, including that of the Arctic. Among the reforms is
a fundamental restructuring of our military operations under a unified “Canada Command”—a change that will
make certain that in a time of crisis, Canada’s military has a single line of command and is better and more quickly
able to act in the best interests of Canadians.


-----

We are also expanding our Canadian Forces, and we are ensuring that when our military personnel are deployed,
they are well equipped to do the job—and to do it as safely as possible. By adding 5,000 new troops and 3,000 new
reserves, we are enhancing our ability to address situations of humanitarian catastrophe in a way that will allow
Canada to play a leading and lasting role in peace support operations.

And lead we will. For instance, Canada will direct a Provincial Reconstruction Team in Kandahar, Afghanistan—
just our latest contribution to securing and rebuilding that country. We will maintain our leading role in supporting
the strengthening of police capacity in Haiti. We will strongly support renewed efforts toward a just settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and will play an integral part in abetting Palestinian efforts in capacity building and
reconstruction. And then there is Darfur, where the suffering continues and the tragedy escalates. The international
community has thus far made unacceptable progress toward initiating a multilateral intervention. Canada will work
closely with the African Union to improve its ability to restore security and bring stability to the region, and we will
do more in the areas of training, equipment and logistical support.

###### Trade and Commerce

We have benefited enormously from an open economy; we are the world’s eighth largest economy and fifth largest
trader. From the “outside in,” our openness to trade, investment and people brings us cost-effective and competitive
industrial inputs and consumer products, new technologies, new research and development, and the human capital
we need to fuel our continuing growth. From the “inside out,” global markets for our goods, services and
investments are a principal engine of our growth, which could not be sustained by our relatively small domestic
market of 32 million people.

That is why we continue to place great emphasis on a positive outcome for the Doha Development Agenda of global
trade negotiations at the World Trade Organization.

Our strategy for international commerce has moved well beyond simply looking for export markets, though that
remains a very important part of what we do. And it has moved beyond simply marketing our natural resources,
though that remains a thriving sector. In today’s economy, it is ever more important to promote strong international
investment and scientific and research relationships around the world. Investment abroad by Canadian companies is
of increasing importance to the Canadian economy; the numbers show that trade follows investment, and that means
more export-led, high-value jobs in Canada. The future belongs to knowledge-based economies, and steps are being
taken now by government and the private and academic sectors to make sure Canada is equipped to benefit.

While the U.S. remains our most important market, Canada will step up its engagement with other mature nations,
as well as with those that today are emerging as the global titans of tomorrow. That’s why we signed a science and
technology agreement with India and launched discussions on new economic frameworks with Japan and Korea.
That’s why we will undertake market access negotiations with Mercosur in the context of the Free Trade Area of the
Americas. And that’s why we are pursuing major opportunities with China in tourism, technology and resources,
where our expertise and other value-added capabilities make us a formidable global player. The International Policy
Statement sets out in more detail what we have done and what we will do to strengthen our commercial relationships
with key partners. This is a crucial opportunity and we will not let it pass us by.

###### International Assistance

Canadians have demonstrated, time and again, a remarkable generosity toward the world’s poor and suffering, most
recently in the response to last December’s Indian Ocean tsunami disaster. Whether as members of religious
congregations, as supporters of non-governmental organizations, or as private individuals working and contributing
on their own, Canadians have done a great deal to share their good fortune with others.

Those who donate want to know that their contribution is having an effect, that it is improving lives, that it is getting
to those who so desperately need it. The same is true of our government and its international assistance programs.
We are motivated by the imperative to ensure our aid reaches the people who need it and is not wasted on
unnecessary overhead.


-----

Accordingly, we have concluded that the government’s aid budget is spread too thinly across too many programs in
more than 150 countries. Put simply, the money that we contribute to international assistance on behalf of Canadians
is not accomplishing as much as it should. We will narrow our focus to maximize our impact. We will be realistic
about Canada’s ability to help others, but we will be resolute in ensuring that our aid money is targeted so that it does
as much good as possible.

That is why the International Policy Statement sets out a new strategic aid policy for Canada that will:

- focus our aid on 25 development partners;

- concentrate our spending on the key sectors that drive development—health, education, governance, indigenous
private sector development and the environment;

- bring new and effective delivery mechanisms to bear, such as Canada Corps;

- continue to increase official development assistance and other forms of foreign aid by 8 percent each year,
resulting in a doubling of assistance between 2001 and 2010; and

- maintain increases beyond 2010, and accelerate the projected rate of growth in international assistance as our
fiscal position continues to improve.

Through implementing this integrated approach, we will ensure that our development assistance will make a
difference where the need and the prospects for results are greatest. And we are committed to finding ways to
increase our aid even more.

The Statement elaborates our approach to institution building, engaging Canadian expertise and idealism in
developing countries. And it affirms our commitment to enhanced research and development to support a
knowledge-based approach to the needs of developing countries.

It also declares that the best way for Canada to make a difference in post-conflict situations is to pursue a “3D”
approach, undertaking Defence efforts to strengthen security and stability, pursuing Diplomacy to enhance prospects
for nation-building and reconstruction, and making certain that Development contributions are brought to bear in a
coordinated and effective way.

###### The New Multilateralism

In the post-war period, the international community has asserted greater collective responsibility for the well-being
of the world’s peoples. In areas ranging from human rights to civil conflict to the environment, the United Nations
and other international organizations are addressing matters that historically were thought to lie solely within the
authority of the sovereign nation-state. That is why, at the United Nations last year, I argued that modern
sovereignty increasingly encompasses responsibilities to the international community as well as to one’s own citizens,
and identified five areas where Canada intends to push forward the international agenda for action:

- first, the “Responsibility to Protect,” to hold governments accountable for how they treat their people, and to
intervene if necessary to prevent a humanitarian catastrophe;

- second, the “Responsibility to Deny,” to prevent terrorists and irresponsible governments from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction that could destroy millions of innocent people;

- third, the “Responsibility to Respect,” to build lives of freedom for all people, based on the fundamental human
rights of every man, woman and child on earth;

- fourth, the “Responsibility to Build,” to make sure our economic assistance programs provide the tools that
ordinary people really need to get on with their own development; and

- fifth, the “Responsibility to the Future,” to ensure sustainable development for future generations through better
management of global public goods.


-----

The Statement sets out how these responsibilities are shaping our diplomacy and how they must reshape
multilaterism. Our multilateral institutions must be up to the task. We must reform for the future the international
systems that have served us well. That means tackling the widening divide between rich and poor nations, and
accommodating new centres of power. A recent UN report recommended a number of changes proposed by Canada,
including the enshrining of the Responsibility to Protect.

This is a defining period for the United Nations, the best opportunity in memory to significantly improve an
institution that is essential to our collective security and prosperity. We will work with like-minded countries in
support of recommendations for a new Peacebuilding Commission, a Human Rights Council, and an internationally
agreed definition of terrorism. We will support reform of the Security Council to make it more effective and more
representative—and to ensure that progressive countries like Canada are able to participate more frequently.

We will also continue to press for a new forum that would bring together the leaders of 20 or so leading countries
from the developed and developing world to hold talks on how to deal with some of the world’s most pressing
problems, including reforms to our multilateral systems. The L20 may not come easily but it will be created because
it makes sense. It is always difficult to get countries to accept changes in their political status, but it cannot be
avoided. As has been noted before, it can take a great deal of effort to bring about the inevitable.

We seek nothing less than a new multilateralism, in which the real and pressing needs of people are addressed.
Canada has always contributed to and benefited from multilateralism. We believe strongly in finding cooperative
solutions. But we also recognize that we must be ready to change with the times and lead where we can, especially
where multilateral institutions are acting too slowly or are not up to the task.

###### Making a Difference

In our current age, the changes to the world’s economic, security and political landscapes are increasingly seismic,
the global fault lines more unstable and numerous. We see it in the headlines of our day. We feel the anxiety of a
world on edge.

That is why as Canadians we must be active beyond our borders to protect and promote our values and our
interests—security in the face of terrorism and the increasing threat of nuclear proliferation, and our trading
relationships with the United States, Mexico and throughout the world. We must advance the concerns of people
who seek freedom, stability, democracy and above all, a better life. And while we value multilateralism and know the
great good that international cooperation can achieve, we must ultimately be committed to playing a lead role in
specific initiatives and, on occasion, to resolving to go it alone. We have the means to help, and so we will. We must.

Canadians want us to promote our international interests vigorously. Canadians know we have to make tough
choices to safeguard our freedom and security, our prosperity and quality of life. Canada can make a difference
through its foreign policy, through its relationships across the globe. Building on our strengths, adapting to a
changing world, we will make a difference.

The Right Honourable Paul Martin
Prime Minister of Canada


-----

-----

##### CANADA’S INTERNATIONAL POLICY STATEMENT

### A Role of Pride and Influence in the World
## OVERVIEW


-----

The International Policy Statement sets out the Government’s international direction and priorities, described in
greater detail in the attached documents on diplomacy, defence, international commerce and development. Each of
these documents stands on its own as a complete statement of the Government’s policy in each field.

Canada’s International Policy Statement is available on-line at
www.international.gc.ca, www.acdi-cida.gc.ca and www.forces.gc.ca

For additional copies, please contact:

Enquiries Services (SXGI)
Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade
125 Sussex Drive
Ottawa, Ontario
K1A 0G2

Tel.: 1 800 267-8376 (in Canada) or (613) 944-4000
Fax: (613) 996-9709
TTY: (613) 944-9134
E-mail: enqserv@international.gc.ca

ISBN 0-662-68608-X
Catalogue No. FR4-3/2005

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, 2005


-----

###### INTERNATIONAL POLICY AT A CROSSROADS 1

THE CHALLENGES WE FACE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
CANADA’S OPPORTUNITY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2

###### THE CANADIAN APPROACH 4

 REVITALIZING OUR NORTH AMERICAN PARTNERSHIP 6

SECURING THE CONTINENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6
PROSPERING IN NORTH AMERICA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9

###### MAKING A DIFFERENCE GLOBALLY 11

BUILDING A MORE SECURE WORLD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
Countering Terrorism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
Stabilizing Failed and Fragile States . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
Combatting Proliferation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .15
INCREASING GLOBAL PROSPERITY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
Strengthening Canada’s Global Competitiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
Increasing Trade and Investment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17
Promoting Sustainable Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .19
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20
Respecting Human Rights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20
Building Genuine Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20

###### CHANGING HOW WE WORK 26

THE NEW MULTILATERALISM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26
THE NEW DIPLOMACY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .28

###### CONCLUSION 30


-----

-----

###### THE CHALLENGES WE FACE

Our world is smaller and more crowded than ever
before. While sovereign states remain the fundamental
building blocks of international society, they now share
the landscape with a host of other actors. Globalization
has connected people and places in ways that were
previously unimaginable, and has blurred the lines
around national economies. In the process it has
generated unprecedented levels of wealth. Yet many
have been left behind and unexpected threats have
emerged. Canadians now understand that seemingly
remote events can have direct, and sometimes dire,
domestic consequences.

_New clusters of threats. In this context, all countries face_
new and diverse challenges. Terrorists have harnessed
the modern tools of globalization and exploited our
open societies with devastating effect. Modern
transportation allows a deadly disease to spread from
one part of the globe to the other in a matter of hours.
Environmental degradation spawns unexpected natural
disasters. Failed and fragile states displace hundreds of
thousands of people, with destabilizing regional and
global consequences.

These developments erode old parochial conceptions of
the national interest. No state, no matter how powerful,
can, by acting alone, make itself invulnerable. In an
interconnected world, countries find themselves sharing
mutual interests more often than ever before. Moreover,
the problems we face are interrelated. Security threats
can diminish economic prosperity by hindering the free
flow of people, goods and services across national
borders. Conversely, long-term commercial engagement
and development assistance can prevent impoverished
states from becoming sources of instability. The
implication for Canada is clear: to remain a secure and
prosperous nation, we must foster international
cooperation as well as defend our sovereignty. Canada’s
task is to promote collective action at both a regional
and a global level.

_Global institutions under strain. We have played a_
successful role in the past, helping to build the
multilateral system that remains integral to meeting
today’s challenges. These traditional political and
economic institutions are now under strain, and their
purposes have shifted as a result of globalization, the end


of the Cold War, and the emergence of new and more
terrifying security threats. The “global village” has
become a reality, yet it still lacks consensus on the rules by
which the inhabitants of that village—sovereign states,
private companies, non-governmental organizations
and individuals—should govern their interactions.

As the legitimacy and effectiveness of our existing global
institutions are increasingly questioned, the challenge for
Canada is to collaborate with others to design and
implement successful reforms. The required “new
multilateralism” must be more representative, so that
nations with different cultures and capabilities can build
mutually beneficial partnerships. It must also be more
responsive to the dilemmas facing the global community,
so that problems are tackled before they become crises.
Above all, the new multilateralism must put action
ahead of rhetoric, and results ahead of process.

_A new global distribution of power. This institutional_
evolution will take place within a new global
distribution of power. The military and strategic gap
between the world’s greatest power, the United States,
and all the others has widened to unprecedented
proportions. As their closest neighbours, Canadians
appreciate the generosity of the American people and
have witnessed their historic role in reconstructing
Western Europe after World War II, creating
international institutions such as the World Bank, and,
after the Cold War, helping to rebuild the new
democracies of Eastern Europe. The agenda of the
United States has shifted and sharpened since 9/11, a
national trauma for all Americans. As a trusted friend
with shared liberal-democratic values, who deeply felt
the trauma as well, Canada can and will collaborate
with the U.S. on the many international issues where
we have common objectives.

At the same time, we recognize that emerging giants,
such as China, India and Brazil, are already making
their presence felt. Their growing influence—
particularly in the economic realm—carries significant
implications for Canada. Our economy is currently the
12th largest in the world, but remains smaller than
those of Brazil, Korea, India and Italy. Our defence
spending, relative to gross domestic product (GDP), has
fallen below that of such countries as Norway, Sweden,
the Netherlands and Australia, and our development
assistance now accounts for only 3 percent of the global


-----

total. In this context, the traditional notion of Canada as
a middle power is outdated and no longer captures the
reality of how power is distributed in the 21st century.
If Canada stands idle while the world changes, we can
expect our voice in international affairs to diminish.
Instead, we will reach out to these emerging powers,
both by developing new bilateral ties and by reforming
how countries work together across regions to
accommodate their needs. Their growing demand for
commodities and energy has the potential to give
Canada, with our vast capacity in natural resources,
increased economic and strategic leverage. These are
essential considerations in developing a strategy for
advancing Canada’s interests and values in the future.

While some states are wielding greater power than ever
before, political and economic developments have
conspired to dampen the prospects for others. Much of
the world’s population is essentially powerless, either
victims of stalled development or citizens of states too
weak to affect the global agenda. Even within emerging
economies, tensions arise between those who are already
integrated into world trade and commerce, and those in
regions or activities that are outside the virtuous circle
of rising prosperity. If left unaddressed, these dramatic
inequalities will inevitably produce new grievances.
Canadian values dictate that we cannot allow their
suffering to continue. Canadian interests demand that
we assist the powerless before they find new and more
ominous ways to make their voices heard.

_A global marketplace. The world economy is also_
changing in two fundamental ways. First, ideas have
become the engine of productivity and the currency of
global success. Innovation determines the wealth of
nations and their capacity to provide a high quality of
life for their citizens. Second, today’s business models
are driven not by geography, but by investment
decisions and information technology. Companies are
moving toward global supply chains. As international
commerce increasingly shifts production, design and
other business activities around the world, Canada faces
new competition for markets, skilled workers, leadingedge technology and foreign direct investment.


###### CANADA’S OPPORTUNITY

Economic, political, technological and demographic
forces will intensify, making the world of 2020
dramatically different from the world of today. Yet this
changing context also represents a tremendous
opportunity for Canada. As a rich and open economy,
with a skilled and adaptable population, we are well
placed to gain from these global transformations. But
we can do more than benefit. We can also contribute. A
series of positive developments, both at home and
abroad, has coalesced to provide Canada with an
unprecedented chance to make a difference.

That said, we need to be realistic and frank with
ourselves. Recent years witnessed a relative decline in the
attention Canada paid to its international instruments,
as priority was given to getting our domestic house in
order. Our diplomatic network, our foreign and trade
policy capacity, our defence capabilities, and our
commitment to development suffered as a result. Canada
will need to do more if we want to maintain influence
in a more competitive world.

Today, Canadians enjoy a robust economy and sound
public finances. We can now reap the dividends from a
decade of sound management that restored our fiscal
sovereignty. Canada has the means and the will to
reinvest in our international role. The Government has
already made significant down payments toward
restoring our capacity to act effectively internationally.
The rebuilding will continue.

The Government is confident that Canadians stand
firmly behind this renewal. The Canadian population is
both keenly interested in international affairs and
strongly oriented toward taking an active role on the
world stage. Our younger generations—the most
ethnically diverse in Canadian history—are already
capitalizing on the opportunities presented by
globalization. Their vision for Canada in the 21st century
is a function of their own experience as confident and
connected members of the global commons.


-----

Internationally, the response to the tsunami tragedy has
revealed a reservoir of global solidarity that could be
mobilized for other crucial humanitarian goals. A year
of major summits on the future of global governance,
2005 also represents a watershed year for the
international community’s response to the growing gap
between rich and poor. The challenge of development is
most acute in Africa, a region that will be in the
spotlight for both the G8 and the UN over the coming
year. Momentum is building. There is a new consensus
both on the targets for poverty reduction and
development—represented by the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs)—and on the best means
for achieving those targets. The recent reports of the
UN High Level Panel and of the UN SecretaryGeneral give further impetus to these efforts by
identifying development as the first line of defence in a
new global system of collective security.

The time to act is now. Canada’s advantages come with
the expectation that we fulfill our responsibilities as a
global citizen. Our current economic and political
standing provides the freedom to make choices about
how we will contribute. By investing strategically today,
we will maintain our capacity to act in the future. Our
unique relationship with the United States does not
alone assure Canada’s influence in the world. We will
set our own course, and pull our own weight. We have
proven before that we can adapt and innovate. In
2005—and beyond—we will do so again.


The February 2005 Budget demonstrates the
Government’s commitment to reinvesting in Canada’s
international role. But money alone is not enough.
Fulfilling this international policy statement requires
choices. While Canada is a prosperous and successful
liberal democracy, it cannot be effective everywhere.
The strategy set out here reflects our continued
engagement in defence, diplomacy, commerce and
development. But we will no longer spread ourselves
thinly across multiple activities, or across every region.
Based on a clear understanding of where our interests
lie, we will focus on particular threats, particular
partners, particular markets and particular institutions.
Our goal is to have the capacity to take action, when and
where we have a practical policy outcome clearly in view.

We also cannot mistake acting in concert for making a
difference. Reforming the world’s multilateral system of
governance will be a priority for Canada, but it cannot
become an end in itself. For Canadians, and for others
around the globe, it is results that ultimately matter.
Therefore, the Government of Canada’s efforts will be
directed to solving specific problems. We will be
selective in our actions and committed to our goals. We
will work across issue areas, creating new forms of
cooperation between Canada and other nations, within
and across government departments, and with globally
active Canadians.


-----

n charting a path forward, Canada’s interests will
guide us. They are intimately linked to the
character of our society and the values it embodies.

# I

Our shared commitment to peace, order and good
government, combined with the dynamism of our
communities and citizens, has produced a vibrant and
prosperous political community. Our federation has
become a diverse multicultural society capable of
transcending the narrow politics of ethnic and cultural
difference. As we have welcomed new members to our
community, our family ties have grown to reach around
the world. The processes of globalization bringing
people closer together at an international level have
been a feature of Canadian life for decades.

Canada’s continued success depends on the joint pursuit
of democracy, human rights and the rule of law.
Though many countries share these values, we have
moulded them into a particular constellation that
reflects our historical experience and our current
aspirations. Our overarching vision is an inclusive
society, where the will of the majority is balanced by a
commitment to minority rights. That vision unifies
Canadians but also celebrates difference manifest in our
official policy of bilingualism, our two legal systems,
and our open immigration and refugee policy. Above
all, it is a distinctly federal model, incorporating vast
differences in size, population and resources between
our provinces and territories. While managing this
partnership has been a complex task, it has also
developed our capacity to accommodate changing
configurations of power. Canada has learned how to
make effective and principled compromises, bringing
disparate groups and interests together in the service of
a common purpose. In no circumstances is violence an
acceptable means for seeking to effect political change,
either from within or without.

This experience also underpins Canada’s economic
model. By wedding free market principles to a
commitment to shared risk and equality of opportunity,
we have produced both prosperity and equity. Over the
last two decades, we have opened our market to the
world, and built a thriving economy that has embraced
new technologies. In the process, Canada has been
recognized as one of the best places in the world to live.


This unique combination of political and economic
models is constantly evolving. There are cracks in our
model, seen most visibly in the condition of Canada’s
First Nations people. Yet our continuing ability to adapt
our political and social union, and to resolve disputes
peacefully, is a significant accomplishment. The lessons
we have drawn are important not only for ourselves,
but also can be useful for engaging with other societies
around the globe. Just as we must remain open to
positive influences from the outside, so we must stand
ready to share our experience with others. In so doing,
we help ensure our influence, particularly as the
developing world takes on a larger international role.

Indeed, Canadians have never been content to rest on
their laurels. From Lester Pearson’s role in the creation
of peacekeeping to our contribution as a leading
member of NATO’s International Security Assistance
Force for Afghanistan, from the Colombo Plan (the
first aid program for the developing world) to NAFTA
(a ground-breaking free trade agreement that crosses
cultural and developmental barriers), Canada has had a
major hand in devising the innovative arrangements
our world requires. Canada has also been a key
architect in the field of international human rights,
beginning with our role in drafting the UN Charter
and continuing with our contribution to establishing the
International Criminal Court. Most recently, our
sponsorship of the International Commission on
Intervention and State Sovereignty and its report, The
_Responsibility to Protect, has promoted a new_
understanding of sovereignty—better suited to our 21st
century world—that combines rights with
responsibilities, and autonomy with collective action.
Whether ideas or concrete actions, our most lasting
international contributions have always served a dual
purpose, securing our own interests by creating a more
stable and prosperous world.

It is here that Canada’s past and future combine. Our
fundamental interests—ensuring continued prosperity
and security for Canadians—remain the same as they
were in 1995 when we last set a strategic course for our
international policy. In fact, these are enduring interests.
But their precise articulation must flow from an
understanding of who we are today and the
contemporary context in which we live. In this context,


-----

we must therefore elevate another priority to guide our
international policy. Canada is a vibrant liberal
democracy, with both regional and global
responsibilities, whose success is intimately tied to a
stable international order.

Effective multilateral governance is essential for
Canadian security and prosperity. Multilateral action is
in turn dependent on states accepting their responsibility
to both their citizens and to other countries. Our support
for these three core priorities—prosperity, security and
responsibility—reflects the fact that they are closely
related and mutually reinforcing. Canada’s future
depends on our skill in pursuing all three together.

We should not be daunted by this task. Our experiences
inside our borders, within North America and as part
of the global community have given us the expertise
necessary for devising effective solutions to the new
problems confronting our interconnected world. We
understand the demands of good governance and the
intricacies involved in accommodating power. While we
can speak the language of toleration and negotiation,
we are also prepared to stand up for our principles—


especially when they are under siege abroad. Now is the
time to mobilize our assets, and our reputation, in the
service of a new global role that will serve our national
interests and contribute to a safer and fairer world.

_How will we know if we’ve made a difference? Given the_
global nature of so many 21st century challenges,
Canada will rarely act alone. This reality makes the
task of measuring our impact more challenging, but it
has not prevented us from playing a distinctive role, in
areas as diverse as Afghanistan, Haiti or Ukraine. Our
old middle power identity imposes an unnecessary
ceiling on what we can do and be in the world. Canada
_can make a difference, if it continues to invest in its_
international role and pulls its weight. We will know
we have done so if there is demand for Canadian ideas
and expertise, if Canadian priorities have pride of place
on the international agenda, if the institutions we are
part of deliver solutions efficiently and equitably, if our
efforts to catalyze induce others to follow, and if the
partners we support achieve their aspirations. Future
generations will use these tests to determine whether
Canada’s global potential has been fulfilled. The
responsibility to act now is ours.


-----

#### PARTNERSHIP

s this new century begins, Canada finds itself
part of an evolving yet mature continental
partnership. The bedrock of that partnership is

# A

the Canada-U.S. relationship, built upon more than two
centuries of close economic, security and personal ties.
Over several generations, Canadians and Americans
have intermingled through migration, cross-border
work and travel, and the exchange of ideas. Our joint
achievements—the world’s largest bilateral trading
relationship and the world’s longest unmilitarized
border—are the envy of the world.

Canada-U.S. collaboration has produced these successes
despite the obvious differences in power between the
two countries, and without the abandonment of
Canadian national identity, social policies or sovereign
decision-making power. Each society is following a
unique path, and we have demonstrated that closer
economic ties are possible without losing our ability to
determine our own course. Canada has also learned that
our influence and cooperation with the U.S. can be a
major asset in the pursuit of our own objectives.
Investing in a durable framework for cooperation with
the United States is therefore central to advancing
Canada’s regional and global interests.

To ensure continued prosperity and security, Canada
needs a more expansive partnership with both the
United States and Mexico that continues to reflect the
unique circumstances of our continent, and the desire of
each country to preserve and promote its particular
social, economic and political achievements. We must
also move forward based on an understanding that
North America is not an island. Its future will be
increasingly affected by the role of new emerging giants,
China, India and the expanding European Union.

The experiment in economic cooperation that began
with the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement, and
continued through NAFTA, is unlike any other
regional arrangement in the world. While European
integration has been a cumulative process that began
with free trade and is ending with political union,
Canada and its continental partners have engaged in a
different process of market making. Cooperation is
managed through common rules, rather than
centralized institutions, and functions at different
speeds depending on the particular problem in need of
resolution. As a consequence, NAFTA is only one piece


of a larger web of arrangements, formal and informal,
that continues to grow and change shape.

The results of North America’s alternative approach
have been remarkable: the past 15 years have
outstripped all expectations in terms of growth in
regional trade and investment. Since 9/11, the security
dimension has received more emphasis, leading to
unprecedented levels of cooperation between Canada,
the United States and Mexico on border management,
asylum and refugee policy, and counterterrorism efforts.

Today Canada’s regional strategy must be pursued with
even greater vigour so that we can realize the aim of a
continent where individuals, as well as goods and
capital, move freely and realize their common
aspirations. In particular, Canada will engage more
actively with Mexico, bilaterally and trilaterally, to
ensure that the North American Partnership is truly
continental in character. NAFTA is one of a rare breed
of free trade arrangements that includes both developed
and developing countries. Thus, the lessons learned
from the NAFTA experiment—in particular, how it
can enhance the quality of life for all Mexicans and
consolidate Mexico’s democratic transformation—will
be important for policy makers all around the world.

A revitalized North American partnership requires
more significant contributions from the Government of
Canada, in terms of both resources and policy
leadership. This is reflected in the March 2005 Security
and Prosperity Partnership of North America, which
builds on last year’s bilateral declarations with the
United States and Mexico. The Partnership is about
finding practical ways to help the citizens of all three
countries live healthier, safer and more prosperous lives.
Through active engagement we can preserve our
national freedom of manoeuvre and ensure that the
benefits of cooperation are fully realized. While
maintaining a strong voice in continental affairs
demands more concrete commitments, particularly in
the realm of security, it will also protect our national
sovereignty, generate further prosperity and build
global influence.

###### SECURING THE CONTINENT

Fifteen years after the end of the Cold War the belief
that Canada’s territorial security was assured, and that


-----

#### PARTNERSHIP


###### PRIORITY FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Collaborate with the United States and Mexico to protect North American territory and citizens from 21st century threats

###### KEY INITIATIVES

- Strengthen coordination of cross-border law enforcement and counterterrorism programs

- Continue joint efforts to build a 21st century border that can expedite the movement of low-risk people and goods, and
interdict threats before they reach North America

- Strengthen the three planks in North America’s critical infrastructure: transportation links, energy resources, and
cybernetic and communications networks

- Build a trilateral emergency response capability that can deal in particular with infectious disease

- Negotiate renewal of the NORAD agreement, while pursuing other measures to strengthen maritime and land
defence cooperation with the United States


we could somehow reap a “peace dividend,” has been
called into question by developments outside and inside
our borders.

The attacks of September 11, and their aftermath, have
recast Canada’s national security agenda in significant
ways. The potential for another terrorist strike in North
America remains high, leaving Canadians with a
vulnerability that is likely to persist well into the
future, particularly as global terrorist networks explore
new ways of harming innocents. While some
Canadians may feel relatively immune to such dangers,
in truth we are not. Complacency has been punished by
those looking for “soft” targets. Several Western
countries—including Canada—have been singled out
by terrorist movements in their public declarations, and
there is indisputable evidence that such groups have
adherents in our own country. Furthermore, a major
terrorist incident within one of our continental
partners could have direct and potentially devastating
consequences for the movement of people and
commerce within the North American space.

The imperative to change our conception of security
threats also stems from three realities much closer to
home. Challenges to our sovereignty and domestic
emergencies were treated as a “residual” requirement.
But over the past decade, the Canadian Forces, in
conjunction with other government departments, have


engaged in a much wider array of activities, from
combatting illegal fishing off our shores, to intercepting
ships carrying illegal migrants to countering drug
smuggling operations. They have also assisted civilian
authorities in responding to devastating floods,
hurricanes, ice storms, forest fires and the tragic
aftermath of the Swissair 111 disaster.

The demands of security and sovereignty for the
Government are more pressing for a second reason: the
predicted changes to Canada’s North over the next two
decades. In addition to growing economic activity in the
Arctic region, the effects of climate change are expected
to open up our Arctic waters to commercial traffic by as
early as 2015. These developments reinforce the need for
Canada to monitor and control events in its sovereign
territory, through new funding and new tools.

Finally, Canadians have become increasingly alarmed
about their vulnerability to infectious disease, identifying
it as one of the most serious threats to their security in
the 21st century. We have already witnessed the effects
of the rapid spread of communicable diseases such as
SARS, West Nile, and avian influenza, and the spread
of resistance to a growing number of antibiotic drugs.
These developments have also made public health a
security priority for the global community, witnessed by
its prominent place in the UN Secretary-General’s
recently released High Level Panel Report.


-----

#### PARTNERSHIP


###### PRIORITY FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Protect Canada and Canadians by implementing the National Security Policy, and updating the approach that the
Canadian Forces take to domestic operations

###### KEY INITIATIVES

- Revise command structures to create a unified national operational “Canada Command” reflecting the new priority
given to domestic operations

- Improve Canada’s maritime, land, air and space surveillance capabilities

- Increase the Canadian Forces’ capacity to monitor and respond to events in the North

- Strengthen the Forces’ ability to respond to terrorist acts on Canadian territory by expanding the counterterrorism unit
(Joint Task Force 2) and the Joint Nuclear Biological and Chemical Defence Company

- Build on the domestic strength of the Reserves by adding 3,000 personnel


The Government has shown determination in its efforts
to address the changing security landscape for
Canadians, investing close to $9.5 billion in security
measures since 9/11. Canadian Forces fighter aircraft
have increased their activity overhead to ensure the
safety of our skies. Our navy has increased its patrols of
our waters. As part of the first-ever comprehensive
strategy for the North, Canada has reasserted its
sovereignty and is collaborating with the Arctic Council
and circumpolar countries to protect the people and
fragile environment of the Arctic. In April 2004, the
Government of Canada took further steps to improve
the security of Canadians by drafting its first-ever
National Security Policy (NSP) and creating a new
department of Public Safety and Emergency
Preparedness. The NSP provides a blueprint for action
in intelligence, threat assessment, emergency planning,
public health and border security.

These new measures, while significant, are the initial
steps in a much larger transformation. The public
expects the Government of Canada to remain vigilant
in protecting both Canadian citizens and Canadian
sovereignty. The first priority of the Canadian Forces
will be the protection of Canada itself. North America
has become a theatre of operation in its own right, and
our defence and security policy must adjust accordingly.
The overriding goals are to detect threats as early as
possible, to quickly analyse what they mean for
Canadians, and to respond with the right mix of


military and non-military resources. A key change
needed to meet these goals will be the creation of a
national operational command headquarters (Canada
Command), that will enable the Canadian Forces to
more effectively meet their fundamental responsibilities
to protect Canadians at home.

The Government of Canada will also work more
closely with its regional partners in ensuring
continental security. Here, the Canada-U.S. defence
relationship will serve as the foundation on which to
build mutually beneficial arrangements that can meet
contemporary threats. It is in Canada’s national
interest to continue to engage cooperatively with the
U.S. on measures that directly affect Canadian
territory and citizens, and to maintain our ability to
influence how the North American continent is
defended. The Government of Canada’s intention to
do so was reflected in the Smart Border Declaration of
2001, the establishment of the Bi-National Planning
Group in 2002, and the 2004 Joint Statement on
_Common Security, Common Prosperity by Prime_
Minister Martin and President Bush. Canadian efforts
to promote continental security will be concentrated
on strengthening the border, while facilitating the
movement of legitimate, low-risk travellers and goods;
reinforcing our coastal and Artic sovereignty; and
bolstering security at points of entry to North America.

We will build on the success of the North American
Aerospace Defence Command (NORAD), working in


-----

the Bi-National Planning Group to find new ways to
protect the continent against evolving threats, and
pursue priority areas such as maritime security and
emergency preparedness.

In its cooperation with the United States, the
Government will focus on those threats that are of the
highest priority to Canadian interests. While
respecting the right of the United States to take
measures it considers essential to ensure its security,
the Government decided that Canada would not take
part in the U.S. ballistic missile defence system.
Nevertheless, we will continue to act—both alone and
with our neighbours—on other defence and security
priorities whether on our continent or internationally.
We will also continue to work actively to promote
non-proliferation, arms control and disarmament
measures to reduce and eliminate the threat from
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and their means
of delivery, and maintain our policy against the
weaponization of space.


#### PARTNERSHIP

###### PROSPERING IN NORTH AMERICA

The North American region is Canada’s anchor in the
global economy. This reality remains central to
Canada’s international commerce policy. Two decades
of trade liberalization, economic restructuring, and
private sector adaptation have deepened the natural
integration of many sectors of the North American
economy. Under NAFTA and the earlier Canada-U.S.
Free Trade Agreement, Canada has expanded its trade
with the U.S. by an average of approximately 10
percent a year. It is here where our immediate
economic future will unfold.

Getting our relationships right with our NAFTA
partners is critical to assuring prosperity for Canadians.
The facts speak for themselves. Since the signing of the
Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement, our exports to the
United States have doubled as a percentage of GDP and
today represent more than 80 percent of our total
exports. While the percentage of U.S. trade going
northward is smaller, 38 of the 50 U.S. states now count


###### PRIORITIES FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Establish Canada as an attractive business gateway for those establishing a foothold in North America

Develop deeper knowledge of, and new channels of influence with, the United States and Mexico

Collaborate with our regional partners to build a competitive economic space that facilitates the free movement of goods,
services, capital, and people and enhances the quality of life of all North Americans

###### KEY INITIATIVES

- Maintain the integrity and improve the effectiveness of trade dispute mechanisms for North America

- Reduce rules of origin costs on goods traded among the three NAFTA partners

- Reach for the best continent-wide standards and regulations that both promote the competitiveness of businesses and
ensure the health and safety of North America citizens

- Expand the FAST and NEXUS programs to facilitate border clearance by shippers and travellers

- Expand technological partnerships that promote the clean and efficient use of North American energy resources,
including initiatives in clean coal, hydrogen and renewable energy

- Intensify our advocacy efforts with U.S. decision makers through the newly established parliamentary and
provincial/territorial secretariat in Washington and our expanded consulate presence

- Improve trade research and policy capacity in Canada through the establishment of networks such as the North
American Forum


-----

#### PARTNERSHIP

Canada as their largest export market. The value of
trade in goods and services that crosses the border each
day is now close to $1.8 billion, and is supported by the
daily cross-border activity of half a million people and
37,000 trucks.

NAFTA is a living agreement that can adjust to
changing circumstances. We are committed to ensuring
that it responds to changing times by continuing to act
as a North American economic framework that secures
and enhances access to the U.S. market, lowers costs for
exports, fuels competitiveness and removes red tape. We
will build on the bilateral and trilateral partnerships we
have, most recently through the Security and Prosperity
Partnership of North America signed by the NAFTA
leaders at the March 2005 meeting. We will discuss with
our NAFTA partners whether bilateral or trilateral
approaches to these issues are best, since not all
problems are equally important to all three countries.
We will also work to bring trade remedy practices
between ourselves and the U.S. into line with the reality
of our shared economic space.

Though there are serious issues to be addressed with
the U.S—most notably involving respect for dispute
resolution procedures—the vast majority of CanadaU.S. commerce occurs dispute-free and to the great
benefit of citizens of both countries. This increased
commercial activity now extends beyond the United
States to Mexico. Indeed, the percentage increase in
Canada-Mexico trade and investment since NAFTA
entered into force has been even more dramatic than
with the United States, and Mexico’s demographic and
economic future points toward even greater potential
for growth.

There is much more that can and should be done
together. The economic interests of all three NAFTA
countries continue to push in the direction of openness


and deeper coordination. It is only by doing so that our
continent can remain competitive with other dynamic
regions in the world economy. The globalization of
production as well as consumption means that none of
the NAFTA partners can take its continued success in
any given sector for granted.

The past 15 years of interaction within the North
American region have exposed policies and practices
that continue to stand in the way of further beneficial
trade and investment. As part of the Security and
Prosperity Partnership of North America, Canada, the
United States and Mexico will work to improve the
security, prosperity and quality of life of all three
partners. To ensure the coherence and effectiveness of
our continental security and regulatory arrangements,
Canada will take further steps to secure the CanadaU.S. border while improving the flow of legitimate
traffic through investments in border infrastructure and
a land pre-clearance initiative.

To succeed in this new phase of North American
cooperation, Canada will invest more in research and
advocacy. We further our own national interests by
knowing our regional partners better, and by
establishing more effective ways to influence their
policy directions. The Government of Canada has
already responded to this need by opening seven new
consulates in key U.S. cities such as Houston and
Phoenix, and by establishing a permanent cabinet
committee on Canada-U.S. relations, chaired by the
Prime Minister. But the task of understanding the issues
confronting the United States and Mexico, and the
priorities they are pursuing, goes beyond government. It
is a job that must be fulfilled by many Canadians,
whether in the parliamentary chamber, the boardrooms
of our companies and non-governmental organizations,
or the research centres in our universities.


-----

he expanding international commitment to the
principles of human rights, democracy and the
rule of law is the most hopeful movement of

# T

our time. It promises unprecedented levels of wealth,
security and quality of life. Yet challenges remain. New
threats have emerged from unconventional sources.
Security and prosperity remain unfulfilled dreams for
many around the world, and democratic systems of
government are often under attack. Our current
institutions of global governance are struggling to
address more complex problems, and sometimes fail to
reflect the principles of transparency and accountability.

In addressing these dilemmas, we will focus on
matching our expertise with what the world needs most
from us. This is best illustrated with reference to weak
states, where a collapse not only creates a humanitarian
emergency but also poses wider security threats.
Without underestimating the complexity of helping
these societies, Canada can make a distinctive
contribution through an integrated, three-part
approach: stabilization through rapid deployment of
our military and police; governance assistance through
contributions such as the new Canada Corps; and
economic and social revitalization through development
assistance and innovative private sector development
initiatives. This combined and targeted effort is a
microcosm of our broader international strategy:
Canada can matter to the world while pursuing its
national interests.

###### BUILDING A MORE SECURE WORLD

Since Canada’s last foreign policy review and defence
white paper, the world has experienced a period of
change and uncertainty. Fifteen years after the fall of
the Berlin Wall, and the end of the old bipolar
structure, the contours of our new world order are still
taking shape. The West may have won the Cold War,
but that victory has not ushered in an era of global
stability. In 2005, we know from painful experience that
our greatest security challenges—now and in the
future—go far beyond the military forces of nationstates waging war against each other. The threats we
face also come from non-state actors, and have a direct
impact on innocent civilians.

A key driver of this change is globalization—the
explosion and rapid movement across borders of


information, technology, people, goods, services and
knowledge. The result of these processes is a world that
is smaller and more interdependent. Interdependence
has fostered prosperity and a growing sense of global
community. But it is a double-edged sword. Though
globalization’s force was recognized a decade ago, we
did not fully appreciate its capacity to trouble as well as
transform us. Globalization facilitates both the spread
of deadly disease and access to deadly weapons. It also
means that the collapse of state capacity in one region
can make all of us more vulnerable to transnational
terrorist and criminal groups. One failed state,
Afghanistan, served as the staging ground for the tragic
events of September 11—events that brought home to
Canadians the new reality and reach of global terrorism.

Canada shares the views, expressed in the recent
reports of the UN High Level Panel and of the UN
Secretary-General, that the front-line actors in dealing
with all threats—old and new—are individual
sovereign states. But states can no longer act alone. Nor
can their sovereign frontiers serve as an excuse for
tolerating actions that contravene human security or
contribute to global instability. One truth is undeniable:
security in the 21st century is a common interest, and a
shared responsibility.

In making a distinctive contribution to a safer world,
we will rely heavily on the Canadian Forces. Canada’s
military is no stranger to this role. Our men and
women in uniform have performed a remarkable
service on behalf of Canadians throughout the decades.
Since 1990, their operational tempo—the number and
size of missions relative to available forces—has tripled
compared to the period between 1945 and 1989. This
increase in activity was not foreseen in the 1994 defence
white paper. In recent years, our soldiers have deployed
throughout the world, participating in complex and
dangerous missions that have tested their skill, training
and equipment. Some have made the ultimate sacrifice,
and many more have been injured.

The image that captures today’s operational environment
for the Canadian Forces is a “three-block-war.”
Increasingly, there is overlap in the tasks our personnel
are asked to carry out at any one time. Our military
could be engaged in combat against well-armed militia
in one city block, stabilization operations in the next
block, and humanitarian relief and reconstruction two
blocks over. Transition from one type of task to the


-----

other can happen in the blink of an eye. This ability of
the Canadian Forces to wage three-block wars has been
amply demonstrated in diverse theatres from Bosnia to
Afghanistan. The Government’s reinvestments in the
Canadian Forces will ensure that they continue to
enjoy a well-earned reputation for versatility in these
complex environments.

As the boundary between the domestic and international
continues to blur, Canada’s defence and security policy
must change. Today’s front lines stretch from the
streets of Kabul and the rail lines of Madrid to our own
Canadian cities. New threats will be met with a forwardlooking and integrated approach—across departments
and levels of government—designed to protect Canadians
and contribute to global security. In the face of a panoply
of challenges, and a range of possible responses, the
Government of Canada will seek to make a difference
in three main areas: countering global terrorism;
stabilizing failed and fragile states; and combatting the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

###### Countering Terrorism

Over the past five years, terrorist networks have
expanded and intensified their attacks on innocent
civilians worldwide. The strikes in New York, Bali and
Madrid demonstrate the global breadth and lethal
potential of even small numbers of committed terrorists
with relatively modest resources. Apart from the direct


damage and human suffering that result from such
attacks, terrorism has other long-term consequences. It
can set back economic development, and disrupt the
channels of free trade and commerce. It can destabilize
governments or push them toward defensive policies
that curb democratic rights and freedoms. It can destroy
the fragile spirit of compromise that is so essential to
resolving long-standing disputes.

Counteracting this threat requires a comprehensive
strategy that includes, but is broader than, coercive
instruments. Canada, in collaboration with other likeminded states, will take advantage of every available
tool: intelligence, law enforcement, financial instruments
and military force. We will ensure that our approach is
consistent with the democratic values we hold dear, and
maintains the utmost respect for civil liberties.

We believe the best weapon against terrorist recruitment
is the promotion of accountable, democratic governments
that respect human rights, allow for peaceful dissent
and fulfill the aspirations of their people. To promote
enduring solutions, we will also seek to share our own
expertise in areas such as border security, law
enforcement, and critical infrastructure protection with
those countries seeking to build up their counterterrorism
capacity. Finally, where necessary the Canadian Forces
stand ready to participate in military missions against
terrorist networks or states who harbour them.


###### PRIORITY FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Contribute to UN, NATO and G8 efforts to counteract terrorist organizations and cut off their support networks

###### KEY INITIATIVES

- Increase Canada’s diplomatic contributions to the resolution of regional disputes that are exploited by terrorists to
mobilize their support

- Push for full implementation of international conventions to combat terrorism and terrorist financing

- Provide technical assistance to countries willing to combat terrorism through a new Counterterrorism Capacity Building
Program, anchored in Foreign Affairs

- Increase the Canadian Forces’ capacity to participate with allies in counterterror operations


-----

###### Stabilizing Failed and Fragile States

Among the greatest contemporary security threats are
those resulting from a large number of fragile and
poorly governed states. These countries pose a dual
challenge for Canada. The refugee flows that they
create not only represent a humanitarian tragedy, but
also undermine the stability of neighbours and entire
regions. More ominously, the weakness of failed states
makes them obvious breeding grounds for terrorist
networks and organized crime, which can directly
threaten the security of Canadians.

Although the first line of responsibility to citizens lies
with national governments, when they collapse, Canada
and the international community share a responsibility
toward the people who are the victims of state failure.
Canada’s strategy to address the multiple challenges
posed by failed and fragile states must be focused, first
and foremost, on preventing state breakdown.
Preventative action can take many forms, but clearly
includes long-term development assistance that helps to
build a set of institutions, civil society and political
culture that is conducive to security and prosperity. The
adequate provision of health and education services and
a vibrant private sector are essential building blocks for
peace and stability.

Where devastating events have already begun to unfold,
members of the international community must also
possess the capacity for rapid intervention that can
stabilize the situation on the ground and restore security


for the local population. Integration between military
operations and civilian assistance is an essential feature
of this intervention capacity. So too is a flexible funding
mechanism that can facilitate a rapid response to a
humanitarian emergency.

Canada is taking a leadership role in helping people in
regions of conflict regain stability and build lasting
peace. The Government will mobilize the international
community, including Africans, to stop the ethnic
cleansing and massive abuse of human rights in the
Darfur region of Sudan. In addition to humanitarian
aid for Sudanese, Canada is also providing financial
support for the International Criminal Court to
prosecute war crimes committed in Darfur, and is
providing training and other assistance to the African
Union’s peace operations. In the Middle East, Canada
will encourage the early signs of emerging peace
between Israel and the Palestinians by assisting the
Palestinian Authority in undertaking social, economic
and security reforms. In Afghanistan, where Canada
has already made a significant contribution—from
military action to election support—we will soon
establish a Provincial Reconstruction Team in
Kandahar, bringing together our diplomatic, military
and development instruments to deliver a better life to
people there. We are already applying this new,
integrated approach in Haiti, where we are helping
rebuild an accountable, competent police force. In Iraq,
Canada will continue to play a major role in
reconstruction and development, chairing the
international donors’ committee for that country.


###### PRIORITY FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Establish a Stabilization and Reconstruction Task Force (START) to plan and coordinate rapid and integrated civilian
responses to international crises

###### KEY INITIATIVES

- Establish links between START and crucial partner departments, especially National Defence and CIDA

- Establish a Global Peace and Security Fund to support START and other urgent civilian contributions to crisis
response operations

- Create links with counterpart taskforces in partner countries such as the United States and the United Kingdom


-----

Drawing on our experience with recent international
crises, most notably the Indian Ocean tsunami, the
Government will establish a Stabilization and
Reconstruction Task Force (START) to ensure that
there is longer-term planning for early responses to
international crises and that the required skills and
expertise are at the ready. Existing agencies will be used
to source experts and individuals or groups whose
capacities are required. They will be dispatched by
those responsible, including the military or CIDA.

In addition, a Global Peace and Security Fund has been
established within Foreign Affairs to provide security
assistance to failed and fragile states, as well as resources
for post-conflict stabilization and recovery. Five
hundred million dollars has been allocated over five
years for the fund.

Operations to restore order in failed and fragile states
have become particularly challenging for the Canadian
Forces since the end of the Cold War. In many cases,
our military personnel must operate in difficult theatres
where civilians mix with friendly, neutral and opposing
forces. In such situations, negotiation and compromise,
as well as an understanding of other cultures and
practices, are essential. Despite these pressures, the
Canadian Forces are recognized globally as one of the
finest militaries in the world. The Canadian military’s
nuanced understanding of conflict environments and
ability to seamlessly transition from combat to
stabilization is a widely recognized comparative
advantage. This is why our men and women in
uniform are in such demand overseas.


To retain this standing, and to fulfill the tasks required
to protect Canadians and build global security, the
Canadian Forces must embrace new technologies,
concepts and doctrines. Relevance, responsiveness and
effectiveness are the principles that will guide
everything they do. In turn, the Government, and
Canadian citizens, will support them with the tools
needed to do the job. To that end, the February 2005
Budget provided the Canadian Forces with almost
$13 billion over the next five years, the largest increase
in defence spending in two decades. This represents a
critical turning point for the future of our military and,
by extension, the identity that Canada projects on the
global stage. Investments today will enable the
Canadian Forces to develop the expertise and skills that
Canadians, and the world, desperately need.

As part of our comprehensive response to state failure,
Canada will take action to help deal with the forced
displacement of civilians within their country and
across borders. Canada is a leader on refugee and
internally displaced persons (IDP) issues. We are
promoting legal and physical protection of affected
persons, providing material assistance, engaging in
diplomatic advocacy to resolve the causes of their plight,
supporting durable solutions, and rebuilding postconflict societies. Our stance is based on long-standing
international obligations, and reflects the strong wish of
Canadians to make a meaningful contribution
internationally. Our resettlement of refugees to Canada
provides both a lasting solution and demonstrates our
commitment to responsibility sharing with countries
hosting large numbers of displaced persons.


###### PRIORITY FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Maintain combat-capable Canadian Forces, focused on the challenge of restoring peace and stability to failed and fragile states

###### KEY INITIATIVES

- Focus on integrated operations to get the best mix of forces to the right place, at the right time, and to the right effect

- Increase the size of the Regular Forces by 5,000, effectively doubling the army’s ability to deploy and sustain
operations overseas

- Equip the Canadian Forces to carry out missions abroad, through initiatives such as the Joint Support Ships, the
Mobile Gun System and guaranteed access to airlift

- Continuously review and modernize the Canadian Forces’ capabilities


-----

###### PRIORITIES FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Prevent the spread and reduce the existing stocks of WMD

Strengthen international export control regimes on proliferation-sensitive technologies and build the capacity of countries to
enforce them

###### KEY INITIATIVES

- Protect Canadian ports against their potential use for illicit activities, including the movement of drugs, weapons and
other contraband

- Participate in joint training missions and information sharing with other partners in the Proliferation Security Initiative

- Expand the G8 Global Partnership Program

- Use the 2005 NPT Review Conference to promote the strengthening of the Treaty’s commitment to non-proliferation,
disarmament,and peaceful uses of nuclear energy

- Contribute Canadian technology to strengthening the international community’s WMD compliance and
verification mechanisms

- Use the Conference on Disarmament to re-engage key countries in talks on the Prevention of an Arms Race in
Outer Space


Canada will create a faster, more efficient, but fair
domestic asylum system that enjoys public and partner
confidence. We will work with other countries and
international organizations to intensify the focus on
facilitating protection for refugees, IDPs and other
war-affected populations. As part of these efforts,
Canada will continue to strongly support the UN
Secretary-General’s efforts to improve the UN
humanitarian response system, and enhance our own
responses, in line with the principles and practices of
humanitarian donorship.

###### Combatting Proliferation

The international community continues to face the
prospect that weapons of mass destruction (WMD)—
chemical, nuclear, radiological or biological—might be
used by a state or terrorist organization. The desire to
acquire these weapons is often driven by regional
tensions—in the Middle East, India-Pakistan and the
Korean peninsula—and misguided attempts to gain
international prestige. Terrorists, who until now have
focused on tactics involving car bombs and suicide
bombers, are seeking new ways to inflict the maximum


amount of damage on their victims. An attack with
such weapons could have an immense impact on
Canada, no matter where in the world it might occur.

The nuclear non-proliferation regime—the cornerstone
of which is the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
(NPT)—is under pressure. A number of countries
remain outside of the Treaty, and several of them have
shared nuclear material and expertise. Recent
revelations about nuclear trafficking networks
underscore the growing commercial dimension of
proliferation. In addition, the means of delivering these
lethal weapons have become easier to access, whether
through high technology systems like long-range
missiles, or unconventional means, such as shipping
containers. The international community urgently
needs stronger interdiction methods—at sea, on land,
and in the air—and new legal mechanisms to facilitate
the search of suspicious vessels, trucks and aircraft.

Concerted international action is also required to
restore the effectiveness of arms control regimes and to
maintain the confidence of the vast majority of
countries that now supports them. Here, and in broader
counter-proliferation efforts, we have a natural


-----

comparative advantage. Canada has played a leading
role in the NPT process, in the G8, and in other forums
such as the International Atomic Energy Agency, where
we now chair the Agency’s Board of Governors. We
have been instrumental in strengthening international
controls on transfers of sensitive nuclear technology,
improving existing treaties, and forging coalitions
among key states on issues such as Iran and North
Korea. This active engagement will continue, whether
through our direction of the Global Partnership
Program to reduce the threat of terrorist acquisition of
weapons of mass destruction in the former Soviet Union
or our ongoing collaboration with Russia to destroy
surplus fissile material. Canadian security depends on it.

###### INCREASING GLOBAL PROSPERITY

Canada’s adaptation to globalization and our
commitment to free trade have generated impressive
levels of national wealth. We have also managed that
wealth well. Prudent fiscal policy has produced a series
of surpluses and enabled us to reduce our debt. This
foundation underpins our freedom to make the choices
that define us as a country.

We cannot take this enviable situation for granted. Our
prosperity is intrinsically tied to international
relationships, and these are evolving rapidly. Business
previously adhered to a centralized model, operating in
a limited number of jurisdictions and exporting to meet
international demand. Today, companies increasingly
operate across national boundaries, not only to improve


access to markets but, more significantly, to allocate
elements of the value chain to their most economically
efficient location. Business has become decentralized as
production, distribution and financial activities within a
single firm now take place in multiple locations around
the globe. Activities from design, to component
manufacturing, to assembly, to after-sales service can
now be distributed across a range of commercial partners.

While exports remain important, accounting for almost
40 percent of our economy, they only represent part of
the picture. Investment is now the more fundamental
driver of economic growth. Investing in skills
development, technology and infrastructure is critical to
advancing our competitiveness. Much of the trade that
benefits us occurs through affiliates of Canadian
companies dispersed around the world. Securing
investment access to overseas markets and attracting
capital to our shores have therefore become pressing
Canadian interests. So has the pursuit of other factors
that shape international business, from government
frameworks around science and technology, to more
nuts-and-bolts issues like the establishment of direct air
links. In short, pursuing international prosperity is no
longer simply a question of negotiating trade agreements.

###### Strengthening Canada’s Global Competitiveness

While the private sector is the major generator of
wealth for Canadians, we cannot expect to benefit from
international commerce unless we get our domestic


###### PRIORITY FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Get the economic framework right at home

###### KEY INITIATIVES

- Facilitate immigration integration through new admissions processing, credential recognition, training and support
programs

- Implement the recommendations of the External Advisory Committee on Smart Regulations

- Promote the internationalization of education through student exchange programs and direct institutional links

- Support international science and technology partnerships by Canadian firms and research institutes with counterparts
in other countries, particularly China and India


-----

economic framework right. In fact, the drivers of
international and domestic competitiveness are one and
the same: our economy, and every player in it, must be
supported by an open, secure and competitive business
climate in Canada.

This begins with our people. Maintaining an
accomplished and skilled workforce is a key component
of a productive and competitive economy. This means
providing lifelong learning opportunities for Canadians
and tapping into the dynamism of our immigrant
population, which will provide all the net growth in our
workforce within a decade. In filling labour market
shortages, we face stiff competition for highly qualified
individuals. Progressive immigration policies and more
comprehensive support structures will encourage more
people to choose Canada as their home and ensure their
success once they are here. Forging international links
between students, academics and universities can
deepen mutual understanding, giving us an edge in
skills recruitment.

But attracting investment requires more than a
qualified workforce. A sound economic policy must
also encourage investment and support innovation.
Supporting Canadian companies as they commercialize
their innovative technology will improve the
competitiveness of our economy; building on the
strengths of particular sectors and regions within
Canada will consolidate it. We will also build a
regulatory environment that attracts investment but
safeguards Canadian quality of life. Regulation in the
public interest is necessary, but not all regulation takes
the right form. Superfluous restrictions hindering
investment will be removed. By benchmarking our
policies with those of major markets, we will facilitate
new investment flows. Though this strategy already
applies to building prosperity with our North American
partners, the next challenge is to extend this model into
the wider world.

###### Increasing Trade and Investment

The 21st century presents a dramatically different
economic landscape for Canadian companies. While our
current relationships with major trading partners will
remain important, large developing countries are
emerging as powers in their own right, with
implications for our own prosperity. These economic


opportunities must be better understood today, so that
Canadians can benefit from them in the decades ahead.

Emerging economic powers like China, India and
Brazil are the key drivers of a new era of global
economic growth. As a result, they will have a
profound impact on Canada’s long-term economic
future. While China is poised to become the most
important national economy in the 21st century, it still
represents only one-tenth of 1 percent of Canada’s
direct investment abroad. We will increase the pace of
our engagement with these new giants. But we must
also recognize their different stages of development.
China and Brazil are deeply embedded in regional
economies, and while India is not yet a major player in
supply chains, its knowledge-based industries, size and
outward orientation make it an important player.
Canadian policy must reflect an intimate knowledge of
these dynamics.

With China in particular, Canada will continue
building on the efforts of the Strategic Working Group,
a crucial mechanism for expanding trade and
investment through regulatory policy dialogue,
cooperation in science and technology, and safeguards
for foreign investment. Since China is also at the heart
of regional economic consolidation in East Asia, Canada
will respond to this shift by looking for new forms of
entry to this regional market. Canada’s proposed free
trade pact with South Korea is one potential solution.
With an advanced economy already the size of
Canada’s, and straddling value chains that link Japan
and China, South Korea offers both a unique
opportunity for Canadian business and a complement to
broader strategies for the region.

India has developed largely on the basis of its own
market and the considerable skills of its people.
Building on the WTO, we will also pursue particular
Canadian needs—such as air links, investment
protection and science and technology partnering—that
tap into the dynamics of India’s information and
technology sectors in particular. The new science and
technology agreement with India will open the door to
accelerated cooperation in this area.

At the same time, our traditional markets offer new
opportunities. As we continue to develop existing
economic relationships, our negotiations with the EU
offer a model for the future. The negotiations toward a


-----

###### PRIORITIES FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Develop new frameworks to promote trade and investment with our mature markets, while reaching out to take advantage
of emerging economic giants

Create a level playing field in international trade and investment through active participation in the WTO

###### KEY INITIATIVES

- Implement the Trade and Investment Enhancement Agreement with the EU

- Establish a new economic framework arrangement between Canada and Japan, with a particular focus on technology

- Explore targeted trade and investment efforts with China and Brazil within the context of regional engagement with
Asia and Latin America

- Pursue discussions with South Korea about negotiating a free trade agreement

- Expand on our current relationship with India, specifically in information and communications technology

- Advocate for an ambitious outcome to the Doha Round, seeking fairer rules for farm trade and a more liberal
environment for goods and services trade


new Canada-EU Trade and Investment Enhancement
Agreement (TIEA) aim to go beyond traditional
market access issues by promoting mutual recognition
of national standards, professional qualifications and
assessment procedures. By achieving regulatory
compatibility, the TIEA will allow Canada to better
exploit the European Union’s advanced science and
technology base, in turn enabling further Canadian
innovation. It will also raise our visibility in the eyes of
European investors, who are second only to Americans
in their contributions to our economy and our
technological base. A similar strategy can be adopted for
Japan. Here our goal is a new Canada-Japan economic
framework that highlights mutual opportunities for
trade and investment, particularly in technologyintensive industries. By deepening our mature economic
relationships through these new arrangements, Canada
can build on its successful trade negotiations while
increasing bilateral investment.

All of Canada’s bilateral trading relationships ultimately
rest on the multilateral framework embodied in the
World Trade Organization. As Canada’s trade
agreement with the rest of the world, it offers us several
substantial benefits. A global, rules-based system
provides traders and investors with predictability and


confidence, and creates a playing field in which relative
economic power has diminished importance. Through its
web of commitments and rules, enforced by its dispute
settlement mechanism, the WTO allows us to leverage
global rules to address bilateral disagreements. Finally,
the WTO represents one of the key planks in the world’s
multilateral architecture and a model for how other
institutions might evolve. It is broad in membership,
liberal in its guiding philosophy and cooperative rather
than coercive in its approach to solving problems. While
an open world economy is not the only answer to the
current challenges of economic stagnation, poverty and
underdevelopment, progress is inconceivable without it.

This is why Canada fully supports the WTO as it
adapts to the changing global economic context.
Achieving a successful outcome to the Doha Round
remains an essential first step. A positive outcome in
this round would affirm that multilateralism works.
Failure would deliver a major blow to the WTO and
the global trading system as a whole.

The substance of Doha is also important for Canada.
Greater openness in international commerce, through
measures that include the end to agricultural export
subsidies, is consistent with our interests as well as our
values. That said, the Government will vigorously


-----

defend the interests of our stakeholders. Through
Doha, developed states stand to gain a more liberal
trading regime while developing countries will get a
fairer deal. Here, as in the security realm, national
interests can be brought to converge with common
interests. Reaffirming the key tenets of the Monterrey
Consensus, Canada can also help developing countries
make the adjustments necessary to benefit from the
opportunities offered by free trade. Continued support,
both through development assistance and technical
capacity building, are necessary if all states are to
participate as equal members in the global economy.

###### Promoting Sustainable Development

While global economic growth has produced many
benefits, it has also had a devastating impact on many
natural systems. For too long, the debate has been
characterized as environmental sustainability versus
economic prosperity. Today, there is a growing
understanding that the most prosperous economies are
also those that take the best care of their natural
environment. Achieving prosperity without
environmental sustainability only beggars the future for
the spoils of the present. The world as a whole needs to
adopt models of resource and energy-intensive
development that do not jeopardize the planet’s capacity
to support life. Yet problems of the global commons are
particularly intractable and little consensus exists on
how to advance key issues. Effective collective action


has proven difficult. Canada will play a lead role in
breaking the impasse through both national and
international initiatives.

Since the collapse of northern cod stocks in the 1990s,
the devastation produced by overfishing has become
especially apparent to Canadians. Indeed, the Food and
Agriculture Organization now estimates that 75% of
the world’s fish stocks are either under strain or
recovering from depletion. Canada has taken a lead role
in addressing this problem, particularly in the
negotiations that led to the 1995 United Nations
Agreement on Straddling and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, which came into force in 2001. But regional
stocks remain threatened and Canada will continue to
work with a network of like-minded countries to
improve the sustainable management of fisheries
resources around the world.

More broadly, new international environmental policies
at home will provide a management framework that
integrates domestic and international goals.
Strengthening domestic environmental organizations
will also enhance Canadian expertise in developing
green technologies. We have a niche role to play in
designing innovative solutions to the technical problems
plaguing sustainable development, particularly in the
area of clean and renewable energy.

Internationally, Canada can set an example. As a first
step, we will increase our efforts to mitigate the causes


###### PRIORITY FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Pursue sustainable development through both domestic and international strategies

###### KEY INITIATIVES

- Design an action plan to implement our Kyoto commitments in a timely fashion

- Contribute to the reform of the United Nations Environmental Programme

- Support implementation of the 2002 Cartagena Agreement on improvements in international environmental governance

- Build on Canada’s Oceans Action Plan and work internationally to close gaps in the management of oceans resources

- Launch a reform process for international fisheries governance at the May 2005 Conference on High Seas Fisheries and
the UN Fish Agreement


-----

of global climate change within the context of the
Kyoto Protocol, which has now come into force. In
addition, we will push forward with the next phase of
commitments, based on what we have learned to date,
including by hosting in Montreal in late 2005 the first
meeting of parties to Kyoto since it entered into force.
These commitments will be built upon incentives that
induce real behavioural change by individuals and
companies, and upon developments in green
technology. Together, these efforts will ensure that
economic and environmental objectives become
mutually reinforcing. But stronger global solutions,
with clear mandates and sufficient resources, will
remain necessary for managing international efforts.

###### TAKING RESPONSIBILITY

In a world of independent states, governments carry an
obligation to look after their own people. However, this
presents a fundamental dilemma. Unless we act
collectively on the basis of our common humanity, the
rich will become richer, the poor will become poorer
and hundreds of millions of people will be at risk. We
have to think beyond our own national borders and
take responsibility for one another.

Canada will advocate reforms that put our common
humanity at the centre of our agenda. We see five areas
of shared responsibility where bold steps are required.
The first three—to protect civilians from conflict, to
deny terrorists and irresponsible states from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction, and to promote
sustainable development—were dealt with in the
preceding sections.

This section describes how Canada will fulfill its
responsibilities to respect fundamental human rights
and to build genuine development.

###### Respecting Human Rights

Canada is committed to extending human rights and
human security throughout the world, a commitment
that also forms the foundation for our approach to
good governance. Canada will collaborate with those
in failed and fragile states to enshrine the principles of
accountability, transparency and representation in
effective democratic institutions. Although specific
governance structures will vary by political and


cultural context, Canada’s ultimate goal is to foster
commitment on human rights, democracy and the rule
of law that places individual citizens at the heart of
society and creates a state committed to protecting
their welfare.

Canada’s new challenge is to specify what these values
actually mean and require, in countries with different
circumstances from our own. Canadians are in an
enviable position: we can manage and adjust to the
challenges of globalization by drawing on the reservoir
of a stable and capable state. Millions of the world’s
inhabitants live without such a buffer. Recent examples,
such as Haiti, illustrate that human rights and human
security remain unachievable ideals without stable state
structures to provide for them.

As we assist in this process, the importance of national
autonomy cannot be overstated. Canadians hold their
values dear, but are not keen to see them imposed on
others. This is not the Canadian way. Each state will take
the lead in charting its own particular path toward
development, with the Government of Canada and
individual Canadians as advisors and assistants. Our
efforts must also remain sensitive to the current lack of
capacity in developing societies. Our initiatives cannot in
turn become burdens themselves. Canadians will assist in
a spirit of partnership; we will position ourselves not as
providers of ready-made solutions, but as a rich resource
of knowledge and experience to be drawn upon. The
Government of Canada believes that an integrated “3D”
approach, combining diplomacy, defence and
development, is the best strategy for supporting states that
suffer from a broad range of interconnected problems. In
short, our official aid programs and our broader
international policies must operate in tandem. This
requires government departments to work more closely
together—from planning through to execution—so that
contributions as disparate as police force training, civil
engineering and private sector development combine
into one, comprehensive approach to capacity building.
Increased collaboration with existing networks of
Canadians will also be essential to ensuring coherence
on the ground.

###### Building Genuine Development

Throughout its history, Canada has been committed to
both generating and sharing wealth. We identify public


-----

health care and comprehensive social welfare programs
as integral features of our society. And as individual
Canadians have experienced structural changes in our
economy, the Canadian model has come into its own,
sharing the risk involved and supporting those who
experience short-term dislocation. Yet these safety nets
are notably absent at the international level.

For many countries, market-led growth has proven
elusive or insufficient, making it difficult to build and
maintain adequate welfare systems. Too often the poor
bear a disproportionate burden for the lack of economic
progress. Better conditions for domestic and
international commerce will be decisive if developing
countries are to generate sufficient resources to lift
themselves from poverty. The reduction of poverty is
one of the most difficult challenges the global
community confronts over the next decade. But it is a
challenge all nations must commit to meet. In addition
to our efforts at the WTO, there is much Canada can
do unilaterally. Improving access to Canadian markets
for goods and services from developing countries will
help foster entrepreneurship. In turn, offering advice
and assistance to potential exporters will enable them to
take advantage of new commercial opportunities.
Similarly, extending research and development
partnerships to poor countries will facilitate the transfer
of technical skills and technology, building their
capacity to compete in the global marketplace.


Helping to create the economic foundations for private
sector growth is an essential step. For some countries,
however, the challenge is even greater, as they lack the
basic resources necessary to participate in international
commerce. In this context, debt relief can form a crucial
part of the solution. Relieving the debts of the world’s
poorest countries will allow them much needed respite
from the crushing financial burdens that currently
hamper their development. While Canada has recently
granted unilateral debt relief to Ethiopia, Ghana and
Senegal, bringing the total forgiven under the Canadian
Debt Initiative to over $1 billion, the global effort
needed is still falling short. In this context, the
Government of Canada has advocated within the G8
for a more ambitious debt servicing relief scheme,
beginning with a core group of countries but with the
possibility of expansion to others. It will also press for
greater participation in debt relief by international
financial institutions (such as the World Bank and
International Monetary Fund), without jeopardizing
the viability of these institutions or world markets.

Canada is a testament to the belief that institutions can
bring disparate interests together in a common cause.
Governing such a large and diverse territory has been
an ongoing challenge for our political leaders, but they
have responded with solutions that reaffirm the values
of individual freedom and collective responsibility.
Canada’s Parliament and provincial legislatures,


###### PRIORITY FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Refocus Canadian development assistance to target states with the greatest need and greatest potential for successful intervention

###### KEY INITIATIVES

- Double international assistance by 2010 from its 2001 level

- Restructure the International Assistance Envelope to ensure greater coherence between aid and non-aid policies

- Establish long-term programming with a limited number of “Development Partners” chosen on the basis of greatest
need, demonstrated ability to use aid effectively, and current level of Canadian involvement

- Concentrate at least two-thirds of Canada’s bilateral aid budget on Development Partner countries by 2010

- Double aid to Africa by 2008-09 from its 2003-04 level

- Maintain increases beyond 2010, and accelerate the projected rate of growth in international assistance as Canada’s
fiscal position continues to improve


-----

###### PRIORITIES FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Focus our contribution to the Millenium Development Goals on governance, private sector development, health, basic
education and environmental sustainability

Ensure our development assistance efforts systematically incorporate gender equality throughout

###### KEY INITIATIVES

- Provide additional funding to combat HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria through the World Health Organization’s
“3 by 5” initiative and the Global Fund to fight HIV/AIDS, TB and malaria

- Encourage implementation of Canada’s new generic drug legislation in other countries

- Focus education assistance on improving community access to schools, increasing the quality of teaching and
supporting life skills training

- Launch the Canada Investment Fund for Africa to provide risk capital to support growth-generating private sector
development

- Renew Canada’s Climate Change Development Fund as an important mechanism to help combat the challenges of
global warming in developing countries


combined with more recent innovations such as the
Charter of Rights and Freedoms and the Social Union
Framework, have given coherence to our
transcontinental partnership of regions and languages.

For those in countries where violence threatens to
overtake political accommodation as the answer to
competing interests, Canada’s long history of
accommodation of linguistic, ethnic and cultural
differences—dating from the Quebec Act of 1774—
offers a glimmer of hope. Our system of governance
represents a laboratory full of intriguing experiments
that can assist others engaged in the complex task of
institution building. This understanding of the “DNA”
of governance is an important resource Canada can use
to make a difference.

The establishment of good governance in other societies
around the globe will make Canadians safer and more
prosperous. In a globalized world, where threats are
transnational and greater wealth depends upon deeper
forms of exchange, the creation of stable and capable
states will form a major part of Canada’s global agenda.

The plight of failed and fragile states is where Canada’s
interests and obligations are most closely aligned.


National interest dictates that we look beyond our
borders to treat the root causes of instability. At the
same time, Canadians have demonstrated that they will
not turn a blind eye to the poorest and most destitute of
the world. The tremendous response to the recent
Indian Ocean tsunami and Canada’s enthusiastic
contribution to facilitating the democratic
transformation in Ukraine reflect our growing sense of
global solidarity and awareness of shared vulnerability.
As the world moves toward a more mature phase of
globalization, there is greater concern with the uneven
impact of this powerful process.

Weak states in the global community confront unique
and particularly daunting governance challenges. Many
are locked in vicious circles where insecurity
undermines prosperity, and underdevelopment
generates instability. Any solution to their dilemma
must operate within this security-development nexus,
seeking to embed efforts to provide a safe and secure
environment in a broader framework of human
development. Tragically, very few of these societies have
sufficient resources—financial or human —to begin
addressing these problems. With vital technical capacity
already lacking, the spread of HIV/AIDS compounds
the crisis, and civil wars drag whole regions backwards.


-----

Canada can make a difference in three main ways.
First, our commitment to support short-term
humanitarian relief will continue. Realizing that crises
disproportionately afflict the poor and vulnerable, we
will respond rapidly to natural disasters and
humanitarian emergencies, deploying our Disaster
Assistance Response Team (DART). We will also
provide coherent financial and technical support through
international agencies and Canada’s network of expert
non-governmental organizations. Without this assistance,
weeks of turmoil can undermine years of progress.

Second, in failed states wracked by civil war, Canada
can help lay the initial groundwork by establishing
stability and then providing development assistance to
further processes of state building.

Third, in stable but poor countries, Canada’s traditional
development assistance framework will be most
applicable. We will focus on a set of basic building
blocks—functioning markets, effective governance
structures, and robust health and education systems—
that can create a “virtuous cycle” of economic growth
and social progress. Here the Government will work in
partnership with others to reinforce good governance,
improve social conditions and resources, and bolster the
impetus for economic growth.

Canada’s current bilateral development programs are
more widely dispersed around the world than those of
any other donor country. Of the 155 countries that
currently receive development assistance from
Canada, only 18 receive assistance valued at more


than $10 million annually, and 54 receive less than
$1 million annually. This wide dispersion of our aid
program makes it more difficult to develop the
knowledge and contacts in any one place to ensure
that our dollars are used effectively. In addition, the
proliferation of small-scale programming on the part
of donors like the Canadian government puts a
greater coordination and cost burden on recipient
countries. Finally, the fragmentation of aid programs
increases the management and overhead costs of the
Government itself.

To achieve measurable impact, we must make choices.
By refocusing our development strategy and moving
away from an extremely broad but often thinly spread
presence, Canada will strive to make a greater
difference in fewer places. In so doing, we will further
the interests of our development partners, the
international community at large and Canada itself.
Priority will be given to Africa, the region where the
needs are most pressing.

The Government will reorient overall bilateral
programming at the country level by placing enhanced
focus on long-term bilateral programs with a core
group of 25 “Development Partners.” These countries
are selected from among the poorest, where effective
programming to reduce poverty is possible and where
Canada can add real value. This does not mean that we
will abandon our established relationships with other
countries. Instead, we will assist countries through a
transition period during which our relationship will
graduate from a focus on development assistance to a


###### PRIORITY FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Establish Canada Corps as a key mechanism for providing governance assistance to developing countries

###### KEY INITIATIVES

- Use Canada Corps to develop collaborative partnerships across government, and with non-governmental
organizations, the private sector and Canadian citizens

- Create coherent governance assistance programs with a focus on sharing Canadian expertise in the rule of law and
human rights

- Create a single portal for Canadians to access international volunteer opportunities


-----

recognition of broader mutual interests. Where we are
not directly engaged, Canada will continue to offer
support through multilateral institutions, working
through the World Bank, regional development banks
and specialized UN agencies. But our priority will be
results over process. We will focus greater support on
those institutions that are most effective in promoting
global governance and contributing to poverty reduction.

The need to act selectively to achieve greater impact
applies equally to the sectors in which Canada seeks
to make a difference. The United Nations has
established eight Millennium Development Goals,
with specific targets to be achieved by 2015. The
MDGs are the world’s agreed-upon benchmarks for
faster, measurable progress in reducing poverty. A very
wide range of interventions and programs could
contribute to these broad goals. But Canada’s assets
and modest share of global development assistance
call for greater focus. We will tailor our distinctive
contribution by targeting five areas: governance,
private sector development, health, basic education and
environmental sustainability. These five will help us
advance all eight MDGs, which are the keys to reducing
poverty in developing countries.

The rationale for sector concentration is threefold. First,
consistent with the core objective of reducing poverty,
these five areas are critical to the achievement of a
number of other MDGs. Second, these sectors have
been identified by our long-term development partners
(governments and civil society groups) as their highest
priorities. Thus, elevating them in our development
strategy honours the principle of local ownership—a
key ingredient in aid effectiveness. And third, these are
the sectors in which Canada can add greatest value in
the form of appreciable Canadian expertise.

Canada is especially well poised to offer governance
assistance. Our experience with human rights yields
valuable insights for those seeking to build pluralistic
societies, and Canadian experts have played a
productive role in the establishment of human rights
commissions and legal frameworks abroad. The
formation of Canada Corps extends this model further
by creating new partnerships between government, civil
society and the private sector.

Canada possesses large reserves of skills and knowledge
necessary for effective governance. Canada Corps will


combine this experience from the private, public and
not-for-profit sectors with the energy, enthusiasm and
new ideas of younger generations to promote good
governance at two levels. The first is at the level of
statehood: governments, courts and elections. But
beneath these formal institutions and processes lie the
less formal but critical elements of any successful
society: a human rights culture, a thriving civil society
and sound public sector management. Working at both
these levels, Canada Corps initiatives will mobilize
Canadians of all ages and backgrounds, providing new
opportunities for individuals to contribute to capacity
building in the developing world. By combining the
dynamism of youth and the experience of professionals,
it will prepare the next generation while passing on the
wisdom of the present.

We are also at the forefront of new approaches to
private sector development. The Report of the UN
Commission on the Private Sector and Development,
_Unleashing Entrepreneurship, sets out a new case for_
private sector-led growth, arguing that markets only
work for the poor when the right conditions are
established. It is here that governance and private sector
development intersect. Effective public institutions,
private organizations and property law all form part of
an enabling environment that encourages the poor to lift
themselves from destitution through entrepreneurship.

Even where these are present, however, many will often
require direct assistance if they are to emerge from a
sustained condition of poverty. Innovative microfinance
schemes and progressive capital funds can provide these
resources, extending credit and loans to those previously
unable to hold a bank account. By focusing on these
strategies, Canada can help foster local growth, giving
the poor the tools they need to generate income and
make their own development choices.

Improvements in basic health and education work
together with better governance and economic
opportunity as key foundations of development and
good development cooperation. They are essential in
enabling poor people to participate in the political and
economic life of their communities and countries, and
are crucial in themselves to meeting the Millennium
Development Goals.

The health and education sectors rank high in all the
priority requests to Canada for assistance from


-----

developing countries. In health, two major strengths
explain this demand. Canada’s longstanding experience
in strengthening accessible health care systems at home
and abroad has been reinforced by its clear global
leadership in recent years in fighting communicable
diseases; strengthening sexual and reproductive health
(especially for women); and improving infant and child
health and food security.

In education, developing countries come to Canada for
its well-established expertise in learner-centred
approaches, teacher training, curriculum development,
and the creation of child-friendly, girl-friendly schools.
Another special strength for the conditions of many
developing countries is built on our geography—
Canada’s leadership in distance education and new
technology to develop educators and expand access to
education information and resources.

Environmental sustainability must be integrated at
planning and programming levels to ensure that
programs and projects are implemented in a sustainable
manner that meets agreed standards. Healthy ecosystems
at the local level are essential to long-term, meaningful


development and sustainable livelihoods for many of
the world’s poor. At the same time, many environmental
challenges are global in their causes and impacts and
require a coordinated response through multilateral
channels. We will work on a global level to ensure that
developing countries are able to participate fully in
global environmental initiatives, such as combatting
climate change, that meet our common goals.

Gender equality will be a crosscutting theme.
Empowering women to participate fully in the political
and economic activities of their communities is an
MDG in its own right and is essential to achieving
poverty reduction. Canada has been a leader among
donors in promoting gender equality, both as a global
issue and as a practical matter in implementing
programs and projects. Across all five sectors, gender
equality will be systematically integrated into
programming. The focus will be on equal participation
of women as decision makers, on their full human
rights, and on their equal access to and control over
community and household assets.


-----

world that is governed well, both globally and
nationally, is not a soft ideal. It is a vital
Canadian interest in the 21st century. Effective

# A

multilateral institutions allow our Government to have
a hand in creating the global rules that directly affect
Canadians. Without such forums, and without a strong
Canadian presence in them, we risk subjecting ourselves
to the wishes of those who may not act in accordance
with our priorities. Effective multilateralism is therefore
an essential tool in preserving the Canadian approach.

Diplomacy is a central tool for achieving the priorities
set out in this International Policy Statement. But as the
world changes, so too must our understanding and
practice of diplomacy. The Government of Canada
must rethink not only what we do, but with whom we
do it. States remain the central actors on the global stage,
but they are increasingly embedded in transnational
linkages that diffuse power above to supranational
frameworks and below to civil society. Individuals are
playing a greater role in international affairs than ever
before, with both positive and negative results.

###### THE NEW MULTILATERALISM

This year, 2005, marks the 60th anniversary of the end
of the Second World War and the birth of the
multilateral institutions that defined the post-war
international order. Our 21st century world looks


markedly different. While 51 states signed the United
Nations Charter in 1945, the current international
system is composed of over 190 members. The purposes
of key post-war institutions, such as the UN, NATO
and the World Bank, have shifted dramatically as a
result of globalization, the end of the Cold War, and the
emergence of new and more deadly security threats. As
they grapple with more complex problems, these
foundational institutions face challenging questions
about their continued relevance and legitimacy.
Moreover, these institutions now exist alongside myriad
informal rules and relationships that contribute to
global governance. Canada must recognize and adapt to
these realities, and contribute to building a new
framework of governance that can both serve our
interests and solve contemporary global problems. Just
as we were present at the creation of the architecture
that has governed our world since 1945, today we will
continue to lend our ideas and expertise to institutional
reform and innovation.

In pursuing this agenda, Canada will adopt two
operating principles. First, we acknowledge that any
successful framework of global governance incorporates
power as well as rules. The founding members of the
United Nations understood this instinctively, having
experienced first hand the failures of the inter-war
collective security system. Their key innovation—a
Security Council that reflected the reigning balance of
power—sought to harness the capacity of the powerful


###### PRIORITY FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Contribute ideas, expertise and resources to reform efforts aimed at improving the effectiveness and legitimacy of existing
international institutions

###### KEY INITIATIVES

- Actively support the reform agenda of the 2004 UN High Level Panel Report, particularly its recommendations
relating to the Responsibility to Protect, the creation of a civilian Peacebuilding Commission, and reform of the UN
Human Rights Commission

- Encourage the creation of an effective division of labour between the UN and key regional organizations

- Contribute to the ambitious transformation of NATO, as set out in the Prague Capabilities Commitment

- Lead the diplomatic efforts to create and define the agenda for an “L20,” comprising leaders from the developing and
developed world


-----

###### PRIORITIES FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Revitalize Canada’s core international relationships, while strengthening our ties with key “pathfinder” states and organizations

Strengthen Canada’s influence in the western hemisphere

###### KEY INITIATIVES

- Develop new bilateral strategies for key regional players, such as South Africa, Jordan, Mexico and South Korea, to
make Canada’s presence more coherent and better known in their respective regions

- Strengthen Canada’s presence in the OAS and support greater hemispheric cooperation through the Summit of
theAmericas process

- Promote cooperation within the transatlantic community in areas of common concern, such as the Israeli-Palestinian
peace process

- Devote special attention to the G8, where we hold our most influential membership and can influence the
industrialized world’s economic and development policy

- Use our developing economic relationship with India, Brazil and China to build stronger political ties

- Engage Canadian diasporas in the creation and renewal of bilateral and regional relationships


and transform it into a responsibility for maintaining
global peace and security. We must therefore continue to
seek ways to engage current and emerging superpowers
in mechanisms for global governance.

Second, Canada’s championing of multilateralism will
put outcomes ahead of process. As a first step, this
requires us to reiterate the case for multilateral
institutions in contemporary global society. A key plank
in that case derives from Canadian values: a rules-based
and more predictable international system produces
better results than one that is dominated by independent
and uncoordinated action. But there is also a more
pragmatic set of arguments that Canada can advance.
First, multilateral cooperation, as we have seen so
clearly in Afghanistan, remains an effective means for
sharing burdens and risks. Great and small powers
benefit from the collective assuming of responsibility.
Second, operating through an international framework
makes it more likely that international policy will be
motivated by a broader set of interests and concerns—
rather than a particular ideological agenda—and is
therefore likely to enjoy greater legitimacy. Finally, and
most importantly, multilateral cooperation remains the
only way to tackle some of the world’s most pressing
problems, such as environmental degradation or global


financial instability. Collective action is the only viable
path to a lasting solution.

In reiterating the case for multilateral institutions,
Canada cannot be complacent. Innovation, not
replication, must guide our contribution. In order to
fulfill the goals of burden sharing, legitimacy, and
collective problem solving, the current architecture of
global governance must be reformed and augmented to
take account of new realities and to better represent the
views of new voices. Of particular interest to Canada is
the G20, a body whose members account for two-thirds
of the world’s population, and almost 60 percent of the
world’s poor. The G20 body of finance ministers, which
Canada proposed in the wake of the Mexican, Brazilian
and Asian financial crises, has in a short time become a
pivotal factor in enabling the world’s emerging
economies to modernize the structures within which
they operate. As such, it offers a glimpse of how our
future system of global governance might operate.
Canada believes the leaders of a globally representative
group of 20 countries should now come together as an
“L20” to tackle the next generation of problems
plaguing the developing and developed worlds, in such
areas as the environment, education, and public health.


-----

###### THE NEW DIPLOMACY

Flexibility has thus become the watchword of this new
century. The Government of Canada must mirror
global developments, learning to interact with new
players at a variety of levels. The transformation of
Foreign Affairs into a 21st century diplomatic corps is a
major component of this process. So too are our fellow
citizens, who showcase every day their global instincts
and aspirations. As members of a society that reflects
the world’s diversity, Canadians are out there, doing
fantastic things in the world. Leveraging this precious
resource will spread Canada’s influence through the
vehicle of public diplomacy.

The international strategy presented here relies on the
capacity for choice. We cannot be everywhere and do
everything while also making a difference on the issues
that mean most to Canadians. This is not just a matter
of diverting resources from a wide base to selected
targets. Canada must also be more flexible and openminded in its global relationships. Forging ties with
states and organizations that are charting new paths
within particular regions or on issues of concern to
Canada will enhance our own diplomatic capacity.

In addition to maintaining close ties with our North
American and G8 partners, Canada will increasingly
deal with societies at various stages of development and
with diverse cultural backgrounds. The western
hemisphere is a priority for this strategy of engagement.
Here, many of the issues that matter to Canadians, such
as democratization and sustainable development, are
happening before our very eyes. Canada will play a
leadership role in regional processes such as the Summit


of the Americas and its key partner institution, the
Organization of American States (OAS), to promote
security, prosperity and democracy in the hemisphere.
We will also strengthen our cooperation with Mexico in
these hemispheric bodies on issues of governance and
economic growth. We will also use the place of privilege
that we enjoy in the Commonwealth and la Francophonie
to enlist the support of our partners in these
organizations in the pursuit of objectives we share.

In the 10 years since our last international policy review,
the issues that dominate the global agenda have been
transformed. Most importantly, they have proven too
complex to be treated by the traditional “silos” of
government. Enduring and emerging problems, such as
terrorism, weapons of mass destruction, state failure
and environmental degradation, now require a coherent
policy that integrates security, development and trade
expertise. The challenge, in short, is to work across
government. Departments must become better connected
with each other, and the system as a whole more efficient
at leveraging current assets—wherever they reside.

Untapped resources also exist at the provincial and
municipal levels. Canadian premiers have already
established close relationships with U.S. governors in
neighbouring states to identify and act upon joint
challenges and opportunities. Continued cooperation
between the federal and provincial governments on
Canada-U.S. relations is critical if we are to manage our
North American partnership effectively, especially
where international obligations touch on areas of shared
jurisdiction. Canada’s largest cities are also globally
recognized centres of excellence, with a wealth of
expertise on urban development and local governance


###### PRIORITY FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Create a new framework for international policy making that engages multiple departments and levels of government

###### KEY INITIATIVES

- Facilitate wider Canadian involvement—both inside and outside government—in the Canada-U.S. relationship

- Cooperate with the Federation of Municipalities to promote sustainable cities and strengthen local governance and
capacity building in the developing world. Establish a “Democracy Council,” comprising government departments and
organizations such as the Parliamentary Centre, the IDRC, the Centre for International Governance Innovation,
Elections Canada, the Forum of Federations, and Rights and Democracy, to guide good governance policy making


-----

###### PRIORITY FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Support the good international work of existing networks of Canadians

###### KEY INITIATIVES

- Seek regular input from Canadian NGOs, labour unions, business groups, academics and professional bodies

- Expand the international public diplomacy program to promote Canadian culture, innovation, education and business
opportunities

- Reform our consular services to provide high-quality support to Canadians

- Encourage academic networking among Canadian institutions through the International Academic Mobility Initiative

- Support the efforts of Canadian diasporas to forge transnational political, economic and cultural links

- Collaborate with the provinces on a “Smart Networks” initiative to build direct cooperation between Canadian
institutions and their counterparts abroad


that is particularly in demand as population migration
from rural to urban areas continues unabated in the
developing world. The 2006 World Urban Forum in
Vancouver will allow Canadian cities to share their
ideas and expertise, and learn from other municipalities
from across the globe.

Canadians are already busy global citizens. Our NGOs,
labour unions, business groups, universities and
professional bodies have widespread international
connections. Their expertise is well respected in many
fields, particularly those related to human rights,
governance and development. Younger Canadians
travel, work and study abroad more than ever before,
and think in terms of networks rather than
geographical units. Our multiculturalism also means
that many Canadians are part of broader diasporas that
link nations directly and transmit impressions of our
country to the world. In times of crisis, like the recent
tsunamis, their efforts are a substantial component of
Canada’s overall response. These professional and
personal networks make a powerful contribution to
Canada’s international success.


Empowering individual Canadians, wherever they
reside, demands a subtle shift in focus. For Foreign
Affairs this translates into greater emphasis on consular
services to support Canadians abroad, ensuring that
those working and studying abroad do so in the safest
possible conditions, by tightening security at our
missions. For the Government as a whole, fostering
academic and professional partnerships between
Canadians and foreign counterparts takes on added
significance. Showcasing Canadian artistry and
innovation to the world will cultivate long-term
relationships, dialogue and understanding abroad.
These activities have taken on new significance as
modern diplomacy increasingly trades on established
credibility. By supporting the efforts of individual
Canadians we confirm the reality of the 21st century:
Canada is a network of people and values whose hub is
north of the 49th parallel, but whose worldwide reach is
growing every day.


-----

his International Policy Statement establishes
the principles and priorities that will guide the
next generation of Canadian global engagement.

# T

It starts from two basic premises. First, that there can
be no greater role, no more important obligation for a
government, than the protection and safety of its
citizens. Second, that unless states act collectively,
acknowledging their shared vulnerability, the rich will
become richer and the poor will become poorer—and
everyone will be less secure.

The strategy that emerges from this International
Policy Statement reflects who we are: a highly
successful liberal democracy, with both a regional
destiny and global responsibilities. It adapts to the key
changes in the global context since 1995: new and more
deadly security threats; a changed distribution of global
power; challenges to existing international institutions;


and the transformation of the global economy. It also
singles out particular geographic areas for increased
activity: the Arctic, Africa and the Americas.

Most importantly, this document responds to the
historic opportunity Canadians have today to reconceptualize and re-energize their global role. That
opportunity can only be seized through a clear-eyed
understanding of our core national interests, and
strategic reinvestments in our military, diplomacy,
commercial policy and development programs. We
believe that through more focused and integrated
policies, Canada can honour its historical achievements
in international affairs, and make a difference to greater
security and prosperity in the 21st century. The success
of this strategy will depend on our continued resolve,
and our capacity to forge new partnerships with other
states and non-state actors.


-----

