# Securing an Open Society: Canada’s National Security Policy

_April 2004_


-----

-----

**National Library of Canada cataloguing in publication data**

Canada. Privy Council Office

Securing an Open Society : Canada’s National Security Policy

Issued also in French under title : Protéger une société ouverte : la politique canadienne
de sécurité nationale.
Text in English and French on inverted pages
Issued also in electronic format on the Internet: www.pco-bcp.gc.ca
ISBN 0-662-36982-3
Cat. no. CP22-77/2004E-PDF

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, 2004.


-----

Security issues are not new to Canada. They were influential in the

decision to create our country in order to provide peace, order and good
government for Canadians. Throughout our history, we have managed a wide
range of threats to our society — from the influenza epidemic of
1918-19 to the risk posed by Soviet bombers that led to the creation of NORAD.
And we have a proud history of contributing to international peace and security,
including the supreme sacrifice made by our citizens in places like Vimy Ridge
and Afghanistan.

We have addressed these threats to our society in a way that has

strengthened the open nature of our country — open to immigrants from around
the world and respectful of differences among us. Our prosperity is directly linked
to this openness and to our ability to flourish in an increasingly interdependent
world.

The horrific events of September 11, 2001, demonstrated how individuals

could exploit such openness to commit acts of terrorism that attempt to
undermine the core values of democratic societies. Those events were a stark
reminder to Canadians of the tragic loss of 329 lives aboard Air India flight 182
in 1985.

The recent SARS outbreak and the 2003 electrical blackout showed how

our interconnectedness to events originating elsewhere can have a major impact
on the health and economic well-being of Canadians. And we continue to face
more longstanding threats, such as organized crime and natural disasters.

The Government of Canada has taken important steps to respond to this

increasingly complex and dangerous threat environment. In the past few years, it
has funded over $8 billion in additional investments to address our key security
gaps. On my first day as Prime Minister, I announced important organizational
changes that will further strengthen the capacity of the Government to deal with
this new environment.

But we need to do more. Working to prevent attacks like the one

launched against commuter trains in Madrid requires a more integrated
approach to national security — integrated inside the Government of Canada
and with key partners. Such an approach will also help us to develop a long-term
strategic framework to more effectively prevent and respond to other types of
security threats. In short, we need to take the historic step of issuing Canada’s
first-ever comprehensive statement of national security policy which provides an
integrated strategy for addressing current and future threats to our country.

_Securing an Open Society articulates core national security interests and_

proposes a framework for addressing threats to Canadians. It does so in a way
that fully reflects and supports key Canadian values of democracy, human rights,
respect for the rule of law, and pluralism.


-----

It outlines the integrated security system the Government of Canada will

build. This system will be supported by $690 million in new initiatives to address
priority gaps in the Government’s areas of responsibility. The Government is
moving forward deliberately with this plan, but recognizes the seriousness of the
challenge and the sustained nature of the effort required.

Addressing many of these threats requires a co-ordinated approach with

other key partners — provinces, territories, communities, the private sector and
allies. In these areas, the policy sets out processes for engaging those partners
in developing co-ordinated plans to support the overall framework. It recognizes
that we need to build a dynamic system that is able to continually evolve to
address emerging threats and that will rely heavily on contributions from all
stakeholders.

The fact that this is Canada’s first-ever comprehensive statement of our

National Security Policy makes it particularly important that we engage
Canadians on its content. We are tabling the policy with Parliament so that it can
facilitate that added dialogue.

This policy puts us on a long-term path to enhancing the security of our

country. The measures announced in it will address important gaps in our
system, but the project cannot end here. The Government is determined to build
a system that works to continually enhance the security of Canadians and
contribute to the creation of a safer world.

Prime Minister Paul Martin


-----

#### Table of Contents

Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii

Chapter 1 - Canada’s Approach to National Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

Chapter 2 - Building an Integrated Security System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

Chapter 3 - Intelligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

Chapter 4 - Emergency Planning and Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

Chapter 5 - Public Health Emergencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

Chapter 6 - Transportation Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

Chapter 7 - Border Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41

Chapter 8 - International Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47


-----

### Executive Summary

There can be no greater role, no more important obligation for a

government, than the protection and safety of its citizens. But as all
Canadians know, we live in an increasingly interconnected, complex and
often dangerous world. The increase in terrorist acts and the threat of
rapid, globalized spread of infectious disease all challenge our society and
the sense of security that is so critical to our quality of life. Canadians
understand this new reality. They know that the threats to security and
public safety are not just the problems other nations face. We too are
touched by, and face, similar challenges.

_Securing an Open Society: Canada’s National Security Policy is a_

strategic framework and action plan designed to ensure that Canada is
prepared for and can respond to current and future threats. The focus is
on events and circumstances that generally require a national response
as they are beyond the capacity of individuals, communities or provinces
to address alone.

The first-ever policy of its kind in Canada, Securing an Open

_Society adopts an integrated approach to security issues across_
government. It employs a model that can adapt to changing
circumstances over time. It has been crafted to balance the needs for
national security with the protection of core Canadian values of openness,
diversity and respect for civil liberties.

The National Security Policy focusses on addressing three core national
security interests:

1. protecting Canada and Canadians at home and abroad;

2. ensuring Canada is not a base for threats to our allies; and

3. contributing to international security.

It contains several measures to help build a more integrated security
system in a way that is consistent with the goals of the policy:

-  An Integrated Threat Assessment Centre will be established to
ensure that all threat-related information is brought together,
assessed and reaches all who need it in a timely and effective
manner.

**_•_** The Government will establish a National Security Advisory
Council, which will be made up of security experts external to
government.


-----

-  An advisory Cross-Cultural Roundtable on Security, composed of
members of Canada’s ethno-cultural and religious communities,
will be created.

-  The new Department of Public Safety and Emergency
Preparedness will be designated as the body responsible for the
testing and auditing of federal departments’ key security
responsibilities and activities.

The National Security Policy also includes chapters on six key

strategic areas. Each chapter builds on important steps already taken,
addresses specific security gaps, and sets out the principles upon which
the policy will be implemented and evolve. Several specific new measures
have spending implications. New investments in these measures total
$690 million and will be funded from the security contingency reserves
in Budget 2001 and Budget 2003, and most recently supplemented by
Budget 2004.

#### Highlights of Key Measures

**Intelligence**

- 
Further investments will be made to enhance Canada’s intelligence
collection capacity, with a focus on Security Intelligence.

-  An arm’s-length review mechanism for RCMP national security
activities will be created.

-  The proposal to establish a National Security Committee of
Parliamentarians will be implemented.

**Emergency Planning and Management**

- 
A new Government Operations Centre will provide stable,
round-the-clock co-ordination and support across government and
to key national players in the event of national emergencies.

-  The Emergency Preparedness Act will be reviewed and
modernized to achieve a seamless national emergency
management system.

-  A permanent federal-provincial-territorial forum on emergencies
is proposed.


-----

-  The Government is committed to co-locate, where practical, with
provincial, territorial and municipal emergency measures operation
centres.

-  The Government will release a position paper this summer setting
out the key elements of a proposed Critical Infrastructure
Protection Strategy for Canada.

-  The Government will increase its capacity to predict and prevent
cyber-security attacks against its networks.

-  A national task force, with public and private representation, will be
established to develop a National Cybersecurity Strategy.

**Public Health**

- 
The new Public Health Agency of Canada and the position of a
Chief Public Health Officer for Canada will be created.

-  The National Microbiology Laboratory in Winnipeg and the
Laboratory for Foodborne Zoonoses in Guelph will be enhanced.

-  The National Emergency Services Stockpile System will be
replenished and updated.

-  The Government will establish Health Emergency Response
Teams made up of health professionals across the country to
enhance capacity to respond to health emergencies.

-  The Government continues its commitment to work with the
provinces and territories to address vulnerabilities and build on
existing public health strengths across Canada.

-  The Government will increase public health surveillance capacity
across the country.

**Transport Security**

- 
The Government is strengthening marine security through the
implementation of a six-point plan that will:

-  clarify responsibilities and strengthen co-ordination of marine
security efforts;

-  establish networked marine security operations centres;


-----

-  increase the Canadian Forces, RCMP, and Canadian Coast
Guard on-water presence and Department of Fisheries and
Oceans aerial surveillance;

-  enhance secure fleet communications;

-  pursue greater marine security co-operation with the
United States; and

-  strengthen the security of marine facilities.

-  In partnership with the private sector and our international partners,
Canada will identify strategies to enhance our aviation security,
including air cargo.

-  The Government will improve and extend security background
check requirements for transportation workers.

**Border Security**

- 
Canada will deploy facial recognition biometric technology on
the Canadian passport, in accordance with international standards.

-  The Government will complete implementation of the RCMP Real
Time Identification Project to achieve an automated and modern
fingerprint system.

-  The Government will table new measures to streamline our refugee
determination process to ensure efficient protection for people
genuinely in need and to facilitate effective removals of people
attempting to abuse our refugee program.

-  Canada is developing a next-generation smart borders agenda with
Mexico and the United States, building on the success of the
Smart Borders Declaration signed with the United States in
December 2001.

-  Working with our international partners and in international forums,
such as the G8 and the World Customs Organization, Canada will
internationalize the Smart Borders model.

**International Security**

- 
The Government will make Canada’s national security one of the
top priorities in its International Policy Review.

-  The Government is committed to ensuring that the Canadian
Forces are flexible, responsive and combat-capable for a wide
range of operations, and are able to work with our allies.


-----

Beginning with the establishment of a dedicated capacity-building
fund, Canada will leverage its experience in building peace, order
and good government to help developing, failed and failing states.

Canada will continue to play an important role in countering
international terrorism, preventing the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, and defusing key intra- and interstate conflicts.


-----

### Chapter 1
 Canada’s Approach to National Security

**Security and Values**

There is no conflict between a commitment to security and a
commitment to our most deeply held values. At their heart, both speak to
strengthening Canada.

Canadians have built a remarkable country shaped by a deep

attachment to democracy, the rule of law, respect for human rights and
pluralism. Our way of life is based on an openness to ideas and
innovations, and to people from every part of the world — a commitment
to include every individual and every community in the ongoing project
that is Canada — and a steadfast rejection of intolerance, extremism
and violence.

A core responsibility of the Government of Canada is to provide for

the security of Canadians. The right to life, liberty and security of the
person is enshrined in our Charter of Rights and Freedoms. A clear and
effective approach to security is not just the foundation of our prosperity
— it is the best assurance that future generations will continue to enjoy
the very qualities that make this country a place of hope in a
troubled world.

We have always faced threats to our national security. As we move

forward into the 21st century, we face new and more complex ones.
Today, individuals have the power to undermine our security in a way that
only hostile states were once able to accomplish. The September 11,
2001, attacks were a powerful example of this.

Terrorism is a global challenge that has been recognized by the

United Nations as a crime against humanity. Canada is not immune to
this threat.

But the threats we face are not limited to terrorism. The SARS

(severe acute respiratory syndrome) outbreak demonstrated the power of
individuals to unintentionally transmit threats around the globe at the
speed of air travel.

The Government is determined to pursue our national security

interests and to be relentless in the protection of our sovereignty and our
society in the face of these new threats.


-----

The new and more complex security environment requires Canada

to deal frankly with the reality that in an open society, tensions can
develop among communities. There is a risk that the seeds of conflict and
extremism can take root even in the most tolerant of settings. Canadians
stand together in reaffirming that the use of violence to pursue political,
religious or ideological goals is an affront to our values and must be met
with a determined response by Canadians and by their governments.

Our commitment to include all Canadians in the ongoing building of

this country must be extended to our approach to protecting it. We reject
the stigmatization of any community and we do not accept the notion that
our diversity or our openness to newcomers needs to be limited to ensure
our security. No one better appreciates the need to protect our society
than those who chose this country as a place to build a better life or who
fled the consequences of instability and intolerance in other parts of
the world. The deep commitment of Canadians to mutual respect and
inclusion helps to mitigate extremism in our society.

The Government needs the help and support of all Canadians to

make its approach to security effective. Therefore, it will introduce new
measures to reach out to communities in Canada that may feel caught in
the “front lines” of the struggle against terrorism.

To this end, the Government is creating a Cross-Cultural

Roundtable on Security, which will be comprised of members of
ethno-cultural and religious communities from across Canada. It will
engage in a long-term
dialogue to improve

manage security interests
in a diverse society and will

- Create a Cross-Cultural Roundtable on

Security

provide advice to promote
the protection of civil order, mutual respect and common understanding.
It will be a partnership with all communities to work to ensure that there is
zero tolerance for terrorism or crimes of hate in Canada. The roundtable
will work with the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness
and the Minister of Justice.

Our knowledge and experience in the hard tasks of fostering

democracy, pluralism and the rule of law are also a means for Canada to
play a significant role in the struggle against terrorism. They provide us
with a rich set of assets we can deploy in failed or failing states to assist
in removing the conditions for extremists to operate and gather support.
Our security interests and our international policy goals work hand
in hand.


-----

Canadians have proved themselves willing to put in place important

measures to address extraordinary threats. The Anti-Terrorism Act was
carefully crafted by parliamentarians to provide such measures in a way
that was consistent with our Charter of Rights and Freedoms and with our
core values. Given the nature of the measures adopted by the
Government, we are committed to their legislative review at the end of this
year to ensure that the balance struck was appropriate. We also need to
ensure that there are effective mechanisms for oversight and review so
that, in protecting an open society, we do not inadvertently erode the very
liberties and values we are determined to uphold.

**The Scope of the National Security Policy**

National security deals with threats that have the potential to
undermine the security of the state or society. These threats generally
require a national response, as they are beyond the capacity of
individuals, communities or provinces to address alone.

National security is closely linked to both personal and international

security. While most criminal offences, for example, may threaten
personal security, they do not generally have the same capacity to
undermine the security of the state or society as do activities such as
terrorism or some forms of organized crime.

Given the international nature of many of the threats affecting

Canadians, national security also intersects with international security.
At the same time, there are a growing number of international security
threats that impact directly on Canadian security and are addressed in
this strategy.


-----

The middle circle in the chart above delineates the focus of the
national security strategy. The security environment includes a wide range
of often interrelated threats. While all threats ultimately impact on
individuals, threats to national security have the capacity to seriously
impair the security of Canada. A growing number of international security
threats impact directly on the national security of Canada.

The type of response required also differs as one moves along the
continuum. Individuals have a primary role in taking responsibility for their
personal security. Their efforts can be amplified when they work in
communities to address challenges in their midst. As threats become
more significant, they may require the assistance of the local police,
a provincial government, a national government or the wider international
community to address them effectively.

While the Government has a role to play in all three areas of
security, this policy focusses on national security threats.

**National Security Interests**

Although threats to Canada will change, our security interests are
enduring. The Government believes that there are three core national
security interests that Canada needs to advance.


-----

1. Protecting Canada and the safety and security of Canadians at
home and abroad


Canada’s foremost national security interest is to protect Canada
and the safety and security of Canadians at home and abroad. This
requires the Government to protect the physical security of Canadians,
our values, and our key institutions.

In addition, the Government has a responsibility to be able to

defend against threats to Canadian sovereignty, ranging from illegal entry
to incursions into our territorial waters.

The Government also has an obligation to offer assistance to

Canadians working or travelling abroad. Canada’s international presence
can also be a target and it is imperative that we take appropriate security
measures to protect our diplomats, aid workers and other personnel
representing Canada abroad.

2. Ensuring that Canada is not a base for threats to our allies


Our second national security interest is to ensure that Canada is
not a base for threats to our allies. Just as Canada expects other
governments to control activities in their countries that might have an
impact on Canada and Canadians, we have a responsibility to manage
threats to the security of our allies.

The interconnected nature of the modern world makes it impossible

to isolate Canada from the effects of any serious threatening event or
activity. The September 11 attacks demonstrated the profound effect an
event in the United States could have on Canadians and the need to work
together to address threats. Canada is committed to strengthening
North American security as an important means of enhancing Canadian
security.

3. Contributing to international security


Canada has a long tradition of contributing to international security,

even where our direct security interests are not affected. But the changing
nature of the world has increased the number of international threats that


-----

can impact on Canada’s national security. Failed and failing states can
provide a haven for terrorists, which can pose risks to the security
of Canadians.

Canadian security will be increasingly dependent on our ability to

contribute to international security.

This may require the deployment of military assets to protect

against direct threats to international peace and security or the provision
of development assistance to strengthen public institutions in weak or
failing states. It will certainly require Canada to continue to play a leading
role in strengthening and modernizing international institutions so that
they can contribute to international security.

**Current Threats**

The world is a dangerous place, even if the relative safety of life in
Canada sometimes obscures just how dangerous it is. As recent events
have highlighted, there is a wide range of threats facing Canada from
pandemics to terrorism. These threats can have a serious impact on the
safety of Canadians and on the effective functioning of our society.

**Terrorism. The bombings of commuter trains in Madrid in March of 2004**
provided a stark reminder of the risks of terrorism and the vulnerability of
open, democratic societies to it. The Bali bombing of October 2002 and
the attacks of September 11 are part of the same phenomenon. In a
taped message released on November 12, 2002, Osama bin Laden
identified Canada as a target for attack.

Terrorism may be motivated by a variety of causes. Broadly speaking,
four key types affect Canada, though they can be intermingled:

1. **_Religious extremism, including that practiced by a network of_**
groups known collectively as al-Qaeda, remains a threat
to Canada.

2. **_Violent secessionist movements pose risks to Canadian citizens._**
Major secessionist movements from other countries have been
active in Canada in a variety of ways.

3. **_State-sponsored terrorism continues to be a serious problem and_**
contributes to a more dangerous world that affects Canada’s
security and prosperity.

4. **_Domestic extremism, while not very prevalent in Canada, has_**
in some cases resulted in violence and has threatened Canadians,
including immigrant communities and religious minorities.


-----

**Proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The proliferation of**
weapons of mass destruction, and their delivery systems, poses a risk to
Canadians. Evidence exists that terrorist organizations and states with
troubling international records have sought and experimented with such
weapons — an example being the foiling of a planned attack using the
deadly chemical ricin in 2003 in the United Kingdom. Whether or not
Canada was the primary target of such an attack, the impact on our
security could be immense. The physical effects of such attacks would not
respect borders and would have a significant impact on the global
economy.

**Failed and failing states. The growing number of failed or failing states is**
one of the most disturbing of recent security developments. These states
contribute to spreading instability and can be a haven for both terrorists
and organized crime groups that exploit weak or corrupt governing
structures to pursue their nefarious activities. These activities have had
consequences far beyond their borders, including for Canada.

**Foreign espionage. Foreign espionage against Canada did not stop with**
the end of the Cold War. As a highly advanced industrial economy,
Canada is subject to foreign espionage that seeks to steal Canadian
industrial and technical secrets for gain. Economic espionage can impact
on our prosperity by undermining the competitiveness of Canadian
companies. Though Canada may not face the same level of military threat
from foreign states as during the Cold War, some countries remain
interested in our defence and security plans, particularly as they relate to
our defence co-operation with the United States and other allies.

**Natural disasters. Many regions of Canada have been subject to severe**
natural disasters in recent years which have taken lives and caused
extensive property damage.

**Critical infrastructure vulnerability. The August 2003 electrical blackout**
that affected Ontario and eight U.S. states demonstrated how dependent
we are on critical infrastructure and how vulnerable we are to accidents or
deliberate attack on our cyber and physical security. Cyber-attacks are a
growing concern that have the potential to impact on a wide range of
critical infrastructure that is connected through computer networks.

**Organized crime. Organized crime in Canada is increasingly becoming**
part of a globalized network that supports the narcotics trade, migrant
smuggling and the trafficking in persons, weapons smuggling, money
laundering, theft (including identity theft), commercial fraud and extortion.
A number of terrorist movements have advanced their activities by
developing links with organized crime. Elements of organized crime are
also increasing their attempts to undermine our justice system.


-----

**Pandemics. The SARS epidemic demonstrated how accelerated**
international travel patterns have amplified the risk of pandemics and
related health threats to the security of Canadians. It demonstrated the
devastating physical and economic impact these threats can have on
communities in Canada.

All of these threats pose a real security challenge for Canada.

Often, they do not exist in isolation from one another. For example, the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is a problem in itself, but
when terrorism is involved, the threat increases dramatically. The danger
of pandemics is amplified if groups seek to spread disease deliberately.

The complex threat environment we are facing evolves

continuously. Therefore, the system we build needs to be capable of
responding proportionately to existing threats while adapting quickly to
meet new threats that may emerge. While we strive to eliminate these
threats, this is not always possible. Strengthening our security is also
about managing and reducing risks. The Government is determined to
work with our partners and with all Canadians to meet the new risk
environment and to build a more effective national security system.
The next chapter describes the integrated system that the Government
will develop to meet this requirement.


-----

### Chapter 2
 Building an Integrated Security System

The increasing complexity of the threats facing Canada requires

an integrated national security framework to address them. It is critical for
our key security instruments to work together in a fully integrated way to
address the security interests of Canadians. The lack of integration in
our current system is a key gap that has been recognized by the
Auditor General of Canada.

The Government of Canada agrees that the key to providing

greater security for Canadians and to getting the most out of our security
expenditures is to co-ordinate and better integrate our efforts. The
Government is committed to providing the leadership, resources and
structures necessary to build a fully integrated and effective security
system.

On December 12, 2003, the Prime Minister announced a series of

organizational changes that help facilitate more effective integration,
including:

-  the appointment of the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency
Preparedness, with a new department supporting the core
functions of security and intelligence, policing and enforcement,
corrections and crime prevention, border services, immigration
enforcement, and emergency management;

-  the creation of the Cabinet Committee on Security, Public Health
and Emergencies to co-ordinate government-wide responses to
emergencies and to manage national security and intelligence
issues; and

-  the appointment of the National Security Advisor to the
Prime Minister to improve co-ordination and integration of security
efforts among government departments.

The Government is building a fully integrated security system that

ensures that we can more effectively respond to existing threats and
quickly adapt to new ones. The evolving nature of threats to Canadians
requires a fully integrated government approach that ensures that issues
and information do not fall between the different parts of our security
system. This system needs to be fully connected to key partners —
provinces, territories, communities, first line responders, the private sector
and Canadians.


-----

The diagram below articulates the integrated security system that

we are developing. It will help to ensure that all of the necessary
government resources are brought to bear in a more co-ordinated way to
ensure the security of Canadians.

The system begins with a comprehensive threat assessment.

It provides both tactical and strategic information about risks to Canada.
This threat information is used to structure and trigger proportionate,
integrated capabilities to prevent or mitigate the effects of the threat.
When an event occurs, an integrated system for managing its
consequences is triggered. In order to ensure the continuous
improvement of the system, effective evaluation and review are
conducted.

This system is capable of responding to both intentional and

unintentional threats. It is as relevant in securing Canadians against the
next SARS-like outbreak as it is in addressing the risk of a terrorist attack.
Above all, it is a flexible system that continually evolves to learn from past
experiences and to respond to emerging threats.


-----

_Threat Assessment_

Effective threat assessment allows the Government to objectively
and continuously assess the risks to Canadians based on all available
information. This assessment is grounded in intelligence and trend
analysis, and evaluates both the probability and potential consequences
of threats.

Although many individual federal departments and agencies

conduct threat assessments, there has been no comprehensive and
timely central government assessment that brings together intelligence
about potential threats from
a wide range of sources to
allow better and more
integrated decision-making.
Consequently, the

- Create an Integrated Threat Assessment

Centre

Government is creating an
Integrated Threat Assessment Centre to facilitate the integration of
intelligence into a comprehensive threat assessment, which will be made
available to those who require it. The integrated approach that the
Government is taking will help to reduce the risk that information held by
one part of Government will fail to be provided in a timely fashion to those
who can utilize it.

_Protection and Prevention Capability_

This integrated threat assessment must be connected to an
effective, tactical capability to deploy resources in proportionate response
to specific situations, and communicate relevant information to first line
responders such as the law enforcement community. These new threat
assessment capabilities will allow the Government to more effectively
co-ordinate activities in response to specific threat information to prevent
or mitigate threats.

The Government will ensure that its own systems are structured to

better share information on threats. For example, threat information needs
to be provided on a timely basis to border services agents so they can act
on that information to prevent people who represent a known threat from
entering Canada. A key objective is to strengthen our watch list system to
ensure that it is fully integrated and updated on a real-time basis.
The Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness will have
clear responsibility for the integration of watch list information across the
Government. This is a complex project that requires the integration of
many different information systems and will be undertaken in a way that
respects the privacy rights of Canadians.


-----

The department will also be responsible for reviewing alert and

warning systems across government to ensure that they are structured to
respond effectively to threats.

It is not, however,

enough to connect activities

better connect our threat owners
information to first line

- Strengthen watch list system

- Review response and alert systems

- Enhance threat information sharing with other

levels of government and critical infrastructure
owners

responders, law
enforcement officials, critical infrastructure providers, and provincial,
territorial and other governments. The department has such a system to
respond to terrorism. It will expand its capacity to ensure full connectivity
on a wider range of threats and respond to create a truly national system
of protection and prevention.

_Consequence Management_

While much of our national security effort is directed at preventing
events from occurring, our system needs to be able to respond to
incidents and their consequences. This can range from providing
emergency medical assistance to prosecuting individuals for committing
security offences. The measures identified below in Chapter 4:
Emergency Planning and Management help to strengthen the
Government’s capacity to meet its core responsibilities and build a
national emergency management system with key partners.

While that national

collectively developed,
there are important

- Co-locate federal, provincial, territorial and

municipal emergency operations centres

tangible steps that can be
taken immediately to enhance co-operation. To this end, the Government
is working to co-locate federal, provincial, territorial and municipal
emergency operations centres to ensure that officials build strong
practices of collaboration and can operate seamlessly during
emergencies.

_Evaluation and Oversight_

An effective national security framework must, of necessity, be a
continual work in progress. We need to continuously evaluate the success
of the system by testing its effectiveness. The Government believes that it
is essential to benchmark our progress against appropriate standards
including the systems adopted by other countries. While the Auditor
General and parliamentary committees will continue to play an important


-----

role in reviewing our performance, we are committed to building a more
systematic approach within Government to testing and improving on the
effectiveness of our systems.

To this end, the

Preparedness will be
given responsibility for

- Evaluate emergency operations plans

- Enhance use of live testing of security systems

- Create the National Security Advisory Council

strengthening the testing and
auditing of key capabilities and conducting assessments of other
departments. This will include a review of the plans of federal departments
to ensure their ability to continue operating during emergencies. The
Government will also enhance its live testing of federal security systems to
assess their effectiveness.

The Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness and

the Cabinet Committee on Security, Public Health and Emergencies,
supported by the National Security Advisor, will ensure the development
and implementation of the security system described above. The
Government also believes that it can benefit from the advice of security
experts from outside the Government in evaluating and improving our
system. To this end, it will create the National Security Advisory Council to
advise the Government on the implementation of this policy framework.

This integrated national security system will help ensure that the

six key security activities described in the following chapters work together
more effectively in meeting the security needs of Canadians:

-  Intelligence

-  Emergency Planning and Management

-  Public Health Emergencies

-  Transportation Security

-  Border Security

-  International Security


-----

### Chapter 3
 Intelligence

**Highlights**

- Increase capabilities for intelligence collection and assessment

- Enhance focus on security intelligence

- Create a new Integrated Threat Assessment Centre

- Enhance existing security and intelligence review mechanisms by
establishing an arm’s-length review body for RCMP national
security activities

- Propose the creation of a National Security Committee of
Parliamentarians


**Context**

Intelligence is the foundation of our ability to take effective
measures to provide for the security of Canada and Canadians. To
manage risk effectively, we need the best possible information about
threats we face and about the intentions, capabilities and activities of
those who would do us harm. The best decisions regarding the scope and
design of security programs, the allocation of resources and the
deployment of assets cannot be made unless decision makers are as
informed as possible.

Canada has a long and distinguished record in the field of

intelligence collection and assessment. Our history in this area goes back
to important contributions Canada made during the Second World War.
Agencies like the Canadian Security Intelligence Service and the
Communications Security Establishment are recognized by our allies as
highly effective professional organizations. They contribute significantly to
our own security as well as that of the global community.

Intelligence is important not only for Canada’s security but also for

sound international, military and economic policy. Unlike a number of our
closest allies, Canada does not have a single agency dedicated solely to
collecting foreign intelligence abroad. However, a number of Canadian
departments and agencies gather information in Canada and abroad
relating to a wide range of interests. In circumstances where it is required
for the protection of Canada from security threats, this can include
operations abroad by the Canadian Security Intelligence Service.


-----

The threats we face do not respect national or international

boundaries. Terrorist organizations, for example, raise money, recruit and
train operatives and plan and carry out operations around the world. This
has been clearly demonstrated in the terrible attacks of September 11,
2001, and in subsequent attacks in Bali and most recently in Madrid.
Other threats, such as weapons proliferation, pandemics, failed and failing
states and organized crime, have transboundary implications.

The nature of intelligence is that we rarely, if ever, have complete

information. Rather, intelligence reporting and assessments are based on
fragmented and sometimes contradictory information. It is therefore
essential to bring together information on threats to Canada from all
available sources and properly assess it in order to provide as accurate
and complete a picture as possible. It is also critically important that the
resulting product be conveyed in a timely, accurate and usable manner to
those whose actions or decisions depend on it.

**Progress to Date**

The Government of Canada significantly enhanced its security and
intelligence sector in the wake of the events of September 11. This
included a 30 percent increase in the Canadian Security Intelligence
Service (CSIS) budget and a 25 percent increase in the budget of the
Communications Security Establishment. The new Financial Transactions
and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada allows us to identify, assess and
track suspicious transfers of money that could indicate support for terrorist
activity or money laundering. Funding has also been provided to increase
intelligence capacity in a number of other departments and agencies,
such as the Canada Border Services Agency and Transport Canada. Our
analytical capacity has been significantly enhanced by doubling the size of
the Intelligence Assessment Secretariat within the Privy Council Office,
which provides government departments and agencies with assessments
on international issues.

The Government has made important legislative changes to ensure

that we can better respond to evolving threats, while maintaining the
balance between collective interests and the rights and freedoms of
Canadians. The Communications Security Establishment has been placed
on a legislative basis for the first time. The Government has proposed
further clarifications and enhancements in the proposed Public Safety Act,
_2002 to a number of legal authorities that impact the security and_
intelligence community.

Structurally, the Government has made key changes to better

enable it to integrate and act upon intelligence on threats to Canada.
The Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness brings
together key departments and agencies under one ministerial roof,


-----

including CSIS, the RCMP, Emergency Management, the Canada Border
Services Agency and others. Complementing this change, the National
Security Advisor, located within PCO, briefs the Prime Minister and the
Deputy Prime Minister on national security from an integrated
government-wide perspective.

**The Way Forward**

The Government believes that additional resources need to be
allocated to enhance intelligence collection and assessment capabilities.
Important initiatives have also been proposed in relation to accountability
and review. Therefore, we are committing an additional $167 million in
this area.

_Increase Capabilities and Focus_

No changes to the current mandates and structures of Canada’s
security and intelligence agencies are being proposed at this time.
However, in order to combat elusive threats and address other risks to our
security, intelligence collection and assessment capabilities will be
increased. Given the security threats facing Canada and our allies, we will
devote a greater proportion of our efforts to security intelligence.

_Working with Our Allies_

A part of our ability to access intelligence derives from our
intelligence alliances and relationships. For many years Canada has
exchanged intelligence with key allies. To effectively meet the security and
intelligence challenges we face, Canada has also developed important
new relationships. These relationships focus on a variety of issues, such
as anti-terrorism, non-proliferation, new and emerging health concerns
and the protection of our armed forces personnel deployed abroad.

These relations are enormously beneficial to our country. Canada

alone could not replicate the benefits gained through these international
arrangements. But we are also a significant contributor of intelligence.
These contributions are recognized and appreciated by our allies. Many of
our key allies are moving ahead to enhance their intelligence collection
capabilities, including making use of, and adapting to, new and evolving
technology. We will keep pace with our allies and with the evolving
security environment.


-----

_Integrated Threat Assessment_

Close allies such as the United States, the United Kingdom and
Australia have all recognized that the current scope of threat assessment
requirements exceeds the capacity of any one organization and have
moved to integrated models.

The United Kingdom has created the Joint Threat Assessment

Centre. The United States has created its Terrorist Threat Integration
Center and the Terrorist Screening Center to ensure that threat related
information reaches all levels of government. Australia has also
developed its National Threat Assessment Centre. All these efforts have
brought together both intelligence and expertise from across the
respective governments to give the most accurate and timely picture of
possible threats. As an ally, Canada will benefit from those decisions.
We will follow suit in order to improve our capacity to protect Canadians
and to contribute more significantly to international efforts.

We need to ensure that we have the ability to assess information

on threats to Canada and Canadian interests. Departments and agencies
must co-operate closely and, wherever appropriate, share relevant
information with each other. In addition, a structure must exist to ensure
that the results of integrated analysis can be quickly transmitted to those
who need them in order to take action. We cannot allow organizational
silos to inhibit our ability to identify and respond to threats to the security
of Canada.

As highlighted in Chapter 2: Building an Integrated Security

System, Canada will create a new Integrated Threat Assessment Centre.
It will be supported by, and staffed with, representatives of a broad range
of departments and agencies including Public Safety and Emergency
Preparedness, CSIS, the RCMP, the Communications Security
Establishment, the Department of National Defence, the Department of
Foreign Affairs, the Privy Council Office, Transport Canada, and the
Canada Border Services Agency. It will also be able to draw on expertise
from other departments and agencies, as required, including Health
Canada, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada and Environment Canada.

Though housed within CSIS, which is accountable to the Minister of

Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, the new centre will be a
community-wide resource working in conjunction with the National
Security Advisor to the Prime Minister. The centre will do a
comprehensive analysis of all available information on potential threats to
Canada and make the results of that analysis available to all who require
them. Systems and procedures will be developed and implemented, within


-----

a framework that provides for appropriate safeguards on the
dissemination of information, to ensure the collaboration and sharing upon
which fully integrated threat assessments depend.

_Review Mechanisms_

The nature of intelligence is such that much of our effort is not
known to the general public. A primary reason that we engage in security
and intelligence activities is to protect Canadians and the society we have
built together, based on democratic principles, the rule of law and respect
for human rights. It is therefore fundamentally important that safeguards
be in place to ensure that the exercise of authorities and the activities of
our agencies are completely appropriate and are in compliance with
Canadian law and policy.

A number of effective mechanisms are already in place for review

of security and intelligence activities. These include the Security
Intelligence Review Committee and the Inspector General for CSIS, the
Commissioner of the Communications Security Establishment and the
Commission for Public Complaints Against the RCMP. Beyond these
structures, the Government has put in place other safeguards, including
the recently established protocol with the United States concerning the
treatment of Canadian citizens.

As the legal authorities and activities of our security and

intelligence agencies evolve to respond to the current and future security
environment, it is vitally important that we ensure that review mechanisms
keep pace. In this context, the budget of the Security Intelligence Review
Committee has recently been increased to enable it to continue to
effectively review an expanded CSIS. The Government has also made
two significant new proposals.

The first is to create an arm’s-length review mechanism for the

RCMP’s activities relating to national security. The Deputy Prime Minister
has asked Mr. Justice Dennis R. O’Connor to provide advice to the
Government on how best to proceed with this important initiative.

Second, the Prime Minister has proposed the creation of a National

Security Committee of Parliamentarians. The Deputy Prime Minister
recently tabled a discussion paper on the proposal in Parliament.
Committees of the House of Commons and of the Senate have been
asked to consider the mandate and structure of such a committee and to
make recommendations to the Government.


-----

As part of the ongoing evaluation and oversight described in

Chapter 2, the Government will monitor progress in relation to enhanced
intelligence collection and assessment as well as development and
implementation of expanded review mechanisms relating to national
security. This will help to determine whether further adjustments are
required in this critically important area.


-----

## Chapter 4
 Emergency Planning and Management

**Highlights**

- Establish the new Government Operations Centre

- Modernize the Emergency Preparedness Act

- Host a permanent, high-level federal-provincial-territorial forum on
emergencies

- Co-locate federal, provincial, territorial and municipal emergency
measures centres

- Enhance cyber-security for federal government systems

- Build a Critical Infrastructure Protection Strategy for Canada

- Establish a public-private task force for the National Cyber-security
Strategy


**Context**

The diverse array of emergencies in Canada in recent years —
September 11, 2001, SARS, BSE, Hurricane Juan, the B.C. forest fires,
floods, the Ontario blackout, and avian influenza — shows the importance
of transforming our national emergency management system to meet the
challenges of protecting modern Canadian society from the effects of
increasingly complex emergencies. This increased complexity is a
function of several factors:

-  transnational threats, including international terrorism, globalized
disease outbreaks and natural disasters, many of which have
significant economic and health impacts;

-  the near simultaneous engagement of multiple government
departments and jurisdictions, often in more than one country; and

-  the need for quick responses to minimize human and economic
losses.

Canada’s current approach to emergencies dates back to the Cold

War era. The system is based on a highly decentralized and distributed
division of responsibilities among first line responders, provinces and
territories, and lead departments at the federal level. There is currently an
urgent need for a more modern, integrated national support system for
first line responders, and there remains a system-wide question about the
adequacy and sufficiency of resources for key players across the country,
particularly in the context of sustained and operationally intense


-----

emergency situations. Interoperability of policies, systems and personnel
is also a major national challenge that must be tackled. And there is
undoubtedly a need for clear national leadership — both on the ground
and in communications — on emergencies of national importance.

Effective emergency management comprises several phases,

including mitigation, prevention, preparedness, detection, response,
recovery, and evaluation. In all of these phases, our national capacity
must be bolstered, and our policies and operations made seamless
across jurisdictions. In saying this, the Government of Canada recognizes
that first line responders lie at the heart of our emergency management
system and that the federal Government will often play only a supporting
role in emergency management to provinces and territories, communities
and the private sector. The Government has identified two important
elements for modernizing Canada’s approach to emergency
management:

-  first, building on key measures taken to date, the Government will
put its house in order by launching initiatives to fill the
highest-priority gaps; and

-  second, the Government will, in concert with its partners in the
provinces and territories, and drawing on communities, first line
responders and industry, launch a process to determine how we
may collectively modernize the national system of emergency
management.

**Progress to Date**

Since September 11, 2001, the Government has taken steps to
bolster its performance and capacity to effectively manage complex
emergencies:

-  It increased resources for dealing with chemical, biological,
radiological or nuclear attacks (CBRN) including networked federal
laboratories for research, the development of a four-level training
program for first line responders and the accelerated delivery of
new technologies to first line responders through the CBRN
Research and Technology Initiative.

-  It implemented the National Urban Search and Rescue program to
build and enhance the capabilities of first line responders to
respond to emergencies resulting in structural collapses.

-  It enhanced the ability of law enforcement agencies to investigate
cyber-incidents and other threats to national security.


-----

-  It enhanced federal-provincial-territorial co-operation on
emergencies, including major exercises.

-  It created a new Government of Canada standard for maintaining
government operations during emergencies.

The Canadian Forces have also figured prominently in the

consequence management of national emergencies, helping civilian
authorities respond, over the last several years, to floods in Quebec and
Manitoba; the ice storm in eastern Ontario, Quebec and New Brunswick;
the aftermath of the Swiss Air crash off the coast of Nova Scotia; the Y2K
transition; forest fires in British Columbia; and Hurricane Juan in
Nova Scotia in 2003. Since 2001, the Government has taken specific
measures aimed at bolstering the capabilities of the Canadian Forces in
emergency preparedness and support. These measures have included:

-  setting up, with our American partners, the Bi-National Planning
Group at Colorado Springs to develop co-ordinated Canada-U.S.
military planning to support civil authorities in responding to
potential terrorist attacks and natural disasters within
North America;

-  creating a dedicated military nuclear, biological and chemical
response unit to support first line responders in a domestic
situation, if requested, and to support deployed operations;

-  enhancing and rationalizing the Canadian Forces’ nuclear,
biological and chemical equipment;

-  increasing the Canadian Forces’ holdings of nuclear, biological and
chemical medical countermeasures, and improving stock
maintenance;

-  enhancing the Disaster Assistance Response Team’s contingencyplanning capacity, and providing for some additional domestic
response capability when the unit is deployed overseas; and

-  ensuring that the Canadian Forces and Canadian first line
responders are adequately prepared to protect Canadian interests
by upgrading and consolidating the facilities required to provide
training, advice and technological support to the Canadian Forces,
Canadian first line responders, and other government departments.


-----

In December 2003, the Government also announced:

-  the creation of a Cabinet Committee on Security, Public Health and
Emergencies, chaired by the Minister of Public Safety and
Emergency Preparedness, to provide political leadership in
emergencies;

-  the integration of the Office of Critical Infrastructure Protection and
Emergency Preparedness into the Department of Public Safety and
Emergency Preparedness, which merged into a single area the
Government’s strategic response capabilities for both non-terrorist
emergencies and terrorist emergencies, and buttressed the ability
of the Government to effectively connect with provincial and
territorial emergency preparedness networks;

-  the creation of the new position of Associate Minister of National
Defence and Minister of State (Civil Preparedness); and

-  an increase in Canadian Forces Reserves available for civil
preparedness, including a capacity to deal with natural disasters
and local emergencies.

**The Way Forward**

Building on the measures taken to date, the Government will take
immediate steps to put the federal house in order by addressing the
highest-priority gaps in its capacity to manage emergencies in the areas of
overall strategic co-ordination, critical infrastructure protection and
cyber-security. We are committing an additional $105 million to address
these gaps.

_Strategic Co-ordination_

The Government will build a centralized Government Operations
Centre to provide stable, round-the-clock co-ordination and support
across government and to key national players in the event of national
emergencies. The Operations Centre will be housed in the Department of
Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, and will provide leadership
in emergencies of national importance.

A seamless national emergency management system requires a

comprehensive, modern legislative foundation, informed by consultations
with provinces, territories, communities, first line responders, and industry.
To this end, the overall statutory framework for the Government’s
emergency management activities — in particular the Emergency
_Preparedness Act — will be reviewed and modernized to reflect the_
emerging requirements of emergency management. These requirements


-----

cover the areas of mitigation programs, critical infrastructure protection,
cyber-security, information-sharing between federal departments,
agreements with international and private sector partners, and protection
of sensitive private sector information.

Recent events in Canada such as SARS have called into question

the effectiveness of existing disaster financial assistance arrangements to
deal quickly and effectively with response and recovery. The need for
consistency of application, improvement of federal-provincial-territorial
co-operation, and a comprehensive federal response is driving the
development of a framework for responsive disaster recovery assistance.
As part of this, the Government will complete an ongoing review of the
Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements, develop guiding principles
for other federal instruments to complement these arrangements for
situations such as public health and animal health emergencies, and
examine the inventory of existing national programs and legal tools to
enhance their applicability to emergency response and recovery.

Major emergencies require extremely close co-operation between

the federal government, provinces and territories, communities, first line
responders and the private sector. National emergency co-ordination
currently suffers from the absence of both an effective federal-provincialterritorial governance regime, and from the absence of commonly agreed
standards and priorities for the national emergency management system.

The Government will therefore invite provinces and territories to

establish a permanent, high-level forum on emergencies in order to allow
for regular strategic discussion of emergency management issues among
key national players. The Government is also committed to moving ahead
on the co-location of federal, provincial and territorial emergency
operations centres. To this end, it will work with its provincial and territorial
partners to put this in place where practical.

The Government needs to be able to continue to provide core

services to Canadians during emergencies. Building on existing work in
this regard, federal departments will ensure that they can continue to
serve Canadians regardless of circumstances by strengthening their
continuity planning processes and requiring regular exercises to test
these plans.

_Critical Infrastructure and Cyber-security_

Critical infrastructure protection is one of the main challenges of
modern emergency management. Most of our critical infrastructure is
owned by the private sector or other levels of government, and much of it
is connected to international networks.


-----

To establish a basis for the federal, provincial and territorial

governments and the private sector to meet critical infrastructure
protection challenge, the Government will release a position paper setting
out the key elements of the proposed Critical Infrastructure Protection
Strategy for Canada this summer. The Government will consult
senior-level provincial, territorial and private sector leaders to inform this
strategy. Key international partners such as the United States will be part
of this consultation process. The Government will work with provinces,
territories and the private sector to drive forward a national process that
prioritizes substantial improvement of our national capabilities in critical
infrastructure protection.

Cyber-security is at the forefront of the transborder challenge to

Canada’s critical infrastructure. The threat of cyber-attacks is real, and the
consequences of such attacks can be severe. To achieve a more
proactive cyber-security posture and to keep pace with the efforts of key
allies, the Government will strengthen its capacity to predict and prevent
cyber-attacks. To this end, the Government will substantially improve
threat and vulnerability analyses for its systems, and strengthen its ability
to defend its systems and respond to cyber-incidents.

The Government will also convene a high-level national task force,

with public and private representation, to develop the National
Cyber-security Strategy to reduce Canada’s vulnerability to cyber-attacks
and cyber-accidents.

_Bringing Key Players to the Table_

The federal Government is often not a lead player in emergency
management. Consequently, the Government will initiate a process with
its partners in the provinces and territories to bring key emergency
management actors from across the country to the table. This includes
communities, first line responders and the private sector. The objective
will be to collectively assess the requirements of the entire national
emergency management community to better position the country to meet
the increasingly complex security environment that we face.

The Government will work with provinces and territories at key

meetings of federal, provincial and territorial security ministers and deputy
ministers this summer. The Government will propose four strategic areas
as national priorities:

-  building operational capacity and seamlessness across the national
system, including strengthening surge capabilities;


-----

developing a broad process that includes the private sector and will
lead to the Critical Infrastructure Protection Strategy for Canada;

staging regular national and international exercises involving
civilian and military resources to assess the adequacy of the
national system against various emergency scenarios; and

working closely with allies, particularly the United States, to
continuously improve capacity and coherence in continent-wide
emergency management.


-----

### Chapter 5
 Public Health Emergencies

**Highlights**

- Create the new Public Health Agency of Canada, and appoint the
Chief Public Health Officer for Canada

- Establish health emergency response teams

- Replenish the National Emergency Services Stockpile System

- Enhance laboratory capacity

- Enhance public health surveillance

- Provide $300 million to provinces and territories for the National
Immunization Strategy

- Provide $100 million to provinces and territories to relieve stress
on public health systems at the front line


**Context**

A robust public health system is a critical line of defence in
protecting Canadians against many current and emerging threats,
including contamination of our food and water, major disease outbreaks
such as SARS, natural disasters, major accidents like chemical spills, and
even the terrorist threat of a chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear
attack. The complex, multijurisdictional nature of such threats also speaks
to the necessity for Canada’s approach to public health emergencies to be
more than strictly local or national in its orientation, and to proactively
contribute to the building of a more resilient international public health
architecture. This approach must also seek to continuously include the
public health dimension in the ongoing national security debate.

Indeed, the SARS outbreak in 2003 highlighted a number of

challenges to the national management of public health emergencies.
These challenges include:

-  a lack of clarity in leadership, legislative authority and roles and
responsibilities among jurisdictions;

-  uneven capacity and co-ordination within and between jurisdictions,
particularly in relation to research and development, surveillance,
and emergency response; and

-  a shortage of public health human resources, resulting, among
other things, in insufficient surge capacity.


-----

The Government of Canada has moved to respond to these

challenges. This document sets out measures to fill prominent gaps in our
public health emergency readiness, and reaffirms the multi-party process
already laid out to modernize our public health emergencies system.

**Progress to Date**

A number of key accomplishments should be noted as the
Government works with key partners — provinces, territories,
communities, first line responders, industry and international partners —
to build a more resilient national public health emergencies system.

-  The Prime Minister has appointed a Minister of State (Public
Health) with specific responsibility for helping to implement the new
Public Health Agency of Canada.

-  The Centre for Emergency Preparedness and Response was
created in 2000 with the mission of leading and co-ordinating
national health emergency preparedness and response. The
centre’s Emergency Operations Centre has been activated in
emergencies, such as SARS and the 2003 power outage.

-  The National Microbiology Laboratory, located in the Canadian
Science Centre for Human and Animal Health in Winnipeg, houses
Canada’s Biological Safety Level 4 containment laboratory, one of
just 15 such laboratories in the world equipped to handle some of
the most virulent pathogens.

-  Canada has developed a Federal Nuclear Emergency Plan to coordinate the federal response to an uncontrolled release of
radioactive materials.

-  Canada’s ability to track and detect bioterrorist events has been
enhanced through the purchase of more advanced equipment for
our laboratories and the provision of timely information sharing on
disease incidents and the development of the Global Public Health
Intelligence Network.

-  Canada plays a leading role in the Global Health Security Initiative.
The initiative is a partnership among G7 countries, Mexico, the
European Union and the World Health Organization to strengthen
global public health preparedness and response to the threat of
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear terrorism. Canada
provides the secretariat for the initiative and also chairs the Global
Health Security Action Group, a network of key officials responsible
for developing and implementing concrete actions to improve
global health security.


-----

-  As part of the Canada-U.S. Smart Border initiative, Health Canada
and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services are
building on their existing relationship to develop and begin to
implement a biosecurity public health work plan.

-  Canada and the United States are developing and harmonizing
international nuclear emergency arrangements through the
Canada-U.S. Joint Radiological Emergency Response Plan, as well
as working with the International Atomic Energy Agency.

-  Canada, together with the United States, the United Kingdom, and
Australia, has established an international network dealing with
scientific, technical and intelligence aspects of chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear terrorism issues.

-  The Government is expanding its stock of pharmaceutical and
medical supplies in warehouses strategically located around the
country, ready to be deployed quickly and efficiently in support of
provincial and territorial governments.

-  Improvements have also been made to Canada’s capacity to
provide quarantine services at our major international airports.

**The Way Forward**

The Government will continue to enhance the coherence and
capacity of the national public health emergency management system,
and will continue its efforts to address key strategic challenges with its
partners. To these ends, Budget 2004 committed an additional
$665 million over the next three years.

_Strategic Co-ordination_

The new Public Health Agency of Canada is being established to
strengthen Canada's public health and emergency response capacity, and
to develop national strategies for managing infectious diseases and
chronic diseases. The new agency will be based upon a distributed model
that builds on existing offices across Canada — in Ottawa, Vancouver,
Edmonton, Winnipeg, Toronto, Guelph, Montreal and Halifax. The work of
the Agency will be carried out in all jurisdictions through its regional
offices, through the Pan-Canadian Public Health Network, and through the
new Centres of Public Health.

The agency will be led by the new Chief Public Health Officer for

Canada, who will be charged with providing timely, objective and
evidence-based advice on all matters pertaining to public health and
national readiness to deal with public health threats, providing leadership


-----

in advancing Canada's interests in international agencies focussed on
public health matters, and helping to co-ordinate the national public health
response during public health disasters and emergencies.

International co-ordination and capacity will be strengthened by

linking the new Public Health Agency to an international network for
disease control and emergency response, alongside the World Health
Organization, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and
other agencies in Europe and Asia.

_Building National Capacity_

Health emergency response capacity will be increased by
establishing health emergency response teams, made up of health
professionals across the country. These professionals will continue to
work in various health care settings, but will be available to come together
and assist local authorities in an emergency situation.

The National Emergency Services Stockpile System will be

replenished with the necessary supplies (portable hospitals, mini-clinics,
blankets, etc.) and the national inventory of drugs will be updated.

The Canadian Field Epidemiology Program — a federally

sponsored and run program for public health graduates — will be
expanded to address human resources shortages in this important area.

Funding will be provided for fellowships, bursaries, chairs and

community-based public health apprenticeships.

Public health surveillance will be enhanced through work with the

provinces and other stakeholders to develop and implement improved
data collection standards to facilitate sharing of public health information
on a national basis. Budget 2004 provided an additional $100 million to
Canada Health Infoway to support the development and implementation
of a national public health surveillance system.

Funding will be provided to establish regional centres of excellence

in public health to advance understanding and action on key priority
areas, for example, communicable disease epidemiology.


-----

Laboratory capacity will be enhanced at the National Microbiology

Laboratory in Winnipeg and the Laboratory for Foodborne Zoonoses in
Guelph, including acquisition of new equipment. Support will be provided
for a new emergency operations centre at the National Microbiology
Laboratory and laboratory networks will be strengthened. Increased
funding will also be provided to support laboratory-based research to
increase Canada's diagnostic capacity.

Budget 2004 makes $300 million available to the provinces and

territories over the next three years in support of the National
Immunization Strategy to assist with the introduction of new and
recommended childhood and adolescent vaccines.

Budget 2004 also makes $100 million available to help the

provinces and territories relieve stresses on their public health systems
and to address immediate gaps in capacity.

_Building on Momentum_

Going forward, the Government intends to take all necessary
measures to fully integrate its approach to public health emergencies with
the national security agenda. As indicated previously, the public health
dimension will figure prominently in the Government’s integrated threat
assessments, and the new Public Health Agency of Canada will be
launched as a matter of priority.

To ensure that the new Public Health Agency is able to take its

place among the best public health agencies in the world, key
international partners such as the World Health Organization, the Pan
American Health Organization, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, and the Health Protection Agency in the United Kingdom will
be engaged during its development so that Canada may benefit from their
expertise.

The Government is also working, and will continue to work, with the

provinces and territories to address vulnerabilities and build on existing
public health strengths across Canada. To this end, the Minister of State
(Public Health) is consulting with stakeholders across the country to
discuss how to improve intergovernmental collaboration on public health
and to seek their guidance on how the federal agency and the Chief
Public Health Officer should function.


-----

### Chapter 6
 Transportation Security

**Highlights**

- Strengthen our marine security through a six-point plan that
includes:
- clarifying responsibilities and strengthening co-ordination

- establishing marine security operations centres

- increasing the Canadian Forces, RCMP, and Canadian Coast
Guard on-water presence as well as the Department of
Fisheries and Oceans aerial surveillance

- securing fleet communications

- pursuing greater marine security co-operation with the
United States

- strengthening the security of marine ports and facilities

- Enhance security in aviation, including air cargo

- Improve and extend security background check requirements for
transportation workers


**Context**

Canada relies on its transportation network of roads, railways,
pipelines, shipping and airlines to move people and goods between
communities within Canada as well as between Canada and our trading
partners in North America and around the world.

Terrorists’ use of aircraft as weapons of mass destruction and

subsequent terrorist attacks on commuters — most recently in Madrid,
Spain — have offended our sense of security and have sparked a
reassessment of the vulnerabilities of the Canadian transportation system.

Canada has a responsibility to contribute to the security of the

North American transportation system by working jointly with our
neighbours to manage the security of our skies, our surface routes, and
our waters, by encouraging stringent, consistent regulatory standards,
and by collaborating in our efforts to better detect, assess, and respond
to threats.

Canada must also do its part to secure the international

transportation system by working bilaterally and through multilateral
institutions with our international partners to raise transportation security
standards, and to increase international co-ordination.


-----

**Progress to Date**

Canada has long been recognized as having one of the most safe
and secure aviation systems in the world — including through the
objective assessment of the International Civil Aviation Organization. The
tragic loss in 1985 of an Air India jet after departing Canada prompted the
Government to implement measures such as searches of passengers and
their carry-on baggage, matching baggage with passengers, and
conducting background checks on airport workers.

Following the events of September 11, 2001, we took further steps

to build on these efforts to secure the air transportation system. The
Government committed $2.2 billion to enhance Canada's aviation
security. Of these funds, more than $1 billion was allocated to acquire and
operate advanced explosives detection systems at Canadian airports. The
Canadian Air Transport Security Authority was created to provide a
professional corps of well-trained security officers to screen passengers
and their baggage, to screen non-passengers entering restricted areas at
airports, and to implement an enhanced restricted-area pass system at
Canadian airports.

To protect aircraft in flight, the Government required the fortification

of cockpits through the installation of reinforced cockpit doors, and we
played a leading role at the International Civil Aviation Organization to
have this requirement adopted internationally. Furthermore, the
Government established the Air Carrier Protective Program, placing
specially trained, armed RCMP undercover officers on selected flights.

Since 1985, Transport Canada, with the support of the RCMP and

Canadian Security and Intelligence Service, has conducted
comprehensive background checks on airport workers. To further
enhance our security clearance system at airports, the Government is
moving to screen individuals for links to organized crime and other
criminal associations.

In recognition of our shared responsibility for our common air

space, Canada and the United States have been formal partners since
1958 in its defence and security through NORAD. Since September 11,
NORAD has adapted to the new threat environment by increasing its
operational readiness and by addressing threats within and outside North
America. Canada and the United States have also further enhanced North
American defence and security co-operation through the creation of
the Bi-National Planning Group located at Colorado Springs, Colorado.
This group, among other things, is working to improve marine security
co-operation, protecting North America from marine threats.


-----

The Government has allocated additional funds for marine security

to better track vessels operating in Canadian waters, increase
surveillance, protect marine infrastructure, and improve domestic and
international coordination. Key measures include long-range detection
technologies; enhanced screening of ships’ passengers and crews;
advanced reporting requirements to improve the assessment of potential
risks posed by vessels, their passengers and cargo; and measures to
intercept vessels of concern before they arrive on our shores.

The Government has taken steps to strengthen security at marine

facilities. For example, the RCMP has established National Ports
Enforcement Teams at Vancouver, Halifax and Montreal.

Canada also played a leading role at the International Maritime

Organization to develop a comprehensive international marine security
regime set to enter into force in July 2004. The International Convention
for the Safety of Life at Sea and the International Ship and Port Facility
Security Code now require security assessments and plans for ships and
marine facilities, including the designation of security officers on ships.
The amendments to the convention require ships to be fitted with
transponder systems that automatically transmit the vessel’s identity, type,
position, course, speed, navigational status and other safety-related
information to shore stations, other ships, and aircraft.

Intermodal cargo containers, which can be moved intact between

trucks, trains, and ships, serve as the backbone of the international
system for the trade in goods. Over 2.5 million 20-foot equivalent units
move through our ports every year — many of them destined for the
United States. Along with enhanced electronic screening capability, the
federal government is invoking mandatory advanced notice requirements
and automated targeting systems to identify and target inspections on
high-risk cargo. Canada has partnered with the United States to jointly
position customs officers at key North American ports. Technology
investments such as gamma-ray systems, ion mobility spectrometers, and
trace detection systems, permit effective and unobtrusive screening of
containers for explosive, chemical, biological, nuclear and radiological
devices.

**The Way Forward**

The Government will work with our international partners, bilaterally
and through multilateral forums, to enhance the security of our skies, our
waters, and surface routes for the movement of people and commerce.
With the United States, we will work to develop stringent, consistent
regulatory standards, and we will collaborate more closely to better detect,
assess, and respond to threats. We will work with other countries to


-----

strengthen international standards for transportation security, build
confidence in one another’s security standards, and where this has been
accomplished, mutually recognize them.

Aviation security remains a primary concern and further steps will

be taken in this area. The proposed Public Safety Act, 2002 would,
among other things, clarify and strengthen authorities for the RCMP,
CSIS, and Transport Canada to request passenger information to assess
threats to transportation security, and for other limited purposes.

In partnership with the private sector and our international partners,

we will identify strategies to enhance the security of air cargo. These
strategies should build on programs pioneered by Canada for the
movement of cargo by truck. This would include building on programs
such as the Partners in Protection program for identifying trusted
shippers, filing advance notice of cargo being shipped by air, and
automated targeting systems to identify high-risk cargo for closer
inspection.

We will work with the United States and with our G8 partners to

develop further security measures, including co-operation on threat and
vulnerability assessment methodology. This will be used, for example, to
assess risks and effective countermeasures for potential attacks from
shoulder-fired missiles.

The Government will implement a six-point plan to strengthen

marine security, and invest $308 million from the security reserve set
aside in Budget 2004.

First, we are clarifying and strengthening accountability for marine

security amongst the various portfolios that have a role to play in securing
our waters. As a result of changes implemented the day the new
government took power, the Minister of Transport has lead responsibility
for marine safety and security policy co-ordination and regulation. The
Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness will continue to
have lead responsibility for enforcement and policing. The Minister of
National Defence will be the lead minister for the co-ordination of on-water
response to a marine threat or a developing crisis in our Exclusive
Economic Zone and along our coasts.

Second, we are establishing Marine Security Operations Centres.

Headed by Canadian Forces Maritime Command, the centres will include
staff from the CBSA, Transport Canada, the RCMP, and the Canadian
Coast Guard. Reflecting the approach the Canadian Forces and Canadian
Coast Guard take to carry out search and rescue operations, these
Marine Security Operations Centres will have the authority and capacity,
through interagency staffing, to bring to bear all civilian and military


-----

resources necessary to detect, assess, and respond to a marine security
threat. Marine Security Operations Centres will be networked with the
Coast Guard’s vessel traffic and communications systems, and with the
new Government Operations Centre in Ottawa.

Third, we are increasing on-water patrols to better position the

RCMP, Coast Guard and the Canadian Forces Maritime Command to
intervene, interdict, and board ships that may pose threats to Canada.
As well, the Government is increasing the Department of Fisheries and
Ocean’s aerial surveillance activities. Combined with Canadian Forces
aerial surveillance activities, these programs detect, track and classify
vessels in our waters.

Fourth, the Government will implement secure communications

technologies that will enhance the ability of our civilian and military fleets
to communicate with each other and with the Marine Security Operations
Centres.

Fifth, Canada and the United States will work more closely to

protect and defend our coasts and our territorial waters. Given that we
share responsibility for our contiguous waters, we will work with the United
States to pursue enhanced marine security cooperation, including
encouraging mutually high and compatible rules, standards and
operations, among other measures.

Canada will propose collaborating more closely in the

enhancement of the security of our ports and vessels by conducting of
common threat, vulnerability and risk assessments, and through security
audit programs. Canada will also strive to closely co-ordinate our Marine
Security Operations Centres with the U.S. Coast Guard Operations
Centres. Working together, these centres would provide a comprehensive
picture of vessels operating in our contiguous waters. They could
systematically share information on vessels, crew and cargo that may
pose a threat to our shared security, and we would propose that they
co-ordinate efforts to target and intercept these threats.

Sixth, the Government will strengthen security at ports and other

marine facilities, such as locks in the St. Lawrence Seaway. We are
implementing mandatory regulatory standards for marine facilities that will
require operators by July 1, 2004, to have in place plans that address
security vulnerabilities.

The Government has a range of programs that require security

background checks for transportation workers, for example, for those
working in restricted areas at airports and for commercial truck drivers
crossing the Canada-United States border. The Government has


-----

committed to introducing similar requirements at marine ports. We will
explore expanding the requirements for background checks to a broader
range of transportation workers.

Canada will work with the United States to improve the security of

intermodal cargo containers. Our aim is to deepen our existing
co-operation by partnering in the Container Security Initiative. We will
explore the deployment of customs officers at overseas ports to verify
inspections of high-risk containers before they are loaded on vessels
destined for North America. Given the integrated nature of North
American shipping, we will increase the compatibility of our systems for
automated targeting of high-risk cargo at seaports, and we will establish
protocols for sharing information on such cargo.

We will work with our international partners to identify and

implement new technologies, such as electronic seals, global positioning
system tracking, and embedded computer chip technology, to signal
breaches of the physical integrity of shipping containers — whether at a
port, or on a truck, ship or train. With our G8 partners and the World
Customs Organization, we will work to establish an integrated container
security regime that enhances the level of security of intermodal
containers globally.

It is important to do more to protect our critical transportation

infrastructure. This will require collaboration with provincial and municipal
governments, and with independent operators responsible for key parts of
our transportation system.

For example, rail operators own the track that carries passengers

and freight across Canada. Pipelines that are privately owned and
operated carry oil and gas resources to our urban centres and to the
United States. Bridge and tunnel operators are responsible for key trade
corridors to the United States. NavCanada owns and operates Canada’s
air navigation system on which Canadians rely for continued safe
operation of our air space. Airport and marine port authorities are
responsible for the gateways connecting Canadians and the Canadian
economy with the rest of the world.

As described in Chapter 4: Emergency Planning and Management,

the Government will work with provinces, territories and the private sector
to define the Critical Infrastructure Protection Strategy for Canada. This
will include the protection of Canada’s critical transportation infrastructure.


-----

### Chapter 7
 Border Security

**Highlights**

- Deploy facial recognition (digitized photograph) biometric on
Canadian passports

- Complete RCMP electronic fingerprint system

- Streamline refugee determination process

- Further develop next generation smart borders agenda

- Apply smart borders principles internationally


**Context**

Effective border management requires governments to treat the
border as more than a single line at which threats can be intercepted.
Well before the events of September 11, 2001, Canada had taken
significant steps to enhance border security — recognizing that a modern
border requires, as much as possible, that screening activities should take
place before a traveller or cargo arrives at our ports of entry. Management
of our borders is in keeping with the need to facilitate trade and travel,
while preventing high-risk travellers and cargo from entering Canada
through air, land, and marine ports.

**Progress to Date**

Border management became even more urgent in the aftermath of
the September 11 attacks. The Government of Canada took immediate
steps to enhance the security of our borders by allocating $646 million in
Budget 2001 to initiatives including equipping and deploying more
intelligence, investigative, and front-line personnel.

The Government also provided funds to improve the screening of

immigrants, refugee claimants and visitors and to enhance the capacity to
detain and remove anyone posing a risk to Canada. This permits the
Government to better identify individuals posing a threat to Canada while
facilitating the flow of those who do not.

The Government created the Immigration Intelligence Branch,

currently located in the Canada Border Services Agency, to better support
screening of persons suspected of terrorism, organized crime and war
crimes or crimes against humanity. The Government also improved the
screening of visa applicants abroad and began to security screen all


-----

refugee claimants immediately after a claim is made. Canada also
introduced the new Permanent Resident Card, which has been
recognized as one of the most secure identity documents in the world.

Criminals and other persons who pose security threats will

sometimes try to use forged documents to gain access to other countries.
A Canadian approach that has been successfully adopted by other
countries, including the United States, is to place migration integrity
officers abroad to combat illegal migration, including people smuggling
and trafficking. Working with partners, these officers work to identify and
stop high-risk travellers before they can board planes bound for Canada.
They also train local airline and airport authorities to identify false and
altered travel documents. In the past six years, these officers have
stopped more than 40,000 people with improper documents from
boarding planes for North America.

In 2001, Parliament passed the Government’s new Immigration and

_Refugee Protection Act,_ which provides more tools to address security
threats. The Act contains more stringent penalties for people using or
selling forged or false documents and it allows the Government to deny
individuals who are confirmed as security threats access to our refugee
determination process. The Act also provides additional tools to prevent
access to Canada by members of foreign-based organized crime groups.
New provisions include grounds of inadmissibility for persons involved in
people smuggling and trafficking, money laundering and trans-border
offences related to the possession of illegal substances. There are
stronger and new offences for counterfeiting and for people smuggling
and trafficking; and there are reduced appeal opportunities for organized
crime members who are ordered deported.

The Government also imposed new visa requirements on

10 countries, as well as on seafarers, to allow for the screening abroad of
potential security risks. We quickly implemented an advance passenger
information/passenger name record system to obtain information on
travellers destined for Canada. This data is used to identify high-risk
individuals before they arrive at Canadian ports of entry.

To strengthen our ability to verify the identity of individuals seeking

to enter Canada, the Government deployed LiveScan digital fingerprint
machines at major border offices. These machines capture fingerprints,
biographical information and photographs of all refugee claimants and
individuals whose identity may be in doubt. This data is sent electronically
to the RCMP for further checks.

To help meet the challenges posed by international terrorism, the

RCMP set up integrated national security enforcement teams in key
locations. The integrated national security enforcement team members


-----

collect, analyse and share intelligence about national security among
partners. Working together, they are better able to enforce the law and
they improve partner agencies’ capacity to manage national security
threats and meet specific mandate responsibilities. Integrating intelligence
and enforcement, from the very early stages of criminal activity or
organized crime, has proven to be a highly effective model for successful
prosecution.

As part of the structural changes announced in December 2003,

the Government created the Canada Border Services Agency. This
agency brings together the border security and intelligence functions
formerly with the Canada Customs and Revenue Agency, Citizenship and
Immigration Canada and the Canadian Food Inspection Agency. To better
link these efforts with the policing and broader intelligence community, the
agency was brought into the new Department of Public Safety and
Emergency Preparedness — which includes the Canadian Security
Intelligence Service (CSIS) and the RCMP. These actions are helping us
to better integrate our intelligence and law enforcement officials with those
responsible for making risk-based decisions on the flow of people and
goods at our borders.

_Smart Borders Discussions with the United States_

Canada took the lead in proposing to the United States a
comprehensive smart borders strategy that would enhance North
American security and prosperity. The Smart Borders Declaration, signed
with the United States on December 12, 2001, supports a detailed
32-point Action Plan to enhance the security of the flow of goods and
people and the transportation system, and to strengthen intelligence and
law enforcement co-operation. The Smart Borders initiatives make both
countries partners in systems and programs that expedite the flow of
low-risk goods and people while increasing the information that is needed
to screen higher-risk flows.

Examples of progress in the Smart Borders discussions include:

-  The joint NEXUS program expedites the flow of pre-approved,
low-risk travellers in both directions across the land border. NEXUS
currently operates at 11 high-volume border crossings, with more
sites planned.

-  The Free and Secure Trade (FAST) program takes the same
approach to low-risk, pre-approved commercial goods and truck
drivers. It currently operates at the 12 highest-volume border
crossings and will be available at all major commercial crossings by
the end of 2004.


-----

-  The Canada-U.S. Safe Third Country Agreement has been signed
which, once implemented, will permit both countries to better
manage the flow of refugee claimants across our common land
border.

-  Canada and the United States have expanded integrated border
enforcement teams to cover the 14 geographic regions along the
land border. These multidisciplinary teams deal with potential
terrorist and criminal activity between ports of entry.

-  The Canada Border Services Agency created the National Risk
Assessment Centre to improve information sharing about high-risk
individuals and cargo with the United States. This is increasing the
capacity of the two countries to detect and stop high-risk travellers
and cargo destined for either country. The National Risk
Assessment Centre will be linked to the Integrated Threat
Assessment Centre described earlier.

**The Way Forward**

Canada has made considerable progress on improving border
security. However, we need to continue building a 21st-century border that
demonstrates to the world that security and prosperity can be
simultaneously pursued effectively. The Government is taking a
comprehensive approach to enhancing the measures taken to secure our
borders, including:

-  continuing the focus on our domestic border security;

-  completing the Smart Border Action Plan launched in 2001;

-  developing a next generation smart borders agenda with the
United States and Mexico; and

-  applying the smart borders principles around the world.

In support of domestic border security initiatives, we are also

committing to spending an additional $110.1 million in this area.

_Domestic Border Security Initiatives_

We will continue to study emerging technologies that could
significantly improve our ability to screen passengers and goods destined
for Canada. We are examining the possibility of implementing a program
to permit us to screen passengers while they are making their flight
reservations abroad. This would allow us to stop known risks from
boarding a flight destined for Canada.


-----

The international community is increasingly using new

technologies, including biometrics, to facilitate low-risk travellers and
interrupt the flow of higher-risk travellers. Canada has worked with the
International Civil Aviation Organization to develop globally interoperable
security standards for travel documents. In May 2003, the organization
announced that facial recognition would be the international biometric
standard for travel documents. Canada will begin issuing a biometrically
enabled smart chip passport in early 2005. There will be no change in the
way that Canadians apply for a passport. However, the photo that they
submit will be digitized and stored on a chip imbedded in the passport.

Given the critical role that biometrics increasingly play in

authenticating the identity of travellers, the Government will also work
toward a broader use of biometrics. In accordance with international
standards, Canada will examine how to use biometrics in our border and
immigration systems to enhance the design and issuance processes of
travel and proof-of-status documents and to validate the identity of
travellers at our ports of entry.

The RCMP is responsible for fingerprint identification and criminal

record activities on behalf of Canada’s law enforcement, criminal justice
and public safety communities. The Auditor General’s Report in 2004
criticized the Government for not yet implementing the RCMP Real Time
Identification project, an automated process for electronic fingerprint
screening. To achieve this system, the Government has allocated funds
from Budget 2004 to complete the project. This system will allow
fingerprints to be electronically recorded, transmitted and instantly verified
against broader databases. It will also permit the RCMP to avoid future
backlogs and to modernize criminal record and fingerprint identification
processes.

Canada’s openness to refugees is a reflection of our international

commitments and humanitarian tradition. As announced in December
2003, the Government is developing strategies to reform the refugee
determination process to create a more streamlined system. This includes
a reformed appointment process to ensure the quality and effectiveness
of the Immigration and Refugee Board. As an initial step, on
March 16, 2004, the Government announced strengthened criteria for
individuals being considered for appointment to the board and an
increased role for parliamentarians in the nomination process. The
Government will table new measures in the coming months to better
provide protection to those genuinely in need and to more efficiently
identify and remove those individuals who may be attempting to abuse our
refugee and immigration system.


-----

The Government continues to examine ways to enhance our

capacity to detain and remove individuals who are inadmissible to
Canada. Investigations and removals of high-risk individuals are integral
to our overall border management strategy. Without these key activities,
the integrity of our immigration system would be severely undermined.

_Completing the Smart Borders Action Plan_

We will follow through on our commitment to complete the
initiatives identified in the 32-point Action Plan. We will implement the
Canada-U.S. Safe Third Party Agreement signed in December 2002 to
better manage the flow of refugee claimants across the land border.
We will also implement the agreement with the United States to
automatically share advance passenger information/passenger name
record data on high-risk travellers destined to either country.

Under the Canada-U.S. Cross-Border Crime Forum, the two

countries are finalizing a joint threat assessment to identify high-level
organized crime priority targets that pose a threat to both countries and
are updating the 2001 Canada-U.S. Border Drug Threat Assessment and
have begun work on a bilateral action plan to combat trafficking.

_Developing a Next Generation Smart Borders Agenda_

We will build on the success of the existing Canada-U.S. Smart
Borders process to develop a next generation smart borders agenda with
the United States and Mexico that will allow us to further enhance the
security and prosperity of Canadians. Detailed discussions on this
initiative, already underway, will seek to strengthen strategies to reduce
the transactions that are required at the border. This agenda would both
deepen and broaden the existing Smart Borders Action Plan and include
new areas such as food safety, cyber-security, public health, marine and
transport security.

_Applying Smart Borders Principles Internationally_

Finally, building on Canada’s history of international co-operation,
we have the opportunity to contribute to the security of the international
system of trade and travel by working with our international partners.
Through institutions such as the G8, the World Customs Organization, the
International Maritime Organization, and the Asia-Pacific Economic
Co-operation forum, we will seek to enhance international standards and
to internationalize our Smart Borders programs.


-----

### Chapter 8
 International Security

**Highlights**

- National security will be one of the top priorities in our
International Policy Review.

- Leverage Canada’s experience in building peace, order and good
government to help developing, failed and failing states, beginning
with the establishment of a dedicated capacity-building fund

- Continue to play an important role in countering international
terrorism, preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, and defusing intra- and interstate conflicts

- Engage in new forums for dialogue that will broaden international
consensus around our security priorities


**Context**

Canada’s national security will be one of the top priorities in our
International Policy Review. The international policy that results from this
review — particularly in the security realm — will also reflect our
increasingly integrated approach to defence, diplomacy and development
(the “3Ds”).

National security is a key driver of Canadian defence policy. The

primary obligation of the Canadian Forces is to defend Canada and
Canadians, particularly from external military threats. They also play a key
role in protecting Canadians from internal threats to their security, both
accidental and intentional.

Our diplomatic pursuit of international peace and security is also

driven, in large part, by our national security interests. Our security was
the paramount rationale for our activism in the shaping of the United
Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and for our
contributions to arms control and disarmament initiatives during the
Cold War. More recently, national security concerns have influenced the
types of assistance we provide to certain failing and failed states in crisis.

The International Policy Review will make important

recommendations regarding the Government of Canada’s diplomatic,
defence and development agenda, as well as the structure of the
Canadian Forces. Without prejudging the final shape of these
recommendations, the Government has identified a number of security
priorities in this area.


-----

**Progress to Date**

Since September 11, the Government has reaffirmed Canada’s
commitment to both NATO and the United Nations and has engaged on
several fronts to counter threats to our national security. Based on the
current threat environment, we have placed the highest priority on
countering international terrorism, preventing the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, assisting failed and failing states, and defusing intraand interstate conflicts that threaten our national security.

_International Terrorism_

In response to the attacks of September 11, Canada was actively
involved in NATO’s decision to invoke Article 5 of the NATO Treaty, which
provides for the collective defence of an ally who is attacked.

From the outset, Canada was an active participant in the military

campaign against both al-Qaeda and the Taliban regime in Afghanistan
that had sheltered and supported this terrorist network. Canada deployed
significant ground, air and naval forces. The Government also announced
in Budget 2001 that it would enhance the capacity of JTF2, our military’s
special forces, to counter terrorism both at home and abroad.

At the United Nations, Canada played a key role in negotiating the

implementation of that organization’s 12 international terrorism
conventions. In addition, we acted quickly and decisively to freeze terrorist
assets through both the UN Suppression of Terrorism regulations and the
Canadian Criminal Code.

We enhanced our counter-terrorism capacity-building efforts in

developing states. For a number of years, Canadian experts across the
Government have provided assistance to these states to enable them to
prevent and respond to terrorist activity in accordance with international
norms and standards, including those related to human rights.

_Weapons of Mass Destruction_

Canada has played a leading role in preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. Under the Canadian presidency in 2002,
the G8 created the Global Partnership Program aimed at preventing the
acquisition, by terrorists or those who shelter them, of materials and
expertise associated with weapons of mass destruction.


-----

Early in 2004, Canada became a full partner in the Proliferation

Security Initiative, which aims to deter and halt the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, their delivery systems, and related
materials. This security initiative contributed to Libya’s important decision
to abandon its weapons of mass destruction program.

In support of our international commitments, the Government is

further strengthening Canada’s licensing and import/export controls on
materials that could be used to produce weapons of mass destruction.

Budget 2001 funded the creation of a dedicated nuclear, biological,

and chemical response unit to support first line responders in a domestic
situation, if requested, and to support deployed operations abroad.

Finally, Canada is discussing the possibility of participating in the

U.S. ballistic missile defence system to increase the security of North
America. Our final decision on participation will be consistent with our
long-standing opposition to the weaponization of space.

_Failed and Failing States and Intra- and Interstate Conflicts_

Canada has also been actively engaged in international efforts to
prevent conflict, as well as to keep and build the peace in failed, failing
and post-conflict states. Our diplomats, aid workers and armed forces are
currently deployed around the globe in a variety of peace efforts. On the
peacebuilding front alone, Canada is involved in Haiti, Afghanistan, and
the Balkans.

In Afghanistan, Canada is playing a critical role to help restore

peace, stabilize the country, and rebuild democratic institutions.
In 2003-04, Canada provided the largest contingent to the NATO-led
International Security Assistance Force. Canada has pledged $600 million
over seven years to help Afghans rebuild their lives and their institutions.
This is our single largest bilateral aid program ever. Canadian aid workers
and diplomats are working with Afghan leaders and civil society to help
build a representative and democratic government.

**The Way Forward**

_The Canadian Forces_

The government recognizes that the Canadian Forces constitute an
essential national security capability. The vital role they play in responding
to emergencies has been referred to in Chapter 4. Our forces must also
be able to defend Canada, help secure North America, and address
threats to our national security as far away from our borders as possible.


-----

Indeed, getting the right balance between domestic and international
security concerns will be an important consideration in determining the
roles and force structure of the Canadian Forces.

In this increasingly unstable international threat environment,

Canada must have armed forces that are flexible, responsive and
combat-capable for a wide range of operations, and that are able to work
with our allies.

This government recognizes, however, that the Canadian Forces

are more than a national security capability. When Canada engages
internationally to protect human rights, for example, it needs to be able to
call on both diplomatic efforts and military power.

We must be selective and strategic when considering the

deployment of our armed forces. Key questions need to be examined,
including: Which efforts would be of greatest relevance to our national
security interests? Do we have the capacity to meaningfully contribute to
a successful outcome?

_Peace, Order and Good Government_

Assisting failed and failing states is one area where the links with
both our national security and our capacity to contribute are clear.

Failed and failing states are potential havens for international

terrorists and organized criminal networks. Terrorist and criminal networks
are already co-operating in money laundering and other illicit activities, all
of which bodes ill for these host states and the rest of the world.

Our preferred approach is to help states avoid slipping into conflict

and fragile situations. Canada’s international development cooperation
program already devotes significant resources to this end and these
efforts will be enhanced. However, when states do fail, Canada’s
expertise must also be brought to bear to re-establish security and to
rebuild institutions.

Canadians have built a bilingual, multicultural federal state whose

system of government and public service is respected around the world.
We have an excellent reputation in international capacity building and in
peace support operations.

The Government will therefore enhance Canada’s capacity for

helping restore peace, order and good government in failed and failing
states. Beyond offsetting direct threats to Canada, the assistance we
provide to these countries is an expression of our values.


-----

One of our initiatives in this area will be to ensure we have greater

military-civilian capacity. We will provide military and police forces to
secure the peace and civilian expertise to help build democratic
institutions. On the civilian side, we will facilitate contributions from across
the Government, as well as from provinces, territories, communities,
non-governmental organizations, the private sector, and the
Canada Corps.

We are also allocating funds from the International Assistance

Envelope towards counter-terrorism capacity building in developing states;
these funds will be managed by the Department of Foreign Affairs.
We expect to provide additional funding for broader capacity-building
programs in failed and failing states in the future. Details will be provided
in the International Policy Review.

Our efforts to build peace, order and good government will involve

greater integration of our defence, development and diplomatic assets.
The impact will the simultaneous advancement of our national security
interests, international peace and stability, and human rights.

_Other Specific Areas of Action_

As part of the fight against international terrorism, Canada will
maintain its military presence in Afghanistan and the Persian Gulf. When
our current commitment ends in August 2004, we will send a new rotation
of ground troops and air personnel to support the NATO mission
in Afghanistan.

We will continue to play an important role in efforts to halt the

proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. In September 2004, for
example, Canada is expected to chair the board of the International
Atomic Energy Agency. During our one-year term, we will seek to
strengthen nuclear safeguards and to build international consensus for
responding to the dangerous nuclear activities of Iran and North Korea.

Finally, we will do our part in defusing intra- and interstate conflicts

that threaten our national security. In consultation with our allies, we will
determine where Canada can best make a difference in the advancement
of peace.

_Engaging the International Community_

We recognize that Canada’s national security interests are well
served by working with like-minded countries to ensure the continued and
enhanced relevance of both NATO and the United Nations. The former is


-----

our best insurance policy in an increasingly dangerous and unpredictable
threat environment. The meaningful reform of the latter is our best hope
for a truly global peace.

We recognize the importance of broadening international

consensus on dealing with threats. Canada has been particularly active in
highlighting a security agenda at the G8 and will continue to do so. We will
continue to pursue a coherent security agenda with key international
partners and other relevant multilateral organizations. We are ready to
engage in any new forums for dialogue that will broaden international
consensus around our security priorities.


-----

