# China’s National Defense in 2004

 Foreword Chapter I. The Security Situation Chapter II. National Defense Policy Chapter III. Revolution in Military Affairs with Chinese Characteristics Chapter IV. Defense Expenditure and Defense Assets Chapter V. The Military Service System Chapter VI. National Defense Mobilization and Reserve Force Building Chapter VII. Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense Chapter VIII. The Armed Forces and the People Chapter IX. International Security Cooperation Chapter X. Arms Control, Disarmament and Non- Proliferation Appendices Appendix I. Members of the CMC of the CPC
 Appendix II. Leaders of the Four Headquarters/Departments of the PLA
 Appendix III. Major Military Exchanges with Other Countries (2003-2004)
 Appendix IV. Participation in Security Consultations (2003-2004) Appendix V. Joint Exercises with Foreign Armed Forces (2003-2004) Appendix VI. Participation in UN Peacekeeping Operations Appendix VII. Major Military Regulations Promulgated Since 2003

**Foreword**

前 言

A panoramic view of the present-day world displays the simultaneous existence of both opportunities
for and challenges to peace and development, and of positive and negative factors bearing on security
and stability. The opportunities cannot be shared and the challenges cannot be overcome unless
diverse civilizations, social systems and development models live together harmoniously, trust each
other and engage in cooperation. Hence, the pursuit of peace, development and cooperation has
become an irresistible trend of history.
放眼当今世界，实现和平发展的机遇与挑战同在，影响安全稳定的积极与消极因素共存。各种
文明、社会制度和发展模式，只有和谐相处才能共享机遇，只有互信合作才能战胜挑战。求和
平、谋发展、促合作已成为不可阻挡的历史潮流。

The development goal for China to strive for in the first two decades of this century is to build a
moderately prosperous society in an all-round way. As a large developing country, China has before it
an arduous task for modernization, which calls for prolonged and persistent hard work. China will
mainly rely on its own strength for development, and therefore poses no obstacle or threat to any one.
China needs a peaceful international environment for its own development, which in turn will enhance
peace and development in the world. Holding high the banner of peace, development and cooperation,
China adheres to an independent foreign policy of peace and a national defense policy of the defensive
nature. China will never go for expansion, nor will it ever seek hegemony.
中国在本世纪头二十年的发展目标，就是集中力量全面建设小康社会。作为发展中的大国，中
国实现现代化任重道远，需要长期坚持不懈的艰苦奋斗。中国发展的基点主要放在依靠自己的
力量上，不会妨碍和威胁任何人。中国需要一个和平的国际环境来发展自己，又努力以自身的
发展促进世界的和平与发展。中国坚持高举和平、发展、合作的旗帜，坚持独立自主的和平外
交政策，坚持防御性的国防政策，永远不搞扩张，永远不称霸。


-----

A major strategic task of the Communist Party of China (CPC) in exercising state power is to secure a
coordinated development of national defense and the economy, and to build modernized, regularized
and revolutionary armed forces to keep the country safe. The Fourth Plenary Session of the 16th CPC
Central Committee and the Enlarged CPC Conference of the Central Military Commission (CMC),
held successively in September 2004, paid a high tribute to Jiang Zemin for his outstanding
contributions to national defense and military modernization, and appointed Hu Jintao Chairman of
the CPC Central Military Commission. Meanwhile, the CMC composition was also readjusted and
expanded, and the developmental direction for national defense and military modernization clearly
defined. In the new stage of the 21st century, China's national defense and army building shall be
guided by Deng Xiaoping Theory and the important thought of the "Three Represents," in an all-round
way implement Jiang Zemin's thought on national defense and army building, maintain the
fundamental principle and system of absolute Party leadership over the armed forces, and take the
military strategy of the new era as an overarching guideline to actively push for the national defense
and military modernization.

坚持国防建设与经济建设协调发展，建设一支现代化、正规化的革命军队，确保国防安全，
是中国共产党执政的一项重大战略任务。2004年9月召开的中国共产党第十六届中央委员会第
四次全体会议和中国共产党中央军事委员会扩大会议，高度评价江泽民为国防和军队现代化
建设作出的杰出贡献，决定胡锦涛任中共中央军委主席，调整充实了中共中央军委组成人员
，进一步指明了国防和军队现代化的发展方向。新世纪新阶段，中国国防和军队建设坚持以
邓小平理论和“三个代表”重要思想为指导，全面贯彻江泽民国防和军队建设思想，坚持党
对军队绝对领导的根本原则和制度，坚持以新时期军事战略方针为统揽，积极推进国防和军
队现代化进程。

This White Paper, China's National Defense in 2004, is published to illustrate China's national defense
policies and the progress made in the past two years in its defense and army building.
为反映中国的国防政策以及近两年国防和军队建设的发展，现发表《2004年中国的国防》白皮
书。

**Chapter I. The Security Situation**

第一章 安全形势

The current international situation continues to undergo profound and complex changes. Peace and
development remain the dominating themes of the times. Although the international situation as a
whole tends to be stable, factors of uncertainty, instability and insecurity are on the increase.

当前，国际形势继续发生深刻而复杂的变化。和平与发展依然是当今时代的主题，国际形势
发展的基本态势保持总体稳定，但不确定、不稳定、不安全因素有所增加。

The trends toward world multipolarization and economic globalization are deepening amid twists and
turns. New changes are occurring in the balance of power among the major international players, with
the process of their realignment and the redistribution of their interests accelerated. New and profound
readjustments have taken place in the relations among the world's major countries. While cooperating
with and seeking support from each other, they are checking on and competing with one another as
well. With their overall strength continuing to rise, the developing countries have become important
players in promoting a multipolar world and democratized international relations. The United Nations
is playing an irreplaceable role in international affairs. Economic globalization and technological
advancement have generated new opportunities for development. As a result of accelerated global
industrial restructuring, and the continued development of regional economic cooperation, world
economy has witnessed new growth, with interdependence among nations deepened and their
common interests increased. However, a fair and rational new international political and economic


-----

order is yet to be established. Tendencies of hegemonism and unilateralism have gained new ground,
as struggles for strategic points, strategic resources and strategic dominance crop up from time to time.
The Iraqi War has exerted a far-reaching influence on the international and regional security
situations. The imbalance in world economic development has worsened, with the North-South gap
continuing to widen, and economic security confronting new challenges.
世界多极化、经济全球化趋势在曲折中深入发展。国际力量对比正在发生新的变化，主要力量
重新分化组合和利益重新分配的进程加快。大国关系出现新的深刻调整，既相互借重、合作又
相互制约、竞争的局面不断发展。广大发展中国家总体实力继续发展，成为推动世界多极化和
国际关系民主化的重要力量。联合国在国际事务中发挥着不可替代的作用。经济全球化和科技
进步带来新的发展机遇，全球产业结构调整步伐加快，区域经济合作持续发展，世界经济出现
新的增长，各国相互依存加深，共同利益增加。但是，公正、合理的国际政治经济新秩序尚未
建立。霸权主义和单边主义倾向有新的发展，围绕战略要地、战略资源和战略主导权的斗争此
起彼伏，伊拉克战争对国际和地区安全形势产生深远影响。世界经济发展不平衡加剧，南北差
距拉大，经济安全面临新的问题。

The military factor plays a greater role in international configuration and national security. Worldwide
Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA) is gaining momentum. The forms of war are undergoing
changes from mechanization to informationalization. Informationalization has become the key factor
in enhancing the warfighting capability of the armed forces. Confrontation between systems has
become the principal feature of confrontation on the battlefield. Asymmetrical, non-contiguous and
non-linear operations have become important patterns of operations. The world's major countries are
making readjustments in their security and military strategies and stepping up transformation of their
armed forces by way of developing high-tech weaponry and military equipment and putting forth new
military doctrines. As a result, the generation gap in military technology between informationalization
on the one hand and mechanization and semi-mechanization on the other is still widening, and
military imbalance worldwide has further increased. The role played by military power in
safeguarding national security is assuming greater prominence.
军事因素对国际格局和国家安全的影响上升。世界新军事变革加速发展，战争形态正由机械化
向信息化转变，信息化成为提高军队战斗力的关键因素，体系对抗成为战场对抗的主要特征，
非对称、非接触、非线性作战成为重要作战方式。世界主要国家调整安全战略和军事战略，发
展高新技术武器装备，创新军事理论，加快军队转型。以信息化对机械化半机械化的军事技术
时代差仍在拉大，世界军事力量对比进一步失衡。军事力量对保障国家安全的作用进一步凸显
。

Traditional and non-traditional security issues are intertwined with the latter posing a growing threat.
Some regional hot spots have cooled down. Security cooperation at the regional level has deepened.
The worldwide campaign against terrorism has made progress. International cooperation in the fields
of information security, energy security, finance security and environment security has been enhanced.
And international efforts to crack down on transnational crimes, prevent epidemic diseases, and
reduce the impact of disasters have been intensified. However, world peace remains elusive.
Geopolitical, ethnic, religious and other conflicts interact with political and economic contradictions,
resulting in frequent outbreak of local wars and armed conflicts. International terrorist forces remain
rampant. It seems rather difficult to eliminate completely the root causes of terrorism, making the fight
against terrorism a long and demanding task before the international community.
传统和非传统安全问题交织，非传统安全威胁日益严重。一些地区热点趋于缓和，区域安全合
作逐步深入，国际反恐斗争取得进展，信息、能源、金融、环境安全领域的国际合作增强，打
击跨国犯罪、防止严重传染性疾病蔓延和进行减灾救灾的国际努力不断强化。但天下仍不太平
，地缘、民族和宗教等冲突同政治经济矛盾相互作用，局部战争和武装冲突时有发生，国际恐
怖势力活动频繁。产生恐怖主义的根源难以从根本上消除，反对恐怖主义将是国际社会的一项
长期艰巨的任务。


-----

The Asia-Pacific region enjoys basic stability in its security situation. As the world's most dynamic
region economically, most nations in the region have made development the centerpiece of their
policy. Major country relations continue to improve and grow. Peaceful consultation has become the
basic approach to the settlement of disputes. Security dialogue and cooperation of various forms have
become more animated. Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) is playing an important role in
promoting common development. The institutionalization of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO) has been basically accomplished. The SCO is incessantly expanding and deepening its
cooperation in the political, security, economic, humanitarian and other fields. The SCO is playing a
greater role in promoting peace, stability and development in the region. China has established a
strategic partnership with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) dedicated to peace
and prosperity in the region, and engaged in comprehensive cooperation that has seen rapid expansion.
Cooperation in East Asia, with the ASEAN and China, Japan and the ROK as the main players, keeps
expanding, leading to greater economic development and political and security trust in the region. The
ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) as the most important official channel for multilateral security
dialogue in the Asia-Pacific region, plays a positive role in promoting security cooperation in the
region. The nuclear issue on the Korean Peninsula has been brought onto the track of peaceful
settlement through dialogue, and the process of the Six-Party Talks has made progress in the
discussion of substantive issues and the institutionalization of the process. Tensions between India and
Pakistan have been eased, and the two countries have maintained the momentum of peaceful
dialogues.
亚太地区安全形势基本稳定。亚太依然是全球最具经济活力的地区，绝大多数国家以发展为主
要政策取向，大国关系保持改善和发展势头，和平协商成为解决争端的基本途径，不同形式的
安全对话与合作日趋活跃。亚太经济合作组织在促进共同发展方面发挥重要作用。上海合作组
织的机制化建设基本完成，并不断扩大和深化政治、安全、经济、人文等领域的合作，在促进
地区和平、稳定、发展方面的作用进一步显现。中国与东盟国家建立致力于和平与繁荣的战略
伙伴关系，双方合作全面、快速发展。以东盟与中、日、韩为主的东亚合作不断扩展，促进了
区域经济发展和政治、安全互信。东盟地区论坛作为亚太地区最重要的官方多边安全对话渠道
，对促进地区安全合作发挥了积极作用。朝鲜半岛核问题已纳入通过对话和平解决的轨道，六
方会谈进程在讨论实质问题和推进机制化等方面取得进展。印巴紧张局势缓解，两国保持了和
平对话势头。

Meanwhile, complicated security factors in the Asia-Pacific region are on the increase. The United
States is realigning and reinforcing its military presence in this region by buttressing military alliances
and accelerating deployment of missile defense systems. Japan is stepping up its constitutional
overhaul, adjusting its military and security policies and developing the missile defense system for
future deployment. It has also markedly increased military activities abroad. The foundation for the
Six-Party Talks is not solid enough as uncertain factors linger in the settlement of the nuclear issue on
the Korean Peninsula. The threat posed by terrorism, separatism and extremism is still grave. Such
transnational crimes as smuggling, piracy, drug trafficking and money laundering are rampant. Many
countries are confronted with the formidable task of eliminating poverty, achieving sustainable
development and enhancing security in the area of public health.
亚太地区安全形势中的复杂因素也在增加。美国重组和加强在亚太地区的军事存在，强化军事
同盟关系，加速部署导弹防御系统。日本加紧推动修宪进程，调整军事安全政策，发展并决定
部署导弹防御系统，对外军事活动明显增加。六方会谈基础尚不牢固，解决朝鲜半岛核问题仍
存在不确定因素。恐怖主义、分裂主义、极端主义威胁依然严峻，走私、海盗、贩毒、洗钱等
跨国犯罪活动猖獗。许多国家面临消除贫困、实现可持续发展、加强公共卫生安全等方面的艰
巨任务。

The situation in the relations between the two sides of the Taiwan Straits is grim. The Taiwan
authorities under Chen Shui-bian have recklessly challenged the status quo that both sides of the


-----

Straits belong to one and the same China, and markedly escalated the "Taiwan independence"
activities designed to split China. Incessantly trumpeting their separatist claim of "one country on each
side," they use referendum to engage in the separatist activities aimed at "Taiwan independence,"
incite hostility among the people on the island toward the mainland, and purchase large amounts of
offensive weapons and equipment. They have not given up their attempt at "Taiwan independence"
through the formulation of a so-called "new constitution for Taiwan." They are still waiting for the
opportune moment to engineer a major "Taiwan independence" incident through the so-called
"constitutional reform." The separatist activities of the "Taiwan independence" forces have
increasingly become the biggest immediate threat to China's sovereignty and territorial integrity as
well as peace and stability on both sides of the Taiwan Straits and the Asia-Pacific region as a whole.
The United States has on many occasions reaffirmed adherence to the one China policy, observance of
the three joint communiqués and opposition to "Taiwan independence." However, it continues to
increase, quantitatively and qualitatively, its arms sales to Taiwan, sending a wrong signal to the
Taiwan authorities. The US action does not serve a stable situation across the Taiwan Straits.
台湾海峡两岸关系形势严峻。陈水扁当局肆意挑衅两岸同属一个中国的现状，图谋分裂中国的
“台独”活动明显升级。它不断鼓吹两岸“一边一国”的分裂主张，利用公投进行“台独”分
裂活动，煽动岛内民众仇视大陆，大规模购买进攻性武器装备。它并未放弃通过制定所谓“台
湾新宪法”走向“台独”的企图，仍然伺机利用所谓“宪政改造”制造重大“台独”事变。“
台独”分裂活动日益成为破坏中国主权和领土完整，危害台海两岸及亚太地区和平与稳定的最
大现实威胁。美国多次重申坚持一个中国政策、遵守三个联合公报、反对“台独”的立场。但
是，美国继续提升售台武器的数量和质量，向台湾当局发出错误信号，不利于台海局势的稳定
。

China's national security environment in this pluralistic, diversified and interdependent world has on
the whole improved, but new challenges keep cropping up. The vicious rise of the "Taiwan
independence" forces, the technological gap resulting from RMA, the risks and challenges caused by
the development of the trends toward economic globalization, and the prolonged existence of
unipolarity vis-a-vis multipolarity - all these will have a major impact on China's security.
Nevertheless, China is determined to safeguard its national sovereignty and security, no matter how
the international situation may evolve, and what difficulties it may encounter, so as to join hands with
the people around the world in advancing the lofty cause of peace and development for mankind.

在一个多元多样又相互依存的世界中，中国国家安全环境总体得到改善，但也面临新的挑战
。恶性发展的“台独”势力、新军事变革引起的军事技术差距、经济全球化趋势发展带来的
风险和挑战、长期存在的单极和多极矛盾，对中国的安全具有重大影响。无论国际风云如何
变幻，无论遇到什么艰难险阻，中国都将坚决维护国家主权和安全，同世界各国人民一道，
共同推进人类和平与发展的崇高事业。

**Chapter II. National Defense Policy**

第二章 国防政策

China persists in taking the road of peaceful development and unswervingly pursues a national
defense policy defensive in nature. China's national defense is the security guarantee for the survival
and development of the nation. The main tasks of China's national defense are to step up
modernization of its national defense and its armed forces, to safeguard national security and unity,
and to ensure the smooth process of building a moderately prosperous society in an all-round way.
中国坚持走和平发展的道路，坚定不移地奉行防御性的国防政策。中国的国防是国家生存与发
展的安全保障。加强国防和军队现代化建设，维护国家安全统一，确保全面建设小康社会的顺
利进行，是中国国防的主要任务。


-----

Proceeding from the fundamental interests of the country, China's national defense policy is both
subordinated to and in service of the country's development and security strategies. Firmly seizing and
taking full advantage of the important strategic opportunities presented in the first two decades of this
century, China sticks to keeping its development in pace with its security and makes great efforts to
enhance its national strategic capabilities by using multiple security means to cope with both
traditional and non-traditional security threats so as to seek a comprehensive national security in the
political, economic, military and social areas.
中国的国防政策以国家的根本利益为出发点，服从和服务于国家的发展战略和安全战略。中国
紧紧抓住并充分利用本世纪头二十年的重要战略机遇期，坚持发展与安全的统一，努力提高国
家战略能力，运用多元化的安全手段，应对传统和非传统安全威胁，谋求国家政治、经济、军
事和社会的综合安全。

China's basic goals and tasks in maintaining national security are:
中国维护国家安全的基本目标和任务是:

l To stop separation and promote reunification, guard against and resist aggression, and defend

national sovereignty, territorial integrity and maritime rights and interests [Listing in 2002 WP
#2. To stop separation and realize complete reunification of the motherland].

制止分裂，促进统一，防备和抵抗侵略，捍卫国家主权、领土完整和海洋权益;
l To safeguard the interests of national development, promote economic and social development

in an all-round, coordinated and sustainable way and steadily increase the overall national
strength. [1. To consolidate national defense, prevent and resist aggression]

维护国家发展利益，促进经济社会全面、协调、可持续发展，不断增强综合国力;
l To modernize China's national defense in line with both the national conditions of China and the

trend of military development in the world by adhering to the policy of coordinating military and
economic development, and improve the operational capabilities of self-defense under the
conditions of informationalization [4. To accelerate national defense development and
# achieve national defense and military modernization].

坚持国防建设与经济建设协调发展的方针，建立符合中国国情和适应世界军事发展趋势的现代
化国防，提高信息化条件下的防卫作战能力；
l To safeguard the political, economic and cultural rights and interests of the Chinese people,

crack down on criminal activities of all sorts and maintain public order and social stability. [3.
# To stop armed subversion and safeguard social stability]

保障人民群众的政治、经济、文化权益，严厉打击各种犯罪活动，保持正常社会秩序和社会稳
定;
l To pursue an independent foreign policy of peace and adhere to the new security concept

featuring mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality and coordination with a view to securing a longterm and favorable international and surrounding environment. [5. To safeguard world peace
# and oppose aggression and expansion]

奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，坚持互信、互利、平等、协作的新安全观，争取较长时期的良
好国际环境和周边环境。

It is the sacred responsibility of the Chinese armed forces to stop the "Taiwan independence" forces
from splitting the country. The Chinese government continues to adhere to the basic principles of
"peaceful reunification" and "one country, two systems" along with the eight-point proposal on
developing cross-Straits relations and advancing the process of peaceful reunification of the
motherland at the current stage. So long as the Taiwan authorities accept the one China principle and
stop their separatist activities aimed at "Taiwan independence," cross-Straits talks can be held at any
time on officially ending the state of hostility between the two sides, including on the establishment of
a confidence-building mechanism in the military field. The Chinese people are resolutely opposed to
all separatist activities in whatever manifestation aimed at "Taiwan independence," to foreign


-----

interference of any form, and to arms sales to Taiwan or entrance to military alliance of any form with
Taiwan by any country in the world. We will never allow anyone to split Taiwan from China through
whatever means. Should the Taiwan authorities go so far as to make a reckless attempt that constitutes
a major incident of "Taiwan independence," the Chinese people and armed forces will resolutely and
thoroughly crush it at any cost.

制止“台独”势力分裂国家，是中国武装力量的神圣职责。中国政府继续坚持“和平统一、一
国两制”的基本方针和现阶段发展两岸关系、推进祖国和平统一进程的八项主张。只要台湾当
局接受一个中国原则、停止“台独”分裂活动，两岸双方随时可以就正式结束敌对状态，包括
建立军事互信机制进行谈判。中国人民坚决反对任何形式的“台独”分裂活动，坚决反对任何
形式的外来干涉，坚决反对任何国家向台湾出售武器或与台湾进行任何形式的军事结盟，决不
允许任何人以任何方式把台湾从中国分割出去。如果台湾当局铤而走险，胆敢制造重大“台独
”事变，中国人民和武装力量将不惜一切代价，坚决彻底地粉碎“台独”分裂图谋。

To adapt itself to the changes both in the international strategic situation and the national security
environment and rise to the challenges presented by the RMA worldwide, China adheres to the
military strategy of active defense and works to speed up the RMA with Chinese characteristics.
为适应国际战略形势和国家安全环境的变化，迎接世界新军事变革的挑战，中国坚持积极防御
的军事战略方针，加速推进中国特色军事变革。

l To take the road of composite and leapfrog development. Going with the tide of the world's

military development and moving along the direction of informationalization in the process of
modernization, the People's Liberation Army (PLA) shall gradually achieve the transition from
mechanization and semi-mechanization to informationalization. Based on China's national
conditions and the PLA's own conditions, the PLA persists in taking mechanization as the
foundation to promote informationalization, and informationalization as the driving force to bring
forward mechanization. The PLA will promote coordinated development of firepower, mobility
and information capability, enhance the development of its operational strength with priority
given to the Navy, Air Force and Second Artillery Force, and strengthen its comprehensive
deterrence and warfighting capabilities.

走复合式、跨越式发展道路。人民解放军适应世界军事发展的趋势，把信息化作为现代化建设
的发展方向，逐步实现由机械化半机械化向信息化的转型。立足国情和军情，坚持以机械化为
基础，以信息化为主导，以信息化带动机械化，以机械化促进信息化。推动火力、机动力和信
息能力的协调发展，加强以海军、空军和第二炮兵为重点的作战力量建设，全面提高军队的威
慑和实战能力。

l To build a strong military by means of science and technology. The PLA works to improve its

combat capabilities by taking advantage of scientific and technological advances and aims at
building qualitative efficiency instead of a mere quantitative scale, and transforming the military
from a manpower-intensive one to a technology-intensive one. Implementing the Strategic
Project for Talented People, the PLA focuses on training a new type of high-caliber military
personnel. It works to build up a complete system of weaponry and equipment by stepping up
development of new- and high-tech weaponry and equipment while upgrading those in active
service. In an innovative spirit, the PLA endeavors to improve its training system as well as the
means and methods of training so as to raise its military training to a higher level. Relying on
national economic, scientific and technological development, the PLA is devoted to improving
the level of scientific management and achieving a higher overall cost-effectiveness in military
expenditure so as to modernize the armed forces with less input and better results.

实施科技强军。人民解放军依靠科技进步提高战斗力，实现由数量规模型向质量效能型、由人
力密集型向科技密集型的转变。实施人才战略工程，培养高素质新型军事人才。加强高新技术
武器装备发展，改造现役武器装备，形成系统配套的武器装备体系。创新和改进训练体制、方


-----

式和手段，推动军事训练向更高层次发展。依靠国家经济科技发展，提高科学管理水平和军费
使用的整体效益，走投入较少、效益较高的军队现代化建设道路。

l To deepen the reform of the armed forces. Based on the transformation of modern warfare and

the requirements of the socialist market economy, the PLA seeks to achieve development and
breakthroughs in the process of reform and innovation. The PLA develops its military theories in
an innovative spirit, and explores the laws of building the army and conducting operations under
the condition of informationalization. In accordance with the principle of making the troops
smaller and better, as well as more integrated and efficient, and with emphasis on adjusting the
organizational structure and reforming the command system, the PLA works to build and further
improve the military structure and organization to make them appropriate in size, optimal in
structure, streamlined in institutional set-up and flexible and swift in command. The PLA also
works to readjust and regulate the relationship within the military as well as that with the
government and society so as to put in place policies and mechanisms which will help motivate
officers and soldiers.

深化军队改革。人民解放军根据现代战争形态的变化和社会主义市场经济发展的要求，坚持在
改革创新中谋发展、求突破。创新发展军事理论，探索信息化条件下建军和作战的规律。按照
精兵、合成、高效的原则，以组织结构调整和指挥体制改革为重点，建立和完善规模适度、结
构合理、机构精干、指挥灵便的军队体制编制。进一步调整和规范军人与国家、军人与社会以
及军队内部的关系，形成有利于调动官兵积极性的政策制度。

l To step up preparations for military struggle. The PLA takes as its objective to win local wars

under the conditions of informationalization and gives priority to developing weaponry and
equipment, to building joint operational capabilities, and to making full preparations in the
battlefields. Meanwhile, it adheres to the people's war concept and develops the strategies and
tactics of the people's war. To meet the requirements of integrated and joint operations, the PLA
endeavors to establish a modern operational system capable of giving full play to the overall
efficiency of the armed forces as well as the national war potentials. The PLA conducts more
training and exercises with specific objectives in order to raise its capabilities in coping with
various crises and contingencies.

加紧军事斗争准备。人民解放军立足打赢信息化条件下的局部战争，突出加强武器装备建设、
联合作战能力建设和战场建设。坚持人民战争思想，发展人民战争的战略战术。适应一体化联
合作战的要求，建立能够充分发挥武装力量整体效能和国家战争潜力的现代作战体系。加强针
对性演练，提高应对危机和处置各种突发事件的能力。

l To carry out military exchanges and cooperation. In line with the national foreign policy, the

PLA conducts military cooperation that is non-aligned, non-confrontational and not directed
against any third party. The PLA takes part in the UN peacekeeping operations and international
counter-terrorism cooperation. While promoting military exchanges in various forms, the PLA
works to establish security dialogue mechanisms in order to create a military security
environment featuring mutual trust and mutual benefit. It takes part in bilateral or multilateral
joint military exercises in non-traditional security fields so as to enhance the joint capabilities to
cope with threats in those fields. The PLA learns from and draws on the valuable experience of
foreign armed forces, and introduces, on a selective basis, technologically advanced equipment
and better management expertise from abroad to advance the modernization of the Chinese
armed forces.

开展军事交流与合作。人民解放军贯彻国家对外政策，发展不结盟、不对抗、不针对第三方的
军事合作关系。参与联合国维和行动和国际反恐合作，开展多种形式的军事交流，建立军事安
全对话机制，营造互信互利的军事安全环境。参加非传统安全领域的双边或多边联合军事演习
，提高共同应对非传统安全威胁的能力。学习和借鉴外军有益经验，有选择地引进先进的技术
装备和管理方法，促进军队现代化建设。


-----

**Chapter III. Revolution in Military Affairs with Chinese Characteristics**

第三章 中国特色军事变革

The PLA, aiming at building an informationalized force and winning an informationalized war,
deepens its reform, dedicates itself to innovation, improves its quality and actively pushes forward the
RMA with Chinese characteristics with informationalization at the core.
人民解放军按照建设信息化军队、打赢信息化战争的目标，深化改革，锐意创新，加强质量建
设，积极推进以信息化为核心的中国特色军事变革。

**Reducing the PLA by 200,000**
裁减军队员额20万

It has been the established policy to build a streamlined military with Chinese characteristics. Since
the mid-1980s, China has twice downsized its military by a total of 1.5 million. In September 2003,
the Chinese government decided to further reduce 200,000 troops by the end of 2005 to maintain the
size of the PLA at 2.3 million. The current restructuring, while cutting down the numbers, aims at
optimal force structures, smoother internal relations and better quality.
坚定不移地走中国特色的精兵之路，是军队建设的既定方针。二十世纪八十年代中期以来，中
国已经完成两次大规模裁军，共裁减军队员额150万。2003年9月，中国政府决定，2005年前再
裁减军队员额20万，军队总规模将保持230万人。这次裁军在压缩规模的同时，着重优化结构
、理顺关系、提高质量。

Rebalancing the ratio between officers and men. By streamlining structure, reducing the number of
officers in deputy positions, filling officers' posts with non-commissioned officers (NCOs) and
adopting a system of civilian employees, the number of the PLA officers can be substantially reduced
to optimize the ratio between officers and men.
改善官兵编配比例。通过精简机构，减少副职领导干部、部分干部岗位改由士官担任或实行聘
用制等，大幅减少干部数量，使全军官兵的编配比例得到优化。

Improving the system of leadership and command. The emphasis is put on streamlining the staff
offices and the directly affiliated organs at the corps level and above, so as to compress the command
chains and further improve the operational command system to strengthen the command functions.
The numbers of offices and personnel are both reduced by about 15% by adjusting staff functions,
dismantling and merging offices and reducing the numbers of subordinate offices and assigned
personnel.
完善领导指挥体制。重点精简军以上机关和直属单位，减少指挥层次，健全作战指挥体系，强
化指挥功能。调整机关职能，撤并部门，减少内设机构和人员，机关机构和人员均减少15%左
右。

Optimizing the composition of the services and arms of the PLA. The Army is streamlined by
reducing the ordinary troops that are technologically backward while the Navy, Air Force and Second
Artillery Force are strengthened. The make-up of troops and the size of the services and arms are
optimized with an increasing proportion of new- and high-tech units.
优化军兵种结构。精简陆军，减少装备技术落后的一般部队，加强海军、空军和第二炮兵建设
。优化部队内部编成和军兵种规模结构，提高各军兵种高新技术部队的比例。

Deepening the reform of joint logistical support. The PLA continues to adopt the system of joint
logistical support at military area commands. The scope of joint logistical support is further enlarged
and the number of logistical organizations and personnel are reduced while the rear hospitals,
recuperation centers and general-purpose warehouses formerly under the administration of the


-----

services and arms are all integrated and reorganized into the joint logistical support system. An
integrated tri-service joint logistical support system gradually takes shape, thus improving the overall
efficiency.
深化联勤保障体制改革。继续实行以军区为基础的联勤保障体制，扩大联勤保障范围，精简后
勤机构和人员，将军兵种领导管理的后方医院、疗养院和通用物资仓库划归联勤系统统一整编
。逐步实现三军一体化的联勤保障体制，提高综合保障效益。

Realigning the organizational structure of military educational institutions. The PLA aims at
improving the structure and system for educating military personnel in both military and civilian
educational institutions, and speeding up the establishment and improvement of a new educational
system. This new system focuses on pre-assignment education which is separated from education for
academic credentials. In accordance with the requirements for running educational institutions
intensively on a proper scale, the PLA has optimized the system and structure of educational
institutions by cutting down on those that are not essentially different from their civilian counterparts,
and those that are more than necessary, and merging those that are co-located or have similar tasks.
调整院校体制编制。健全军地并举培养军事人才的体制和制度，加快建立和完善以任职教育为
主体、军事高等学历教育和任职教育相对分离的新型院校体系。按照规模化、集约化办学的要
求，优化院校体系结构，精简部分军地通用或同类数量偏多的院校，合并同驻一地或任务相近
的院校。

**Strengthening the Navy, Air Force and Second Artillery Force**

加强海军、空军和第二炮兵建设

While continuing to attach importance to the building of the Army, the PLA gives priority to the
building of the Navy, Air Force and Second Artillery Force to seek balanced development of the
combat force structure, in order to strengthen the capabilities for winning both command of the sea
and command of the air, and conducting strategic counter-strikes.
人民解放军在继续重视陆军建设的同时，加强海军、空军和第二炮兵建设，谋求作战力量结构
协调发展，提高夺取制海权、制空权以及战略反击能力。

The PLA Navy is responsible for safeguarding China's maritime security and maintaining the
sovereignty of its territorial seas along with its maritime rights and interests. The Navy has expanded
the space and extended the depth for offshore defensive operations. Preparation for maritime
battlefield is intensified and improved while the integrated combat capabilities are enhanced in
conducting offshore campaigns, and the capability of nuclear counter-attacks is also enhanced. In
accordance with the principle of smaller but more efficient troops, the PLA Navy compresses the
chain of command and reorganizes the combat forces in a more scientific way while giving
prominence to the building of maritime combat forces, especially amphibious combat forces. It also
speeds up the process of updating its weaponry and equipment with priority given to the development
of new combat ships as well as various kinds of special-purpose aircraft and relevant equipment. At
the same time, the weaponry is increasingly informationalized and long-range precision strike
capability raised. It takes part in joint exercises to enhance its joint operational capabilities and
integrated maritime support capabilities.
海军担负着保卫国家海上方向安全、维护领海主权和海洋权益的任务。海军扩大近海防御作战
空间和防御纵深，加强、完善海战场建设，增强在近海遂行海上战役的综合作战能力和核反击
能力。按照精干、顶用的原则，减少领导指挥层次，对各种作战力量进行科学编成，突出海上
作战兵力特别是两栖作战兵力建设。加快更新海军武器装备，重点发展新型作战舰艇，以及多
种专用飞机和配套装备，提高武器装备的信息化水平和远程精确打击能力。参加诸军兵种联合
演练，提高联合作战能力和海上综合保障能力。


-----

The PLA Air Force is responsible for safeguarding China's airspace security and maintaining a stable
air defense posture nationwide. In order to meet the requirements of informationalized air operations,
the Air Force has gradually shifted from one of territorial air defense to one of both offensive and
defensive operations. Emphasis is placed on the development of new fighters, air defense and antimissile weapons, means of information operations and Air Force automated command systems. The
training of inter-disciplinary personnel is being accelerated for informationalized air operations.
Combined arms and multi-type aircraft combat training is intensified to improve the capabilities in
operations like air strikes, air defense, information counter-measures, early warning and
reconnaissance, strategic mobility and integrated support. Efforts are being made to build a defensive
air force, which is appropriate in size, sound in organization and structure and advanced in weaponry
and equipment, and which possesses integrated systems and a complete array of information support
and operational means.
空军担负着保卫国家领空安全、保持全国空防稳定的任务。空军适应信息化空中作战要求，逐
步实现由国土防空型向攻防兼备型转变。重点发展新型战斗机、防空反导武器、信息作战手段
和空军指挥自动化系统，培养适应信息化空中作战的复合型人才，加强多兵种、多机种合同作
战训练，提高空中打击、防空作战、信息对抗、预警侦察、战略机动和综合保障能力，努力建
设一支总体规模适度、编成结构合理、武器装备先进、系统配套集成、信息支援和作战手段完
备的空中防卫作战力量。

The PLA Second Artillery Force is a major strategic force for protecting China's security. It is
responsible for deterring the enemy from using nuclear weapons against China, and carrying out
nuclear counter-attacks and precision strikes with conventional missiles. By upgrading missiles,
stepping up the R&D of missiles, and promoting the informationalization of missiles and supporting
equipment for command, communications and reconnaissance, the Second Artillery Force has built in
its initial form a weaponry and equipment system that comprises both nuclear and conventional
missiles, covers different ranges, and possesses markedly increased power and efficiency. The PLA
Second Artillery Force boasts a contingent of talents mainly composed of academicians of the Chinese
Academy of Engineering and missile specialists. More than 70% of its active-duty officers have
bachelor's degrees or above. High-tech means are used to reform its training and shorten the cycle for
new weaponry and equipment to be combat-ready. It conducts missile-launching training and
readiness exercises in near-real conditions and constantly enhances its quick-response and precisionstrike capabilities.
第二炮兵是保卫国家安全的重要战略力量，主要担负遏制敌人对中国使用核武器、遂行核反击
和常规导弹精确打击任务。第二炮兵通过加强导弹武器的改进和研发，提高导弹武器和指挥、
通信、侦察等配套装备的信息化水平，初步形成核常兼备、射程衔接、威力和效能明显增强的
武器装备体系。建立了以工程院院士和导弹专家为骨干的人才队伍，超过70%的军官具有大学
本科以上学历。运用高科技手段进行训练改革，缩短新型武器装备形成战斗力的周期。紧贴作
战实际，开展导弹发射训练和近似实战条件下的战备演练，部队的快速反应和精确打击能力不
断提高。

**Speeding Up Informationalization**
推进信息化建设

In its modernization drive, the PLA takes informationalization as its orientation and strategic focus.
By adopting the general approach of giving priority to real needs, making practical innovations,
valuing talented personnel, and achieving informationalization by leaps and bounds, the PLA is
actively engaged in the research and practice of informationalization.
人民解放军把信息化作为现代化建设的发展方向和战略重点，坚持应用主导、创新求实、人才
为本、跨越发展的总体思路，积极开展信息化建设的研究和实践。


-----

In the past two decades, the PLA has been pushing forward informationalization in the field of
military operations, focusing on command automation. It has completed a series of key projects to
build military information systems and made great progress in building information infrastructure. As
a result, command means have been substantially improved at all levels of headquarters and combat
troops. Computers and other IT equipment have been gradually introduced into routine operations.
The ability to provide operational information support has been greatly enhanced while more and
more IT elements have been incorporated into main battle weapon systems. The CMC has approved
and promulgated the Guidelines for the Development of Automated Command Systems of the Chinese
People's Liberation Army and the Regulations of the Chinese People's Liberation Army on Automated
Command Systems, defining the goals and relevant policies and statutes for developing automated
command systems.
二十多年来，人民解放军以指挥自动化建设为重点，着力提高军队作战领域的信息化水平。组
织实施了一批军事信息系统重点工程，信息基础设施建设取得长足进步，各级指挥机关和作战
部队指挥手段明显改善，计算机等信息技术设备在军队日常业务工作中日益普及，作战信息保
障能力有了很大提高，主战武器系统信息技术含量不断增加。中央军委先后批准颁布《中国人
民解放军指挥自动化建设纲要》、《中国人民解放军指挥自动化条例》，明确了指挥自动化建
设目标和有关政策法规。

In the new stage of the 21st century, the PLA strives to comprehensively push forward
informationalization with military information systems and informationalized main battle weapon
systems as the mainstay and with military informationalization infrastructure development supported
and guaranteed. In its drive for informationalization, the PLA adheres to the criterion of combat
efficiency and the direction of an integrated development, enhances centralized leadership and overall
planning, develops new military theories and operational theories while optimizing management
system and force structure, updating systems of statutes and standards, and emphasizing training for
informationalization. The PLA strengthens the building of military information systems and speeds up
the informationalization of main battle weapon systems. It also makes full use of various information
resources and focuses on increasing system interoperability and information-sharing capability. The
PLA takes advantage of progress in government and social sectors in the field of informationalization,
and establishes a scientific research and production system and information mobilization mechanism
that integrates military and civilian efforts to promote the informationalization process of both the
PLA and the government.
新世纪新阶段，人民解放军致力于全面推进以军事信息系统和信息化主战武器系统建设为主体
、以信息化基础设施建设为支撑和保障的军队信息化建设。在信息化建设中，坚持战斗力标准
，坚持一体化发展方向，加强集中领导和统筹规划，创新军事理论和作战思想，优化管理体制
和部队编制，完善法规和标准体系，重视培养信息化人才。加强军事信息系统建设，加快主战
武器装备的信息化改造，充分开发利用各类信息资源，注重提高系统互联互通和信息共享能力
。利用国家和社会信息化发展的有利条件，建立军民结合的科研生产体制和信息动员机制，实
现军队信息化建设与国家信息化建设的相互促进。

**Accelerating the Modernization of Weaponry and Equipment**
加快武器装备现代化

The PLA regards weaponry and equipment as the crucial material and technological basis for pushing
forward the RMA with Chinese characteristics. In accordance with the national security needs, the
PLA accelerates the modernization of weaponry and equipment, depending on national economic
development and technological advance.
人民解放军把武器装备作为加速推进中国特色军事变革的重要物质技术基础，依托国家经济发
展和科技进步，适应国家安全需要，不断加快武器装备现代化进程。


-----

In order to strengthen the capability to win local wars under informationalized conditions, the PLA, in
its development of weaponry and equipment, stresses the importance of capstone design, persists in
taking informationalization as the leading force while advancing mechanization and
informationalization simultaneously, and strives to build a streamlined, efficient and optimized
modern weaponry system appropriate in size and optimal in structure.

为增强打赢信息化条件下局部战争的能力，人民解放军武器装备建设注重顶层设计，坚持走
以信息化为主导、机械化信息化复合发展的道路，努力建设规模适度、结构合理、精干高效
、整体优化的现代化武器装备体系。

Giving priority to the development of new- and high-tech weaponry and equipment. The PLA
intensifies its R&D efforts and strengthens its innovative capability through self-reliance. It
accelerates the R&D of new informationalized combat platforms and precision munitions, as well as
electronic counter-measures equipment, and puts more effort into elevating the capabilities for
precision strikes and information operations.

优先发展高新技术武器装备。加大科研攻关力度，增强自主创新能力。研发新型信息化作战
平台和精确制导弹药，研制新型电子对抗装备，着力增强精确打击能力和信息作战能力。

Accelerating the modification of old and outmoded weaponry. A number of old and outmoded
weapons and equipment, which are backward in technology, poor in performance and no longer costeffective in maintenance, are being phased out, and part of the active-service main battle weaponry is
reconfigured on a selective, priority and phasal basis. By embedding advanced technology, developing
new munitions, and integrating command and control systems, the PLA has restored or upgraded the
tactical and technical performance of some current main battle weapons.
加快改造老旧装备。一批技术落后、性能下降、使用维修成本高的老旧装备正在逐步退出现役
。有选择、有重点、有步骤地改造部分现役主战装备，通过“嵌入”先进技术，研制新型弹药
，整合指挥控制系统，恢复或提高了现役武器装备的战术技术性能。

Continuously elevating integrated support for weaponry and equipment. Taking existing weaponry
and equipment as the basis, the PLA emphasizes the organic and systematic development of combat
and support capabilities of weaponry and equipment. In accordance with the development of main
battle weaponry and equipment, the PLA develops new types of general- and special-purpose support
equipment, while strengthening the maintenance and technical support forces with priority given to
new equipment and the training of personnel who employ, maintain and manage the new equipment,
so as to elevate the integrated support of weaponry and equipment, thus satisfying the needs of
readiness for military struggle.

不断提高装备综合保障水平。坚持立足现有装备，把武器装备成建制、成系统形成作战能力
和保障能力建设摆在重要位置。适应主战装备发展，配套研制新型通用和专用保障装备，加
强以新装备为重点的维修和技术支援力量建设，重点加快培养新装备的使用、维修和管理人
员，使部队装备的综合保障水平有了新的提高，保证了军事斗争准备的需要。

**Implementing the Strategic Project for Talented People**

实施人才战略工程

In August 2003, the CMC began to implement its Strategic Project for Talented People. The Project
proposes that in one to two decades, the PLA will possess a contingent of command officers capable
of directing informationalized wars and of building informationalized armed forces, a contingent of
staff officers proficient in planning armed forces building and military operations, a contingent of
scientists capable of planning and organizing the innovative development of weaponry and equipment
and the exploration of key technologies, a contingent of technical specialists with thorough knowledge


-----

of new- and high-tech weaponry performance, and a contingent of NCOs with expertise in using
weapons and equipment at hand. The Project will be implemented in two stages. By the end of 2010,
there will be a remarkable improvement in the quality of military personnel, and a big increase in the
number of well-educated personnel in combat units. The following decade will witness a big leap in
the training of military personnel.
2003年8月，中央军委制定实施军队人才战略工程规划，提出力争经过一二十年的努力，拥有
一支懂得信息化战争指挥和信息化军队建设的指挥军官队伍，一支善于对军队建设和作战问题
出谋划策的参谋队伍，一支能够组织谋划武器装备创新发展和关键技术攻关的科学家队伍，一
支精通高新武器装备性能的技术专家队伍，一支能够熟练掌握手中武器装备的士官队伍。人才
战略工程分两个阶段实施:
2010年前使全军人才状况明显改观，作战部队人才建设大幅跃升;2011年到2020年，实现人才
建设大的跨越。

In recent years, the PLA has utilized military educational institutions as major platforms for training
military personnel. Officer candidates have, in the main, been trained in four-year colleges. A
functional transformation of military educational institutions is taking place with the emphasis shifting
from academic credentials education to pre-assignment training. More and more military personnel
with specialties for both military and civilian use will be trained by regular institutions of higher
learning. So far, more than 90 such institutions have undertaken the task of training PLA cadres. In
implementing the Project for Strengthening the Military with High-Caliber Personnel, nearly 30 key
regular institutions of higher learning have trained a great number of Master Degree students for the
PLA, whose specialties are urgently needed. Various training courses have been offered at military
educational institutions, including courses for young and middle-aged cadres, high-tech knowledge
training courses for leading cadres at the levels of military area command and corps, and training
programs of cross-service and cross-arm expertise. Hundreds of military cadres have been sent to the
central and provincial Party schools. Division and brigade commanding officers have been arranged
for study tours abroad. The number of commanders has been increased among the overseas military
students.

近年来，人民解放军发挥军队院校培养人才的主渠道作用，生长干部培养已基本实现本科化
，军队院校职能正在由以学历教育为主向任职教育为主转变。逐步实现军地通用人才主要依
靠普通高等学校培养，已有90余所普通高等学校承担为军队培养干部的任务。实施“高层次
人才强军计划”，近30所重点普通高校为部队培养了一大批紧缺专业硕士。在军事院校开办
中青年干部培训班、大军区职和军职领导干部高科技知识培训班、军兵种知识交叉培训班等
班次，选送数百名军队干部入中央和省级党校学习。有计划地组织作战部队师旅主官出国考
察，增加军事指挥军官出国留学数量。

**Intensifying Joint Training**
加强联合训练

Adapting to the features and patterns of modern warfare, the PLA has intensified joint training among
services and arms at all levels to enhance joint fighting capabilities.
人民解放军适应现代战争的主要特点和样式，加强各个层次的诸军兵种联合训练，提高联合作
战能力。

Highlighting joint operational training. In view of the future operational tasks, the PLA has given
priority to training with specific objectives, joint operational training and high-level command post
training. It has successfully organized a series of major joint operational training activities. Studies
and exercises directed at operational issues are emphasized with additional attention to the
development of operational doctrines and training regulations, and the construction of network
systems. By exploring approaches for operational guidance, operational command and operational


-----

training for joint campaigns, the PLA has improved the capabilities of commanding officers at each
level to organize and direct joint operations.
深化联合战役训练。全军以作战任务为牵引，突出针对性训练、联合作战训练和高级领率机关
训练，成功组织了一系列重大联合战役训练活动。强化作战问题的研究演练，加强作战理论、
训练法规和网络系统等基本建设，探索联合战役的作战指导、作战指挥和训练方法，提高了各
级指挥员组织指挥联合作战的能力。

Conducting joint tactical training. To meet the needs of joint operations at the tactical level, units of
different arms and services stationed in the same areas have intensified their contacts and cooperation
in the form of regional cooperation to conduct joint tactical training. In September 2003, the General
Staff Headquarters organized a PLA-wide demonstration on regional cooperation for military training
in Dalian. That event drew lessons from regional cooperation for military training and explored new
ways to conduct joint tactical training.
开展联合战术训练。为适应战术层次联合作战的需要，全军通过区域协作的形式，使驻地相邻
的诸军兵种部队打破军种界线，加强联系与合作，开展联合战术训练。2003年9月，总参谋部
在大连地区组织全军军事训练区域协作观摩交流活动，总结开展军事训练区域协作经验，探索
联合战术训练新途径。

Improving the means of joint training. After years of development, substantial progress has been
achieved in on-base training, simulation training and network training. Almost all combined tactical
training activities at division, brigade and regiment levels can be conducted on base. All services and
arms have set up their basic simulation training systems for operational and tactical command. A
(joint) combat laboratory system of simulation training for all military educational institutions has
been initially put in place. A military training network system has been set up to interconnect the
LANs of military area commands, services and arms, and command colleges.

改进联合训练手段。经过多年的发展，基地化训练、模拟化训练、网络化训练取得明显进展
。全军各种类型师、旅、团级作战部队的合同战术训练初步实现基地化，初步建成各军兵种
战役、战术指挥训练模拟系统和“全军院校作战（联合）实验室训练模拟系统”，建成各军
区、军兵种和各级指挥院校局域网互联互通的军事训练网络系统。

Training commanding officers for joint operations. The military educational institutions have
intensified their joint operations training. The elementary command colleges offer basic courses in
joint operations. The intermediate command colleges offer courses on service campaigns and
combined operations. The advanced command university offers courses on strategic studies and joint
operations. In order to bring up commanding officers for joint operations, PLA units carry out on-duty
training and regional cooperation training, and acquire knowledge of other services and arms and joint
operations through assembly training, cross-observation of training activities, academic seminars and
joint exercises.
培养联合作战指挥人才。院校加强联合作战教育，初级指挥院校进行联合作战基础知识教学，
中级指挥院校进行各军种战役、军种合同作战教学，高级指挥院校进行战略研究和联合战役教
学。部队通过开展岗位练兵和区域协作训练，采取集训、相互观摩、学术研讨和联合演习等方
式，进行军兵种知识和联合作战知识学习，促进联合作战指挥人才的成长。

**Deepening Logistical Reforms**
深化后勤改革

The PLA continues to deepen, expand and coordinate the reforms of its logistical system, and makes
efforts to enhance the capability to provide fast, efficient and integrated support.
人民解放军继续推进后勤改革的深化、拓展、配套，努力提高快速、高效、综合的保障能力。


-----

Pushing forward an integrated tri-service support system. Experimental reforms of joint logistics
started in the Jinan Theater in July 2004. First, all logistical organs of the three services are integrated
into one. The Theater Joint Logistics Department or Joint Logistics Department of Military Area
Command, originally called Logistics Department of Military Area Command, takes responsibility for
joint logistical support for all in-theater units of the three services. The percentage of non-Army
cadres in this department has risen from 12% to 45%. Second, all logistical support resources of the
three services are integrated. All in-theater logistical support facilities such as rear depots, hospitals,
recuperation centers, and material supply and engineering facilities, originally under the leadership
and management of the services and arms, have been transferred to the joint logistics system for
unified integration, construction, management and employment. Third, all logistical support
mechanisms of the three services are integrated. The in-theater logistical support for troops of the
three services is no longer categorized into general or special supply support. All supplies are planned
and provided by the joint logistics system. Fourth, all logistical support channels of the three services
are integrated. The multiple support channels for troops of the arms and services have been readjusted
and integrated into one support channel of the joint logistics system, aiming at compressing the supply
chain and improving efficiency to form an effective system of supervision and management.
推进三军一体化保障进程。从2004年7月开始，在济南战区进行大联勤改革试点。实行联勤机
关三军一体。将目前的军区联勤部改称军区（战区）联勤部，作为战区三军部队联勤工作的领
导机关，联勤部机关的军兵种干部比例由原来的12%增至45%。实行保障力量三军一体。将战区
内军兵种领导管理的后方仓库、医院、疗养院和物资、工程等后勤保障机构，全部划归联勤系
统，进行统一整合、统一建设、统管共用。实行保障内容三军一体。战区内三军部队的后勤保
障，不再划分通用保障和专用保障，统一由联勤系统组织实施。实行保障渠道三军一体。将目
前对军兵种部队保障的多个渠道，调整合并为联勤系统一个渠道，减少供应保障环节，提高效
率，形成有效的监督管理机制。

Conducting technological research of logistical equipment. Over the past two years, the PLA has
completed experiments to finalize the designs of 92 types of new logistical equipment, with the
designs in logistical equipment system finalized at a rate of 93%. A new-generation logistical
equipment system with all necessary specialized varieties has been basically established with some of
the equipment reaching the internationally advanced standards. The Fourth Beijing International
Exhibition on Military Logistical Equipment and Technology was held in April 2004. More than 340
manufacturers from 26 countries and regions took part in the exhibition, and military logistics
delegations from 16 countries were invited to attend the exhibition as well as the international
symposium on the development strategy of military logistical equipment and technology.
开展后勤装备科研。两年来，共完成92项新型后勤装备的试验定型，后勤装备体制项目定型率
达到93%，基本形成专业门类齐全的新一代后勤装备体系，部分装备达到国际先进水平。2004
年4月，举办第四届北京国际军事后勤装备技术展览会。26个国家和地区340多个厂商参加展览
，16个国家军事后勤代表团应邀出席展览活动，并参加国际军事后勤装备技术发展战略研讨。

Deepening reforms of the medical support system and logistics outsourcing. In May 2004, the PLA
started in an all-round way to carry out the reform of its medical support system based on pilot and
expanded experiments. The reform features categorized support, appropriate medical care, unified
management and treatment at designated hospitals, and treatment upon presentation of medical cards.
The PLA has established a new type of medical support system in which medical service is free for
servicemen, preferential for dependents accompanying officers, and available to civilian employees in
the PLA through medical insurance. This has improved the quality of medical service and enhanced
the capability of medical support. The PLA has adopted the management method of packaging wages
for civilian employees and the policy of providing resettlement benefits to redundant personnel. It has
also introduced in an all-round way such housing reform measures as monetization, market supply and
management outsourcing, stepped up efforts to cash housing subsidies, and further enabled
servicemen to purchase houses.


-----

深化医疗保障制度和社会化保障改革。2004年5月，全军在先期试点和扩大试点的基础上，全
面推行以分类保障、合理医疗、统定管理、持卡就医为主要内容的医疗保障制度改革。建立了
军人免费医疗、随军家属优惠医疗、军队职工保险医疗相结合的新型医疗保障制度，提高了医
疗服务质量和保障水平。出台军队职工工资总额包干管理办法和分流安置经费补助等政策，重
点解决军队职工分流和转制问题。全面推行住房分配货币化、供应市场化、管理社会化，加大
住房补贴兑现力度，提高军人购房能力。

**Innovating Political Work**
创新政治工作

The PLA takes as guidance Marxism-Leninism, Mao Zedong Thought, Deng Xiaoping Theory and the
important thought of the "Three Represents," adheres to the fundamental principle and system of the
Party's absolute leadership over the armed forces, puts ideological and political work first, innovates
political work in its content, approaches, means as well as mechanism to give full play to the support
and combat functions of political work.
人民解放军坚持以马克思列宁主义、毛泽东思想、邓小平理论和“三个代表”重要思想为指导
，坚持党对军队绝对领导的根本原则和制度，把思想政治建设摆在首位，创新政治工作的内容
、方法、手段和机制，充分发挥政治 工作的服务保证作用和作战功能。

In December 2003, the new Regulations on the Political Work of the Chinese People's Liberation
Army was revised and promulgated. The regulation maintains that political work is the fundamental
guarantee of the Party's absolute leadership over the armed forces and the assurance for the armed
forces to accomplish their missions. It clearly defines political work as a significant component of
combat capabilities of the PLA, and stresses the importance of giving full play to the combat function
of political work. Education in the RMA with Chinese characteristics is given PLA-wide. Wartime
political work is studied and rehearsed extensively. Political work is strengthened in all services and
arms as well as the units carrying out special missions. Education in the PLA's functions and sense of
urgency has been intensified in the PLA so that officers and men are motivated in their trainings and a
tough fighting spirit and a good working style are fostered.
2003年12月重新修订颁布的《中国人民解放军政治工作条例》，坚持把政治工作作为实现党对
军队绝对领导和军队履行职能的根本保证，明确提出政治工作是构成军队战斗力的重要因素，
强调发挥政治工作的作战功能。全军广泛开展中国特色军事变革主题教育，深入进行战时政治
工作的研究演练，加强各军兵种和执行特殊任务部队的政治工作，强化军队职能教育，增强忧
患意识，激发练兵热情，培育部队的战斗精神和优良作风。

The PLA relies on laws and regulations to promote the innovation of political work. In April 2004, the
CMC promulgated the Regulations on the Work of the Armed Forces Committees of the Communist
Party of China (for Trial Implementation), which further defines the duties and responsibilities of the
Party committees, the standing committees of the Party committees, secretaries and committee
members, and further improves the decision-making procedures and principles in Party committees. In
February 2004, the CMC released the Provisions on Strengthening the Education and Management of
High- and Middle-Ranking Cadres of the PLA, which establishes and refines the systems for cadres at
the regiment level and above to do self-study and review, to receive thematic education, to take
admonishment talks, to make ideological and political assessment, to submit work and probity reports
as well as reports on important work assignments.
人民解放军坚持依靠法规制度推动政治工作创新发展。2004年4月，中央军委颁布《中国共产
党军队委员会工作条例（试行）》，进一步明确了全委会、常委会、书记和委员的职责，完善
了党委议事决策的程序和原则。2004年2月，中央军委颁布《关于加强军队高中级干部教育管
理的若干规定》，制定和完善了团级以上干部个人学习检查考核、专项教育、诫勉谈话、思想
政治素质考查、述职述廉、重要工作履职报告等制度。


-----

The PLA attaches great importance to ideological and cultural work. In the period of 2000-2002, the
CMC allocated RMB 140 million for the cultural work of grass-roots units. In recent two years, the
General Political Department and the General Logistics Department have jointly issued a number of
regulations in succession, including the Provisional Regulations of the Chinese People's Liberation
Army on the Management of Cultural Equipment and the Provisional Regulations on Grass-Roots
Cultural Construction. Beginning in 2003, the cultural equipment supplied to grass-roots units are
covered by regularized outlays and managed as organic equipment. In May 2004 a PLA-wide forum
on art and literature was held, in which a five-year plan was formulated for art and literature work in
the military. The PLA publishes more than 2,800 titles of books and audio-visual products every year.
All units carry out rich and colorful on-camp cultural activities to promote the all-round development
and enhance combat capability.
人民解放军重视思想文化建设。2001年至2002年，中央军委共拨款1.4亿元用于军队基层文化
建设。近两年，总政治部、总后勤部相继联合印发《中国人民解放军文化装备管理暂行规定》
和《军队基层文化建设暂行规定》。从2003年起，全军基层文化器材列入标准经费供应，实行
列装管理。2004年5月，召开全军文艺创作座谈会，制定全军文艺创作五年规划。军队每年出
版2800多种图书和音像制品。各部队开展丰富多彩的军营文化活动，促进了全面建设和战斗力
的提高。

**Governing the Armed Forces Strictly and According to Law**
依法从严治军

The PLA implements the principle of governing the armed forces strictly and according to law,
strengthens the building of the military legal system, raises the level of regularization, and enhances
the combat capability of the armed forces.
人民解放军贯彻依法治军、从严治军方针，加强军事法制建设，提高正规化水平，增强部队战
斗力。

The PLA has emphasized incorporating into laws and regulations its good traditions in governing the
armed forces and the requirements of the RMA with Chinese characteristics, so as to regulate all
dimensions of the armed forces building. In the new historical era, the PLA has promulgated and
revised a large number of military regulations, including the Regulations on Routine Service of the
People's Liberation Army, Regulations on Discipline of the People's Liberation Army, Regulations on
Formation of the People's Liberation Army, Regulations on the Headquarters of the People's
Liberation Army, Regulations on the Political Work of the People's Liberation Army, Regulations on
the Logistics of the People's Liberation Army, Regulations on the Armaments of the People's
Liberation Army, Regulations on the Military Training of the People's Liberation Army, Regulations
on the Garrison Service of the People's Liberation Army, and a new generation of operations
regulations. The military law system has been basically established with regulations as its main body.
In April 2003, the CMC promulgated the Regulations on Military Rules and Regulations to regulate
the military legislative work. In January 2004, according to the CMC's directive, the PLA and the
People's Armed Police Forces (PAPF) proceeded to sort out in a comprehensive way all their current
regulations and rules, and uniformly organize the compilation and printing of the collections of
military regulations and rules so as to provide legal basis for strict governing of the armed forces. The
armed forces have carried out legal education in a deep-going way and conducted regulation training
courses at various levels to guide the officers and men to perform their duties in accordance with the
law.
注重把治军的优良传统和中国特色军事变革的要求用法规的形式确定下来，规范军队建设的各
个方面。在新的历史时期，军队先后颁布和修订了《中国人民解放军内务条令》、《中国人民
解放军纪律条令》、《中国人民解放军队列条令》、《中国人民解放军司令部条例》、《中国
人民解放军政治工作条例》、《中国人民解放军后勤条例》、《中国人民解放军装备条例》、
《中国人民解放军军事训练条例》、《中国人民解放军警备条令》以及新一代作战条令等一大


-----

批军事法规，已基本形成以条令条例为主体的军事法规体系。2003年4月，中央军委颁布《军
事法规军事规章条例》，规范了军事立法工作。2004年1月，根据中央军委的指示，全军和武
警部队对现行军事法规、军事规章进行全面清理，统一组织编印军事法规和军事规章汇编，为
从严治军提供法规依据。全军深入开展法制教育和条令条例学习，举办不同层次的条令集训，
引导官兵依法履行职责。

The PLA has maintained the authority and solemnity of the regulations and rules and administered
troops strictly in accordance with the regulations and rules. Incorporating the cultivation of good style
and strict discipline into routine military training and administration has helped to sharpen the
awareness of the officers and men in their observance of regulations and rules. Through strict training,
refined military bearing, strict discipline and resolute and swift work style have been cultivated among
the troops. In August 2003, the CMC revised and issued the Outline for Armed Forces Building at the
Grass-Roots Level, which has promoted the regularization of the orders in preparation against war,
training, routine work and everyday life at the grass-roots level. The General Staff Headquarters, the
General Political Department, the General Logistics Department and the General Armaments
Department have twice formed joint working groups for overall inspection of strict administration of
the troops. In accordance with the CMC requirements, the PLA and the PAPF have intensified
rectification and improvement, and have further promoted the implementation of the guiding principle
of governing the armed forces strictly and according to law.
维护条令条例和规章制度的权威性、严肃性，严格按照条令条例管理部队。把作风纪律建设贯
穿于经常性教育和管理，使官兵自觉遵守条令条例和规章制度。通过严格的训练，培养部队严
整的军容、严明的纪律和雷厉风行的作风。2003年8月，中央军委修订颁布《军队基层建设纲
要》，推动了基层战备、训练、工作和生活秩序的正规化。总参谋部、总政治部、总后勤部、
总装备部两次组成联合工作组，对全军从严治军情况进行全面检查。全军和武警部队按照中央
军委的要求，开展整顿治理工作，促进了依法治军、从严治军方针的落实。

**Chapter IV. Defense Expenditure and Defense Assets**

第四章 国防经费和国防资产

China manages and uses its defense funds, ensures the procurement and supply of its military
equipment and materials, and protects its defense assets in conformity with legal provisions and in
accordance with the needs of national defense building and the requirements of the socialist market
economy.
中国根据国防建设的需要和社会主义市场经济的要求，依法管理和使用国防经费，保障军事装
备、物资的采购供应，保护国防资产。

**Defense Expenditure**
国防经费

Pursuant to The National Defense Law, the Chinese government follows the guiding principle of the
coordinated development of national defense and economy. Based on the economic development and
revenue growth, it has continued to increase its defense expenditure moderately so as to keep up with
the changes in the demands of national defense. China's GDP in 2002 and 2003 was 10,517.234
billion yuan and 11,725.194 billion yuan respectively. Its defense expenditure in 2002 and 2003 was
170.778 billion yuan and 190.787 billion yuan respectively. Its defense budget for 2004 is 211.701
billion yuan.
中国政府依据国防法，贯彻国防建设与经济建设协调发展的方针，适应国防需求的变化，在国
家经济发展和财政收入增长的基础上，继续适度增加国防费。2002年、2003年中国国内生产总
值（GDP）分别为105172.34、117251.94亿元人民币。2002年、2003年中国年度国防费分别为1
707.78、1907.87亿元人民币，2004年中国年度国防费预算为2117.01亿元人民币。


-----

The increased part of China's defense expenditure has primarily been used for the following purposes:
(1) Increase of the salaries and allowances of the military personnel. It is necessary to raise the salaries
and allowances of the military personnel in step with the socio-economic development and the percapita income rise of urban and rural residents. In the light of the unified wage adjustment policy for
the personnel of state organs, China has raised the salary rates of officers, civil cadres and noncommissioned officers; the allowances of conscripts and cadets under the supply system; and the
pensions of the retired. (2) Further improvement of the social insurance system for servicemen. In
December 2003, the Provisional Measures on Social Insurance for Unemployed Accompanying
Spouses of PLA Servicemen was formulated, to guarantee their basic living standard and provide
them with social insurance subsidies. (3) Support for the structural and organizational reform of the
military. China once again downsizes its military by 200,000, and has to increase the expenses on the
resettlement of the discharged surplus personnel accordingly. (4) Increased investment in the
development of high-caliber talents in the military. The PLA has established and refined an incentive
mechanism for talented people, improved conditions in military educational institutions, and entrusted
non-military colleges and universities with the education of qualified personnel, so as to ensure the
achievement of the PLA's Strategic Project for Talented People. (5) Moderate increase of equipment
expenses. This is aimed at promoting the leapfrog development of weaponry and equipment, and
stepping up preparations for military struggle.
中国增加的国防费， 主要用于:
（一）提高军队人员工资待遇。在国家社会经济发展和城乡居民人均收入提高的同时，保证军
队人员工资水平能够同步提高。比照国家机关工作人员统一的调资政策，提高军官、文职干部
、士官工资标准和义务兵、供给制学员津贴标准，以及增加离退休人员离退休费。（二）进一
步完善军人社会保险制度。2003年12月制定《中国人民解放军军人配偶随军未就业期间社会保
险暂行办法》，解决了军人配偶随军未就业期间的基本生活保障和社会保险补贴待遇问题。（
三）保障军队体制编制调整改革。中国再次裁减军队员额20万，相应增加编余人员退役安置等
经费开支。（四）加大军队人才建设投入。建立完善人才激励机制，改善军队院校条件，委托
地方院校培养人才，确保军队人才战略工程的实施。（五）适度增加装备经费。为推动武器装
备跨越式发展和加强军事斗争准备，增加部分装备建设经费。

In the past two years, the percentages of China's annual defense expenditure to its GDP and to the
state financial expenditure in the same period have remained basically stable. For most of the years
since the 1990s, the growth rate of China's defense expenditure has been lower than that of the state
financial expenditure.
近两年来，中国年度国防费占同期国内生产总值和国家财政支出的比例基本持平。二十世纪九
十年代以来的绝大多数年份，中国国防费的增长率低于国家财政支出的增长率。

The absolute amount of China's defense expenditure has long been lower than those of some major
Western countries, and the proportion to the GDP and state financial expenditure has also been
relatively low. In 2003, China's defense expenditure amounted to only 5.69% of that of the United
States, 56.78% of that of Japan, 37.07% of that of the United Kingdom, and 75.94% of that of France.
中国国防费的绝对额长期低于一些西方大国，占国内生产总值和国家财政支出的比重也相对较
低。2003年，中国国防费仅相当于美国的5.69%、日本的56.78%、英国的37.07%、法国的75.94
%。

The management of China's defense funds has become more transparent and standardized, and its
cost-effectiveness has been steadily improving. The budgeting reform for defense expenditure has
been further deepened, and a new defense budgeting system established, which introduces the zerobase budgeting method and united budgeting system. The budget adjustment and control function has
been strengthened, and the input direction and amount of defense funds optimized. The tendering and
bidding system for the procurement of defense materials, projects and services has been improved,
and the scope of centralized payment extended.


-----

中国国防费的管理更加公开、规范，使用效益稳步提高。国防经费预算编制改革进一步深化，
建立了新的国防费预算体系，推行零基预算方法和综合预算制度。增强预算调控功能，优化国
防费投向投量。完善国防物资、工程、服务的招投标采购制度，扩大资金集中支付的范围。
Table 1: Percentage of China's Annual Defense Expenditure in Its GDP (1997-2003)
# Year 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

 Percentage 1.09 1.19 1.31 1.35 1.48 1.62 1.63

图表1：1997—2003年中国年度国防费占国内生产总值（GDP）的比例（%）

# 1997年 1998年 1999年 2000年 2001年 2002年 2003

 1.09 1.19 1.31 1.35 1.48 1.62

Chart 1: Comparison Between the Growth Rate of China's Defense expenditure and That of Its State
Financial Expenditure (1995-2003)

图表2：1995—2003年中国国防费增长率与国家财政支出增长率（%）对比

金额单位：亿元人民币

|Year|1997|1998|1999|2000|2001|2002|2003|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Percentage|1.09|1.19|1.31|1.35|1.48|1.62|1.63|

|年度|1997年|1998年|1999年|2000年|2001年|2002年|2003年|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|比例|1.09|1.19|1.31|1.35|1.48|1.62|1.63|


-----

Chart 2: Comparison of the Defense Expenditures of Some Countries in 2003 and 2004 (unit: billion
US dollars)
Note 1: Statistics in the charts are sourced from the national defense reports, financial reports and
other government reports published by the said countries.
# Note 2: The average exchange rate in 2003 was US$ 1.0 ≈ RMB 8.2770. On Nov. 20, 2004, US$ 1.0 ≈ RMB 8.2765.

图表3：2003、2004年部分国家国防费比较

金额单位：亿美元


-----

注： 图内数据来源于上述国家公布的国防报告、财政报告或其他政府文告。2003年平均汇价1
美元折合8.2770元人民币。2004年11月20日，1美元折合8.2765元人民币。

Table 2: The Percentages of the Defense Expenditures in the GDP and Financial Expenditures of
Some Countries in 2003

# Country USA Russia UK France Japan China
 Defense expend. as % of 3.60 2.64 3.11 2.22 0.99 1.63 GDP
 Defense expend. as % 14.69 8.10 11.00 6.06 7.74 of financial expenditure [16.20 ]

图表4：2003年度中国与部分国家国防费占国内生产总值（GDP）和财政支出比例（%）的

比较

Chart 3: China's Defense Expenditure, 2003 by Proportion (unit: RMB billion yuan)

|Country|USA|Russia|UK|France|Japan|China|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Defense expend. as % of GDP|3.60|2.64|3.11|2.22|0.99|1.63|
|Defense expend. as % of financial expenditure|16.20|14.69|8.10|11.00|6.06|7.74|


-----

**Military Order Placement and Procurement**
军事订货与采购

China practices a state ordering system to guarantee the procurement and provision of weapons,
equipment and military materials. The General Armaments Department is responsible for the
procurement of weaponry and equipment while the General Logistics Department is in charge of the
procurement of military materials.
中国实行国家军事订货制度，保障武器装备和其他军事物资的采购供应。军队武器装备采购由
总装备部负责，军队物资采购由总后勤部负责。

In October 2002, the CMC promulgated the Regulations on the Armaments Procurement of the PLA.
In December 2003, the General Armaments Department issued relevant provisions, including the
Provisions on the Management of Armaments Procurement Plans, the Provisions on the Management
of Armaments Procurement Contracts, the Provisions on the Management of Armaments Procurement
Modes and Procedures, the Provisions on the Management of the Examination of the Qualifications of
Armaments Manufacturing Units and the Provisions on the Management of the Centralized
Procurement of Armaments of the Same Kind. All these regulations and provisions constitute a new
statutory system for the procurement of armaments. In recent years, the procurement of armaments
has followed the basic principles of the government procurement system, gradually pulled down the
sectional barriers in military industry, introduced the mechanism of competition and supported stateowned enterprises outside the military industry and private high-tech enterprises to enter the market of
military products. The procurement mode has been in an accelerating transition from procurement at
designated enterprises to multiple ways of procurement such as open bidding, invited bidding,
competitive bargaining and inquiry procurement. This has raised the overall cost-effectiveness of
armaments procurement and ensured the procurement at reasonable prices of weapons and equipment
advanced in performance, superior in quality and complete as a set. The procurement of military
computers and network devices, vehicle chassis, generating sets, shelters, and other types of generalpurpose equipment has changed from separate to centralized procurement at the PLA level.

2002年10月，中央军委颁布《中国人民解放军装备采购条例》。2003年12月，总装备部下发
《装备采购计划管理规定》、《装备采购合同管理规定》、《装备采购方式与程序管理规定
》、《装备承制单位资格审查管理规定》和《同类型装备集中采购管理规定》等配套规章，
构成了装备采购新的法规体系。近年来，装备采购工作遵循政府采购制度的基本原则，逐步
打破军品行业部门界限，引入竞争机制，支持非军工国有企业和高技术民营企业进入军品市
场，采购方式由过去的定点采购加速向公开招标、邀请招标、竞争性谈判和询价采购等多种


-----

方式转变，提高了装备采购的整体效益，确保部队以合理的价格采购到性能先进、质量优良
、配套齐全的武器装备。军用计算机和网络设备、车辆底盘、发电机组、方舱等通用性较强
的装备，已由各部门单独采购向全军集中采购转变。

Since February 2002, in accordance with the Overall Plan for Deepening the Reform in the
Procurement of Military Materials, Projects and Services approved for distribution by the CMC, the
General Logistics Department has promulgated in succession the Provisions on the Management of
the Procurement of Military Materials, the Provisions on the Management of Inviting Tenders for
Military Materials, the Provisions on the Management of Procurement Contracts for Military
Materials, the Provisions on the Management of the Price Review Work of Procurement Agencies of
Military Materials, the Provisional Measures for the Management of Centralized Procurement
Payment of Military Materials, Projects and Services, and the Provisions on Auditing the Procurement
of Military Materials, Projects and Services. Following the basic principles of government
procurement and taking into consideration the actual conditions of the building and management of
the armed forces, the PLA has adopted in an all-round way a mode of procurement of military
materials which focuses mainly on hierarchical management and centralized procurement. This mode
has improved the operational mechanism of proper division of labor and mutual restraint among the
departments in charge of funds, planning and procurement, and raised the level of standardization,
specialization and informationalization in the procurement of materials as well as the costeffectiveness resulting from large-scale procurement. Now procured in a centralized way are more
than 1,000 kinds of materials in 24 categories needed in the development, training, scientific research
and daily life of the armed forces. Procurement items included in the annual budget are procured
through public bidding if their procurement value exceeds the quota. The quota prescribed by the
General Logistics Department is RMB 500,000 yuan or more.
2002年2月以来，总后勤部根据中央军委批转的《深化军队物资、工程、服务采购改革总体方
案》，相继颁布《军队物资采购管理规定》、《军队物资招标管理规定》、《军队物资采购合
同管理规定》、《军队物资采购机构审价工作管理规定》、《军队物资、工程、服务集中采购
资金支付暂行办法》和《军队物资、工程、服务采购审计规定》。军队物资采购遵循政府采购
的基本原则，结合军队建设管理实际，全面实行分级管理体制和集中采购为主的模式，完善经
费、计划、采购的分工协作、相互制约运行机制，提高了物资采购的规范化、专业化、信息化
水平和规模效益。部队建设、训练、科研、生活等所需24类1000多种物资，已纳入集中采购范
围。纳入年度预算、采购金额达到限额标准以上的采购项目实施招标采购，总部物资招标限额
标准为50万元。

**Protection of Defense Assets**
国防资产保护

Defense assets are funds, land and other resources which the state has directly invested in or
appropriated for the building of the armed forces, defense scientific research and production and other
aspects of defense construction. They also include the resultant weaponry and equipment, installations
and facilities, materials and technological achievements used for defense purposes. The defense assets
possessed, used and managed by the PLA in accordance with the law belong to the PLA's state-owned
assets. The state has promulgated the National Defense Law of the PRC, the Law of the PRC on
Protecting Military Facilities, and the Implementation Measures for the Law of the PRC on Protecting
Military Facilities. The PLA has formulated more than 30 rules and regulations on the management of
its state-owned assets, such as the Provisions on the Management of the State-Owned Assets of the
PLA. This has put the work of protecting defense assets on the legal track.
国防资产是国家为武装力量建设、国防科研生产和其他国防建设直接投入的资金、划拨使用的
土地等资源，以及由此形成的用于国防目的的武器装备和设备设施、物资器材、技术成果等。
由军队依法占有、使用、管理的国防资产属于军队国有资产。国家颁布《中华人民共和国国防
法》、《中华人民共和国军事设施保护法》和《中华人民共和国军事设施保护法实施办法》，


-----

军队制定《军队国有资产管理规定》等30多个军队国有资产管理规章制度，使国防资产的保护
工作走上法制化轨道。

The people's governments and military organs at all levels jointly protect military facilities and
safeguard national defense interests. Under the leadership of the State Council and the CMC, the
General Staff Headquarters is in charge of the work of protecting military facilities throughout the
country. The headquarters of the military area commands are in charge of the work of protecting
military facilities within their areas of responsibility. In the areas where there are military facilities,
the local governments at and above the county level and the relevant military organs stationed there
jointly set up military facility protection committees, with their administrative offices established in
the provincial commands (garrison commands), sub-commands (garrison commands) and the people's
armed forces departments of counties, autonomous counties, cities and municipal districts. Following
the guiding principle of providing categorized protection and ensuring the safety of key facilities, the
state designates military forbidden zones and military restricted zones as a way to protect military
facilities, and also takes appropriate measures to protect military facilities outside such zones.
Protected by law are works for military operations, airspace clearance around military airports,
military communication and power transmission lines, military oil and water pipelines,
electromagnetic environments of fixed military radio installations, frontier defense installations and
military survey marks.
各级人民政府和军事机关共同保护军事设施，维护国防利益。总参谋部在国务院和中央军委的
领导下，主管全国的军事设施保护工作。军区司令机关主管辖区内的军事设施保护工作。设有
军事设施的地方，县级以上地方人民政府和驻地有关军事机关共同成立军事设施保护委员会，
其办事机构设在省军区（卫戍区、警备区）、军分区（警备区）和县、自治县、市、市辖区的
人民武装部。国家按照分类保护、确保重点的方针，通过划定军事禁区、军事管理区对军事设
施实施保护，对没有划入军事禁区、军事管理区的军事设施也采取适当保护措施。对作战工程
、军用机场净空、军用通信、输电线路和军用输油输水管道、军用无线电固定设施电磁环境、
边防设施、军用测量标志依法进行保护。

Under the General Logistics Department is the Bureau of PLA's State-Owned Assets Management in
charge of the management of the PLA's state-owned assets. The PLA's state-owned assets are
managed under the system of unified leadership and hierarchical responsibility. The logistics organ at
each level is responsible for management of the state-owned assets at its own level. In recent years,
the PLA has adopted a management method of property inspection and registration and physical assets
valuation and accounting, and instituted a system of property right registration, assets assessment and
assets reporting, thus effectively standardizing the management of the PLA's state-owned assets and
ensuring their safety, integrity, appropriate allocation and effective use.
总后勤部设有军队国有资产管理局，主管全军国有资产管理工作。军队国有资产实行统一领导
、分级负责的管理体制，各级后勤机关主管本级国有资产管理工作。近年来，全军开展财产清
查登记和实物资产计价核算管理，实施产权登记、资产评估、资产报告制度，有效规范国有资
产管理行为，确保军队国有资产安全完整、合理配置和有效使用。

**Chapter V. The Military Service System**

第五章 兵役制度

China practices a military service system which combines conscripts with volunteers and a militia
with a reserve service. It is the glorious duty of the Chinese citizens to serve in the armed forces and
join militia organizations according to law.
中国实行义务兵与志愿兵相结合、民兵与预备役相结合的兵役制度。依照法律服兵役和参加民
兵组织是中国公民的光荣义务。

**Administration System for Military Service Work**


-----

役工作管理体制

China practices an administration system of unified leadership and graded responsibility for military
service work. Under the leadership of the State Council and the CMC, the Ministry of National
Defense assumes responsibility for the military service work throughout the country. The military area
commands are responsible for the military service work in their respective areas in accordance with
the directions of the Ministry of National Defense. The provincial commands (garrison commands),
sub-commands (garrison commands) and the people's armed forces departments of counties,
autonomous counties, cities and municipal districts concurrently act as the military service organs of
the people's governments at corresponding levels and are responsible for the military service work in
their respective areas under the leadership of the military organs at higher levels and the people's
governments at corresponding levels. The government organs, public organizations, enterprises and
institutions and the people's governments of townships, ethnic townships and towns accomplish their
military service work in accordance with the provisions of the Military Service Law. Professional
work concerning military service is handled by the people's armed forces departments, or by the
designated departments where there are no people's armed forces departments.
中国兵役工作实行统一领导和分级负责的管理体制。全国的兵役工作，在国务院、中央军委领
导下，由国防部负责;各军区按照国防部赋予的任务，负责办理本区域的兵役工作;省军区（卫
戍区、警备区）、军分区（警备区）和县、自治县、市、市辖区的人民武装部，兼各该级人民
政府的兵役机关，在上级军事机关和同级人民政府领导下，负责办理本区域的兵役工作;机关
、团体、企业事业单位和乡、民族乡、镇的人民政府，依照兵役法规定完成兵役工作任务。兵
役工作业务，在设有人民武装部的单位，由人民武装部办理;不设人民武装部的单位，确定一
个部门办理。

**Active Service**
现役

Active service is the principal form in which Chinese citizens perform their military service
obligations. The citizens in active service in the PLA are servicemen in active service, consisting of
officers in active service, civil cadres and soldiers in active service.
现役是公民履行兵役义务的主要形式。在人民解放军服现役的公民是现役军人，包括现役军官
、文职干部和现役士兵。

Officers in active service are the servicemen who hold posts at or above the platoon level or junior
specialized technical level, and are conferred corresponding military ranks. They are classified as
operational, political, logistics, armaments and specialized technical officers. The Law of the PRC on
Officers in Active Service stipulates that the main sources of officers in active service are: graduates
of schools or academies in the military, who are originally selected to study there from among
outstanding soldiers and graduates of regular secondary schools; graduates of regular institutions of
higher learning; civil cadres in the military; and specialized technicians and other persons recruited
from outside the military. In war, soldiers, enlisted reserve officers, and persons in non-military
departments may be directly appointed as active officers as needed.
现役军官是被任命为排级以上职务或者初级以上专业技术职务，并被授予相应军衔的现役军人
，分为军事、政治、后勤、装备和专业技术军官。《中华人民共和国现役军官法》规定，现役
军官的主要来源是: 选拔优秀士兵和普通中学毕业生入军队院校学习毕业;
接收普通高等学校毕业生;文职干部改任；招收军队以外的专业技术人员和其他人员。战时根
据需要，可以从士兵、征召的预备役军官和非军事部门的人员中直接任命现役军官。

The PLA institutes a post-based military rank system for officers. Military ranks for officers in active
service are divided into 10 grades in three categories: general, lieutenant general and major general;
senior colonel, colonel, lieutenant colonel and major; captain, first lieutenant and second lieutenant.


-----

The posts at and below the level of the military area command are: military area command, corps,
division, regiment, battalion, company and platoon. The highest military rank for specialized technical
officers is lieutenant general, and their professional levels are graded into senior, intermediate and
junior.
人民解放军实行军官职务等级编制军衔。现役军官军衔设三等十级，将官设上将、中将、少将
，校官设大校、上校、中校、少校，尉官设上尉、中尉、少尉。大军区级以下的职务等级，分
为大军区、军、师、团、营、连、排级。专业技术军官最高军衔为中将，等级分为高、中、初
级专业技术职务。

Soldiers in active service are composed of conscripts based on compulsory military service (referred
to as conscripts) and volunteers based on volunteer military service (referred to as non-commissioned
officers). Non-commissioned officers are chosen from conscripts who have completed their terms of
active service, and may be recruited from citizens with professional skills in non-military
organizations. The term of service for conscripts in active service is two years. A system of active
service for different terms is adopted for non-commissioned officers. The first two terms are three
years each, the third and fourth terms four years each, the fifth term five years, and the sixth term nine
years or longer. Non-commissioned officers are divided into two categories: specialized-technical and
non-specialized-technical. The term of active service for the former ranges from the first to the sixth,
and the latter and women non-commissioned officers serve, in principle, only the first term.
现役士兵包括义务兵役制士兵（称义务兵）和志愿兵役制士兵（称士官）。士官从服现役期满
的义务兵中选取，根据军队需要也可从非军事部门具有专业技能的公民中招收。义务兵服现役
的期限为二年。士官实行分期服现役制度，第一、二期各三年，第三、四期各四年，第五期五
年，第六期九年以上。士官分为专业技术士官和非专业技术士官。专业技术士官服现役的期限
为第一至第六期，非专业技术士官和女士官服现役的期限原则上为第一期。

The lowest military rank for soldiers in active service is private, and the highest is non-commissioned
officer of the sixth grade. Conscripts in their first year of service are of the rank of private, and rise to
the rank of private first class in their second year. The military ranks for non-commissioned officers
are divided into six grades in three categories. The first two grades are junior non-commissioned
officers, the third and fourth grades are intermediate non-commissioned officers, and the fifth and
sixth grades are senior non-commissioned officers.
现役士兵的最低军衔为列兵，最高军衔为六级士官。服现役第一年的义务兵为列兵，第二年晋
升为上等兵。士官军衔分为三等六级，一级、二级士官为初级士官，三级、四级士官为中级士
官，五级、六级士官为高级士官。

**Reserve Service**
预备役

Reserve service is divided into reserve service for officers and reserve service for soldiers. Citizens
registered for reserve service are reservists.
预备役分为军官预备役和士兵预备役，经过登记服预备役的公民称预备役人员。

Reserve officers are chosen mainly from officers and civil cadres who have been discharged from
active service, soldiers who have been discharged from active service, cadres of the people's armed
forces departments and the militia, graduates from non-military institutions of higher learning, and
other citizens who meet the qualifications of reserve officers. Reserve officers who hold posts in
reserve forces, or are pre-regimented to active forces are reserve officers of Category One, and the
other reserve officers are in Category Two. Reserve officers are classified as operational, political,
logistics, armaments, and specialized technical officers and their posts are classified as division,
regiment, battalion, company and platoon levels, and for specialized technical officers, as senior,
intermediate and junior levels. The military ranks for reserve officers are divided into eight grades in


-----

three categories: reserve major general; reserve senior colonel, colonel, lieutenant colonel and major;
reserve captain, first lieutenant and second lieutenant. Reserve soldiers range in age from 18 to 35. On
the basis of age and military qualities, they are classified into Category One and Category Two.
预备役军官从退出现役的军官和文职干部、退出现役的士兵、人民武装干部和民兵干部、非军
事的高等学校毕业学生、符合预备役军官条件的其他公民中选拔。在预备役部队任职和预编到
现役部队的预备役军官为第一类军官预备役，其他预备役军官为第二类军官预备役。预备役军
官分为军事、政治、后勤、装备和专业技术军官，职务等级分为师、团、营、连、排级和高、
中、初级专业技术职务。预备役军官军衔设三等八级:
预备役少将，预备役大校、上校、中校、少校，预备役上尉、中尉、少尉。士兵预备役的年龄
为18岁至35岁。根据年龄和军事素质，士兵预备役分为第一类士兵预备役和第二类士兵预备役
。

**Enlistment in Peacetime**
平时征集

The number of conscripts enlisted into active service in China every year, and the requirements and
time for their enlistment are prescribed by order of the State Council and the CMC. The provinces,
autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the Central Government make arrangements for
enlistment in their respective areas in accordance with the enlistment order of the State Council and
the CMC. Enlistment in peacetime usually takes place once a year.
中国每年征集服现役的人数、要求和时间，由国务院和中央军委的命令规定。各省、自治区、
直辖市根据国务院和中央军委的征兵命令，部署本区域的征兵工作。平时征集工作一般每年一
次。

The Military Service Law of the PRC stipulates that male citizens who reach the age of 18 by
December 31 each year are eligible for enlistment for active service. Those who are not enlisted that
year remain eligible for enlistment until the age of 22. Female citizens may also be enlisted, if
necessary. Male citizens reaching the age of 18 before December 31 should register for military
service before September 30 of the same year. Citizens who meet the required conditions for active
service are enlisted into active service after gaining approval from the military service organs of their
own counties, autonomous counties, cities or municipal districts. If a citizen qualified for enlistment is
the only supporter of his or her family or is a student in a full-time school, his or her enlistment may
be postponed. Citizens who are kept in custody for investigations, legal proceedings or trials, or who
are serving sentences or are under criminal detention or surveillance may not be enlisted.
根据兵役法，每年12月31日以前年满18岁的男性公民应当被征集服现役。当年未被征集的，在
22岁之前仍可以被征集。根据需要可以征集女性公民。每年12月31日以前年满18岁的男性公民
，应在当年9月30日以前进行兵役登记。符合服现役条件的应征公民，经县、自治县、市、市
辖区的兵役机关批准，被征集服现役。应征公民是维持家庭生活的唯一劳动力或者是正在全日
制学校就学的学生，可以缓征;
被羁押正在受侦查、起诉、审判或者被判处徒刑、拘役、管制正在服刑的公民，不征集。

**Discharge from Active Service and Resettlements**
退役和安置

Active officers who have reached the maximum age limit for peacetime active service should be
discharged from active service. Those who have not yet reached the maximum age limit or have not
served the minimum term limit for peacetime active service may be discharged from active service in
special circumstances after gaining approval. Soldiers who have completed their term of active service
should be discharged from active service.


-----

现役军官达到平时服现役最高年龄的，应当退出现役。未达到平时服现役最高年龄或未达到平
时服现役最低年限，因特殊情况需要，经批准可以退出现役。士兵服现役期满，应当退出现役
。

The state makes proper arrangements for officers and civil cadres who have been discharged from
active service. The main modes of arrangement are transference to civilian work, demobilization and
retirement. Transference to civilian work is the principal mode of arrangement for officers and civil
cadres discharged from active service. Administrative organs for resettlement of officers and civil
cadres who have been transferred to civilian work or have retired, are set up at the national level and
at the level of the province (autonomous region or municipality directly under the Central
Government), and, if necessary, corresponding organs may be set up at the level of the city
(prefecture). The General Political Department is responsible for the overall administration of the PLA
resettlement work for officers and civil cadres who have been transferred to civilian work or have
retired.
国家妥善安置退出现役的军队干部。安置方式主要有转业、复员、离休、退休。转业地方工作
是安置退出现役军队干部的主要方式。国家、省（自治区、直辖市）设立军队转业和离休、退
休干部安置管理工作机构，市（地）视情设立相应机构。总政治部统一管理全军干部转业和离
休、退休工作。

Since 2001, the Central Committee of the CPC, the State Council and the CMC have promulgated and
implemented the Provisional Measures for Resettlement of Officers and Civil Cadres Transferred to
Civilian Work and related regulations and policies, providing for execution of the resettlement mode
to civilian work, whereby the state planned assignment of jobs and posts is combined with finding
jobs by oneself. Officers at the level of division or regiment or at battalion-level with 18 years of
military service (including civil cadres at the corresponding levels and specialized technical officers
who enjoy corresponding status) can either be assigned civilian jobs according to the unified plan or
choose to find jobs by themselves. Those at or below the battalion level with less than 18 years of
military service are assigned civilian work under the unified plan. The Party committees and
governments are responsible for arranging jobs and posts for officers and civil cadres transferred to
civilian work. Those who choose to find jobs by themselves may seek assistance from the government
in their job-finding and are entitled to a monthly-paid service-discharge pension for life long with
exemption from income tax. Officers and civil cadres transferred to civilian work may settle at their
native places or the places where they were enlisted, or settle at the places where their spouses lived
before moving to accompany the servicemen or where they were married. When they meet the
required conditions, they may also settle at the places where their parents, their spouses' parents, their
spouses or their children are permanent residents, or at the places where their troops are stationed.
2001年以来，中共中央、国务院和中央军委颁布实施《军队转业干部安置暂行办法》及有关政
策法规，规定对军队转业干部实行计划分配与自主择业相结合的方式安置。师、团级职务和军
龄满十八年的营级职务转业干部（含相应职级文职干部和享受相应待遇的专业技术干部），可
以选择计划分配或自主择业的方式安置，军龄不满十八年的营级以下职务转业干部，采取计划
分配的方式安置。计划分配的转业干部由党委、政府负责安排工作和职务。自主择业的转业干
部由政府协助就业，逐月发给退役金，享受终身，免征个人所得税。转业干部可以回原籍或入
伍地安置，也可到配偶随军前或结婚时所在地安置，具备相应条件的，还可以到父母或者配偶
父母、配偶、本人子女常住户口所在地、部队驻地安置。

When conscripts have been discharged from active service, the people's government of the county
where they were enlisted makes appropriate arrangements for them, depending on whether they are
from the countryside or city and whether they have received any awards for meritorious service. Noncommissioned officers are resettled and arranged as transference to civilian work, demobilization, or
retirement from active service according to their terms of service.


-----

义务兵退出现役后，由原征集地的县级人民政府接收安置。根据家居农村或城镇以及服现役期
间立功受奖的情况，对退出现役的义务兵做出妥善安排。根据服役年限不同，士官退出现役后
分别作转业、复员、退休安置。

Table 3: Maximum Age Limits for Active Officers Holding Posts in Peacetime

# Category Operational, Political, Logistics, Armaments Specialized Officers Technical Officers
 Combat Troops Non-combat Troops
 Platoon 30 30
 Company 35 35 Junior-level 40
 Battalion 40 40
 Regiment 45 Chief 50 Deputy 45
 Division 50 55 Intermediate-level Corps 55 Chief 60 Deputy 58 50
 Military Chief 65 Senior-level 60 Area Deputy 63 Command

图表6： 现役军官平时任职最高年龄

**Chapter VI. National Defense Mobilization and Reserve Force Building**

第六章 国防动员和后备力量建设

China adheres to the principle of having all people engaged in national defense with an aim at giving
full play to the overall advantages of the present-day people's war so as to promote the national
defense mobilization and reserve force building on the basis of the overall national strength.
中国坚持全民办国防，着眼于发挥现代人民战争整体优势，加强以综合国力为基础的国防动员
和后备力量建设。

|Category|Operational, Political, Logistics, Armaments Officers|Col3|Col4|Specialized Technical Officers|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||Combat Troops|Non-combat Troops||Junior-level 40|
|Platoon|30|30|||
|Company|35|35|||
|Battalion|40|40|||
|Regiment|45|Chief 50|Deputy 45||
|Division|50|55||Intermediate-level 50|
|Corps|55|Chief 60|Deputy 58||
|Military Area Command|Chief 65|||Senior-level 60|
||Deputy 63||||


-----

**Mobilization of National Economy**
国民经济动员

As an important component of the national defense building and economic construction, China's
economic mobilization follows the strategic thinking of soldiers and the people being the foundation
for victory and the strategic concept of the people's war.
中国的国民经济动员贯彻兵民是胜利之本和人民战争的战略思想，是国防建设和经济建设的重
要组成部分。

The mobilization of national economy refers to activities which improve, in a planned and organized
way, the emergency reaction capabilities of national economy for national security. In peacetime, as
an important measure to build up the economic potentials for national defense and to cope with
contingencies, the mobilization of national economy balances the proportion of the permanent power
of the defense economy to the national economy, and constitutes a powerful deterrence to war. In
wartime, the mobilization of national economy is an important guarantee to transfer the national
defense economic potentials into national defense capabilities to win the war by way of a rapid and
orderly shift of the national economic system from a peacetime state to a wartime state. The
mobilization of national economy includes mobilizations in the areas of industry, agriculture,
communication and transport, post and telecommunications, science and technology, medical care and
health, urban construction, commerce and trade, and finance. The capacity to mobilize national
economy is an important indicator of the level of both national defense modernization and the overall
national strength.
国民经济动员是为保卫国家安全，有计划、有组织地提高国民经济应变能力的活动。平时，它
是加强国防经济潜力建设和应付突发事件的重要措施，是调节国防经济常备力量与国民经济比
例关系的手段，是遏制战争的强大威慑力量。战时，它是快速、有序地将国民经济体制由平时
状态转入战时状态，将国防经济潜力转化为国防实力，赢得战争胜利的重要保证。国民经济动
员包括工业、农业、交通运输、邮电通信、科技、医疗卫生、城市建设、商业贸易、财政金融
等领域的动员。国民经济动员能力是国防现代化水平和综合国力的重要体现。

Under the leadership of the State Council and CMC, the PRC Development and Reform Commission
is responsible for the mobilization of national economy. The National Economy Mobilization Office is
the administrative organ which is primarily responsible for: organizing and implementing the
mobilization of national economy throughout the country; coordinating relations between the military
and economic work, between government organizations and military systems and between the Central
Government and the local governments in the process of mobilization; properly combining peacetime
needs with wartime needs and integrating military purposes with civilian ones in the development of
national economy; improving the mechanism for mobilization of national economy and the
capabilities to shift from peacetime to wartime footing. All services and arms of the PLA and all
military area commands as well as the ministries and commissions concerned under the State Council
along with all provinces (including autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the Central
Government) have set up corresponding offices for mobilization of national economy.
国民经济动员工作在国务院、中央军委的领导下，由国家发展和改革委员会承担。办事机构为
国家经济动员办公室，其主要职责是：组织实施全国国民经济动员工作，协调国民经济动员工
作中军事与经济、政府部门与军队系统、中央与地方的关系，搞好国民经济的平战结合、军民
兼容，完善国民经济动员机制，增强平战转换能力。国务院有关部委，各省（自治区、直辖市
），军队各军兵种、各军区设有相应的经济动员机构。

China initially established a system for mobilization of national economy after the founding of New
China in 1949. In the 1960s and 1970s, China undertook the construction of mobilization of national
economy with preparations against war as the primary task. In the 1980s, the national economy
mobilization began transformation in four fields: transformation from purely serving the war demands


-----

to serving both national defense and economic construction, focusing on the combination of both
military effectiveness and economic efficiency; transformation from playing a unitary administrative
role under the planned economy to that of an overall regulation and control under the socialist market
economy to gradually form a management mechanism using multiple means related to law, economy
and administration; transformation from building the military production capacity in the pre-war state
to enhancing the converting ability from peacetime production to wartime production with the
emphasis on building up economic potentials for national defense; and transformation from general
mobilization preparations to partial mobilization preparations with priority given to rapid mobilization
against contingencies in major directions and key areas.
新中国成立后，国家初步建立起国民经济动员体系。二十世纪六十、七十年代，开展以备战为
首要任务的国民经济动员建设。二十世纪八十年代，国民经济动员开始实现四个转变:
由单纯为战争需求服务向为国防和经济建设服务转变，注重军事效益和经济效益的结合;
由计划经济体制下单一的行政管理向社会主义市场经济体制下的综合调控转变，逐步形成运用
法律、经济、行政等多种手段的管理机制;
由临战状态下的军品生产能力建设向和平时期增强平战转换能力转变，注重国防经济潜力建设
; 由全面动员准备向局部动员准备转变，突出抓好主要方向和重点地区突发事件的快速动员。

At the new historical stage, following the principles of combining peacetime needs with wartime
needs and having military and civilian purposes compatible with each other while reserving the
military capabilities in civilian potentials, China's national economy mobilization makes great
progress in the construction of national economy mobilization and steadily improves the capacity of
national economy mobilization by observing the principles of centralized leadership, responsibility at
different levels, overall planning, construction of key projects, long-term preparations and gradual
development. A three-level (central, provincial and prefectural) management system to mobilize
national economy has initially taken shape with the attention paid to handling major contingencies and
emergencies, thus creating conditions, in terms of system, for national economy to turn rapidly from
peacetime production to wartime production. Making full use of advanced information technologies,
China has initially established a digital information platform for national economy mobilization, thus
improving the speed and efficiency of turning peacetime production to wartime production. The
capability of national economy to turn peacetime production into wartime production in 2003 was
12.44% higher than that of the previous year. The contributions made by science and technology to
national economy mobilization rose by 3.53 percentage points compared with that of the previous
year.
在新的历史时期，国民经济动员贯彻平战结合、军民兼容、寓军于民的方针，遵循统一领导、
分级负责、统筹规划、重点建设、长期准备、逐步发展的原则，国民经济动员建设取得长足发
展，国民经济动员能力稳步提高。国家、省（自治区、直辖市）和地（市）三级经济动员管理
体系初步形成，注意与处置重大突发事件和紧急情况接轨，为提高国民经济平战转换速度创造
了制度条件。充分运用信息技术，初步形成国民经济动员数字化信息平台，提高了平战转换的
速度和效率。2003年国民经济平战转换能力比上年提高12.44％，科学技术对国民经济动员的
贡献率比上年提高3.53个百分点。

**Civil Air Defense (CAD)**
人民防空

As an important part of the national defense and an important aspect of the economic and social
development, China's civil air defense (CAD) refers to measures and actions to mobilize and organize
the Chinese people to be prepared against enemy air raids and disastrous events, and to deal with the
aftermath of enemy air raids and disastrous events. Resorting to preventive means such as camouflage,
cover and evacuation, and adopting measures such as emergency rescue and rush-repair, the CAD
serves the purpose of securing the people's lives and property, reducing losses of national economy
and preserving the war potentials. The CAD is built and managed strictly in accordance with the Civil


-----

Air Defense Law of the PRC. The CAD adopts a system of joint leadership by the people's
governments and the military organs with the local people's governments and the military organs at
the county level and above exercising leadership over the CAD work within their respective
administrative areas. The basic task of the CAD is to organize the people in CAD building in
peacetime and to organize and direct people to fight against air raids in wartime.
中国人民防空是国防的重要组成部分，是国民经济和社会发展的重要方面，是动员和组织人民
群众防备敌人空中袭击和重大灾害事故、消除空袭后果和灾害事故危害所采取的措施和行动。
它通过运用伪装、掩蔽、疏散等防护手段和采取抢救、抢修等措施，达到保护人民群众生命财
产安全，减少国民经济损失，保存战争潜力的目的。人民防空严格实施《中华人民共和国人民
防空法》，坚持依法建设、依法管理。人民防空实行人民政府和军事机关共同领导体制，县级
以上地方各级人民政府和军事机关领导本行政区域的人民防空工作。人民防空的基本任务是，
平时组织人民防空建设，战时组织指挥人民群众防空袭斗争。

The CAD bases itself on making preparations against air raids under the informationalized conditions
by adhering to the guideline of long-term preparation, construction of key projects and combination of
peacetime footing with wartime footing. In recent years, major cities throughout the country have set
up joint, streamlined and highly efficient CAD command systems. They have made their municipal
anti-air-raid plans, improved their urban air defense (AD) early-warning-alarm networks, and sped up
the construction of the auxiliaries to the AD protection facilities while strengthening the protection of
key economic targets, the construction of evacuation areas, and the building of specialized AD
contingents among the people. In some provinces and municipalities, the people's governments have
organized many anti-air-raid exercises, in which the AD alarm sirens were tested. They have also
carried out education in the common sense of protection in case of air raids, and conducted training in
protection skills. Consequently, the people's AD awareness has been generally raised and the overall
urban anti-air-raid capabilities have been noticeably improved.
人民防空坚持长期准备、重点建设、平战结合的方针，立足于做好信息化条件下防空袭斗争准
备。近年来，全国主要城市建立联合、精干、高效的人防指挥体制，制定城市防空袭方案，健
全城市防空预警报知网络，加快工程防护设施的配套，加强重要经济目标的防护和疏散地域建
设，充实群众防空专业队伍。一些省、市人民政府多次组织人民防空袭演习，进行防空警报试
鸣，开展防护常识教育和防护技能训练。人民群众的防空意识普遍增强，城市整体防空袭能力
明显提高。

The CAD actively safeguards public security based on the needs of comprehensive national security.
It has continuously improved its leading organs; established emergency rescue systems; set up a
unified, coordinated and highly-efficient joint-action mechanism; formulated detailed backup
emergency plans; provided services for emergency rescue and disaster relief by using CAD's
communication, alarm and command facilities; organized specialized AD contingents to undertake
tasks entrusted by the people's governments, such as comprehensive coordination, command support,
and specialized rescue and assistance in emergency rescue and disaster relief; and made every effort to
set up an integrated civil defense system that combines peacetime and wartime footing, and is capable
of carrying out both anti-air-raid and disaster-preventing missions. Many factories, mines, enterprises
and communities have established volunteer teams for civil defense.
人民防空从国家综合安全的需要出发，积极维护社会公共安全。不断完善领导机构，构建应急
救援体系，建立统一、协调、高效的联动机制，制定详细配套的应急方案，利用人民防空通信
警报和指挥设施为抢险救灾提供服务，组织防空专业队伍承担人民政府赋予的抢险救灾综合协
调、指挥保障和专业救援等任务，努力建立防空防灾一体化的平战结合民防体制。许多厂矿、
企业和社区组建了民防志愿者队伍。

**Mobilization of Communications for National Defense**
国防交通动员


-----

The Chinese government attaches great importance to the mobilization of communications for
national defense. Under the leadership of the State Council and the CMC, the state-level organs in
charge of national defense communications are responsible for national defense communications
mobilization across the country; the organs of the military area commands in charge of national
defense communications are responsible for national defense communications mobilization within the
areas under their jurisdiction; the organs of the people's governments at the county level and above in
charge of national defense communications are responsible for national defense communications
mobilization in their respective administrative regions; and the departments of the State Council in
charge of communications management are responsible for national defense communications
mobilization of their own industries.
中国政府高度重视国防交通动员建设。在国务院、中央军委领导下，国家国防交通主管机构负
责全国国防交通动员，军区国防交通主管机构负责本区域有关的国防交通动员，县级以上人民
政府国防交通主管机构负责本行政区域国防交通动员，国务院交通管理部门分别负责本行业的
国防交通动员。

In recent years, with the rapid development of national transportation and communication and the
constant improvement in the informationalization of transportation and communication, China's
national defense communications systems have been further improved, and the capacity to mobilize
national defense communications has been greatly enhanced. Construction of the national and local
infrastructure for transportation, communication and postal service is undertaken in pursuance of the
principle of combining peacetime needs with wartime needs, fully taking into account the defense and
military needs. Some railways, highways and ports of national defense significance are listed as key
construction projects of the state. The support contingents and plans for transportation and
communication have played an important role in emergency rescue and disaster relief in peacetime. In
2003, China's mileage of railways and highways in operation reached 73,000 km and 1,809,800 km
respectively, including 29,700 km of expressways, and the annual volume of freight handled at the
major coastal ports reached 2.01 billion tons. In railway transportation, the management of goods in
transit has been informationalized, and the marshaling has been computerized. In water transportation,
the positioning, tracking and control of ocean freighters have been brought into reality. In highway
transportation, the positioning, tracking and control of some heavy trucks have been realized. In air
transportation, real-time information processing has been realized with regard to ticket booking,
departure, air routes as well as freight traffic and security monitoring. Database management has been
initially implemented in terms of basic information and communications mobilization information
concerning major railway stations, harbors, airports, airline companies and transportation companies.
近年来，随着国家交通、通信事业的快速发展和交通运输信息化程度的不断提高，国防交通体
系更加完善，国防交通动员能力大幅提升。国家和地方交通运输、邮电通信基础设施建设贯彻
平战结合原则，充分考虑国防和军事需求。一些具有重要国防意义的铁路、公路和港口码头列
入国家重点建设项目。交通、通信保障队伍和保障方案在平时抢险救灾等应急保障中发挥了重
要作用。2003年，铁路营运里程达到7.3万公里，公路达到180.98万公里，其中高速公路2.97
万公里，沿海主要港口吞吐量达到20.1亿吨。铁路运输实现了在运货物的信息化管理和调度指
挥的计算机控制，水路运输实现了远洋货轮的定位跟踪和调度指挥，公路运输实现了部分大型
货车的定位跟踪和调度指挥，航空运输实现了订票、离港、航线、货运及安全监控的实时信息
处理。全国主要车站、港口、机场、航空公司、运输公司等的基础信息和交通动员信息，初步
实现了数据库管理。

Following the publication of the Regulations on Communications for National Defense, the State
Council and the CMC promulgated the Regulations on Mobilization of Civil Transport for National
Defense in September 2003, and the mobilization of civil transport for national defense has been put
on the track of law. Peacetime preparations of civil transport mobilization are made in accordance
with the principle of emphasizing key projects and focusing on actual effects. In this respect, the work
includes the drafting of an overall plan for newly-built civil vehicles and related equipment to meet


-----

the demands of national defense, acquisition of information regarding the potentials to mobilize civil
transport for national defense, and formulation of plans for national defense mobilization. Wartime
mobilization of civil transport is conducted according to the mobilization order issued by the President
of the state. Under special circumstances in peacetime, the mobilization of civil transport is
implemented upon the decision on mobilization of civil transport made by the State Council and the
CMC. All organizations and individuals possessing or managing civil transport capacity are obliged
by the law to fulfill their duties and responsibilities for civil transport mobilization.
继《国防交通条例》之后，2003年9月，国务院、中央军委颁布《民用运力国防动员条例》，
民用运力国防动员开始走上法制化轨道。民用运力动员，平时按照突出重点、注重实效的原则
进行准备，包括拟定新建民用运载工具及相关设备贯彻国防要求的总体规划、掌握民用运力国
防动员潜力、编制国防动员预案等;
战时依据国家主席发布的动员令实施，平时特殊情况下依据国务院、中央军委发布的民用运力
国防动员决定实施。一切拥有或者管理民用运力的单位和个人，都有依法履行民用运力国防动
员的义务和责任。

**Militia Force Building**
民兵建设

As an important component of the Chinese armed forces and the assistant and backup forces of the
PLA, the militia force is an armed organization composed of the masses not released from their
regular work. The militia is divided into two categories - the ordinary and the primary militia. The
primary militia comprises rapid reaction detachments, infantry detachments, specialized technical
detachments and detachments with corresponding specialties. There are now 10 million primary
militia members throughout the country.
民兵是不脱离生产的群众武装组织，是中国武装力量的重要组成部分，是人民解放军的助手和
后备力量。民兵组织分为普通民兵组织和基干民兵组织。基干民兵组织中建有民兵应急分队、
步兵分队、专业技术分队和对口专业分队。目前，全国共有基干民兵1000万。

In recent years, based on the principle of controlling quantity and improving quality, and emphasizing
key components and laying good foundation, priority has been given to the quality of the militia
organizations in building the militia force while keeping its mass and universal character. Infantry
detachments have been reduced, specialized technical detachments increased, and technical
detachments specialized in areas of AA artillery (machine-guns), missiles, field artillery,
communication, chemical defense, engineering, reconnaissance and information reinforced.
Enterprises and institutions with corresponding specialties have established their militia detachments
with a high technological content. Also established therein are militia detachments with specialties
corresponding to different services and arms responsible for combat and logistic support, and militia
support detachments responsible for fuel and other military supplies. The organizational structure of
the militia force has been optimized. The scientific and technological quality of the militia force has
been continuously improved, and the capability of the militia force has been apparently enhanced for
rapid mobilization and operations.
近年来，民兵工作贯彻控制数量、提高质量、抓好重点、打好基础的方针，在保持民兵群众性
和普遍性的基础上，突出质量建设。压缩步兵分队规模，扩大专业技术分队比例，重点加强高
炮（机）、导弹、地炮、通信、防化、工兵、侦察、信息等专业技术分队建设。在与军事专业
对口的企业事业单位，组建了具有较高技术含量的民兵对口专业分队，还新组建了担负军兵种
战斗、勤务保障任务的军兵种民兵对口专业分队以及物资油料民兵保障分队。民兵组织结构得
到优化，布局趋于合理，民兵队伍科技素质不断提高，快速动员和遂行任务的能力明显增强。

The primary militia members aged 18-22 receive 30-40 days of military training. The training duration
for specialized technical militia members will be extended if necessary. Upon approval by the CMC,
the General Staff Headquarters assigns military training tasks to the militia throughout the country.


-----

Military training for militia members will be conducted collectively at the militia military training
bases in administrative regions at the county level. In some provinces and municipalities specialized
technical training centers and people's military schools have been set up.
基干民兵在18岁至22岁期间，参加30天至40天的军事训练，其中专业技术兵的训练时间，按照
实际需要适当延长。全国民兵的军事训练任务，经中央军委批准后，由总参谋部下达。民兵军
事训练主要在县级行政区内的民兵军事训练基地集中进行，部分省、市建有专业技术兵训练中
心和人民武装学校。

The nationwide militia work comes under the centralized leadership of the State Council and the
CMC. The provincial commands (garrison commands), military sub-commands (garrison commands)
and the people's armed forces departments of counties, autonomous counties, cities and municipal
districts are responsible for militia work in the areas under their respective jurisdictions. The people's
armed forces departments at the level of townships, ethnic townships, towns and sub-districts are
responsible for militia work in their own areas. The people's armed forces departments of enterprises
and institutions, set up in accordance with relevant provisions of the government, are responsible for
their own militia work. Enterprises and institutions with no people's armed forces department shall
designate a department or personnel to handle their militia work.
全国的民兵工作，由国务院、中央军委统一领导。省军区（卫戍区、警备区）、军分区（警备
区）和县、自治县、市、市辖区的人民武装部负责本区域的民兵工作。乡、民族乡、镇、街道
人民武装部负责本区域的民兵工作。企业事业单位根据国家有关规定设立的人民武装部，负责
本单位的民兵工作;
未设立人民武装部的企业事业单位，确定一个部门或者专门人员负责办理民兵工作。

The Suggestions on Strengthening and Improving Militia Work in Cities, jointly issued in August
2002 by the Central Committee of the CPC, the State Council and the CMC, defines the strategic
status and role of the urban militia force and calls for strengthening and improving the urban militia
work, so as to be prepared for winning people's wars under high-tech conditions with cities as
important bases. In consideration of local conditions and wartime assignments undertaken by the
militia, adjustments and reforms are steadily underway with respect to urban militia work.
2002年8月，中共中央、国务院、中央军委印发《关于加强和改进城市民兵工作的意见》，明
确了城市民兵的战略地位和作用，要求切实加强和改进城市民兵工作，做好打赢以城市为重要
依托的高技术条件下人民战争准备。各地结合当地实际，着眼民兵战时担负的任务，正在稳步
实施城市民兵工作调整改革。

**Reserve Force Building**
预备役部队建设

As an important component of the PLA, the reserve force constitutes the focal point of the defense
reserves building. It consists of active servicemen as its backbone and reserve officers and men as its
foundation. It is organized according to the PLA's unified organizational structure.
预备役部队是人民解放军的重要组成部分，是国防后备力量建设的重点。预备役部队以现役军
人为骨干，以预备役官兵为基础，按照军队统一的编制进行编组。

After more than 20 years of development, the reserve force has grown from purely a land force into an
important composite reserve force consisting of the Army reserve, Navy reserve, Air Force reserve
and the reserve of the Second Artillery Force. The reserve force adopts the system of dual leadership
by the military and the local Party committees and governments. The Army reserve is under the
leadership of the provincial commands (garrison commands) in peacetime, and the Navy reserve, Air
Force reserve and the reserve of the Second Artillery Force are placed under the joint leadership and
control of both the provincial commands (garrison commands) and the Navy, Air Force and Second


-----

Artillery Force units. The reserve force is under the command of the designated troops in active
service after wartime mobilization.
经过二十多年的建设，预备役部队已由单一的陆军发展成为由陆军、海军、空军和第二炮兵预
备役部（分）队组成的重要后备力量。预备役部队实行军队与地方党委、政府的双重领导制度
。陆军预备役部队平时归省军区（卫戍区、警备区）建制领导，海军、空军、第二炮兵预备役
部队平时由省军区（卫戍区、警备区）和军兵种现役部队共同领导管理。预备役部队战时动员
后归指定的现役部队指挥。

Under the new historical conditions, China persists in combining the building of the reserve force with
that of the armed forces in active service. China improves the quality of the reserve force while
enhancing the reserves' capabilities for rapid mobilization and operations so as to build a reserve force
properly sized, reasonably structured, scientifically organized and credibly effective. In recent years,
the key aspects of building the reserve force have been further highlighted. Combat readiness has been
enhanced and training levels have been raised step by step. Based on the wartime chain of command,
training systems linked with the active PLA troops have been established, and on-base training,
simulated training and network training have been conducted on a wide scale.
在新的历史条件下，预备役部队建设坚持与现役部队建设相结合，全面加强质量建设，大力提
高快速动员和遂行作战任务的能力，努力实现建立一支规模适度、结构合理、编成科学、可靠
管用的预备役部队的目标。近年来，预备役部队建设的重点更加突出，战备工作得到加强，训
练水平逐步提高。按照战时隶属关系，建立与现役部队的挂钩训练制度，普遍开展基地化、模
拟化、网络化训练。

**National Defense Education**
国防教育

In accordance with the National Defense Education Law of the PRC, governments and relevant
departments at all levels conduct national defense educational activities of various forms to enhance
the national defense awareness of the people. A favorable situation in national defense education has
just arisen, in which the government attaches great importance to it, the general public provides
support to it, and the people take an active part in it.
中国各级政府和有关部门依照国防教育法，开展多种形式的国防教育，提高全民国防观念。国
防教育工作已初步形成政府重视、社会支持、全民参与的良好局面。

The Central Government has set up the National Defense Education Office while organs or offices for
national defense education have been established accordingly in provinces, autonomous regions,
municipalities directly under the Central Government, and in most cities and counties. Twenty-six
provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the Central Government have
formulated or revised their national defense education regulations. The State National Defense
Education Office has organized the drafting of the national defense education program.
国家设立国防教育办公室，各省、自治区、直辖市和大部分市、县成立国防教育领导机构和办
公室。26个省、自治区、直辖市制定或修订了国防教育条例，国家国防教育办公室组织起草国
防教育大纲。

China conducts its national defense education mainly among civil servants, young students, militia
members and reservists. National defense education is absorbed into the curricula for civil servants
and Party schools of the CPC. More than 2,500 Party schools throughout China have offered courses
on national defense education. Such educational forms as special lectures, Military Day on camp and
short-term training programs are adopted. As a result, the awareness of government functionaries in
performing national defense duties is enhanced. National defense education has been incorporated into
the courses of all kinds of schools at different levels to provide students with national defense
knowledge and education in patriotism. Some primary and secondary schools have also introduced


-----

activities in the form of juvenile military schools with national defense education as the theme.
National defense education for the militia and reserve forces is conducted in connection with political
education, intensified disciplining and military training.
国家以公务人员、青少年学生、民兵预备役人员为重点开展全民国防教育。将国防教育纳入公
务员理论学习计划和中共党校教学体系，在全国2500多所党校开设国防教育课程，并通过专题
讲座、到军营过“军事日”和短期训练等形式，强化公务人员履行国防职责的意识。将国防教
育内容纳入各级各类学校教学课程，对青少年学生进行国防知识和爱国主义教育。一些中小学
校开展了以国防教育为主题的少年军校活动。对民兵预备役人员的国防教育，主要结合政治教
育、组织整顿、军事训练进行。

In accordance with the Military Service Law of the PRC and the National Defense Education Law of
the PRC, colleges, universities, senior high schools and their equivalents should develop their national
defense education by linking their curricula with military training. When studying at colleges and
universities, students are obliged to receive basic military training. The PLA Student Military Training
Office, together with the Ministry of Education, has formulated a program to strengthen guidance on
military training for students throughout the country. In 2003, some 1,100 colleges and universities
and 11,500 senior high schools throughout China conducted military training as required and more
than eight million students received such training.
按照兵役法和国防教育法，高等学校、高级中学和相当于高级中学的学校的国防教育，应当将
课堂教学与军事训练相结合;
高等学校学生在就学期间，必须接受基本军事训练。为加强对全国学生军训工作的指导，全军
学生军训工作办公室会同教育部制定了全国学生军训工作规划。2003年，全国1100所高等学校
和11500所高级中学按照要求开展学生军训，800多万学生接受训练。

On major holidays, commemoration days and military recruitment occasions, national defense
education is conducted in all parts of China in the form of exhibitions, lectures, cultural and art
performances, knowledge competitions and military summer camps. Special columns or programs in
such media as newspapers, magazines, radio, TV and web pages are devoted to national defense
education. There are now nine provinces and municipalities that have published newspapers or
magazines on national defense education and more than 30 regions have set up websites on national
defense education. With such platforms like cemeteries of revolutionary martyrs, revolutionary sites,
and memorial halls and museums which can be used for this purpose, national defense education has
been provided in all parts of the country with nearly 200 million people educated every year.
全国各地利用重大节日、纪念日和征兵等时机，举办展览、演讲、文艺演出、知识竞赛、军事
夏令营等国防教育活动。报刊、电台、电视、网络等媒体普遍开设国防教育专栏或专题节目。
已有9个省市创办国防教育报刊，30多个地区开办国防教育网站。各地利用烈士陵园、革命遗
址和具有国防教育功能的博物馆、纪念馆等场所开展国防教育，每年受教育人数近2亿。

**Chapter VII. Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense**

第七章 国防科技工业

To meet the requirements of the development of weaponry and equipment and the socialist market
economy, China is speeding up the development of its defense-related science, technology and
industry, and making efforts to build a new system of defense-related science, technology and industry
which is structurally optimized, organizationally efficient, technologically advanced and properly laid
out.
中国适应武器装备建设和社会主义市场经济发展要求，加快国防科技工业发展，努力建立结构
优化、组织高效、技术先进、布局合理的国防科技工业新体系。

**Main Tasks**
国防科技工业主要任务


-----

The main responsibility of China's defense-related science, technology and industry is to ensure the
production and supply of military equipment to meet the needs of national defense. At the same time,
it undertakes the important task of promoting the development of the national economy and enhancing
the overall national strength.
中国国防科技工业的主要职责是保障军事装备的生产供应，满足国防需要。同时，还承担推动
国民经济发展和提升综合国力的重要任务。

In accordance with the requirements of the RMA with Chinese characteristics, the defense-related
science, technology and industry strives to raise its capability for weaponry and equipment research
and production, and accelerate the research and production of new- and high-tech weaponry and
equipment. It adjusts the capability composition of weaponry and equipment research and production,
giving priority to the building of capability of new- and high-tech weaponry and equipment research
and production, and promoting the optimization and upgrading of the military industrial structure. It
strengthens and improves its technology- and defense-based research work, and conducts explorations
of frontier technology and future-oriented research, so as to expand its technological reserve. It
employs new- and high- technologies to remold military industrial enterprises, so as to convert its
weaponry and equipment production capability from a rigid structure to a flexible one. It enhances the
development of military standards, so as to establish a universal system of technical standards tailored
to new developments of weaponry and equipment. It carries out dynamic adjustments of the research
and production of weaponry and equipment, so as to shorten the development cycle and reduce the
cost of products.
按照中国特色军事变革的要求，国防科技工业努力提高武器装备科研生产能力，加快研制生产
高新技术武器装备。调整武器装备科研生产能力结构，重点支持高新技术武器装备科研生产能
力建设，促进军工产业结构优化升级。加强和改进技术基础、国防基础科研工作，开展前沿技
术探索和前瞻性研究，增加技术储备。用高新技术改造军工企业，实现武器装备生产能力由刚
性结构向柔性结构转变。加强军用标准建设，建立适应武器装备新发展的通用技术标准体系。
对武器装备科研生产实施动态调整，缩短研制周期，降低产品成本。

While ensuring the fulfillment of military orders, the defense-related science, technology and industry
vigorously develops dual-purpose technologies and actively participates in the development of the
national economy. It promotes the development and technological advances of civilian products
manufactured mainly by the military industry, such as those in the fields of nuclear energy and applied
nuclear technologies; space and aviation technologies and ships and demolition technologies for civil
use. To help bring about industrial upgrades and technological advances of the national economy, it
supports the large-scale development of China's western region and the remolding of the old industrial
bases in northeast China, and undertakes key construction projects and major equipment development
and technical problem tackling tasks.
国防科技工业在确保完成军事订货任务的同时，大力发展军民两用技术，积极参与国民经济建
设。促进核能及核应用技术、民用航天、民用航空、民用船舶、民用爆破等军工主导民品的发
展与技术进步。支持西部大开发、东北老工业基地改造，承担国家重点工程建设项目、重大设
备研制和技术攻关任务，促进国民经济产业升级和技术进步。

The first two decades of the 21st century will be a crucial period for the reform and adjustment of the
defense-related science, technology and industry. It will adhere to the strategic guideline of combining
military needs with civilian needs, reserving military potential in civilian capability, vigorously
developing coordination, and making independent innovations, and persist in taking a new road of
industrial development. It will establish and improve a mechanism of competition, appraisal,
supervision and motivation, give impetus to the optimization and reorganization of resources and the
upgrading of the industrial structure, strengthen the building of the basic capabilities of the defenserelated science, technology and industry foundations, and enhance in an all-round way the overall


-----

quality and sustainable development capability of the defense-related science, technology and
industry.
二十一世纪头二十年，是国防科技工业改革调整的关键阶段。国防科技工业坚持军民结合、寓
军于民、大力协同、自主创新的战略方针，坚持走新型工业化发展道路，建立健全竞争、评价
、监督和激励机制，推进资源优化重组和产业结构升级，加强国防科技工业基础能力建设，全
面提高国防科技工业整体素质和可持续发展能力。

**Reform and Adjustment**
国防科技工业改革调整

China's defense-related science, technology and industry continues to deepen its reform, optimize its
industrial structure and resources allocation, accelerate system and mechanism innovation, and
establish a streamlined and efficient research and production system.
国防科技工业继续深化改革，优化产业结构和资源配置，加快体制机制创新，建立精干、高效
的科研生产体系。

Optimizing the industrial structure. China's defense-related science, technology and industry aims to
form an industrial layout with military high-tech industries as the precursor, major dual-purpose
industries as the main body, and military manufacturing industries as the foundation. It gives priority
to the development of dual-purpose high-tech industries, absorbs advanced civilian technologies from
all industries and trades for the service of national defense, and promotes the two-way transfer of
military and civilian high technologies. It supports enterprises to develop projects and programs which
are technology-intensive, produce good economic results, consume fewer resources, cause less
environmental pollution and give full play to the advantages of human resources. It encourages the
development of burgeoning industries with information technology, new materials, energy saving and
environmental protection, life sciences, oceanic engineering and other high technologies as the
precursor, so as to foster new economic growth.
优化产业结构。形成以军工高技术产业为先导，以军民两用主导产业为主体，以军工制造业为
基础的产业格局。优先发展军民两用高技术产业，吸纳各行业的先进民用技术为国防建设服务
，推动军用和民用高技术双向转移。支持企业发展科技含量高、经济效益好、资源消耗低、环
境污染少、人力资源优势得到充分发挥的项目。发展信息技术、新材料、节能与环保、生命科
学、海洋工程等高技术为先导的新兴产业，培育新的经济增长点。

Accelerating the reform and adjustment of military industrial enterprises. China's defense-related
science, technology and industry optimizes the organizational structure of military industrial
enterprises and encourages competitive enterprises to carry out strategic reorganization on the basis of
market demand and their own advantages, in compliance with the principle of specialized division of
labor and large-scale production and with products and assets as the link. Military industrial
enterprises are impelled to establish a modern enterprise system, accelerate the pace of ownership
system restructuring, establish a standard parent-subsidiary system and a legal person management
structure, and change their enterprise operational mechanism. Full play is given to the guiding role of
the state's input, to lead and channel social funds into the development of the defense-related science,
technology and industry and carry forward the diversification of investors. Through reforms and
adjustments, the main body of the military industry is streamlined, and a new defense-related science,
technology and industry system established, which features a small core, extensive cooperation and
military potential reserved in civilian capability.
加快军工企业改革调整。优化军工企业组织结构，鼓励优势企业根据市场需求和自身优势，按
照专业化分工和规模经济原则，以产品和资产为纽带实施战略性重组。推进军工企业建立现代
企业制度，加快改制步伐，建立规范的母子公司体制和法人治理结构，转换企业经营机制。发
挥国家投入的导向性作用，引导和带动社会资金参与国防科技工业建设，推进投资主体多元化


-----

。通过改革调整，浓缩精干军工主体，建立小核心、大协作、寓军于民的国防科技工业新体系
。

Improving the innovation system of scientific research. Scientific research institutions engaged in
innovation activities in basic research, strategic high-tech research and important public welfare
research should expedite the establishment of a modern scientific research institution system
according to the principle of clearly defined responsibilities and duties, scientific evaluation, orderly
opening, and standard management. Market-oriented applied technology research and development
institutions should speed up their transformation into enterprises run on a commercial basis. The goal
is to form a defense scientific research system with defense scientific research institutions, institutions
of higher learning and key enterprises as the main body, and to enhance the independent development
capability of the defense-related science, technology and industry.
完善科研创新体系。从事基础研究、战略高技术研究、重要公益研究领域创新活动的科研机构
，按照职责明确、评价科学、开放有序、管理规范的原则，加快建立现代科研院所制度。面向
市场的应用技术研究开发机构，加快向企业化转制。形成以国防科研院所、高等院校和骨干企
业为主体的国防科研体系，增强国防科技工业自主发展能力。

Promoting innovation in talents-related work. A new mechanism should be established as soon as
possible for training, attracting, using, and retaining talented people, and for accelerating their growth,
so as to create a well-structured contingent of high-caliber people in a whole array of principles.
Impetus should be given to the reform and development of higher education for the defense-related
science, technology and industry, so as to speed up the training of high-level specialized personnel
urgently needed by the defense-related science, technology and industry. Preferential policies should
be formulated to encourage college and university graduates, excellent students returned from
overseas, and other scientific, technological and management talents from outside the defense-related
science, technology and industry to take part in its building. In addition, the personnel employing
mechanism and the distribution system should be reformed to raise the salaries and improve the
conditions of those engaged in weaponry and equipment research, development and production.
推进人才工作创新。尽快建立培养、吸引、使用、留住人才和加快人才成长的新机制，建设一
支专业配套、结构合理、素质优良的人才队伍。推进国防科技工业高等教育事业改革、发展，
加速培养国防科技工业急需的高级专门人才。制定优惠政策，鼓励高校毕业生、优秀留学回国
人员及社会其他科技、管理人才参与国防科技工业建设。改革用人机制和分配制度，提高承担
武器装备科研生产任务人员的待遇。

**Development of Civil Use Industry**
国防科技工业民用产业发展

China has made remarkable progress in putting military industrial technology to civil use in the past
two years. In 2003, the output value of civilian products rose by 20% as compared with that of the
previous year, accounting for more than 65% of the total output value of the defense-related science,
technology and industry.
两年来，中国政府积极推进和平利用军工技术发展民用产业，并取得显著成效。2003年民品产
值比上年增长20%，占国防科技工业总产值的65%以上。

Nuclear power production is being industrialized. China's mainland now has nine nuclear power
generating sets in operation, the total installed capacity of which is 7.01 million KW. Another two,
each with an installed capacity of 1.06 million KW, are now under construction. In 2003, China's
nuclear power production was 43.3 billion KWH, accounting for 2.3% of its total power production.
Steady progress has been made in the construction of auxiliary projects for nuclear energy. A nuclear
fuel production system tailored to nuclear power production has by and large taken shape, and the
production of nuclear fuel has been technologically upgraded. Great importance is attached to the


-----

decommissioning of nuclear installations and the treatment of radioactive waste, and great efforts are
made to enhance the awareness of environmental protection and ensure the safe disposal of all kinds
of radioactive waste. The emergency response system for nuclear accidents has been gradually
improved, and the response capability increased.
核电向产业化方向发展。中国大陆目前共有9台核电机组运行，总装机容量为701万千瓦，另有
2台106万千瓦机组正在建设中。2003年核发电量为433亿千瓦时，占全国总发电量的2.3%。核
能配套工程建设稳步推进，基本形成了与核电相配套的核燃料生产体系，核燃料生产实现技术
升级。高度重视核设施退役和放射性废物治理工作，强化环境保护意识，确保各种放射性废物
的安全处置。核事故应急响应体系逐步完善，响应能力得到提高。

Major breakthroughs have been made in space technologies for civil use. Since October 1996, China
has succeeded in 41 space launches. The successful launching of the "Shenzhou V" spaceship in
October 2003 sent China's first astronaut into space. The key technological problems for the new
generation of carrier rockets have been tackled. China has successfully launched various application
satellites, including SSO (Sun Synchronous Orbit) and GEO (Geostationary Orbit) meteorological
satellites, the HY-1 oceanographic satellite and CBERS (China-Brazil Earth Resource Satellite). The
R&D of a DMEC (Disaster Monitoring and Environmental Control) satellite constellation, a large
GEO satellite platform and a new generation of SSO meteorological satellites is going on smoothly. A
lunar probe project was officially started in January 2004, and a lunar orbiting exploration is
scheduled to be carried out by the end of 2007.
民用航天取得重大突破。1996年10月以来，41次航天发射均获成功。2003年10月成功发射神舟
五号载人飞船，将中国首名航天员送入太空。完成了新一代运载火箭关键技术攻关工作。成功
发射了极轨和静止轨道气象卫星、海洋一号卫星、资源卫星等应用卫星。环境与灾害监测预报
小卫星星座、大型静止轨道卫星公用平台、新一代极轨气象卫星等卫星研制工作顺利推进。20
04年1月正式启动月球探测工程，计划2007年底前实施绕月探测。

The aviation industry for civil use has made important headway in the R&D of feeder liners and
general-purpose aircraft. ARJ21, a new jet feeder liner with 70 seats, is being independently
developed, and is scheduled for delivery in 2008. The Y-12E general-purpose aircraft for use in hightemperature and plateau conditions and the Z-11 and Z-9 helicopters have all received airworthiness
certificates and been put on the commercial market. The newly developed "Xiaoying 500" generalpurpose plane made its first flight in 2003. The ERJ145 jet feeder liner jointly manufactured by China
and Brazil has been delivered to users. An agreement has been formally signed on the building of an
assembly line in China for the EC120 helicopter jointly developed by China, France and Singapore.
Subcontracting business for the manufacture of foreign aircraft parts has been developing steadily, and
begun to be integrated into the large-scale circulation system of the international aviation industry.
民用航空工业在研制支线飞机、通用飞机等方面取得重要进展。自行开发的70座级ARJ21新型
喷气支线客机研制工作全面展开，计划2008年交付使用。运12E高温高原型通用飞机、直11、
直9直升机相继取得适航证，进入民用市场。新研制的小鹰500通用飞机2003年实现首飞。中国
和巴西合资生产的ERJ145喷气支线客机已交付使用。中国、法国和新加坡共同研制的EC120直
升机在中国建设总装线协议正式签订。国外航空零部件转包生产业务稳步发展，开始融入国际
航空工业大循环。

The shipbuilding industry for civil use has witnessed sustained rapid growth, with an output ranking
third in the world for many years. In 2003, China's accomplished shipbuilding output, newly received
orders and on-hand orders amounted to 6.41 million DWT, 18.95 million DWT and 26.23 million
DWT respectively, accounting for a world market share of 11.8%, 18.9% and 17.7% respectively.
Products manufactured by the shipbuilding industry for civil use have been exported to more than 90
countries and regions. The R&D and designing capability of the shipbuilding industry for civil use has
been remarkably raised. It can now build and repair large ships, and has made new breakthroughs in
building high-tech ships.


-----

民用船舶工业继续快速发展，造船产量连续多年位居世界第三位。2003年造船完工量达641万
载重吨，承接新船订单1895万载重吨，手持船舶订单2623万载重吨，分别占世界市场份额的11
.8%、18.9%和17.7%。民用船舶产品已出口到90多个国家和地区。民用船舶工业研发和设计能
力有较大提高，已具备造修大型船舶的能力，并在高技术船舶的承造方面取得新突破。

**Cooperation with Foreign Countries**
国防科技工业对外合作

China's defense-related science, technology and industry take an active part in international exchanges
and cooperation and opens wider to foreign countries. In the field of the military industry for civil use,
China encourages military enterprises and institutions to develop both the international and domestic
markets, utilize resources from both home and abroad, participate in the international division of
labor, optimize the export product mix, and raise the international competitiveness of their products.
China also encourages them to introduce advanced foreign technologies and management expertise,
improve the use of foreign funds, expand the strategic cooperation with large multinational
companies, and raise the technological level of the defense-related science, technology and industry.
China attaches great importance to developing cooperation in defense technology with friendly
countries, and promotes exchanges of and cooperation in defense technology in the international
industrial community.
中国国防科技工业积极参与国际交流与合作，提高对外开放水平。在军工民用产业领域，鼓励
和支持军工企业事业单位开发国内国外两个市场，利用国内国外两种资源，参与国际分工，优
化出口产品结构，提高产品国际竞争力。引进国外先进技术和管理经验，提高利用外资质量和
水平，拓展与大型跨国公司的战略合作，提升国防科技工业的技术水平。中国高度重视发展与
友好国家的防务技术合作关系，促进工业界的防务技术交流与合作。

China's defense-related science, technology and industry takes a prudent attitude toward the export of
military products and related technologies, and strictly complies with the policies and laws of the state
on non-proliferation. On the export of missiles and other military products, it strictly abides by the
Regulations of the PRC on the Export Control of Missiles and Related Items and Technologies, the
Regulations of the PRC on the Export Administration of Military Products and the corresponding lists.
China has invariably adhered to three principles concerning the export of military products: It should
only serve the purpose of helping the recipient state enhance its capability for legitimate self-defense;
it must not impair peace, security and stability of the relevant region and the world as a whole; and it
must not be used to interfere in the recipient state's internal affairs.
中国国防科技工业以审慎态度对待军品及相关技术的出口，严格执行国家的防扩散政策及法律
。在导弹及其他军品出口方面，认真执行《中华人民共和国导弹及相关物项和技术出口管制条
例》、《中华人民共和国军品出口管理条例》及相应的清单。中国的军品出口始终坚持三项原
则:
有利于接受国的正当自卫能力，不损害有关地区和世界的和平、安全与稳定，不干涉接受国的
内政。

**Chapter VIII. The Armed Forces and the People**

第八章 军队与人民

China's national defense is the people's national defense, and China's armed forces belong to the
people. It is an important responsibility and duty of the Chinese armed forces to take part in national
construction and exert themselves in the service of the people. Strengthening unity between the PLA
and the government and between the PLA and the people is an important political foundation for
relying on the people to build national defense and the PLA.
中国的国防是人民的国防，中国武装力量属于人民。参加国家建设事业，努力为人民服务，是
中国武装力量的重要职责。加强军政军民团结，是依靠人民建设国防和军队的重要政治基础。


-----

**Supporting the PLA and Giving Preferential Treatment to Families of Servicemen and Martyrs,**
**and Supporting the Government and Cherishing the People**
拥军优属和拥政爱民

Maintaining unity between the military and the people and between the PLA and the government,
supporting the PLA and giving preferential treatment to families of servicemen and martyrs, and
supporting the government and cherishing the people: these are the fundamental principles
consistently adhered to in the building of national defense and the PLA. Supporting the PLA and
giving preferential treatment to families of servicemen and martyrs are activities carried out by the
local people's governments at all levels, mass organizations and the masses to support the PLA and
give preferential treatment to families of active-duty servicemen and revolutionary martyrs.
Supporting the government and cherishing the people is the mass work carried out by the people's
army focusing on support for the government and love for the people. These glorious traditions
formed during the revolutionary wars demonstrated tremendous might in Chinese people's liberation
cause.
军民一致、军政一致，拥军优属、拥政爱民，是国防和军队建设一贯坚持的基本原则。拥军优
属是地方各级人民政府、社会团体和人民群众开展的拥护军队、优待现役军人亲属及革命烈士
亲属的活动。拥政爱民是人民军队开展的以拥护政府、热爱人民为主要内容的群众工作。革命
战争年代形成的拥军优属、拥政爱民光荣传统，在中国人民的解放事业中显示了巨大力量。

Since the founding of New China, the work of supporting the PLA and giving preferential treatment to
families of servicemen and martyrs has been gradually legalized and standardized. The State Council
has, in succession, promulgated the Regulations on the Commendation of Revolutionary Martyrs, the
Regulations on Compensation and Preferential Treatment for Servicemen and the Regulations on the
Resettlement of Demobilized Conscripts. It has also formulated and issued policies and statutes on the
resettlement of officers transferred to civilian work, on the employment of the accompanying spouses
of officers, and on safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests of servicemen and their families.
The Ministry of Civil Affairs and the PLA General Political Department jointly issue circulars on New
Year's Day, the Spring Festival and Army Day every year on the arrangements for the work of
supporting the PLA and giving preferential treatment to families of servicemen and martyrs and
supporting the government and cherishing the people. In the past ten years and more, proper
arrangements have been made for more than 600,000 officers transferred to civilian work, more than
7,000,000 demobilized enlisted men, more than 50,000 disabled enlisted men and more than 900,000
spouses. In addition, more than 100,000 retired military cadres and civilian employees have been
given political status and material benefits they deserve, and children of servicemen enjoy preferential
policies in education. In August 2004, the State Council and the CMC promulgated the newly revised
Regulations on Compensation and Preferential Treatment for Servicemen, greatly raising the
compensation standards, expanding the scope and increasing the items of social preferential treatment,
and further improving the compensation and preferential treatment system for servicemen, which is
suited to the conditions of China.
新中国成立后，拥军优属工作逐步法制化、规范化。国务院相继颁布《革命烈士褒扬条例》、
《军人抚恤优待条例》、《退伍义务兵安置条例》等，制定出台有关转业军官安置、军官配偶
随军就业、维护军人及其亲属合法权益的政策制度。国家民政部和解放军总政治部在每年元旦
、春节和“八一”建军节期间都联合发出通知，对拥军优属、拥政爱民工作进行部署。十多年
来，有60多万转业军官、700多万退役士兵、5万多伤残士兵、90多万军官配偶得到妥善安置，
10多万军队离退休干部和无军籍职工的政治、生活待遇得到落实，军人子女入学入托享受优惠
政策。2004年8月，国务院、中央军委颁布新修订的《军人抚恤优待条例》，大幅度提高优抚
对象的抚恤补助标准，拓展优抚对象的社会优待范围和内容，完善了适合中国国情的军人抚恤
优待制度。


-----

The people's governments at all levels have incorporated the work of supporting the PLA and giving
preferential treatment to families of servicemen and martyrs into their economic and social
development programs, and given active support to national defense building and the PLA. They have
actively helped PLA units to accomplish tasks of education and training, performing combat readiness
duties, conducting scientific research and testing, and carrying out the construction of military
projects, by ensuring the requisitioning of sites and providing road support and material supplies.
They have encouraged regular institutions of higher learning and scientific research institutions to
provide the PLA with technological and intellectual support, and established bases for such purposes
to help PLA units train personnel in different fields. They have organized non-governmental sectors to
help PLA grass-roots units to improve their living conditions, supplied to them food, oil, water and
electricity with priority, helped build barracks and living quarters, and set up food-production bases
and cultural centers, and helped nearly one million families of servicemen to overcome their living,
housing and medical care difficulties. Local governments at all levels have established working
mechanisms for safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests of servicemen and their families,
courts at the basic level have set up collegiate benches for cases involving servicemen, and judicial
administrative organs in various places have set up legal assistance centers to solve and mediate in the
legal problems of servicemen and their families. In the past two years or so, more than 300 cities
(counties), more than 2,000 enterprises and institutions and more than 1,000 individuals have been
commended by the Central Government and its relevant departments for their outstanding
performance in supporting the PLA and giving preferential treatment to families of servicemen and
martyrs.
各级人民政府把拥军优属工作纳入经济社会发展规划，积极支持国防和军队建设。主动配合部
队完成教育训练、战备执勤、科研试验和军事工程建设等任务，做好场地征用、道路保障、物
资供应等工作。动员大专院校、科研单位开展科技拥军、智力拥军活动，建立科技拥军基地，
帮助部队培养各类人才。组织社会力量帮助基层部队改善生活条件，优先保证部队粮油水电供
应，帮助修建营区和生活区，建立副食品生产基地和文化活动场所，帮助近百万军烈属家庭解
决生活、住房、医疗方面的困难。地方各级政府建立维护军人及其家属合法权益的工作机制，
各基层法院成立涉军案件合议庭，各地司法行政机关建立军人军属法律援助中心，依法解决和
调解部队官兵涉法问题。近两年来，先后有300多个市（县）、2000多个单位和1000多名个人
在拥军优属工作中作出突出成绩，受到国家和有关部门的命名表彰。

Carrying forward its fine traditions, the PLA has persisted in taking it as an important part of its
political work to support the government and cherish the people, and has included this in the overall
plan for the building of its forces. The PLA's political organs at all levels have special departments
responsible for organizing activities of supporting the government and cherishing the people, and for
setting up mechanisms for coordinating the relations between PLA units and local people. The PLA
consciously respects the local people's governments at all levels, and assists them in their work. It
strictly complies with the policies and statutes of the state, cherishes and respects the people, and
helps them overcome their difficulties. In the past decade and more, the PLA has set up nearly 40,000
points of contact for helping the poor. Owing to its help, more than 3.7 million poor people have been
enabled to get rid of poverty, more than 2,800 primary and secondary schools have been built in
poverty-stricken areas, and more than half a million school drop-outs have returned to class.
人民解放军发扬优良传统，坚持把拥政爱民作为政治工作的重要内容，纳入部队建设的总体规
划。各级政治机关均设有专门组织机构，组织开展拥政爱民活动，建立军地关系协调机制。军
队自觉尊重地方各级人民政府，支持和配合地方工作。严格执行国家政策法规，热爱和尊重人
民群众，帮助人民群众排忧解难。十多年来，先后建立扶贫联系点近4万个，扶持370多万贫困
人口走上富裕道路，援建贫困地区中小学2800多所，资助50多万失学少年儿童重返校园。

Under the unified leadership of the local people's governments, the PLA and the PAPF grass-roots
units jointly carry out mass activities with local grass-roots organizations to build socialist spiritual
civilization. Throughout the country, more than 30,000 links for joint activities have been set up for


-----

such purposes. All grass-roots units of the PLA and the PAPF take an active part in local activities
aimed at building "civic virtues" cities, villages, communities and trades. They open for free to the
public military history exhibition halls, and honor rooms of heroic companies, and memorial halls in
honor of heroes and models. They assist in areas inhabited by ethnic minorities to develop
educational, cultural and health programs. Local governments help the PLA and the PAPF train
servicemen competent in both military and civilian jobs, and help grass-roots units of the PLA and the
PAPF improve and enrich the cultural life in barracks.
在地方人民政府的统一领导下，军队和武警部队基层单位同驻地基层单位或组织共同开展群众
性精神文明创建活动，全国先后建立3万多个共建点。各基层部队积极参加驻地创建文明城市
、文明村镇、文明社区、文明行业活动，义务向社会开放军史陈列馆、英雄连队荣誉室和英模
人物纪念馆，帮助少数民族地区发展民族教育、文化、卫生事业。地方支持部队培养军地两用
人才，帮助基层单位改善和丰富军营文化生活。

**Participating in and Supporting National Construction**
参加和支援国家建设

The PLA and the PAPF actively participate in and support all aspects of national construction besides
fulfilling their assignments of education and training. They participate in the construction of national
and local infrastructure projects, support agriculture, relieve poverty through development projects,
transfer scientific and technological achievements, assist in tackling technological problems and
training personnel, and support the development of the public welfare undertakings in both urban and
rural areas. They have also vacated part of the land for military use and barracks and camp facilities,
and opened some military airfields, harbors and docks and communication lines to civilian use.
人民解放军和武装警察部队，在完成教育训练任务的同时，积极参加和支援国家的各项建设事
业。参加国家和地方的基础设施工程建设，支援农业和扶贫开发工作，转让科学技术成果、协
助技术攻关、帮助培训人才，支持城乡社会公益事业发展，腾让部分军事用地和营房设施，开
放部分军用机场、港口码头、通信线路。

The General Staff Headquarters and the General Political Department have specified that everyone in
PLA units is obliged to devote an average of not less than eight days a year to national construction.
Under the condition that military needs are met, PLA units may use some of their vehicles, machines,
ships, planes and other equipment to support local economic construction. Organic units of the
engineering troops may take part in the construction of national or local projects. The goldmine,
forest, water conservancy and electric power, and transportation forces of the PAPF take a direct part
in national economic construction.
总参谋部、总政治部规定，全军部队每人每年义务参加国家建设的时间平均不得少于八天。在
保证军事需要的前提下，可抽调部分车辆、机械、舰船、飞机等装备支援地方经济建设。工程
兵部队可成建制参加国家和地方的工程建设。武警黄金、森林、水电、交通部队，直接参加国
家经济建设。

In the past two years, the PLA has assisted in the construction of more than 490 key projects at the
provincial level and above, and transferred more than 500 scientific and technological achievements to
civilian sectors. More than 100 military hospitals have given support to corresponding local hospitals
in remote and less-developed areas. PLA technical troops specializing in mapping, meteorology, water
supply and so on have provided services in geographic survey, weather forecasts, water source
exploration and other fields. Military institutions of education and research have helped train more
than 100,000 personnel urgently needed in local construction. PAPF units have taken part in the
construction of more than 100 key national and provincial projects, and made significant contributions
in particular to the Three Gorges Project, the West-East Electricity Project, the West-East Natural Gas
Project and the Qinghai-Tibet Railway Project, as well as to geological prospecting, forest fire
prevention and highway construction.


-----

两年来，军队援建省级以上重点工程490多项，向地方转让科技成果500多项，100多所军队医
院对口支援边远贫困地区地方医院，测绘、气象、给水等技术部队为地方提供大地勘测、气象
预报、水源勘探等服务，军队院校和科研院所为地方建设培养急需人才10多万名。武警部队参
与100多项国家和省级重点工程项目建设，在三峡工程、“西电东送”、“西气东输”、青藏
铁路等重点工程建设和地质勘探、森林防火、公路建设中作出了重要贡献。

Since the founding of New China in 1949, more than 3,500,000 military cadres have been transferred
to civilian work, and they have taken an active part in all aspects of national construction. Among the
1,500,000 military cadres transferred to civilian work since the beginning of the reform and openingup, more than 540,000 have been cited as model or outstanding workers, more than 10,000 have been
chosen as outstanding entrepreneurs, and more than 330,000 have become leaders at or above the
county or corresponding level, many of whom have even become provincial or ministerial leaders.
新中国成立以来，先后有350多万军队干部转业到地方工作，活跃于国家建设的各个领域。在
改革开放以来安置的150多万名军队转业干部中，54万多人被评为各级劳动模范和先进工作者
，1万多人被评为优秀企业家，33万多人担任县（处）级以上领导职务，不少人走上省（部）
级领导岗位。

**Participating in Emergency Rescue and Disaster Relief Operations**
参加抢险救灾

Taking part in emergency rescue and disaster relief operations is an important mission the state and
the people have entrusted to the PLA and PAPF. In the course of these operations, the PLA and PAPF
mainly undertake the following tasks: rescuing and evacuating disaster victims and people trapped in
danger, eliminating or controlling major dangers and disasters, ensuring the safety of important
targets, participating in the emergency rescue and transportation of important goods, conducting rush
repairs of roads and bridges, carrying out underwater operations and rescue operations under nuclear,
biological and chemical conditions, controlling major epidemic diseases, providing medical aid, and
assisting local people's governments in such tasks as disaster relief and post-disaster reconstruction. In
normal time, the PLA and PAPF make a point of gathering information on disasters and dangers, set
up a system of information exchanges with local governments, draw up rescue and relief plans,
conduct rescue and relief training and exercises, and offer rescue and relief courses in military
command colleges. In rescue and relief operations, PLA and PAPF troops receive orders from the
joint military-civilian headquarters.
参加抢险救灾，是国家和人民赋予军队和武警部队的重要使命。在抢险救灾中，军队和武警部
队主要担负解救、转移和疏散受困群众，排除或控制重大险情、灾情，保护重要目标安全，紧
急抢救和运送重要物资，抢修道路、桥梁，进行潜水作业、核生化救援、重大疫情控制和医疗
救护，协助地方人民政府开展赈灾和灾后重建等任务。平时注意了解掌握有关灾情、险情信息
，同地方人民政府建立信息通报制度，制定抢险救灾预案，开展抢险救灾训练，并在军队指挥
院校开设抢险救灾专业课程。在抢险救灾中，军队和武警部队接受军地联合指挥部的指挥和调
动。

In the past two years, PLA and PAPF troops have taken part in fighting floods, typhoons, earthquakes,
forest fires, epidemic diseases and other natural disasters on more than 120 occasions, and prevented
economic losses totaling some RMB 10 billion. The PAPF alone put in more than 240,000 troops,
rescued more than 230,000 people out of danger, and rush-transported more than 2.6 million tons of
goods. In 2003, the PLA and PAPF offered all-out support to governments at all levels in the fight
against SARS by sending 37,000 officers and men to help control the spread of the disease and
sterilize on a large scale key places, sites and areas with a high incidence of SARS. Eighteen military
hospitals provided meticulous medical treatment to 420 SARS patients. The Military Academy of
Medical Science was the first to separate the SARS pathogen in China and develop a rapid-diagnosis
reagent for SARS. A total of 1,383 medical personnel from different PLA units worked hard


-----

continually at the Beijing Xiaotangshan Hospital for more than 50 days to give meticulous treatment
to 680 SARS sufferers.
两年来，军队和武警部队参加抗击洪涝、台风、地震、林火和疫情等重大自然灾害120多次，
减少经济损失上百亿元。仅武警部队就出动兵力24万多人次，抢救和转移遇险群众23万多人，
抢运物资260多万吨。2003年，军队和武警部队全力支援地方抗击“非典”斗争，出动3.7万名
官兵协助驻地控制疫情，组织防疫力量对重点部位、重点场所和疫情多发地区进行大面积消毒
，18所军队医院精心救治“非典”病人420多名。军事医学科学院率先在国内分离出非典型传
染性肺炎的病原体，研制出快速诊断试剂。来自各部队的1383名医护人员，在北京小汤山医院
连续奋战50多天，精心救治“非典”患者680名。

**Keeping Discipline in Relation to the Masses**
执行群众纪律

The PLA's discipline in relation to the masses is the code of conduct that all officers and men must
observe in their contacts with the masses of the people. Strict enforcement of discipline in relation to
the masses is the guarantee for the PLA to win the support of the people.
人民解放军的群众纪律，是全体官兵同人民群众交往必须遵守的行为规范。严格执行群众纪律
，是军队赢得人民拥护和支持的保证。

In its early days, the PLA formulated the "Three Main Rules of Discipline" and "Eight Points for
Attention," which clearly state: "Do not take a single needle or piece of thread from the masses,"
"Speak politely," "Pay fairly for what you buy," "Return everything you borrow," "Pay for anything
you damage," "Do not hit or swear at people," "Do not damage crops," and so on. The newly issued
Regulations on Routine Service of the People's Liberation Army and the Regulations on Discipline of
the People's Liberation Army, along with a series of new statutes formulated by the CMC and the
general departments of the PLA, stipulate that servicemen must conform to the required standards of
bearing when they go out in uniform, and that they should not engage in trade or in paid services
beyond their own jobs, or use their names or portraits for commercial advertising, thus enriching the
content of discipline in relation to the masses.
人民解放军在建军初期就制定了“三大纪律八项注意”，明确提出“不拿群众一针一线”、“
说话和气”、“买卖公平”、“借东西要还”、“损坏东西要赔”、“不打人骂人”、“不损
坏庄稼”等群众纪律。新颁布的《中国人民解放军内务条令》、《中国人民解放军纪律条令》
和军委、总部制定的一系列新规定，要求军人着军装外出必须军容严整、不得经商和从事本职
以外的有偿服务活动、不得以军人名义和肖像做商业广告等，丰富和完善了群众纪律的内容。

All PLA units regard it as a constant and important task to strictly enforce discipline in relation to the
masses. They conduct education in discipline in relation to the masses, inspect and supervise its
observance, and strictly restrain the behavior of officers and men in social activities. The garrison
headquarters of troops stationed in cities send out pickets to patrol the streets from time to time, and
PLA units send out discipline inspection teams on major holidays or when their personnel go out to
perform tasks. Regular visits are paid to civilian organizations in the areas where PLA units are
stationed, and when breaches of discipline are found, they will be dealt with in time. The PLA units
stationed in areas inhabited by ethnic minorities strictly implement the state policies concerning ethnic
groups and religions, and consciously respect the religious beliefs and customs of the ethnic
minorities.
各部队把严明群众纪律作为一项经常性的重要任务，开展群众纪律教育，检查监督群众纪律执
行情况，严格约束官兵的社会活动行为。驻城市部队警备司令部经常派出纠察队，部队在重大
节日和外出执行任务时派出群众纪律检查组。定期走访驻地有关单位，及时查处违犯群众纪律
的行为。驻少数民族地区部队严格执行国家的民族宗教政策，自觉尊重少数民族宗教信仰和风
俗习惯。


-----

**Chapter IX. International Security Cooperation**

第九章 国际安全合作

Adhering to the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, China persists in developing friendly
relations and strengthening cooperation with other countries on the basis of the Five Principles of
Peaceful Co-existence, and devotes itself to promoting international security dialogues and
cooperation of all forms.
中国坚持根据《联合国宪章》的宗旨和原则，在和平共处五项原则的基础上与世界各国发展友
好合作关系，致力于推动各种形式的国际安全对话与合作。

**Strategic Consultation and Dialogue**
战略磋商和对话

In recent years, China has intensified bilateral and multilateral strategic consultation and dialogues
with countries concerned in security and defense fields which contribute to better mutual trust and
mutual exchange and cooperation.
近年来，中国加强同有关国家在安全与防务领域的双边及多边战略磋商和对话，促进了相互信
任、交流与协作。

With the strengthening of the strategic and cooperative partnership between China and Russia, the two
countries have established a senior-level meeting mechanism to exchange views on major issues. They
have also held consultations on major strategic issues between relevant departments. In 2003, China
and Russia conducted a number of vice-foreign-ministerial level consultations on the nuclear issue on
the Korean Peninsula, the questions of Iraq and the Middle East, and other international, regional and
bilateral issues of common concern. In 2004, the two countries held a counter-terrorism working
group meeting and consultation on strategic stability at the vice-foreign-ministerial level. The two
militaries established a consultation mechanism in 1997, and the General Staff headquarters of the two
militaries held the seventh and eighth rounds of strategic consultations in 2003 and 2004 respectively.
随着中俄两国战略协作伙伴关系深入发展，两国建立了高层会晤机制，就重大问题交换意见。
两国相关部门也就重要战略问题进行磋商。2003年，两国就朝鲜半岛核问题、伊拉克、中东及
其他共同关心的国际、地区形势和双边关系问题，进行了多次副外长级磋商。2004年，两国举
行了副外长级反恐工作组会议和战略稳定磋商。中俄两军于1997年建立磋商机制，2003年、20
04年两国总参谋部举行了第七、第八轮战略磋商。

China and the United States maintain consultations on non- proliferation, counter-terrorism, and
bilateral military security cooperation. In the past two years, the two countries held three rounds of
consultations at the vice-foreign-ministerial level on strategic security, multilateral arms control and
non-proliferation, the sixth Defense Consultative Talk, the third and fourth counter-terrorism
consultations, and the second financial counter-terrorism consultation. The military maritime and air
safety working groups under the Military Maritime Consultative Agreement held the third and fourth
meetings in Hawaii and Shanghai respectively.
中美两国在防扩散、反恐和双边军事安全合作等领域保持磋商。两年来，中美举行了三轮副外
长级战略安全、多边军控和防扩散磋商，第六次国防部副部长级防务磋商，第三、第四次反恐
磋商和第二次金融反恐磋商。中美海上军事安全磋商机制框架下的海空军事安全工作小组，分
别在夏威夷和上海举行第三、第四次会议。

China has conducted extensive strategic consultations and dialogues with other countries. China and
France established the relationship of strategic dialogue in 1997, and have since held six rounds of
such consultation. China and the United Kingdom held two rounds of strategic security dialogue in
October 2003 and March 2004 respectively, and established the Sino-British strategic security
dialogue mechanism. The Chinese Ministry of National Defense and its South African counterpart


-----

signed an agreement on the establishment of a defense commission in April 2003. The Seventh SinoAustralian Defense Strategic Consultation was held in October of the same year. The two militaries of
China and Germany held their second round of strategic consultation in July 2004. China has also held
fruitful security consultations and dialogues respectively with Canada, Mexico, Italy, Poland, New
Zealand and other countries.
中国广泛开展与其他国家的战略磋商和对话。1997年中法两军建立战略对话关系，迄今已进行
七轮磋商。2003年10月和2004年3月，中英两国进行了两轮战略安全对话，并确立中英战略安
全对话机制。中国在2003年4月与南非签署两国国防部关于建立防务委员会的协议，10月与澳
大利亚举行第七次战略防务磋商。2004年7月，中德两军举行第二轮战略磋商。中国还与加拿
大、墨西哥、意大利、波兰、新西兰等国开展了卓有成效的安全磋商和对话。

China attaches importance to security consultations with its neighboring countries. China and Pakistan
held their second defense and security consultation in July 2003. The defense ministries of China and
Thailand held their second defense security consultation in September of the same year. The Chinese
Ministry of National Defense and Japanese Defense Agency held their fourth and fifth security
consultations respectively in January and October 2004. In April this year, China and Mongolia held
their first defense and security consultation. In September, the Chinese Ministry of National Defense
held the second strategic consultations respectively with its counterparts of Kyrgyzstan and
Kazakhstan. In October this year, China and Australia held their eighth Defense Strategic Dialogue,
and the Chinese Ministry of National Defense held the third security consultation with its Thailand
counterpart.
中国重视与周边国家的安全磋商。2003年7月，中国与巴基斯坦举行第二次防务与安全磋商。9
月，中泰两国国防部举行第二次安全磋商。2004年1月、10月，中日举行第四、第五次防务部
门安全磋商。4月，中蒙举行首次防务安全磋商。9月，中吉、中哈两国国防部先后举行第二次
战略磋商。10月，中澳举行第八次战略防务磋商，中泰举行第三次国防部安全磋商。

**Regional Security Cooperation**
地区安全合作

China pursues a foreign policy of building a good-neighbor relationship and partnership with its
neighbors, trying to create an amicable, secure and prosperous neighborhood, and vigorously pushing
forward the building of a security dialogue and cooperation mechanism in the Asia-Pacific region.
中国坚持与邻为善、以邻为伴，奉行睦邻、安邻、富邻的周边外交政策，积极推动亚太地区安
全对话合作机制的建设。

Since its establishment more than three years ago, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) has
been evolving into an important mechanism for promoting regional security, stability and
development. It has set up a relatively complete organizational structure and laid a sound legal basis,
and successfully initiated cooperation in security, economic and other fields. The Shanghai
Convention on Combating Terrorism, Separatism and Extremism and the Agreement of State Parties
of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization on the Regional Counter-terrorism Agency took effect in
2003. In pursuance of the convention and agreement, the SCO held meetings of chief procurators and
ministers of defense, and conducted joint counter-terrorism military exercises. The SCO Secretariat
and regional counter-terrorism agency were formally inaugurated in Beijing and Tashkent in January
2004. The Tashkent Summit Meeting of the SCO signed the Tashkent Declaration and the Agreement
on Cooperation in Combating Illegal Turnover of Narcotic and Psychotropic Substances and the
Precursors Thereof in June 2004. The SCO also set up the mechanism of regular meetings between
security committee secretaries of its member states to strengthen security and cooperation.
上海合作组织成立三年多来，已建立起较完善的机构体系和法律基础，顺利启动安全、经济等
领域的合作，正发展成为促进地区安全、稳定和发展的重要机制。2003年，《打击恐怖主义、
分裂主义和极端主义上海公约》和《关于地区反恐怖机构的协定》正式生效，举行了总检察长


-----

、国防部长会议和联合反恐军事演习。2004年1月，上海合作组织秘书处和地区反恐机构分别
在北京和塔什干正式启动。6月，上海合作组织塔什干峰会签署《塔什干宣言》和《上海合作
组织成员国关于合作打击非法贩运麻醉药品、精神药物及其前体的协议》。上海合作组织还建
立了成员国安全会议秘书定期会晤机制，加强安全合作。

China attaches great importance to the role of the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), and is devoted to
its sound development. At the 11th ARF Foreign Ministers' Meeting in 2004, China proposed the
following initiatives for the future development of ARF: to maintain its forum nature and adhere to the
basic principles of decision-making through consensus, taking an incremental approach, and moving
at a pace comfortable to all members so as to encourage the initiative and active participation of all
members; to continuously strengthen and consolidate confidence-building measures (CBMs) while
actively addressing the issue of preventive diplomacy, so as to gradually find out cooperative methods
and approaches for preventive diplomacy that are suitable to the region and fitting the current needs;
to increase participation of defense officials, promote exchanges and cooperation among militaries of
the countries concerned and give full play to the important role of the militaries in enhancing mutual
trust; to highlight cooperation in non-traditional security fields such as counter-terrorism and
combating transnational crimes. As its co-chairmen, China and Myanmar hosted two intersessions in
Beijing and Rangoon respectively on CBMs for the 2003-2004 Forum. China hosted the ARF
Workshop on Drug-Substitute Alternative Development in September 2004 in Kunming, Yunnan
Province, and the ARF Conference on Security Policies in November 2004.
中国高度重视东盟地区论坛（ARF）的作用，致力于论坛的健康发展。在2004年举行的第十一
届论坛外长会议上，中方提出东盟地区论坛今后发展应注意以下几点:继续坚持论坛性质，坚
持协商一致、循序渐进、照顾各方舒适度等基本原则，充分调动全体成员的主动性和积极性;
继续巩固和加强建立信任措施活动，同时积极探讨预防性外交问题，逐步探索出适合本地区特
点和现实需要的预防性外交合作方式与途径；逐步扩大国防官员的参与，促进各国军方交流与
合作，发挥各国军方在增进相互信任方面的重要作用；重点在反恐和打击跨国犯罪等非传统安
全领域加强合作。中国和缅甸作为两主席，分别在北京和仰光举办了2003—
2004年度论坛建立信任措施会间会。2004年9月，中方在云南省昆明市承办了“ARF毒品替代发
展研讨会”。2004年11月，中方成功承办了“东盟地区论坛安全政策会议”首次会议。

In October 2003, the leaders of China, Japan and the Republic of Korea held their fifth meeting, and
issued the Joint Declaration on the Promotion of Tripartite Cooperation Among the People's Republic
of China, Japan and the Republic of Korea, which confirmed that the three countries would work
together to intensify security dialogues and extend exchanges among defense and military officials in
East Asia, and strengthen cooperation in the fields of disarmament and non-proliferation, and the
realization of a nuclear-free Korean Peninsula.
2003年10月，中国、日本和韩国领导人举行第五次会晤，发表《中日韩三方推进合作联合宣言
》，决定三国在东亚地区加强包括安全对话，促进国防或军事人员之间广泛交流，裁军、防扩
散和实现朝鲜半岛无核化等领域的合作。

**Cooperation in Non-Traditional Security Fields**
非传统安全领域的合作

China attaches great importance to security cooperation in the non-traditional security fields with
other countries, maintaining that in jointly combating non-traditional security threats, it is imperative
to address both the symptoms and root causes and to adopt comprehensive measures.
中国高度重视与各国在非传统安全领域的合作，主张采取综合措施，标本兼治，共同应对非传
统安全威胁。

Cooperation in non-traditional security fields within the frameworks of ASEAN and China (10 + 1)
and ASEAN and China, Japan and the Republic of Korea (10 + 3) has developed gradually in recent


-----

years. In November 2002, leaders of China and ASEAN signed the Joint Declaration Between China
and ASEAN on Cooperation in Non-Traditional Security Fields. In April 2003, leaders of China and
ASEAN held a special meeting in Bangkok, Thailand, on SARS and issued a joint declaration. In
January 2004, the two sides signed the Memorandum of Understanding Between China and ASEAN
on Cooperation in Non-Traditional Security Fields. China initiated and participated in the first
ministerial meeting between ASEAN and China, Japan and the Republic of Korea on combating
transnational crimes, held in Bangkok, Thailand, in January 2004, and submitted a concept paper. The
meeting agreed to set up a cooperation mechanism between ASEAN and China, Japan and the
Republic of Korea for combating transnational crimes, and adopted the first Joint Communiqué of the
ASEAN Plus Three Ministerial Meeting on Combating Transnational Crimes.
近年来，东盟与中国（10+1）、东盟与中日韩（10+3）框架下的非传统安全领域合作逐步展开
。2002年11月，中国与东盟领导人签署《中国与东盟关于非传统安全领域合作联合宣言》。20
03年４月，中国—
东盟领导人在泰国曼谷举行关于非典型传染性肺炎问题的特别会议，并发表联合宣言。2004年
1月，双方签署《中国与东盟关于非传统安全领域合作谅解备忘录》。中国倡议并参加了2004
年1月在曼谷举行的首届东盟与中日韩打击跨国犯罪部长级会议，并提交了概念文件。会议同
意建立东盟与中日韩打击跨国犯罪合作机制，并通过了《首次东盟与中日韩打击跨国犯罪部长
级会议联合公报》。

China continued to strengthen its international counter-terrorism cooperation. It supported the UN,
particularly the Security Council in playing a leading role in this regard, and seriously implemented
Security Council resolutions on counter-terrorism issues, as was shown by its reports to the Council
on the implementation of Resolution No. 1373. It has actively supported and participated in the
drafting of the Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism and the International
Convention on the Suppression of Nuclear Terrorism. In January 2003, China put forward four
proposals on deepening international counter-terrorism cooperation at the foreign ministers' meeting
of the UN Security Council on counter-terrorism. China also conducted exchanges and cooperation
with Russia, the United States, Pakistan, India, the United Kingdom, France and Germany in this
regard.
中国继续加大参与国际反恐合作力度。支持联合国特别是安理会发挥主导作用，认真执行安理
会有关反恐问题决议，数次向安理会提交执行第1373号决议情况的报告。支持和参与制订《关
于国际恐怖主义的全面公约》和《关于制止核恐怖主义行为的国际公约》的工作。2003年1月
，中国在安理会反恐问题外长会议上提出深化国际反恐合作四项主张。中国还与俄罗斯、美国
、巴基斯坦、印度、英国、法国、德国等开展了反恐交流与合作。

The PLA has taken an active part in cooperation in non-traditional security fields such as joint
counter-terrorism, maritime search and rescue, combating piracy, and cracking down on drug
production and trafficking. The ministers of defense of China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia and
Tajikistan signed the Memorandum of the Ministries of National Defense of the SCO Member
Countries on Holding the "Joint-2003" Counter-terrorism Exercise in May 2003. The armed forces of
the five countries successfully conducted the first multilateral counter-terrorism exercise in the
vicinities of Ucharal in Kazakhstan and Yining in China's Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region within
the framework of the SCO in August 2003. The armed forces of China and Pakistan conducted
Friendship-2004, a joint counter-terrorism exercise, in the border area between the two countries in
August 2004. The Chinese navy conducted joint maritime search-and-rescue exercises off the Chinese
coast with visiting Pakistani navy in October and Indian navy in November 2003. It also held joint
maritime search-and-rescue exercises with French navy in March, British navy in June, and Australian
navy in October in 2004 in the Yellow Sea area.

人民解放军积极参与联合反恐、海上搜救、打击海盗、打击制贩毒品等非传统安全领域

的合作。2003年5月，中国、哈萨克斯坦、吉尔吉斯斯坦、俄罗斯、塔吉克斯坦国防部长在莫


-----

斯科签署《上海合作组织成员国国防部关于举行“联合—
2003”反恐演习的备忘录》。2003年8月，中、哈、吉、俄、塔五国军队在哈萨克斯坦乌恰拉
尔市和中国新疆伊宁市附近地区，成功举行了上海合作组织框架内首次多边联合反恐演习。2
004年8月，中国和巴基斯坦两国军队在中巴边境地区举行代号为“友谊—
2004”的联合反恐军事演习。2003年10月、11月，中国海军舰艇编队分别与来访的巴基斯坦
、印度海军舰艇编队，在中国沿海举行了海上联合搜救演习。2004年3月、6月、10月，中国
海军舰艇编队分别与法国、英国和澳大利亚海军舰艇编队在黄海海域举行了海上联合搜救演
习。

**Participating in UN Peacekeeping Operations**
参与联合国维和行动

China has consistently supported and actively participated in the peacekeeping operations that are
consistent with the spirit of the UN Charter. It maintains that the UN peacekeeping operations should
abide by the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and other universally recognized principles
governing peacekeeping operations. China will continue to support the reform of the UN
peacekeeping missions, hoping to further strengthen the UN capability in preserving peace.
中国一贯支持并积极参与符合《联合国宪章》精神的维和行动，主张联合国维和行动应切实遵
守《联合国宪章》的宗旨和原则及公认的维和行动原则。中国继续支持联合国维和行动改革，
希望进一步加强联合国的维和能力。

Since its first dispatch of military observers to the UN peacekeeping operations in 1990, China has
sent 3,362 military personnel to 13 UN peacekeeping operations, including 785 military observers,
800 (in two batches) engineering personnel to Cambodia, 654 (in three batches) engineering and
medical personnel to Congo (Kinshasa), 1,116 personnel in transportation, engineering and medical
units to Liberia, and seven staff officers to the UN Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Since
January 2000, China has sent 404 policemen to the peacekeeping operations in six UN peacekeeping
task areas including East Timor. In 2004, China has sent 59 policemen to East Timor, Liberia,
Afghanistan, Kosovo of Serbia-Herzegovina and Haiti, and a 125-member organic police detachment
to Haiti to serve with MINUSTAH at the request of the UN. In the past 14 years, six Chinese
servicemen lost their lives and dozens wounded in UN peacekeeping operations.
中国自1990年首次向联合国维和行动派遣军事观察员以来，已先后向13项联合国维和行动派出
维和军事人员3362人次。包括军事观察员785人次，向柬埔寨维和行动派出工兵部队两批共800
人，向刚果（金）维和行动派出工兵和医疗分队三批共654人，向利比里亚维和行动派出运输
、工兵和医疗分队两批共1116人，向联合国维和部派出7名参谋军官。自2000年1月起，中国已
向东帝汶等6个任务区派遣维和警察404人次。2004年，中国共向东帝汶、利比里亚、阿富汗、
塞黑科索沃地区和海地派遣59名维和警察，并应联合国请求，向联合国海地稳定特派团派遣首
支125人的成建制维和警察分队。在过去十四年中，中国先后有6名维和军事人员在执行任务中
牺牲，数十人负伤。

At present, 845 PLA personnel are working in eight UN peacekeeping task areas. They included 66
military observers, an engineering unit of 175 personnel and a medical unit of 43 personnel in Congo
(Kinshasa), an engineering unit of 275 personnel, a transportation unit of 240 personnel and a medical
unit of 43 personnel in Liberia, and three staff officers at the UN Department of Peacekeeping
Operations.
目前，中国有845名维和军事人员在联合国8个任务区执行维和任务。其中，军事观察员66人，
赴刚果（金）工兵分队175人、医疗分队43人，赴利比里亚工兵分队275人、运输分队240人、
医疗分队43人，联合国维和部参谋军官3名。


-----

**Military Exchanges**

军事交流

The PLA conducts active military exchanges and cooperation with militaries of other countries, and
has created a military diplomacy that is all-directional, multi-tiered and wide-ranging.
人民解放军积极开展对外军事交流与合作，形成了全方位、宽领域、多层次的军事外交局面。

China has established military relations with more than 150 countries in the world. It has set up over
100 military attaché's offices in its embassies abroad, and 85 countries have set up military attaché's
offices in China. Over the past two years, the PLA has sent high-level military delegations to over 60
countries, and played host to over 130 delegations of military leaders from over 70 countries. The
military-to-military relations between China and Russia continued to strengthen and develop. The
Chinese Minister of National Defense visited the United States in October 2003, the first such visit in
seven years. The Director General of the Japanese Defense Agency visited China in May 2003, after
an interval of five years. The Indian and Chinese ministers of defense exchanged visits in April 2003
and March 2004 respectively, the first of its kind in many years. Meanwhile, military exchanges
between China and European countries developed in depth. China also strengthened military relations
with its surrounding countries, extended military exchanges with other developing countries, and
continued to provide militaries of some countries such assistance as personnel training, equipment,
logistical materials and medical treatment.
中国已与150多个国家建立军事关系，在100多个驻外使馆设立武官处，有85个国家在中国设立
武官处。两年来，人民解放军高级军事代表团出访60多个国家，有70多个国家130余批军队领
导人来访。中俄军事关系继续保持良好势头。2003年10月，中国国防部长在时隔七年后首次访
美。2003年5月，日本防卫厅长官五年后再次访华。2003年4月和2004年3月，印度、中国国防
部长实现多年后的首次互访。中国与欧洲国家的军事交流向纵深发展。中国深化与周边国家的
军事关系，加强与广大发展中国家的军事交流，继续向一些国家的军队提供人员培训、装备器
材、后勤物资、医疗卫生等方面的援助。

In October 2003, [NOTE: ACTUALLY WAS AUGUST 2003] the PLA invited for the first time
military observers from 15 countries to observe the joint exercise Northern Sword-0308U organized
by the Beijing Military Area Command. In September 2004, it invited observers from foreign
militaries to watch Exercise Dragon-2004 organized by the Chinese navy. In the same month, military
leaders or observers from 16 neighboring countries and their military attachés stationed in China were
invited to observe Exercise Iron Fist-2004 organized by the Jinan Military Area Command. In June
2004, China invited foreign naval attachés from 15 foreign embassies in China to observe a SinoBritish joint maritime search-and-rescue exercise. Besides, the PLA sent delegations to observe
military exercises in Russia and Japan, as well as joint military exercise by the United States, Thailand
and Singapore. From October to November 2003, Chinese naval ships paid friendly visits to the US
territory of Guam, Brunei and Singapore. Meanwhile, naval ships from the United Kingdom, Russia,
the United States, Pakistan, India, France, Indonesia and other countries visited China. The PLA
pursued active military academic exchanges with foreign militaries. The PLA Academy of Military
Science and other Chinese research institutions had extensive academic exchanges with scientific
research institutions of other countries. The PLA increased the number of military students sent
abroad and received more overseas military students in China. In recent years, it has sent over 1,000
military students to more than 20 countries, and 19 military colleges and universities in China have
established inter-collegiate exchange relations with their counterparts in 25 countries, including the
United States and Russia. Over the past two years, 1,245 military personnel from 91 countries have
come to study in Chinese military colleges and universities, and officers from 44 of these countries
have participated in the fifth and sixth International Symposium Course hosted by the PLA National
Defense University.


-----

2003年10月，人民解放军首次邀请15国军事观察员观摩由北京军区组织的“北剑—
0308U”联合演习。2004年9月，邀请外军观察员观摩海军组织的“蛟龙—
2004”演习。同月，邀请周边16国军队领导人或军事观察员及其驻华武官观摩济南军区组织的
“铁拳—
2004”演习。2004年6月，邀请15国驻华海军武官观摩中、英海上联合搜救演习。人民解放军
也分别派团观摩了俄罗斯、日本的军事演习，以及美、泰、新加坡三国联合军事演习。2003年
10月至11月，中国海军舰艇编队对美国关岛、文莱和新加坡进行友好访问。英国、俄罗斯、美
国、巴基斯坦、印度、法国、印度尼西亚等国海军舰艇编队相继访华。人民解放军对外军事学
术交流日益活跃，军事科学院等科研机构与国外军事科研机构进行了广泛的学术交流活动。人
民解放军扩大派出和接受军事留学生的规模，近年来向20多个国家派出军事留学生1000余名。
19所军事院校分别与美国、俄罗斯等25个国家的相应院校建立校际对口交流关系。两年来，91
个国家的1245名军事人员到中国军事院校学习，其中有44国的军官参加了国防大学第五、第六
期国际问题研讨班。

**Chapter X. Arms Control, Disarmament and Non-Proliferation**

第十章 军控、裁军与防扩散

In recent years, some positive progress has been made in the fields of international arms control,
disarmament and non-proliferation, but the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and
their means of delivery and other issues have become major factors affecting the international security
situation. The Chinese government maintains that the international community should safeguard the
international regime of arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation treaties, promote its
universality and reinforce its effectiveness and authority; that it should persist in multilateralism and
give full play to the role and influence of the multilateral arms control, disarmament and nonproliferation treaty organs; that it should strive to meet the challenges brought about by the
proliferation of WMD through political and diplomatic means on the basis of the existing international
laws; and that it should address both the symptoms and root causes and adopt comprehensive
measures, which means that it should take into consideration security threats such as proliferation of
WMD while not neglecting the social and economic root causes of such threats.
近年来，国际军控、裁军与防扩散领域取得一些积极进展，但大规模杀伤性武器及其运载工具
的扩散等问题日益成为影响国际安全局势的重要因素。中国政府主张，国际社会应维护国际军
控、裁军与防扩散条约体系，促进其普遍性，加强其有效性和权威性;
坚持多边主义，发挥多边军控、裁军和防扩散条约机构的作用和影响;
在现有国际法基础上，努力通过政治、外交手段应对大规模杀伤性武器扩散带来的挑战;
采取标本兼治，综合治理的方法，既要关注大规模杀伤性武器扩散等安全威胁，又不忽视产生
这些问题的社会和经济根源。

**Committed to the Non-Proliferation Efforts**
致力于防扩散努力

The proliferation of WMD and their means of delivery is detrimental to world peace and security, so
is it to China's own security. Non-proliferation is in the common interest of all countries, including
China, and it has become an international consensus.
大规模杀伤性武器及其运载工具的扩散不利于世界的和平与安全，也不利于中国自身的安全。
防扩散符合包括中国在内的所有国家的共同利益，并已成为国际共识。

China attaches great importance to non-proliferation. It pursues a policy of not supporting, not
encouraging and not assisting other countries to develop WMD. It resolutely opposes the proliferation
of WMD and actively participates in the diplomatic efforts of the international community to deal with


-----

non-proliferation issues. The Chinese government published a white paper entitled China's NonProliferation Policy and Measures in December 2003.
中国重视防扩散问题，奉行不支持、不鼓励、不帮助别国发展大规模杀伤性武器的政策，坚决
反对大规模杀伤性武器的扩散，积极参与国际社会解决有关防扩散问题的外交努力。2003年12
月，中国政府发表了《中国的防扩散政策和措施》白皮书。

China has put in place a comprehensive legal system for non-proliferation export control, covering the
exports of nuclear, biological, chemical, missile and other sensitive items and technologies. It has
adopted the international export control measures, including export registration system, end-user and
end-use certification system, licensing system, list control method and "catch-all" principle, and has
stipulated corresponding penalties for breaches of these laws and regulations. China's nonproliferation export control measures are basically in conformity with the current international
practice.
中国已建立起一整套涵盖核、生、化和导弹等各类敏感物项和技术的出口控制法规体系，采用
了出口经营登记管理制度、最终用户和最终用途保证制度、许可证管理制度、清单控制方法、
全面控制原则等国际通行的出口管制措施，明确了有关违法、违规行为处罚措施（条款）。中
国的防扩散出口控制与国际通行做法基本一致。

The relevant departments in China have adopted and will continue to adopt forceful measures to
ensure the implementation of the relevant regulations and laws. China has set up an inter-agency
approval and coordination mechanism on export control and a national expert supporting system for
export control. It has promulgated and implemented the Export Licensing Catalogue of Sensitive
Items and Technologies. It is revising the related regulations on non-proliferation export control and
the corresponding control lists, and has set up an emergency coordination mechanism in order to
promptly and effectively handle proliferation contingencies. It imposes penalties on activities which
violate the non-proliferation export control laws and regulations.
中国有关部门已经并将继续采取有力措施，确保相关法规的贯彻落实。中国建立了出口管制跨
部门审批协调机制; 组建了国家出口管制专家支持体系;
颁布实施了《敏感物项和技术出口许可证管理目录》;
正在修订有关出口管制条例及其控制清单;
为迅速、有效地处理突发性扩散个案，建立了应急协调机制;
依法对违反出口管制法规的行为进行处罚。

China has actively developed its relations with relevant multilateral export-control regimes. It has
formally joined the Nuclear Suppliers Group and has applied for its accession to the Missile
Technology Control Regime. China has established a dialogue mechanism with the Wassenaar
Arrangement and kept contact with the Australia Group. It has also strengthened information
exchanges and law-enforcement cooperation on non-proliferation with relevant countries.
中国积极发展与有关多边出口控制机制的关系，已正式加入“核供应国集团”，并提出加入“
导弹及其技术控制制度”的申请。中国与“瓦森纳安排”建立了对话机制，与“澳大利亚集团
”也保持着接触。中国还加强了与有关国家的防扩散出口控制情报交流和执法合作。

China is in favor that the United Nations plays its due role in the non-proliferation field, and hopes
that the UN Security Council Resolution 1540 on non-proliferation will be implemented effectively.
In October 2004, China submitted a report on Chinese government's implementation of the Resolution
to the Security Council's Non-proliferation Commission. China takes an open attitude toward all
proposals that may help safeguard and strengthen the international non-proliferation regime, and is
ready to have in-depth discussions with other parties in this regard.
中国支持联合国在防扩散领域发挥应有的作用，希望安理会通过的1540号防扩散决议得到有效
执行。中国已于2004年10月向安理会防扩散委员会递交报告，全面介绍中国政府执行决议的情


-----

况。中国对所有有助于维护和加强国际防扩散机制的建议持开放态度，愿与各方进行深入探讨
。

**Promoting the International Arms Control and Disarmament Process**
推动国际军控与裁军进程

At present, the key to pushing forward the international arms control and disarmament process is to
break the deadlock at the Conference on Disarmament (CD) in Geneva. In August 2003, China
announced that it accepted the amended mandate of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Prevention of an
Arms Race in Outer Space (PAROS) in the Five Ambassadors' Proposal, and is ready to participate in
reaching consensus through consultation on the Five Ambassadors' Proposal on the Program of Work.
It hopes that the other parties concerned would give positive response.
当前推动国际军控与裁军进程的关键，是打破日内瓦裁军谈判会议的僵局。中国于2003年8月
宣布接受“五国大使方案”关于外空特委会职权的修改建议，并准备参加对五国大使工作计划
方案的协商一致，希望其他有关方面也能作出积极回应。

China supports the Conference on Disarmament in its efforts to start substantive work on the
following four topics: nuclear disarmament, the Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT), security
assurances to non-nuclear-weapon states, and prevention of an arms race in outer space.

中国支持裁谈会尽快就核裁军、“禁止生产核武器用裂变材料条约”谈判、无核武器国家安
全保证、防止外空军备竞赛四大议题开展实质性工作。

China consistently stands for complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. It
always pursues a policy of no first use of nuclear weapons, and undertakes unconditionally not to use
or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states or nuclear-weapon-free zones.
China did not and will never engage in a nuclear arms race with any other country. It supports the
international community in its efforts to start substantive discussions on nuclear disarmament.
中国一贯主张全面禁止和彻底销毁核武器。中国始终奉行不首先使用核武器的政策，承诺无条
件地不对无核武器国家和无核武器区使用或威胁使用核武器。中国过去没有、将来也不会与任
何国家进行核军备竞赛。中国支持国际社会就核裁军问题展开实质性讨论。

The FMCT is of great significance to preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and facilitating
the nuclear disarmament process. China supports an early conclusion of the treaty through
negotiations.
“禁止生产核武器用裂变材料条约”对防止核扩散、促进核裁军进程具有重要意义。中国支持
尽快谈判缔结该条约。

In the current situation, the importance and urgency of providing security assurances for non-nuclearweapon states has become more prominent. China supports the negotiation and conclusion of an
international legally binding instrument on this issue. China is the only country among the five nuclear
weapon states to commit itself not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclearweapon states or nuclear-weapon-free zones. China appeals to the four other nuclear weapon states to
make the same commitment.
当前形势下，对无核武器国家提供安全保证问题的重要性和紧迫性更趋突出，中国支持就该问
题谈判缔结一项国际法律文书。中国是五个核武器国家中唯一承诺无条件地不对无核武器国家
或无核武器区使用或威胁使用核武器的国家。中国呼吁其他四个核武器国家做出同样保证。

Outer space is the common property of mankind. China hopes that the international community would
take action as soon as possible to conclude an international legal instrument on preventing the
weaponization of and arms race in outer space through negotiations, to ensure the peaceful use of
outer space.


-----

外空是全人类的共同财产。中国希望国际社会尽快采取行动，谈判缔结一项防止外空武器化和
军备竞赛的国际法律文书，确保外空的和平利用。

China favors discussions on and settlement of issues such as "terrorism and WMD," "radioactive
weapons" and "observance of international treaties on disarmament, arms control and nonproliferation" within multilateral arms control framework.
中国赞成在多边军控机制内讨论和处理“恐怖主义与大规模杀伤性武器”、“放射性武器”以
及“遵守国际裁军、军控与防扩散条约”等问题。

In the other international multilateral arms control processes, China has continued to play a
constructive role. It has taken an active part in the multilateral efforts to enhance the effectiveness of
the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC), thus assuming a positive role in maintaining and pushing
forward the multilateral arms-control process in the biological field. China supports the efforts of the
ASEAN countries, the Central Asian countries and other neighboring countries to establish nuclearweapon-free zones and has reached agreement in principle with the ASEAN countries on the Protocol
to the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty, and participated in the consultations
between the five nuclear weapon states and the Central Asian countries on the Central Asian NuclearWeapon-Free Zone Treaty and its protocol. It also participated in the First (Disarmament) Committee
sessions of the UN General Assembly, the UN Disarmament Commission meetings, the preparatory
committee sessions for the 2005 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and the sessions of the Conference of the States Parties to
the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) and its first review conference.
在其他国际多边军控进程中，中国继续发挥建设性作用。中国积极参与加强《禁止生物武器公
约》有效性的多边努力，为维持并推动生物领域的多边军控进程发挥了积极作用。中国支持东
盟、中亚等周边国家建立无核武器区的努力，与东盟就《东南亚无核武器区条约》议定书达成
了原则一致，参加了五核国与中亚有关中亚无核武器区条约及议定书的磋商。中国还参加了联
合国大会第一委员会会议、联合国裁军审议委员会会议、《不扩散核武器条约》2005年审议大
会筹备会议、《禁止化学武器公约》第一次审议大会和缔约国大会等会议。

**Fulfilling International Arms Control and Disarmament Obligations**
履行国际军控与裁军义务

China conscientiously honors the NPT, consistently stands for maintaining its authority and promoting
its universality.
中国认真履行《不扩散核武器条约》，一贯主张维护条约的权威性，努力促进条约的普遍性。

China supports and participates in the safeguards system of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA). China was the first among the five nuclear weapon states to have completed the domestic
legal procedures necessary for the entry into force of the Protocol Additional to the Agreement
Between China and IAEA for the Application of Safeguards in China.
中国支持和参与国际原子能机构的保障监督活动。中国是五个核武器国家中第一个完成保障监
督协定附加议定书生效所需国内法律程序的国家。

The Chinese government firmly upholds the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) and
supports its early entry into force. Before the treaty becomes effective, China will stay committed to
the moratorium on nuclear testing. China attaches great importance to the work of the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO), and supports
and takes part in its work.
中国政府坚定支持《全面禁止核试验条约》，支持条约尽快生效。在条约生效之前，中国继续
恪守“暂停试”承诺。中国重视《全面禁止核试验条约》组织筹委会工作，支持和参加筹委会
工作。


-----

China continues to earnestly fulfill its obligations under the CWC, and received 11 inspections by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in 2003. The Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region has started to implement China's obligations under the Convention, and the
Macao Special Administrative Region has stepped up the relevant preparatory work. In the same year,
China continued to submit report to the United Nations on its confidence-building measures in
accordance with the BWC.
中国继续认真履行《禁止化学武器公约》各项义务，在2003年顺利接待禁化武组织11次视察。
中国政府根据公约承担的各项义务已在香港特别行政区履行，在澳门特别行政区履行相关义务
的筹备工作也在加紧进行。2003年，中国继续按时向联合国提交《禁止生物武器公约》建立信
任措施情况的报告。

Today, large quantities of chemical weapons abandoned by Japan remain on Chinese soil, which pose
a grave threat to the lives and property of the Chinese people and to the ecological environment. China
urges Japan to earnestly fulfill its obligations under the CWC for the destruction of these weapons,
and commence as soon as possible the substantive destruction process in accordance with the
Memorandum of Understanding Between the Government of the People's Republic of China and the
Government of Japan on the Destruction of the Chemical Weapons Abandoned by Japan in China.
中国领土上至今还有日本遗弃的大量化学武器，严重威胁中国人民生命财产安全和生态环境。
中方敦促日方切实履行《禁止化学武器公约》义务，按照中日两国政府签署的《关于销毁中国
境内日本遗弃化学武器的备忘录》，尽早开展实质性销毁工作。

**Participating in Humanitarian Efforts in the Arms Control Field**
参与军控领域的人道主义努力

China supports the leading role played by the United Nations in combating the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons (SALW), and attaches great importance to and conscientiously implements
the Program of Action adopted at the UN Conference on SALW. It supports the negotiation and
conclusion of an international instrument on identifying and tracing illicit SALW, and participates in
the negotiations with a constructive attitude. China signed the Firearms Protocol in 2002, and is now
making preparations for the ratification of the protocol.
中国支持联合国在打击小武器非法贸易方面发挥主导作用，重视并认真落实联合国小武器大会
通过的《行动纲领》，支持谈判缔结一项“识别和追查非法小武器”的国际文书，并以建设性
态度参与谈判工作。中国已于2002年签署《枪支议定书》，目前正在为批准议定书做准备。

The Chinese government continues to support and take part in the work of the Group of Governmental
Experts of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, and has contributed to the progress
made so far in the work. Having ratified the amendment to Article 1 of the Convention, China is now
preparing to ratify the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War.
中国政府继续支持并参与《特定常规武器公约》专家组工作，推动有关工作取得进展。继批准
公约第一条的修正案之后，中国正准备批准《战争遗留爆炸物议定书》。

China attaches great importance to the solution of the humanitarian issue arising from landmines.
While strictly implementing the Amended Landmine Protocol, it is strengthening communications and
exchanges with the states parties to the Ottawa Convention. China continues to provide assistance in
international mine clearance efforts. After providing assistance to Eritrea in this regard in 2002, China
sent another group of mine clearance experts to that country to give guidance on de-mining operations
in 2003, trained a total of 120 mine clearance specialists for Eritrea, and provided Eritrea with demining equipment. China joined the Mine Action Supporting Group, headquartered in New York, in
2003. China and the Australian Network of the International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL) cosponsored the Humanitarian Mine/UXO Clearance Technology and Cooperation Workshop in
Kunming, Yunnan Province, in April 2004.


-----

中国一贯重视解决地雷引发的人道主义问题。在严格履行经修订的《地雷议定书》的同时，加
强与《渥太华禁雷公约》缔约国的沟通与交流。中国继续开展国际扫雷援助活动，继2002年向
厄立特里亚提供扫雷援助后，2003年再次派专家组赴该国指导扫雷，共为厄方培训120名扫雷
专业人员，并向厄方捐赠一批扫雷装备。2003年，中国加入总部设在纽约的“地雷行动支助小
组”。2004年4月，中国与“国际禁雷运动”澳大利亚分会在云南省昆明市联合举办“人道主
义扫雷技术与合作国际研讨会”。

# Appendices Appendix I Members of the CMC of the CPC Appendix II Leaders of the Four Headquarters/Departments of the PLA Appendix III Major Military Exchanges with Other Countries (2003-2004) Appendix IV Participation in Security Consultations (2003-2004) Appendix V Joint Exercises with Foreign Armed Forces (2003-2004) Appendix VI Participation in UN Peacekeeping Operations Appendix VII Major Military Regulations Promulgated Since 2003
 (China.org.cn December 27, 2004)

附 录

附录1：中央军事委员会组成

附录2：人民解放军总部领导组成

附录3：2003—2004年中国军队主要对外交往情况

附录4：2003—2004年中国军队参与有关安全磋商情况

附录5：2003—2004年中国军队与外国军队举行联合演习情况

附录6：中国参加联合国维持和平行动情况

附录7：2003年以来颁发的主要军事法规

# 中国网 2004年12月27日


-----

# Unswervingly push ahead with all-in-one joint logistics support(III)
 坚定不移地推进三军一体化保障(之三)

 http://english.pladaily.com.cn/english/pladaily/2004/07/21/20040721001026_Bilingual News.html

 PLA Daily 2004-07-21

 Reporter: What are the main contents of all-in-one joint logistics support pilot reform?

 记：大联勤改革试点有哪些主要内容？

 Zhang: It can be summarized into the following four aspects:

 张：可以概括为以下四个方面：

 Firstly, the integrated joint logistics organs of the three services. The present Military Area Command Joint Logistics Department is to be renamed Military Area Command (Theatre) Joint Logistics Department, and it is positioned as a compound leading body of the joint logistics work of the three services in a theatre, oriented towards the three services and to provide service and support to the three services. The ratio of cadres from various services and arms in the organs of joint logistics department is to increase up to 45% from the original 12%. Some of these cadres would be absorbed into decision-making echelons. At the same time, functional departments providing special support to various services and arms will be added.

 联勤机关三军一体。将目前的军区联勤部改称军区（战区）联勤部，定位为战区

 三军部队联勤工作的合成型领导机关，面向三军、服务三军、保障三军。联勤部

 机关的军兵种干部比例由原来的12%增至45%，部分干部进入决策层，同时增设

 军兵种特种保障职能部门。

 Secondly, the integrated logistics support strength of the three services. The logistics support setups such as rear depots, hospitals and sanatoriums, and material supply and engineering units used to be led and managed by various services and arms in a theatre will be all put under the management of all-in-one joint logistics support system and will be consolidated and strengthened in the light of principle of intensive support on a large scale.


-----

# 保障力量三军一体。将战区内军兵种领导管理的后方仓库、医院、疗养院和物资

 、工程等后勤保障机构，全部划归联勤系统，按照规模化、集约化要求，进行统

 一整合、统一建设。

 Thirdly, the integrated logistics support contents of the three services. The logistics support of the three services in a theatre is to be organized and implemented in a unified way by joint logistics system, and there will no longer be division between general support and special support.

 保障内容三军一体。战区内三军部队的后勤保障，不再划分通用保障和专用保障

 ，统一由联勤系统组织实施。

 Fourthly, the integrated logistics support channels of the three services. The current multi-channels for general support planning and implementation used by various services and arms are to be combined into a single channel run by the joint logistics system. Through necessary readjustment, supply and support links will be reduced to the convenience of military units, which will also boost the support efficiency and enhance the transparency of supply support and form an effective supervision and management mechanism.

 保障渠道三军一体。将目前对军兵种部队通用保障计划和实施的多个渠道，调整

 合并为联勤系统一个渠道运行。经过调整，减少供应保障环节，方便部队，提高

 效率，增加供应保障的透明度，形成有效的监督管理机制。

 By Huang Benhai and Liu Mingxue

 黄本海 本报记者 刘明学


-----

