Ministry of National Defense


# The Diversified Employment of China's Armed Forces

[Source： www.scio.gov.cn Editor：Huang Panyue 2021-06-23 11:13:09](http://eng.mod.gov.cn/xb/Publications/WhitePapers/4887929.html)

**The Diversified Employment of China's Armed Forces**

**Information Office of the State Council**

**The People's Republic of China**

**April 2013, Beijing**

Contents

Preface

I. New Situation, New Challenges and New Missions

II. Building and Development of China's Armed Forces

III. Defending National Sovereignty, Security and Territorial Integrity

IV. Supporting National Economic and Social Development

V. Safeguarding World Peace and Regional Stability

Concluding Remarks

Appendices

**Preface**

In today's world, peace and development are facing new opportunities and challenges. It is a historic

mission entrusted by the era to people of all nations to firmly grasp the opportunities, jointly meet the

challenges, cooperatively maintain security and collectively achieve development.

It is China's unshakable national commitment and strategic choice to take the road of peaceful

development China unswervingly pursues an independent foreign policy of peace and a national


-----

and does not interfere in the internal affairs of other countries. China will never seek hegemony or

behave in a hegemonic manner, nor will it engage in military expansion. China advocates a new

security concept featuring mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality and coordination, and pursues

comprehensive security, common security and cooperative security.

It is a strategic task of China's modernization drive as well as a strong guarantee for China's

peaceful development to build a strong national defense and powerful armed forces which are

commensurate with China's international standing and meet the needs of its security and

development interests. China's armed forces act to meet the new requirements of China's national

development and security strategies, follow the theoretical guidance of the Scientific Outlook on

Development, speed up the transformation of the generating mode of combat effectiveness, build a

system of modern military forces with Chinese characteristics, enhance military strategic guidance

and diversify the ways of employing armed forces as the times require. China's armed forces

provide a security guarantee and strategic support for national development, and make due

contributions to the maintenance of world peace and regional stability.

**I. New Situation, New Challenges and New Missions**

Since the beginning of the new century, profound and complex changes have taken place in the

world, but peace and development remain the underlying trends of our times. The global trends

toward economic globalization and multi-polarity are intensifying, cultural diversity is increasing, and

an information society is fast emerging. The balance of international forces is shifting in favor of

maintaining world peace, and on the whole the international situation remains peaceful and stable.

Meanwhile, however, the world is still far from being tranquil. There are signs of increasing

hegemonism, power politics and neo-interventionism. Local turmoils occur frequently. Hot-spot

issues keep cropping up. Traditional and non-traditional security challenges interweave and interact.

Competition is intensifying in the international military field. International security issues are growing

noticeably more abrupt, interrelated and comprehensive. The Asia-Pacific region has become an

increasingly significant stage for world economic development and strategic interaction between

major powers. The US is adjusting its Asia-Pacific security strategy, and the regional landscape is

undergoing profound changes.

China has seized and made the most of this important period of strategic opportunities for its

d l t d it d i ti hi t h t d ld tt ti Chi ' ll


-----

improved. China enjoys general social stability and cross-Straits relations are sustaining a

momentum of peaceful development. China's international competitiveness and influence are

steadily increasing. However, China still faces multiple and complicated security threats and

challenges. The issues of subsistence and development security and the traditional and non
traditional threats to security are interwoven. Therefore, China has an arduous task to safeguard its

national unification, territorial integrity and development interests. Some country has strengthened

its Asia-Pacific military alliances, expanded its military presence in the region, and frequently makes

the situation there tenser. On the issues concerning China's territorial sovereignty and maritime

rights and interests, some neighboring countries are taking actions that complicate or exacerbate

the situation, and Japan is making trouble over the issue of the Diaoyu Islands. The threats posed

by "three forces," namely, terrorism, separatism and extremism, are on the rise. The "Taiwan

independence" separatist forces and their activities are still the biggest threat to the peaceful

development of cross-Straits relations. Serious natural disasters, security accidents and public

health incidents keep occurring. Factors affecting social harmony and stability are growing in

number, and the security risks to China's overseas interests are on the increase. Changes in the

form of war from mechanization to informationization are accelerating. Major powers are vigorously

developing new and more sophisticated military technologies so as to ensure that they can maintain

strategic superiorities in international competition in such areas as outer space and cyber space.

Facing a complex and volatile security situation, the People's Liberation Army (PLA) resolutely

carries out its historical missions for the new stage in the new century. China's armed forces

broaden their visions of national security strategy and military strategy, aim at winning local wars

under the conditions of informationization, make active planning for the use of armed forces in

peacetime, deal effectively with various security threats and accomplish diversified military tasks.

The diversified employment of China's armed forces adheres to fundamental policies and principles

as follows:

Safeguarding national sovereignty, security and territorial integrity, and supporting the country's

peaceful development. This is the goal of China's efforts in strengthening its national defense and

the sacred mission of its armed forces, as stipulated in the Constitution of the People's Republic of

China and other relevant laws. China's armed forces unswervingly implement the military strategy of

active defense, guard against and resist aggression, contain separatist forces, safeguard border,


-----

will surely counterattack if attacked." Following this principle, China will resolutely take all necessary

measures to safeguard its national sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Aiming to win local wars under the conditions of informationization and expanding and intensifying

military preparedness. China's armed forces firmly base their military preparedness on winning local

wars under the conditions of informationization, make overall and coordinated plans to promote

military preparedness in all strategic directions, intensify the joint employment of different services

and arms, and enhance warfighting capabilities based on information systems. They constantly

bring forward new ideas for the strategies and tactics of people's war, advance integrated civilian
military development, and enhance the quality of national defense mobilization and reserve force

building. They raise in an all-round way the level of routine combat readiness, intensify scenario
oriented exercises and drills, conduct well-organized border, coastal and territorial air patrols and

duties for combat readiness, and handle appropriately various crises and major emergencies.

Formulating the concept of comprehensive security and effectively conducting military operations

other than war (MOOTW). China's armed forces adapt themselves to the new changes of security

threats, and emphasize the employment of armed forces in peacetime. They actively participate in

and assist China's economic and social development, and resolutely accomplish urgent, difficult,

hazardous, and arduous tasks involving emergency rescue and disaster relief. As stipulated by law,

they perform their duties of maintaining national security and stability, steadfastly subduing

subversive and sabotage attempts by hostile forces, cracking down on violent and terrorist activities,

and accomplishing security-provision and guarding tasks. In addition, they strengthen overseas

operational capabilities such as emergency response and rescue, merchant vessel protection at sea

and evacuation of Chinese nationals, and provide reliable security support for China's interests

overseas.

Deepening security cooperation and fulfilling international obligations. China's armed forces are the

initiator and facilitator of, and participant in international security cooperation. They uphold the Five

Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, conduct all-round military exchanges with other countries, and

develop cooperative military relations that are non-aligned, non-confrontational and not directed

against any third party. They promote the establishment of just and effective collective security

mechanisms and military confidence-building mechanisms. Bearing in mind the concept of

openness, pragmatism and cooperation, China's armed forces increase their interactions and


-----

maritime security; participate in UN peacekeeping missions, international counter-terrorism

cooperation, international merchant shipping protection and disaster relief operations; conduct joint

exercises and training with foreign counterparts; conscientiously assume their due international

responsibilities; and play an active role in maintaining world peace, security and stability.

Acting in accordance with laws, policies and disciplines. China's armed forces observe the country's

Constitution and other relevant laws, comply with the purposes and principles of the UN Charter,

and maintain their commitment to employing troops and taking actions according to law. They strictly

abide by laws, regulations and policies, as well as discipline regarding civil-military relations.

According to law, they accomplish such tasks as emergency rescue, disaster relief, stability

maintenance, contingency response and security provision. On the basis of the UN Charter and

other universally recognized norms of international relations, they consistently operate within the

legal framework formed by bilateral or multi-lateral treaties and agreements, so as to ensure the

legitimacy of their operations involving foreign countries or militaries. The diversified employment of

China's armed forces is legally guaranteed by formulating and revising relevant laws, regulations

and policies, and the armed forces are administered strictly by rules and regulations.

**II. Building and Development of China's Armed Forces**

China's armed forces are composed of the People's Liberation Army (PLA), the People's Armed

Police Force (PAPF) and the militia. They play a significant role in China's overall strategies of

security and development, and shoulder the glorious mission and sacred duty of safeguarding

national sovereignty, security and development interests.

Over the years, the PLA has been proactively and steadily pushing forward its reforms in line with

the requirements of performing its missions and tasks, and building an informationized military. The

PLA has intensified the strategic administration of the Central Military Commission (CMC). It

established the PLA Department of Strategic Planning, reorganized the GSH (Headquarters of the

General Staff) Communications Department as the GSH Informationization Department, and the

GSH Training and Arms Department as the GSH Training Department. The PLA is engaged in the

building of new types of combat forces. It optimizes the size and structure of the various services

and arms, reforms the organization of the troops so as to make operational forces lean, joint, multi
functional and efficient. The PLA works to improve the training mechanism for military personnel of a

t dj t li i d l di ilit h d l i ti d t th


-----

force structure with Chinese characteristics.

The PLA Army (PLAA) is composed of mobile operational units, border and coastal defense units,

guard and garrison units, and is primarily responsible for military operations on land. In line with the

strategic requirements of mobile operations and multi-dimensional offense and defense, the PLAA

has been reoriented from theater defense to trans-theater mobility. It is accelerating the

development of army aviation troops, light mechanized units and special operations forces, and

enhancing building of digitalized units, gradually making its units small, modular and multi-functional

in organization so as to enhance their capabilities for air-ground integrated operations, long-distance

maneuvers, rapid assaults and special operations. The PLAA mobile operational units include 18

combined corps, plus additional independent combined operational divisions (brigades), and have a

total strength of 850,000. The combined corps, composed of divisions and brigades, are

respectively under the seven military area commands (MACs): Shenyang (16th, 39th and 40th

Combined Corps), Beijing (27th, 38th and 65th Combined Corps), Lanzhou (21st and 47th

Combined Corps), Jinan (20th, 26th and 54th Combined Corps), Nanjing (1st, 12th and 31st

Combined Corps), Guangzhou (41st and 42nd Combined Corps) and Chengdu (13th and 14th

Combined Corps).

The PLA Navy (PLAN) is China's mainstay for operations at sea, and is responsible for safeguarding

its maritime security and maintaining its sovereignty over its territorial seas along with its maritime

rights and interests. The PLAN is composed of the submarine, surface vessel, naval aviation,

marine corps and coastal defense arms. In line with the requirements of its offshore defense

strategy, the PLAN endeavors to accelerate the modernization of its forces for comprehensive

offshore operations, develop advanced submarines, destroyers and frigates, and improve integrated

electronic and information systems. Furthermore, it develops blue-water capabilities of conducting

mobile operations, carrying out international cooperation, and countering non-traditional security

threats, and enhances its capabilities of strategic deterrence and counterattack. Currently, the PLAN

has a total strength of 235,000 officers and men, and commands three fleets, namely, the Beihai

Fleet, the Donghai Fleet and the Nanhai Fleet. Each fleet has fleet aviation headquarters, support

bases, flotillas and maritime garrison commands, as well as aviation divisions and marine brigades.

In September 2012, China's first aircraft carrier Liaoning was commissioned into the PLAN. China's

development of an aircraft carrier has a profound impact on building a strong PLAN and

safeguarding maritime security.


-----

security and maintaining a stable air defense posture nationwide. It is primarily composed of

aviation, ground air defense, radar, airborne and electronic countermeasures (ECM) arms. In line

with the strategic requirements of conducting both offensive and defensive operations, the PLAAF is

strengthening the development of a combat force structure that focuses on reconnaissance and

early warning, air strike, air and missile defense, and strategic projection. It is developing such

advanced weaponry and equipment as new-generation fighters and new-type ground-to-air missiles

and radar systems, improving its early warning, command and communications networks, and

raising its strategic early warning, strategic deterrence and long-distance air strike capabilities. The

PLAAF now has a total strength of 398,000 officers and men, and an air command in each of the

seven Military Area Commands (MACs) of Shenyang, Beijing, Lanzhou, Jinan, Nanjing, Guangzhou

and Chengdu. In addition, it commands one airborne corps. Under each air command are bases,

aviation divisions (brigades), ground-to-air missile divisions (brigades), radar brigades and other

units.

The PLA Second Artillery Force (PLASAF) is a core force for China's strategic deterrence. It is

mainly composed of nuclear and conventional missile forces and operational support units, primarily

responsible for deterring other countries from using nuclear weapons against China, and carrying

out nuclear counterattacks and precision strikes with conventional missiles. Following the principle

of building a lean and effective force, the PLASAF is striving to push forward its informationization

transform, relying on scientific and technological progress to boost independent innovations in

weaponry and equipment, modernizing current equipment selectively by applying mature

technology, enhancing the safety, reliability and effectiveness of its missiles, improving its force

structure of having both nuclear and conventional missiles, strengthening its rapid reaction, effective

penetration, precision strike, damage infliction, protection and survivability capabilities. The PLASAF

capabilities of strategic deterrence, nuclear counterattack and conventional precision strike are

being steadily elevated. The PLASAF has under its command missile bases, training bases,

specialized support units, academies and research institutions. It has a series of "Dong Feng"

ballistic missiles and "Chang Jian" cruise missiles.

In peacetime, the PAPF's main tasks include performing guard duties, dealing with emergencies,

combating terrorism and participating in and supporting national economic development. In wartime,

it is tasked with assisting the PLA in defensive operations. Based on the national information

infrastructure, the PAPF has built a three-level comprehensive information network from PAPF


-----

conducts scenario-based training so as to improve its guard-duty, emergency-response and

counter-terrorism capabilities. The PAPF is composed of the internal security force and other

specialized forces. The internal security force is composed of contingents at the level of province

(autonomous region or municipality directly under the central government) and mobile divisions.

Specialized PAPF forces include those guarding gold mines, forests, hydroelectric projects and

transportation facilities. The border public security, firefighting and security guard forces are also

components of the PAPF.

The militia is an armed organization composed of the people not released from their regular work.

As an assistant and backup force of the PLA, the militia is tasked with participating in the socialist

modernization drive, performing combat readiness support and defensive operations, helping

maintain social order and participating in emergency rescue and disaster relief operations. The

militia focuses on optimizing its size and structure, improving its weaponry and equipment, and

pushing forward reforms in training so as to enhance its capabilities of supporting diversified military

operations, of which the core is to win local wars in informationized conditions. The militia falls into

two categories: primary and general. The primary militia has emergency response detachments;

supporting detachments such as joint air defense, intelligence, reconnaissance, communications

support, engineering rush-repair, transportation and equipment repair; and reserve units for combat,

logistics and equipment support.

**III. Defending National Sovereignty, Security and Territorial Integrity**

The fundamental tasks of China's armed forces are consolidating national defense, resisting foreign

aggression and defending the motherland. Responding to China's core security needs, the

diversified employment of the armed forces aims to maintain peace, contain crises and win wars;

safeguard border, coastal and territorial air security; strengthen combat-readiness and warfighting
oriented exercises and drills; readily respond to and resolutely deter any provocative action which

undermines China's sovereignty, security and territorial integrity; and firmly safeguard China's core

national interests.

**Safeguarding Border and Coastal Security**

With a borderline of more than 22,000 km and a coastline of more than 18,000 km, China is one of

the countries with the most neighbors and the longest land borders. Among all China's islands, more


-----

China's armed forces defend and exercise jurisdiction over China's land borders and sea areas, and

the task of safeguarding border and coastal security is arduous and complicated.

The border and coastal defense forces of the PLAA are stationed in border and coastal areas, and

on islands. They are responsible for defense and administrative tasks such as safeguarding the

national borders, coastlines and islands, resisting and guarding against foreign invasions,

encroachments and provocations, and assisting in cracking down on terrorist sabotage and cross
border crimes. The border and coastal defense forces focus on combat-readiness duties, strengthen

the defense and surveillance of major directions and sensitive areas, watercourses and sea areas in

border and coastal regions, maintain a rigorous guard against any invasion, encroachment or cross
border sabotage, prevent in a timely fashion any violation of border and coastal policies, laws and

regulations and changes to the current borderlines, carry out civil-military joint control and

management, and emergency response missions promptly, and effectively safeguard the security

and stability of the borders and coastal areas.

China has signed border cooperation agreements with seven neighboring countries, and established

mechanisms with 12 countries for border defense talks and meetings. The border and coastal

defense forces of the PLA promote friendly cooperation in joint patrols, guard duties and joint

control-management drills with their counterparts of Russia, Kazakhstan, Mongolia and Vietnam,

respectively. They also organize annual mutual inspections to supervise and verify the

implementation of confidence-building measures in border areas with Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,

Russia and Tajikistan.

The PLAN strengthens maritime control and management, systematically establishes patrol

mechanisms, effectively enhances situational awareness in surrounding sea areas, tightly guards

against various types of harassment, infiltration and sabotage activities, and copes promptly with

maritime and air incidents and emergencies. It advances maritime security cooperation, and

maintains maritime peace and stability, as well as free and safe navigation. Within the framework of

the Military Maritime Consultative Agreement (MMCA), the Chinese and US navies regularly

exchange maritime information to avoid accidents at sea. According to the Agreement on Joint

Patrols by the Navies of China and Vietnam in the Beibu Gulf, the two navies have organized joint

patrols twice a year since 2006.


-----

and coastal areas, and at ports. It assumes important responsibilities of safeguarding national

sovereignty, and maintaining security and stability in border, coastal and sea areas, as well as entry

and exit order at ports. It carries out diversified tasks of maintaining stability, combating crimes,

conducting emergency rescues and providing security in border areas. The border public security

force establishes border control zones along the borderlines, establishes maritime defense zones in

the coastal areas, establishes border surveillance areas 20 to 50 meters in depth along land border

and coastline areas adjacent to Hong Kong and Macao, sets up border inspection stations at open

ports, and deploys a marine police force in coastal areas. In recent years, regular strict inspections,

management and control in border areas and at ports have been carried out to guard against and

subdue separatist, sabotage, violent and terrorist activities by the "three forces" or hostile

individuals. The border public security force takes strict and coordinated measures against cross
border fishing activities, strengthens law enforcement by maritime security patrols, and clamps down

on maritime offenses and crimes. Since 2011, it has handled 47,445 cases, seized 12,357 kg of

drugs, confiscated 125,115 illegal guns, and tracked down 5,607 illegal border-crossers.

The militia takes an active part in combat readiness duties, joint military-police-civilian defense

efforts, post duties, and border protection and control tasks in the border and coastal areas. Militia

members patrol along the borders and coastlines all year round.

**Safeguarding Territorial Air Security**

The PLAAF is the mainstay of national territorial air defense, and in accordance with the instructions

of the CMC, the PLAA, PLAN and PAPF all undertake some territorial air defense responsibilities. In

peacetime, the chain of command of China' s air defense runs from the PLAAF headquarters

through the air commands of the military area commands to air defense units. The PLAAF exercises

unified command over all air defense components in accordance with the CMC's intent. China's air

defense system is composed of six sub-systems of reconnaissance and surveillance, command and

control, aerial defense, ground air defense, integrated support and civil air defense. China has

established an air defense force system that integrates reconnaissance and early warning,

resistance, counterattack and protection. For air situation awareness means, air detection radars

and early warning aircraft are the mainstay, supplemented by technical and ECM reconnaissance.

For resistance means, fighters, fighter-bombers, ground-to-air missiles and antiaircraft artillery

troops are the mainstay, supplemented by the strengths from the PLAA air defense force, militia and


-----

strengths are the mainstay, supplemented by specialized technical protection forces.

The PLAAF organizes the following routine air defense tasks: reconnaissance and early warning

units are tasked with monitoring air situations in China's territorial air space and surrounding areas

and keeping abreast of air security threats. Command organs at all levels are tasked with assuming

routine combat readiness duties with the capital as the core, and border and coastal areas as the

key, and commanding air defense operations at all times. Routine air defense troops on combat duty

are tasked with carrying out air vigilance and patrols at sea, conducting counter-reconnaissance in

border areas and verifying abnormal and unidentified air situations within the territory. The air control

system is tasked with monitoring, controlling and maintaining air traffic order so as to ensure flight

safety.

**Maintaining Constant Combat Readiness**

Combat readiness refers to the preparations and alert activities of the armed forces for undertaking

operational tasks and MOOTW, and it is the general, comprehensive and regular work of the armed

forces. It is an important guarantee for coping with various security threats and accomplishing

diversified military tasks to enhance the capabilities of combat readiness and maintain constant

combat readiness. The PLA has a regular system of combat readiness. It improves infrastructure for

combat readiness, carries out scenario-oriented drills, and earnestly organizes alert duties, border,

coastal and air defense patrols and guard duties. It keeps itself prepared for undertaking operational

tasks and MOOTW at all times. Based on different tasks, the troops assume different levels of

readiness (Level III, Level II and Level I, from the lowest degree of alertness to the highest).

The routine combat readiness work of the PLAA serves to maintain normal order in border areas

and protect national development achievements. Relying on the operational command organs and

command information system, it strengthens the integration of combat readiness duty elements,

explores joint duty probability within a theater, and optimizes the combat readiness duty system in

operational troops at and above the regiment level. It ensures the implementation of combat

readiness work through institutionalized systems and mechanisms. It creates a combat readiness

system with inter-connected strategic directions, combined arms and systematized operational

support. Thus, the PLAA keeps sound combat readiness with agile maneuvers and effective

response. The routine combat readiness work of the PLAN serves to safeguard national territorial

i t d iti i ht d i t t It i t di ifi d t l d id h l


-----

readiness patrols, and maintains a military presence in relevant sea areas. All fleets maintain the

necessary number of ships patrolling in areas under their respective command, beef up naval

aviation reconnaissance patrols, and organize mobile forces to conduct patrols and surveillance in

relevant sea areas, as required. The PLAAF focuses its daily combat readiness on territorial air

defense. It follows the principles of applicability in both peacetime and wartime, all-dimension

response and full territorial reach, and maintains a vigilant and efficient combat readiness. It

organizes air alert patrols on a regular basis to verify abnormal and unidentified air situations

promptly. The PLAAF command alert system takes PLAAF command posts as the core, field

command posts as the basis, and aviation and ground air defense forces on combat duty as the

pillar.

The PLASAF keeps an appropriate level of readiness in peacetime. It pursues the principles of

combining peacetime needs with wartime needs, maintaining vigilance all the time and being ready

to fight. It has formed a complete system for combat readiness and set up an integrated, functional,

agile and efficient operational duty system to ensure rapid and effective responses to war threats

and emergencies. If China comes under a nuclear threat, the nuclear missile force will act upon the

orders of the CMC, go into a higher level of readiness, and get ready for a nuclear counterattack to

deter the enemy from using nuclear weapons against China. If China comes under a nuclear attack,

the nuclear missile force of the PLASAF will use nuclear missiles to launch a resolute counterattack

either independently or together with the nuclear forces of other services. The conventional missile

force is able to shift instantly from peacetime to wartime readiness, and conduct conventional

medium- and long-range precision strikes.

**Carrying out Scenario-based Exercises and Drills**

The PLA takes scenario-based exercises and drills as the basic means to accelerate the transition in

military training and raise combat capabilities. It widely practices in training such operational

concepts in conditions of informationization as information dominance, confrontation between

different systems, precision strike, fusion, integration and jointness. It organizes training based on

real combat needs, formations and procedures. It pays special attention to confrontational command

training, live independent force-on-force training and training in complex battlefield environments.

Thus, the warfighting capabilities based on information systems have been thoroughly improved.


-----

unfamiliar environments and complex conditions, the divisions and brigades of the same specialty

with similar tasks and tailored operational environments are organized to carry out a series of trans
MAC live verification-oriented exercises and drills in the combined tactical training bases. In 2009,

the Shenyang, Lanzhou, Jinan and Guangzhou MACs each sent one division to join long-distance

maneuvers and confrontational drills. Since 2010, a series of campaign-level exercises and drills

code-named "Mission Action" for trans-MAC maneuvers have been carried out. Specifically, in 2010

the Beijing, Lanzhou and Chengdu MACs each sent one division (brigade) led by corps

headquarters, together with some PLAAF units, to participate in the exercise. In 2011, relevant

troops from the Chengdu and Jinan MACs were organized and carried out the exercise in plateau

areas. In 2012, the Chengdu, Jinan and Lanzhou MACs and relevant PLAAF troops were organized

and carried out the exercise in southwestern China.

Highlighting force-on-force training. The various services and arms are intensifying confrontational

and verification-oriented exercises and drills. Based on different scenarios, they organize live force
on-force exercises, online confrontational exercises and computer-simulation confrontational

exercises. The PLAAF creates complex battlefield environments based on its training bases,

organizes confrontational exercises on "Red-Blue" war systems under informationized conditions,

either between MAC air forces or between a combined "Blue Team" and MAC air force ("Red

Team"). The Second Artillery Forces carry out confrontational training of reconnaissance vs.

counter-reconnaissance, jamming vs. counter-jamming, and precision strikes vs. protection and

counterattack, in complex battlefield environments. They are strengthening safety protection and

operational skills training under nuclear, biological and chemical (NBC) threats. Units of different

missile types are organized to conduct live-firing launching tasks annually.

Intensifying blue water training. The PLAN is improving the training mode of task force formation in

blue water. It organizes the training of different formations of combined task forces composed of

new types of destroyers, frigates, ocean-going replenishment ships and shipborne helicopters. It is

increasing its research and training on tasks in complex battlefield environments, highlighting the

training of remote early warning, comprehensive control, open sea interception, long-range raid,

anti-submarine warfare and vessel protection at distant sea. The PLAN organizes relevant coastal

forces to carry out live force-on-force training for air defense, anti-submarine, anti-mine, anti
terrorism, anti-piracy, coastal defense, and island and reef sabotage raids. Since 2007, the PLAN

has conducted training in the distant sea waters of the Western Pacific involving over 90 ships in


-----

close-in reconnaissance and illegal interference activities by military ships and aircraft. From April to

September 2012, the training vessel Zhenghe completed global-voyage training, paying port calls to

14 countries and regions.

**IV. Supporting National Economic and Social Development**

The Constitution and relevant laws entrust China's armed forces with the important tasks of

safeguarding the peaceful labor of the Chinese people, taking part in national development and

serving the people wholeheartedly. Subordinate to and serving the overall situation of national

reform and development, the armed forces of China actively participate in national development,

emergency rescue and disaster relief, maintain social harmony and stability according to law, and

endeavor to protect national development interests.

**Participating in National Development**

Under the precondition of accomplishing such tasks as education, training, combat readiness duties,

and scientific research and experiments, the PLA and PAPF center their efforts on national and local

plans and arrangements for economic and social development; persist in combining PLA and PAPF

capabilities with local governments' needs and local people's expectations; make full use of their

resources and advantages in personnel, equipment, technology and infrastructure; actively support

local key infrastructure projects, ecological environment conservation and new socialist rural area

development; and take solid steps to support poverty-alleviation initiatives, give financial aid to

education and provide medical service support. They thereby make significant contributions to

promoting local economic development, social harmony and the improvement of people's livelihood.

Supporting key infrastructure projects. China's armed forces bring into full play the advantages of

hydroelectric, transportation, engineering and cartographic units, and support national and local

infrastructure construction related to national economy and people's livelihood in such areas as

transportation, water conservancy, energy and communications. Since 2011, the PLA and PAPF

have contributed more than 15 million work days and over 1.2 million motor vehicles and machines,

and have been involved in more than 350 major province-level (and above) projects of building

airports, highways, railways and water conservancy facilities. The PAPF hydroelectric units have

partaken in the construction of 115 projects concerning water conservancy, hydropower, railways

and gas pipelines in Nuozhadu (Yunnan), Jinping (Sichuan) and Pangduo (Tibet). In addition, PAPF


-----

Tianshan Mountains in the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, the double-deck viaduct bridge over

the Luotang River in Gansu Province and the Galungla Tunnel along the Medog Highway in the

Tibet Autonomous Region, with a total length of 3,250 km.

Promoting ecological progress and protecting the environment. The PLA, militia and reserve organic

troops are organized to help afforest barren hills, control desertification and preserve wetlands.

Specifically, they have supported the construction of key national reserves and ecological

engineering projects such as controlling the sources of sandstorms affecting Beijing and Tianjin,

afforesting the periphery of the Taklimakan Desert, protecting the ecological environment of the

upper and middle reaches of the Yangtse and Yellow rivers, and harnessing the Yarlung Zangbo,

Lhasa and Nyangqu rivers in Tibet. Over the past two years, the PLA and PAPF have planted over

14 million trees, and afforested above three million mu of barren hills and beaches by large-scale

planting and aerial seeding. Besides, technical units specializing in cartography, meteorology, and

water supply provide such services as cartographic surveying, weather and hydrological forecasting,

and water source exploration for local people.

Contributing to poverty-alleviation initiatives and helping build new rural areas. The PLA and PAPF

have paired up with 63 poverty-stricken counties and 547 poverty-stricken towns and townships; set

up 26,000 places of contact for poverty reduction; supported over 20,000 small projects such as

constructing irrigation and water-conservancy facilities, building rural roads, and improving small

river valley areas; aided the development of more than 1,000 industries; and helped over 400,000

needy people shake off poverty. The Beijing Military Area Command's water-supply engineering

regiment has helped local governments to search for water and dig wells in Yunnan, Shandong,

Hebei and Guizhou provinces, as well as the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region and Inner

Mongolia Autonomous Region, and dug 358 wells, solving the domestic water shortage for 960,000

people and the problem of irrigation for 85,000 mu of farmland. Implementing the project of "digging

wells to enrich farmers," the Lanzhou Military Area Command's water-supply engineering regiment

has explored water sources and dug 192 wells in the arid zone in the middle and southern parts of

the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, and alleviated drinking water shortages for 390,000 people

and 570,000 head of livestock and the problem of irrigation for 37,000 mu of farmland.

Supporting scientific and technological, educational, cultural and health undertakings. From 2011 to

2012, military academies, research institutions and specialized technical units undertook more than


-----

technologies. A total of 108 PLA and PAPF hospitals have paired up with 130 county-level hospitals

in poverty-stricken areas in the western parts of the country, while medical and health units below

the corps level have paired up with 1,283 clinics and health centers in towns and townships. From

2009 to 2012, the armed forces financed and built 57 "August 1" schools particularly in areas

inhabited by ethnic minorities in the western parts of the country, such as Xinjiang and Tibet,

providing schooling for over 30,000 children.

**Participating in Emergency Rescue and Disaster Relief**

China is one of the countries most vulnerable to natural disasters. With more varieties, wide

distribution and high frequency, natural disasters endanger China's economic and social

development as well as the lives and property of many Chinese people. The armed forces of China

have always acted as the shock force in emergency rescue and disaster relief, and always

undertaken the most urgent, arduous and hazardous rescue tasks. According to the Regulations on

the PLA's Participation in Disaster Rescue promulgated in 2005, the PLA and PAPF are mainly

tasked with rescuing and evacuating the trapped; ensuring the security of important facilities and

areas; salvaging and transporting important materials; participating in specialized operations such

as rush repairs of roads, bridges and tunnels, maritime search and rescue, NBC rescue, epidemic

control, and medical aid; eliminating or controlling other major dangers and disasters; and assisting

local governments in post-disaster reconstruction.

The PLA, PAPF and people's governments at various levels have established military-civilian joint

response mechanisms for natural disasters, set up a mobile command platform for emergency

response at the strategic level, pre-stored and pre-positioned in key areas materials and equipment

urgently needed for emergency rescue and disaster relief, worked out relevant scenarios for units at

and above the regiment level, and organized joint military-civilian exercises and training, thereby

enhancing their capabilities for emergency rescue and disaster relief in all respects. So far, China

has formed nine state-level professional teams, with a total membership of 50,000. They are

emergency-response teams for flood relief, earthquake rescue, NBC defense, emergency airlift,

rush repair of transportation and power facilities, maritime search and rescue, mobile

communications support, medical aid and epidemic prevention, and meteorological support. In

collaboration with relevant provinces (autonomous regions, and municipalities directly under the

central government) and based on active and reserve forces, all MACs have joined to set up


-----

played a vital role. In 2008, some 1.26 million officers and men as well as militia members were sent

to counter the disaster of freezing weather, sleet and snowstorms in southern China, and 221,000 to

participate in rescue after the devastating earthquake in Wenchuan County, Sichuan Province. In

2010, some 21,000 and 12,000 armed forces members were dispatched respectively to take part in

rescue after the Yushu (Qinghai Province) earthquake and the Zhouqu (Gansu Province) mud-rock

slide. Since 2011, the PLA and PAPF have contributed a total of 370,000 servicepersons and

197,000 vehicles or other machines of various types, flown over 225 sorties (using fixed-wing

aircraft and helicopters), organized 870,000 militiamen and reservists, participated in emergency
rescue and disaster-relief operations in cases of floods, earthquakes, droughts, ice jams, typhoons

and fires, rescued or evacuated more than 2.45 million people, and rushed 160,000 tons of goods to

disaster areas. Every year, the army aviation flies hundreds of sorties to prevent and fight forest and

grassland fires on a regular basis.

**Maintaining Social Stability**

In accordance with relevant laws and regulations, the armed forces of China participate in social

order maintenance, and guard and fight against terrorist activities. The PAPF is the state's backbone

and shock force in handling public emergencies and maintaining social stability. The Law of the

People's Republic of China on the People's Armed Police Force, promulgated in August 2009,

specifies the scope, measures and support of PAPF security missions. With mobile PAPF troops as

the mainstay, supplemented by forces pooled from routine duty units, and supported by various

police forces and PAPF academies, the PAPF has established a force structure for stability

maintenance and emergency response. In addition, a counter-terrorism force structure has been set

up, which consists of a counter-terrorism contingent, special-duty squadrons, special-duty platoons

and emergency-response squads at state, province, municipality and county levels, respectively.

Solid steps have been taken to implement strict security measures for major events, including guard

duties, security checks, security of important facilities and areas, checkpoints on major roads, and

armed urban patrols. From 2011 to 2012, the PAPF effectively responded to and handled various

emergencies, coordinated with public security organs to successfully handle some violent and

terrorist attacks, and participated in handling 68 incidents of serious violence, and rescuing 62

hostages. Altogether contributing more than 1.6 million persons, the PAPF has provided security for

such important events as the 26th Summer Universiade (Shenzhen, 2011), China-Eurasia Expo

(Urumqi, 2011) and Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) Beijing Summit (2012).


-----

PLAA is mainly tasked with counter-terrorism, NBC and explosive item checks, and medical aid. The

PLAN is mainly responsible for guarding against potential maritime threats and terrorist attacks. The

PLAAF is mainly charged with providing air security for major event venues and their adjacent

areas. In recent years, contributing 145,000 servicepersons, 365 fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters,

148 ships and 554 sets of radar equipment, the PLA provided security for the Beijing Olympics,

celebrations of the PRC's 60th founding anniversary, Shanghai World Expo and Guangzhou Asian

Games.

The militia is an important force for maintaining social stability. It assists in the maintenance of social

order in accordance with laws and regulations. Under the unified arrangements of local CPC

committees and governments as well as the guidance of corresponding military organs, the militia

participates in joint defense of public security, integrated social management, and security provision

for major events. Each year, more than 90,000 militiamen carry out the task of guarding bridges,

tunnels and railways.

Hong Kong and Macao garrison troops are dispatched by the central government to the two special

administrative regions (SARs) to perform defense duties according to law. As stipulated by the

garrison laws, the governments of Hong Kong and Macao SARs may, if necessary, request the

central government for the assistance of the garrison troops in maintaining social order and

providing disaster relief. Hong Kong and Macao garrison troops organize joint air-sea patrols,

conduct annual exercises and drills, and participate in joint exercises held by the SAR governments

for air-sea search and rescue operations. They succeeded in providing security for the Hong Kong

venue of the Beijing Olympics (2008) and anniversary celebrations of the SARs' returning to the

motherland.

**Safeguarding Maritime Rights and Interests**

China is a major maritime as well as land country. The seas and oceans provide immense space

and abundant resources for China's sustainable development, and thus are of vital importance to

the people's wellbeing and China's future. It is an essential national development strategy to exploit,

utilize and protect the seas and oceans, and build China into a maritime power. It is an important

duty for the PLA to resolutely safeguard China's maritime rights and interests.


-----

China's maritime law enforcement, fisheries, and oil and gas exploitation. It has established

mechanisms to coordinate and cooperate with law-enforcement organs of marine surveillance and

fishery administration, as well as a joint military-police-civilian defense mechanism. Further, the

PLAN has worked in coordination with relevant local departments to conduct maritime survey and

scientific investigation; build systems of maritime meteorological observation, satellite navigation,

radio navigation and navigation aids; release timely weather and sea traffic information; and ensure

the safe flow of traffic in sea areas of responsibility.

Together with the marine surveillance and fishery administration departments, the PLAN has

conducted joint maritime exercises and drills for protecting rights and enforcing laws, and enhanced

its capabilities to coordinate command and respond to emergencies in joint military-civilian

operations to safeguard maritime rights. The "Donghai Collaboration-2012" joint exercise was held

in the East China Sea in October 2012, involving 11 ships and eight planes.

As an important armed maritime law-enforcement body, the border public security force exercises

jurisdiction over both violations of laws, rules and regulations relating to public security

administration and suspected crimes committed in China's internal waters, territorial seas,

contiguous zones, exclusive economic zones and continental shelf. In recent years, the border

public security force has endeavored to guarantee the security of sea areas, strengthened patrols,

surveillance and management along the sea boundary in the Beibu Gulf and around the Xisha sea

areas, and effectively maintained maritime public order and stability.

**Protecting Overseas Interests**

With the gradual integration of China's economy into the world economic system, overseas interests

have become an integral component of China's national interests. Security issues are increasingly

prominent, involving overseas energy and resources, strategic sea lines of communication (SLOCs),

and Chinese nationals and legal persons overseas. Vessel protection at sea, evacuation of Chinese

nationals overseas, and emergency rescue have become important ways and means for the PLA to

safeguard national interests and fulfill China's international obligations.

In line with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations Security Council (UNSC), and with the

consent of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, the Chinese government dispatched a

combined naval task force to conduct escort operations in the Gulf of Aden and waters off Somalia


-----

the security of Chinese ships and personnel traversing those waters and the security of ships

delivering humanitarian supplies for the World Food Programme (WFP) and other international

organizations, and sheltering passing foreign vessels as far as possible. As of December 2012, the

Chinese Navy has dispatched, in 13 task groups, 34 warships, 28 helicopters, and 910 Special

Operations Force (SOF) soldiers, escorting 4,984 ships in 532 batches. Among them, 1,510 were

Chinese mainland ships, 940 Hong Kong ships, 74 Taiwan ships and one Macao ship. The task

forces also rescued two Chinese ships from pirates who had boarded them and 22 which were

being chased by pirates.

In February 2011, the turbulent situation in Libya posed grave security threats to Chinese

institutions, enterprises and nationals in that country. The Chinese government organized the largest

overseas evacuation since the founding of the PRC, and 35,860 Chinese nationals were taken

home. The PLA contributed ships and aircraft to the effort. The Chinese Navy' s frigate Xuzhou, on

escort mission in the Gulf of Aden and waters off Somalia at that time, sailed to the waters off Libya

and provided support for ships evacuating Chinese nationals stranded there. The PLAAF sent four

aircraft at short notice, flew 40 sorties, evacuated 1,655 people (including 240 Nepalese) from Libya

to Sudan, and took 287 Chinese nationals from Sudan back home.

**V. Safeguarding World Peace and Regional Stability**

China's security and development are closely connected with the peace and prosperity of the world

as a whole. China's armed forces have always been a staunch force upholding world peace and

regional stability, and will continue to increase cooperation and mutual trust with the armed forces of

other countries, participate in regional and international security affairs, and play an active role in

international political and security fields.

**Participating in UN Peacekeeping Operations**

China earnestly fulfills its international responsibilities and obligations, and supports and actively

participates in UN peacekeeping missions. In accordance with UN resolutions as well as

agreements between the Chinese government and the UN, China dispatches peacekeeping troops

and specialized peacekeeping personnel to designated countries or regions, who carry out

peacekeeping operations under the auspices of the UN. They are mainly tasked with monitoring


-----

support, and participating in social reconstruction and humanitarian assistance.

In 1990, the PLA sent five military observers to the UN Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) 
the first time China had taken part in UN peacekeeping missions. In 1992, it dispatched an

engineering corps of 400 officers and men to the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) 
the first time China had sent an organic military unit on a peacekeeping mission. To date, the PLA

has dispatched 22,000 military personnel to 23 UN peacekeeping missions. All of them have been

awarded the UN peace medals. Three officers and six soldiers have laid down their lives performing

such duties and were posthumously awarded the Dag Hammarskjold medal. So far, China is the

biggest troop and police contributor among the five permanent members of the UN Security Council.

It also dispatches the most numbers of troops for engineering, transportation and medical support

among all the 115 contributing countries. China pays and contributes the largest share of UN

peacekeeping costs among all developing countries.

As of December 2012, a total of 1,842 PLA officers and men are implementing peacekeeping tasks

in nine UN mission areas. Among them, 78 are military observers and staff officers, 218 are

engineering and medical personnel for the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the

Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), 558 are engineering, transportation and medical

personnel for the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), 335 are engineering and medical

personnel for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), 338 are engineering and

medical personnel for the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) and

315 are engineering personnel for the African Union/United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur

(UNAMID).

Tough, brave and devoted, Chinese peacekeepers accomplish all their tasks in an exemplary

manner. Over the past 22 years, Chinese peacekeepers have built and repaired over 10,000 km of

roads and 284 bridges, cleared over 9,000 mines and various types of unexploded ordnance (UXO),

transported over one million tons of cargo across a total distance of 11 million km and treated

120,000 patients. The staff officers and military observers have displayed a high degree of

professionalism in their work at the headquarters and in the tasks of patrol, ceasefire monitoring,

liaison and negotiation. The Chinese engineering units to the Democratic Republic of the Congo

worked day and night to level an area of 16,000 square meters littered with volcanic rocks. The

Chinese transportation units to Liberia have worked throughout the country and served as the


-----

assistance and impart agricultural technology to local people. The Chinese engineering units to

Lebanon invented the method of "tilted cross positioning" in minesweeping, which has greatly raised

the safety and efficiency of such operations. They can now cover an average of over 500 square

meters per day with this method. During the Lebanon-Israel conflict in 2006, over 3,500 unexploded

bombs were defused and disposed of. The Chinese engineering units to Darfur, Sudan, dug 13

wells in areas where well digging was deemed impossible. The Chinese engineering units to South

Sudan built the first interim training center for Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration

(DDR) at a high standard, making a positive contribution to the local peace process.

Chinese peacekeepers strictly abide by the code of personal conduct for UN peacekeepers, rules of

engagement and laws of host countries. They respect local religious beliefs and customs, and

conscientiously observe the mission regulations and rules for the Chinese peacekeeping troops,

thereby winning trust from the local people.

**International Disaster Relief and Humanitarian Aid**

China's armed forces take an active part in international disaster relief and humanitarian aid

operations organized by the government. They provide relief supplies and medical aid, dispatch

specialized rescue teams to disaster-stricken countries, provide mine-sweeping assistance and

carry out international exchanges of rescue and disaster reduction.

Since 2002 the PLA has undertaken 36 urgent international humanitarian aid missions, and

transported relief materials worth more than RMB1.25 billion to 27 disaster-stricken countries. Since

2001, the Chinese International Search and Rescue (CISAR) Team, composed of officers and men

from the engineering regiment of the Beijing Military Area Command, medical personnel from the

PAPF General Hospital and experts from the China Earthquake Administration, has participated in

eight international rescue operations. Since 2010, PLA medical assistance teams have been sent

three times to Haiti and Pakistan to carry out international humanitarian medical rescue operations,

and the helicopter rescue team of the army aviation has been sent to Pakistan to assist flood-relief

operations there.

In March 2011 a devastating earthquake and tsunami hit Japan. The CISAR rushed to Japan and

participated in the search-and-rescue operations. In July 2011 heavy floods battered Thailand. The

PLAAF sent four aircraft to transport to Bangkok more than 90 tons of relief materials provided by


-----

floods struck Pakistan, the PLAAF dispatched five aircraft to deliver 7,000 tents to Karachi, and the

Lanzhou Military Area Command sent a medical-care and epidemic-prevention team to Kunri, the

worst-hit area.

China's armed forces actively provide medical care and aid to developing countries, and participate

in international medical exchanges and cooperation, thus strengthening friendship and mutual trust

with them. From 2010 to 2011, PLAN's hospital ship Peace Ark visited five countries in Asia and

Africa and four countries in Latin America to provide "Harmonious Mission" humanitarian medical

service. In 193 days the voyage covered 42,000 nautical miles, and nearly 50,000 people received

medical services. In recent years, the PLA medical team has also provided medical service to local

people in Gabon, Peru and Indonesia while participating in joint humanitarian medical drills.

The Chinese government attaches great importance to the solution of humanitarian problems

caused by landmines. It actively supports and participates in international de-mining efforts. Since

1999, the PLA, in collaboration with relevant departments of the PRC government, has provided de
mining assistance to nearly 40 Asian, African and Latin American countries through offering training

courses, sending experts to give on-site instruction, and donating de-mining equipment. As a result,

the PLA has trained more than 400 mine-clearance personnel for foreign countries, guided the

clearance of more than 200,000 square meters of land-mine areas and donated mine-clearance

equipment worth RMB 60 million.

**Safeguarding the Security of International SLOCs**

To fulfill China's international obligations, the Chinese navy carries out regular escort missions in the

Gulf of Aden and waters off Somalia. It conducts exchanges and cooperation with other escort

forces to jointly safeguard the security of the international SLOCs. As of December 2012, Chinese

navy task groups have provided protection for four WFP ships and 2,455 foreign ships, accounting

for 49% of the total of escorted ships. They helped four foreign ships, recovered four ships released

from captivity and saved 20 foreign ships from pursuit by pirates.

Chinese navy escort task forces have maintained smooth communication with other navies in the

areas of joint escort, information sharing, coordination and liaison. They have conducted joint

escorts with their Russian counterparts, carried out joint anti-piracy drills with naval ships of the

ROK, Pakistan and the US, and coordinated with the European Union to protect WFP ships. It has


-----

Maritime Forces (CMF), the ROK, Japan and Singapore. It has exchanged officers for onboard

observations with the navy of the Netherlands. China takes an active part in the conferences of the

Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia (CGPCS) and "Shared Awareness and

Deconfliction" (SHADE) meetings on international merchant shipping protection.

Since January 2012, independent deployers such as China, India and Japan have strengthened

their convoy coordination. They have adjusted their escort schedules on a quarterly basis, optimized

available assets, and thereby enhanced escort efficiency. China, as the reference country for the

first round of convoy coordination, submitted its escort timetable for the first quarter of 2012 in good

time. India and Japan's escort task forces adjusted their convoy arrangements accordingly, thereby

formulating a well-scheduled escort timetable. The ROK joined these efforts in the fourth quarter of

2012.

**Joint Exercises and Training with Foreign Armed Forces**

In adherence to the principles of being non-aligned, non-confrontational, and not directed against

any third party, as well as the guidelines of mutual benefit, equality and reciprocity, the PLA has

held, together with other countries, bilateral and multilateral exercises and training featuring multiple

levels, domains, services and arms. Since 2002, the PLA has held 28 joint exercises and 34 joint

training sessions with 31 countries in accordance with relevant agreements or arrangements. This is

conducive to promoting mutual trust in the political and military fields, safeguarding regional security

and stability, and accelerating the PLA's modernization.

Joint anti-terrorism military exercises within the framework of the Shanghai Cooperation

Organization (SCO) have become more institutionalized. To date, China and other SCO member

states have conducted nine bilateral and multilateral military exercises. Since 2005, they have

carried out a series of "Peace Mission" joint exercises at the campaign level with strategic impact.

They were the "Peace Mission-2005" China-Russia joint military exercise, "Peace Mission-2007"

joint anti-terrorism military exercise by SCO members, "Peace Mission-2009" China-Russia joint

anti-terrorism military exercise, "Peace Mission-2010" joint anti-terrorism military exercise by SCO

members and "Peace Mission-2012" joint anti-terrorism military exercise by SCO members. The

aforementioned exercises served to warn and deter terrorist, secessionist and extremist forces. The

capabilities of the SCO members are constantly being enhanced to jointly deal with new challenges

d th t


-----

taken part in the "Peace-07," "Peace-09" and "Peace-11" multinational maritime exercises hosted by

Pakistan on the Arabian Sea. The PLA and Russian navies held the "Maritime Cooperation-2012"

military drill in the Yellow Sea off China's east coast focusing on joint defense of maritime traffic

arteries. Chinese and Thai marine corps held the "Blue Strike-2010" and "Blue Strike-2012" joint

training exercises. During mutual port calls and other activities, the Chinese navy also carried out

bilateral or multilateral maritime exercises and training in such tasks as communications, formation

movement, maritime replenishment, cross-deck helicopter landing, firing at surface, underwater and

air targets, joint escort, boarding and inspection, joint search and rescue and diving with its

counterparts of India, France, the UK, Australia, Thailand, the US, Russia, Japan, New Zealand and

Vietnam.

Joint army training is gradually being increased in breadth and depth. Since 2007, the PLAA has

conducted a number of joint training sessions with its counterparts of other countries. The PLAA

joined the "Hand-in-Hand 2007" and "Hand-in-Hand 2008" joint anti-terrorism training sessions with

the Indian army, "Peacekeeping Mission-2009" joint peacekeeping exercise with the Mongolian

army, "Cooperation-2009" and "Cooperation-2010" joint security training exercises with Singapore,

"Friendship Operation-2009" and "Friendship Operation-2010" joint military training of mountain

troops with the Romanian army, and joint SOF unit training with the Turkish army. The PLAA special

forces held the "Strike-2007," "Strike-2008" and "Strike-2010" joint anti-terrorism training with their

Thai counterparts, "Sharp Knife-2011" and "Sharp Knife-2012" joint anti-terrorism training with their

Indonesian counterparts, "Friendship-2010" and "Friendship-2011" joint anti-terrorism training with

their Pakistani counterparts, and "Cooperation-2012" joint anti-terrorism training with their

Colombian counterparts. In November 2012, joint anti-terrorism training was held with the Jordanian

special forces and a joint humanitarian-assistance and disaster-relief tabletop exercise with the US

army.

Joint air force training is also making progress. The PLAAF contingent held the "Shaheen-1" joint

training of operational aerial maneuvers with its Pakistani counterpart in March 2011. China' s

airborne commandos and their Venezuelan counterparts held the "Cooperation-2011" urban joint

anti-terrorism training in October of the same year. China's airborne troops joined their Belarusian

counterparts in the joint training code-named "Divine Eagle-2011" and "Divine Eagle-2012"

respectively in July 2011 and November 2012.


-----

medical teams held the "Peace Angel" joint operations for humanitarian medical assistance in

Gabon and Peru, and participated in a disaster-relief exercise of the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF)

in Indonesia. The PLA health service team staged a joint exercise on humanitarian assistance and

disaster relief code-named "Cooperation Spirit-2012" with its counterparts of Australia and New

Zealand in October 2012.

**Concluding Remarks**

At the new stage in this new century, China's armed forces have effectively fulfilled their new

historical missions, and enhanced their capabilities of accomplishing diversified military tasks, the

most important of which is to win local wars under informationized conditions. They have resolutely

defended national sovereignty, security and territorial integrity, strongly guaranteed national

economic and social development and ensured that the people can live and work in peace and

stability. Their accomplishment of a host of urgent, difficult, dangerous and arduous tasks has been

remarkable, and through their staging of major exercises and training for combat readiness they

have won the full trust of and high praise from the people.

At this new historical starting point, China's armed forces are undertaking missions which are noble

and lofty, and assuming responsibilities which are paramount and honorable. They will constantly

place above all else the protection of national sovereignty and security as well as the interests of the

Chinese people. They will persistently regard maintaining world peace and promoting common

development as their important missions, and accelerate the modernization of national defense and

the armed forces. They will continue to actively participate in international security cooperation, and

endeavor to foster, together with the armed forces of other countries, an international security

environment of peace, stability, equality, mutual trust and win-win cooperation.

**Appendices**

(EDS: Please refer to Xinhua's Photographic News Department for figures and graphics in the

report.)


-----

[About Us](http://eng.mod.gov.cn/xb/AboutUs/index.html) | [Site Map](http://eng.mod.gov.cn/xb/AboutUs/index.html#a2) | [Chinese Edition](http://www.mod.gov.cn/)


-----

