English http://www.china.org.cn/e-white/5/index.htm

China’s National Defense
Information Office of the State Council Of the People’s Republic of China
July 1998, Beijing

Foreword

Mankind is about to enter the 21st century of its history. It is the aspiration of the Chinese
government and people to lead a peaceful, stable and prosperous world into the new
century.

At the turn of the century, an important historical period, China is devoting itself to its
modernization drive. China needs and cherishes dearly an environment of long-term
international peace, especially a favorable peripheral environment. The Chinese people
are willing, together with the people of the other countries in the world, to make
unremitting efforts for the lofty cause of promoting world peace and development, and
for initiating a glorious future for mankind.

Guided by its aspiration for peace and development, China unswervingly pursues a
national defense policy that is defensive in nature, keeps national defense construction in
a position subordinate to and in the service of the nation's economic construction,
strengthens international and regional security cooperation and actively participates in the
international arms control and disarmament process. Facts show that China is a
responsible big country and a firm force safeguarding world peace and stability.

In 1995 China issued a white paper titled, China: Arms Control and Disarmament, which
mainly describes China's substantial efforts and progress in the sphere of arms control
and disarmament. Here China wishes to present a further introduction to and exposition
of her work in defense.
中国曾于１９９５年发表《中国的军备控制与裁军》白皮书，主要介绍了中国在军

控与裁军领域的实际努力与进展。在这里，将就中国国防建设的有关情况，作进一

步的介绍和阐述。

I. The International Security Situation

Peace and development are the major themes of the present era. The striving for peace
and cooperation, and the promotion of development have become irresistible historical
trends.

In general, the present international security situation has continued to tend toward
relaxation. With the end of the cold war, a tendency toward multipolarity has further
developed both globally or regionally in the political, economic and other fields as


-----

various world forces are experiencing new splits and realignments.
当前，国际安全形势总体上继续趋向缓和。冷战结束后，多极化趋势在全球或地区

范围内，在政治、经济等领域都有新的发展，世界上各种力量出现新的分化和组合

。 The relations among the major powers are undergoing significant and profound
readjustments; various kinds of partnerships are gradually developing along the line of
institutionalization; and each country is enhancing its consciousness of independence,
unity for strength, and coordinated development. The overall strength of the developing
countries is growing, and they are becoming an important force on the international stage.
The sustained development of the multipolarity tendency and economic globalization has
further deepened their mutual reliance and mutual condition and helped toward world
peace, stability and prosperity. The factors for safeguarding world peace are growing
constantly.

The influence of armed conflicts and local wars on the overall international situation has
been remarkably weakened. In the past, when the two major military blocs confronted
each other, armed conflicts and local wars in some regions seriously disturbed world
security and stability. For a time in the post-cold war period, regional conflicts were still
frequent, even showing a trend of escalation. In the past few years, however, some
conflicts and wars that had lasted for many years have been settled, and some are being
put on the track of political settlement, or are gradually being cooled down. At present,
armed conflicts and local wars touched off by disputes about territory, natural resources,
ethnicity or religion are relatively limited in terms of scale, intensity and region, and are
under control to varying degrees. The international community is making more and more
efforts to mediate such disputes, with its capability to do so improving constantly.

Military factors still occupy an important position in state security. In the new
international security environment, while stressing the settlement of disputes through
political, economic and diplomatic means, most countries still regard military means and
the reinforcement of military strength as important ways to safeguard their own security
and national interests. A profound reform in the military field led by the development of
high-tech weapons is taking place throughout the world. This reform, which is
developing rapidly, will exert an important and profound influence on weaponry, military
system and setup, combat training and military theory. To adapt to the new situation and
strive for their own advantages, many countries have readjusted their defense policies and
military strategies, reduced the scale of armaments and paid more attention to improving
the quality of their armed forces.

Economic security is becoming daily more important for state security. In international
relations, geopolitical, military security and ideological factors still play a role that cannot
be ignored, but the role of economic factors is becoming more outstanding, along with
growing economic contacts among nations. The competition to excel in overall national
strength, focused on economy and science and technology, is being further intensified;
globewide struggles centered on markets, natural resources and other economic rights and
interests are daily becoming sharper; and the quickening of economic globalization and


-----

intensification of the formation of regional blocs render the economic development of a
country more vulnerable to outside influences and impacts. Therefore, more and more
countries regard economic security as an important aspect of state security. The financial
crisis in Asia has made the issue of economic security more prominent, and has set a new
task for governments of all countries to strengthen coordination and face challenges
together in the course of economic globalization.

The political security situation in the Asia-Pacific region is relatively stable. The
development of the trend toward multipolarity in this region is being quickened, and the
relations among the big nations are being readjusted strategically and gradually becoming
stable. Despite the emergence of a nancial crisis in Asia, the Asia-Pacific region remains
one of the areas with the greatest economic development vitality in the world, and
developing the economy is the most important task for each country. The countries in the
Asia-Pacific region rely more and more on each other economically, and, to solve their
disputes by peaceful means, to stress the search for the meeting points of their common
interests and to strengthen cooperation and coordination are becoming the main current of
the relations among the countries of the region. Various forms of regional and subregional multilateral cooperation are constantly being developed, and security dialogues
and cooperation are being carried out at many levels and through many channels.

However, there still exist some factors of instability both globally and regionally:
Hegemonism and power politics remain the main source of threats to world peace and
stability; cold war mentality and its influence still have a certain currency, and the
enlargement of military blocs and the strengthening of military alliances have added
factors of instability to international security; some countries, by relying on their military
advantages, pose military threats to other countries, even resorting to armed intervention;
the old unfair and irrational international economic order still damages the interests of
developing countries; local conflicts caused by ethnic, religious, territorial, natural
resources and other factors arise now and then, and questions left over by history among
countries remain unsolved; terrorism, arms proliferation, smuggling and trafficking in
narcotics, environmental pollution, waves of refugees, and other transnational issues also
pose new threats to international security.

In May 1998, in defiance of strong opposition by the international community India
flagrantly carried out nuclear tests, thus provoking a nuclear arms race in South Asia.
Then Pakistan followed suit, in response to India's nuclear tests. The nuclear tests
successively conducted by India and Pakistan have seriously impeded the international
non-nuclear arms proliferation efforts and produced grave consequences on peace and
stability in the South Asian region and the rest of the world. The task for the international
community to strengthen non-proliferation mechanisms has become even more pressing
now.

History has proved that the concepts and systems of security with military alliances as the
basis and increasing military might as the means could not be conducive to peace during
the cold war. Under the new situation, especially, enlarging military blocs and
strengthening military alliances run counter to the tide of the times. Security cannot be


-----

guaranteed by an increase in arms, nor by military alliances. Security should be based on
mutual trust and common interests. We should promote trust through dialogue, seek
security through cooperation, respect each other's sovereignty, solve disputes through
peaceful means and strive for common development. To obtain lasting peace, it is
imperative to abandon the cold war mentality, cultivate a new concept of security and
seek a new way to safeguard peace. China believes that this new concept and way should
include the following:

-- The relations among nations should be established on the basis of the Five Principles of
Peaceful Coexistence: mutual respect for territorial integrity and sovereignty, mutual
non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual
benefit, and peaceful coexistence. These are the political basis and premise of global and
regional security. Each country has the right to choose its own social system,
development strategy and way of life, and no country should interfere in the internal
affairs of any other country in any way or under any pretext, much less resort to military
threats or aggression.

-- In the economic field, all countries should strengthen mutually beneficial cooperation,
open up to each other, eliminate inequalities and discriminatory policies in economic and
trade relations, gradually reduce the development gaps between countries and seek
common prosperity. Such steps can form the economic basis of global and regional
security. Maintaining a normal and sound economic, trade and financial order calls for
not only a perfect macro-economic management system as well as a sound system of
economic operations, it also calls for strengthening regional and international economic
contacts and cooperation, so as to jointly create a stable and secure external economic
environment.

-- All countries should promote mutual understanding and trust through dialogue and
cooperation, and seek the settlement of divergences and disputes among nations through
peaceful means. These are the realistic ways to guarantee peace and security. Security is
mutual, and security dialogues and cooperation should be aimed at promoting trust, not at
creating confrontations, still less at directing the spearhead against a third country or
infringing upon the security interests of any other nation.

As a country in the Asia-Pacific region, China places great importance on the region's
security, stability, peace and development. China's Asia-Pacific security strategy has
three objectives, i.e., China's own stability and prosperity, peace and stability in its
surrounding regions, and conducting dialogue and cooperation with all countries in the
Asia-Pacific region. Hence China devotes its efforts to promoting equal treatment and
friendly cooperation with other countries, and attaches importance to developing healthy
and stable relations with all countries and all major forces in the region; actively
participates in regional economic cooperation and promotes an open type of regionalism;
insists on handling and settling disputes among countries through peaceful means; and
takes an active part in the dialogue and cooperation process aimed at regional security.

On the basis of equal consultation, mutual understanding and mutual accommodation,


-----

China has solved in an appropriate manner border issues with most of its neighbors. As
for remaining disputes on territorial and marine rights and interests between China and
neighboring countries, China maintains that they are to be solved through consultation by
putting the interests of the whole above everything else, so that the disputes will not
hamper the normal development of state relations or the stability of the region. China has
clearly stated that relevant disputes should be properly solved through peaceful
negotiation and consultation, in accordance with commonly accepted international laws
and modern maritime laws, including the basic principles and legal systems as prescribed
in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.

Taiwan is an inseparable part of Chinese territory. It is a lofty mission and a common
aspiration of all Chinese people, including the Taiwan compatriots, to put an end to the
cleavage between the two sides of the Taiwan Straits and realize the reunification of the
motherland. The Chinese government adheres to its stand for solving the issue of Taiwan
according to the basic principle of "peaceful reunification, and one country, two
systems,'' and resolutely opposes any attempt, by words or deeds, to split the country by
creating an "independent Taiwan,'' "two Chinas,'' or "one China, one Taiwan.'' The issue
of Taiwan is entirely an internal affair of China. Directly or indirectly incorporating the
Taiwan Straits into the security and cooperation sphere of any country or any military
alliance is an infringement upon and interference in China's sovereignty. The Chinese
government seeks to achieve the reunification of the country by peaceful means, but will
not commit itself not to resort to force. Every sovereign state has the right to use all
means it thinks necessary, including military means, to safeguard its own sovereignty and
territorial integrity. In deciding which way to deal with the issue of Taiwan, the Chinese
government has no obligation to make a commitment to any country or any person
attempting to split China. The Chinese government opposes any country selling arms to
Taiwan, which not only violates the basic norms of international law but also threatens
China's security and regional peace and stability.

The Chinese government steadfastly follows an independent foreign policy of peace, and
stands for establishing and developing relations of friendship and cooperation with all
countries on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence and other commonly
recognized international relationship norms. China is willing to make unswerving efforts
to safeguard world peace and promote international security together with other
countries.

II. National Defense Policy

The Chinese government firmly pursues a national defense policy that is defensive in
nature. The Constitution of the People's Republic of China (PRC) clearly specifies the
tasks of the armed forces of the PRC as being to consolidate national defense, resist
aggression, defend the motherland, safeguard the people's peaceful labor, participate in
national construction and strive to serve the people. China's state interests, social system,
foreign policy and historical and cultural traditions postulate that China will inevitably
adopt such a national defense policy.


-----

China has always attached primary importance to safeguarding the state's sovereignty,
unity, territorial integrity and security. Following the Opium War in 1840, China was
gradually reduced to a semi-colonial and semi-feudal country, and the Chinese nation
was subject to the imperialist powers' invasion, oppression, bullying and humiliation time
and time again. After a protracted, persistent and heroic struggle, the Chinese people won
the independence for their country and the emancipation of the nation; therefore they
hold dear their hard-earned right to independence. Defending the motherland, resisting
aggression, safeguarding unity and opposing split are the starting point and underpinning
of China's defense policy.

China being at the primary stage of socialism, the fundamental task of the state is to
concentrate its strength on the socialist modernization program. The situation in which
China has a large population, a poor foundation, uneven regional development and
underdeveloped productive forces will continue for a comparatively long period of time
to come. China is now confronted with the extremely heavy task of economic
construction, so the work in defense must be subordinate to and in the service of the
nation's overall economic construction. The social system, development strategy and way
of life that China has chosen conform to the actual conditions of the country, and no
factors prompting invasion of another country can emerge.

The development of China requires an environment of long-term international peace,
especially a favorable peripheral environment. China unswervingly pursues an
independent foreign policy of peace, advocates handling international affairs in light of
the fundamental interests of the Chinese and other people of the world, and refrains from
forming alliances with any big power or any group of countries. China holds that
conflicts and disputes among countries should be solved in a peaceful way through
consultation, and opposes the threat or use of force, hegemonism and power politics.
China advocates establishing a new fair and rational international political and economic
order, and developing relations of friendship and cooperation with all countries on the
basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. China will always be an important
force defending world peace and regional stability. Even when China becomes strong and
powerful in the future, it will by no means take to the road of foreign aggression and
expansion.

The defensive nature of China's national defense policy also springs from the country's
historical and cultural traditions. China is a country with 5,000 years of civilization, and a
peace-loving tradition. Ancient Chinese thinkers advocated ``associating with benevolent
gentlemen and befriending good neighbors,'' which shows that throughout history the
Chinese people have longed for peace in the world and for relations of friendship with the
people of other countries. In military affairs, this maxim means solving disputes by nonmilitary means, being wary of war and strategically gaining mastery by striking only after
the enemy has struck. During the course of several thousand years, loving peace,
stressing defense, seeking unification, promoting national unity, and jointly resisting
foreign aggression have always been the main ideas of China's defense concept. The
defense policy of New China has carried forward and developed such excellent Chinese
historical and cultural traditions.


-----

**China's defense policy has mainly the following aspects:**

-- Consolidating national defense, resisting aggression, curbing armed subversion, and
defending the state's sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and security. These are the
basic objectives of China's defense policy, as well as the main tasks the Chinese
Constitution has entrusted to China's armed forces. China spares no effort to avoid and
curb war, and to solve international disputes and questions left over by history through
peaceful means. However, as long as hegemonism and power politics still exist, a country
must have the capability to defend its sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and security
by military means. The modernization program of China's national defense work is
entirely for self-defense, and arises from the need to safeguard the country's
modernization drive and security. The size of China's armed forces is suited to the needs
of defending the country's security and interests. China builds and consolidates its
national defense independently and through self-reliance.

-- Subordinating national defense work to, and placing it in the service of, the nation's
overall economic construction, and achieving the coordinated development of these two
kinds of work. This is China's long-term basic policy for its work in defense. The
modernization of the national defense of a country requires the support of its economic
and technological forces; and the modernization level of national defense can only be
improved gradually along with the increase of the country's economic strength. The
Chinese government insists that economic construction be taken as the center, that
defense work be subordinate to and in the service of the nation's overall economic
construction and that the armed forces actively participate in and support the nation's
economic construction. While concentrating its efforts on economic construction, the
state also endeavors to improve its national defense work and to promote a coordinated
development of the two.

-- Implementing the military strategy of active defense. Strategically China pursues the
defensive policy featuring self-defense and gaining mastery by striking only after the
enemy has struck, and adheres to the principle: ``We will not attack unless we are
attacked; if we are attacked, we will certainly counter-attack.'' China possesses a small
number of nuclear weapons, entirely for meeting the needs of self-defense. China upholds
the principle of self-defense by the whole people and the strategic concept of people's
war, and works hard to enhance the defense consciousness of the whole people, perfect
the defense mobilization system and intensify the building of the reserve force for
defense. On the basis of its existing weaponry, China carries forward and develops its
fine traditions. It seeks to adapt to profound changes in the world's military sphere, and
makes proper preparations for defensive combat in the situation where modern
technology, especially high technology, prevails.

-- Streamlining the army the Chinese way. During the new historical period, the Chinese
army is working hard to improve its quality and endeavoring to streamline the army the
Chinese way, aiming to form a revolutionized, modernized and regularized people's army
with Chinese characteristics. Reducing quantity and improving quality is a basic principle
upon which the army is to be modernized. The Chinese army strengthens itself by relying


-----

on science and technology, and strives to make the transition from a numerically superior
type to a qualitatively efficient type, and from a manpower-intensive type to a
technology-intensive type. In view of the characteristics of modern wars, no effort will be
spared to improve the modernization level of weaponry, reform and perfect the army
system and setup, and improve the training of troops and curricula and teaching methods
of military academies.

-- Safeguarding world peace, and opposing aggression and expansion. China upholds the
Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, and handles foreign military relations and
engages in military exchanges and cooperation independently. China does not seek
hegemonism, nor does it seek military blocs or military expansion. China does not station
any troops or set up any military bases in any foreign country. China opposes the arms
race, and maintains that effective arms control and disarmament should be carried out in
accordance with the principles of fairness, rationality, comprehensiveness and balance.
China supports the international community in its activities to promote world and
regional peace, security and stability, and also in its efforts to fairly and rationally solve
international disputes and to bring about arms control and disarmament.

III. National Defense Construction

China's national defense construction is an important part of its modernization program.
Given the new historical conditions the Chinese army upholds the absolute leadership of
the Communist Party of China (CPC), implements the strategic principle of active
defense, emphasizes quality in army building, administrates the armed forces along legal
lines, engages in army building through diligence and thrift, and actively participates in
and supports national economic construction. As a result, it has made great contributions
to the country's security, stability and modernization drive.

Defense System

In accordance with the Constitution, the National Defense Law and other relevant laws,
China has established and improved its national defense system. The state exercises
unified leadership over defense-related activities.

The National People's Congress (NPC) of the PRC is the highest organ of state power. It
decides on the questions of war and peace, and exercises other defense-related functions
and powers provided for in the Constitution. The Standing Committee of the NPC is the
NPC's permanent body. It decides on the proclamation of a state of war, decides on
general or partial mobilization, and exercises other defense-related functions and powers
provided for in the Constitution. The president of the state, in accordance with decisions
of the NPC and its Standing Committee, proclaims a state of war, issues mobilization
orders and exercises other defense-related functions and powers provided for in the
Constitution. The State Council directs and administrates national defense work, and the
Central Military Commission (CMC) directs and assumes unified command of the
nation's armed forces.


-----

The Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA) is organized in accordance with a system
whereby the General Staff Department, the General Political Department, the General
Logistics Department and the General Armament Department are placed under the
leadership of the CMC. The General Staff Department organizes and leads the buildingup of the nation's armed forces, and organizes and directs their military operations. The
General Political Department administrates the army's Party work and organizes and
conducts its political work. The General Logistics Department organizes and leads the
army's logistics work. The General Armament Department organizes and leads the army's
work in military equipment.

The armed forces of the PRC are composed of the PLA, both the active and reserve
components, the Chinese People's Armed Police Force and the militia. The active
components of the PLA comprise the state's standing army, which mainly undertakes the
task of defensive combat, and helps to maintain social order, if necessary, according to
law; reservists undergo military training in peacetime according to relevant regulations,
and help to maintain social order, if necessary, according to law, and in wartime they
shall be incorporated in the forces in active service in pursuance of the state's
mobilization order. The Chinese People's Armed Police Force undertakes the tasks for
maintenance of security and social order entrusted by the state. The militiamen, under the
command of military organs, perform combat service support and defensive operations,
and help to maintain social order. The PLA, comprised of the Army, the Navy, the Air
Force and the Second Artillery Force, is organized in seven military area commands
nationwide.

The state exercises unified leadership and planned control over defense research and
production. The State Council leads and administrates defense research and production,
as well as defense expenditure and assets. The CMC approves the military equipment
system of the armed forces and military equipment development plans and programs,
leads and administrates defense research and production in coordination with the State
Council, and manages defense outlays and assets jointly with the State Council. The state
practices a state military supplies order system to guarantee the acquisition of weapons
and other war materials. The state practices a financial allocation system for defense
spending. It decides the size, structure and location of the defense assets and the
adjustment and disposal of these assets in accordance with the needs of national defense
and economic construction.

The State Council and the CMC jointly lead mobilization preparation and implementation
work. In peacetime the state conducts mobilization preparation and integrates armed
mobilization of the people, mobilization of the national economy, civil air defense,
national defense transportation and other mobilization preparations into the state's overall
development plan and program. It improves the mobilization system step by step, and
establishes a strategic materials storage system. The state attaches importance to national
defense education and conducts it in line with its plan for economic and social
development.

Military Legislative Work


-----

China attaches importance to the building of a military legal system, regarding the
improvement of the work in this regard as a basic approach and important guarantee for
realizing defense modernization and the regularization of the armed forces. In order to
meet the needs of defense and army building in the new historical period, the state has
laid down the principles for administrating the armed forces along legal lines. It has
improved its military legislative work comprehensively to ensure that China's defense
and army building advance along a legal track and to propel it in that direction.

Since 1982 the military legislation system has been further fine-tuned as part of the state
legislation system: The NPC and its Standing Committee have formulated laws on
defense and army building; the CMC has formulated military laws and regulations, or
jointly worked out military administrative laws and regulations with the State Council; all
general departments, all services and arms and all military area commands of the PLA
have drawn up military rules and regulations or jointly worked out military administrative
rules and regulations with the relevant departments of the State Council. The Interim
Regulations on Legislative Procedures of the PLA promulgated by the CMC contains
clear-cut provisions on legislation programming and planning and the drafting,
examination, promulgation and enforcement of laws and regulations, which embody the
standardization and systemization of military legislation.

Over the past ten-odd years, remarkable achievements have been made in military
legislation. The NPC and its Standing Committee have formulated 12 defense and armybuilding laws and legality-related decisions, including the National Defense Law of the
PRC, Military Service Law of the PRC, Military Facilities Protection Law of the PRC,
Civil Air Defense Law of the PRC, Law on the Reserve Officers of the PRC, the Garrison
Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the PRC, Military Service
Regulations Pertaining to PLA Officers in Active Service, and Regulations on the
Military Ranks of PLA Officers. The State Council and the CMC have worked out 40odd military administrative laws and regulations, such as the Regulations on National
Defense Transportation, Regulations on Conscription Work, Regulations on Militia
Work, and Military Service Regulations Pertaining to PLA Soldiers in Active Service.
The CMC has formulated 70-odd military laws and regulations, including the Regulations
of the PLA Headquarters, Regulations on Political Work in the PLA, Logistics
Regulations of the PLA, Routine Service Regulations of the PLA, Discipline Regulations
of the PLA, and Drill Regulations of the PLA. The various general departments, services
and arms and military area commands have drawn up 1,000-some items of military rules
and regulations. Now, China has laws to go by basically in the principal aspects of its
defense and army building, as a military legal system with Chinese characteristics now is
initially in place. While adhering to the principle of suiting military legislation to its
national and military conditions, China also lays stress on bringing it into line with the
international military-related treaties and agreements that China has acceded to, so as to
make China's military laws consistent in content with international legal norms and
practices.


-----

In the sphere of national defense construction, China has set up and improved its defense
leading system and operating mechanism at both the central and local levels in
accordance with the law, together with basic national defense systems and institutions,
such as those of military service, mobilization, research and production, assets
management and military facilities protection, as well as those of giving special care to
the bereaved families of servicemen. In the area of army building, the principles defining
the nature, tasks and building of the armed forces have been determined in accordance
with the law, and a series of important systems and institutions are in operation, such as
those of military ranks and insignia, military training, headquarters work, political work,
logistic support, garrison service, and military discipline-related rewards and penalties,
which ensure that national defense activities and army building can be carried out in an
orderly manner, within a legal framework and along a regulatory line.

In order to guarantee the unified implementation of the nation's relevant laws and
regulations in the armed forces, the state has established mechanisms of military law
enforcement and military judicature, military legal institutions and legal service
organizations, forming a fairly complete military legal system in the armed forces. The
military-law enforcement system is mainly formed of relevant leading organs and
functional departments at various levels. Besides, discipline inspection organs and
financial auditing organs have been set up in units at and above the corps level, which
carry out supervision and inspection over law enforcement, and garrison service organs in
garrison units in large and medium-sized cities, which check, inspect and handle cases of
infringements of military discipline by military personnel as well as cases of violations of
relevant rules by military vehicles. The military judicial system is composed of military
courts and procuratorates established by the state at the three levels of the PLA, the
military area command and the corps, which, together with the PLA's security
departments at various levels, exercise their respective functions and powers and handle
criminal cases involving military personnel in accordance with the law. The military legal
system is composed of the legal organs or personnel authorized by the Bureau of
Legislative Affairs of the CMC, the various general departments, services and arms and
military areas commands, and are in charge of the legal work of the entire PLA as well as
the various army units. The legal service organizations are composed of legal advice
offices and legal counseling stations of the army units at various levels, which provide
legal advice and services to help leading military organs at various levels to make
decisions as well as for individual officers and men. By the end of 1997, over 240 legal
advice offices with more than 1,360 lawyers had been set up by the PLA units, in
addition to more than 4,250 legal counseling stations with 65,700-some legal consultants
at the grassroots level.

China attaches importance to promoting publicity and education in the law in the armed
forces, bringing it into the orbit of the army's regular education and training. In order to
equip officers and men with knowledge of the law in accordance with the state's unified
plan on publicity and education in the law for all citizens, the Chinese armed forces
carried out two sessions of the Five-Year Legal Education Program from 1986 to 1995.
The Third Five-Year Legal Education Program started early in 1996.


-----

Defense Expenditure

China has always stressed rationally scaled expenditure on defense. The costs of defense
are allocated based on the needs of defense and the country's financial capacities and the
principle of overall balance. Since the introduction of the policies of reform and opening
to the outside world, the Chinese government has strictly controlled its defense
expenditure at a comparatively low level so that it can concentrate on economic
construction.

The Chinese government has consistently stuck to the principle of strict control, strict
management and strict supervision of defense spending; it has established and perfected a
complete administrative and regulatory system. China's defense budget and final accounts
are examined and approved by the NPC, and the state and army's auditing organs exercise
strict audit and supervision of the execution of the budget.

China's expenditure on national defense falls into the following categories: personnel
expenses, mainly including pay, food and clothing of military and non-military
personnel; costs for maintenance of activities, mainly including military training,
construction and maintenance of facilities and running expenses; and costs for equipment,
including research and experimentation, procurement, maintenance, transportation and
storage. In terms of the scope of logistic support, these expenditures cover not only active
service personnel, but also militia and reserve requirements. In addition, a large amount
of spendings are used to fund activities associated with social welfare, mainly pensions
for some of the retired officers, schools and kindergartens for children of military
personnel, training personnel competent for both military and civilian services,
supporting national economic construction, and participation in emergency rescues and
disaster relief efforts.

Plain living and hard working is a fine tradition of the Chinese armed forces. China's
military personnel have launched a sequence of mass movements for practicing economy,
such as conducting checkups of warehouses to make better use of the stored goods and
repairing or utilizing old or discarded things. They have also done everything they can to
join in agricultural and sideline production or engage in business, mainly for the purpose
of providing employment for dependents of military personnel and improving the
material and cultural lives of officers and men in grassroots units.

Since the introduction of the policies of reform and opening to the outside world the
Chinese government has placed work in national defense in a position subordinate to and
in the service of overall national economic construction and has made relatively major
reductions in defense inputs. From 1979 to 1994 defense spending increased by 6.22
percent annually in absolute terms, which represented in real terms a negative growth of
1.08 percent compared to the 7.3 percent annual increase of the general retail price index
of commodities in the same period.

China's annual defense outlay from 1995 to 1997 came to RMB 63.672, 72.006 and
81.257 billion yuan, respectively. The annual increase in defense outlay went for the most


-----

part to ensure that the living standards of military personnel keep up with the nation's
social and economic development and with the increase of the per capita incomes of
urban and rural residents, so as to improve the living conditions of officers and men.
Even so, defense spending in the total state expenditure declined annually in the same
period, accounting for 9.3, 9.1 and 8.8 percent respectively.

The composition of China's defense expenditure in 1997 (Table 1) was as follows: 29.162
billion yuan for personnel expenses, accounting for 35.89 percent; 26.536 billion yuan for
maintenance of activities, 32.66 percent; and 25.559 billion yuan for equipment, 31.45
percent. From the above, we can see that most of the defense outlay went to the
personnel's living costs and maintenance of normal activities. In addition, more than four
billion yuan, or about 5 percent, was spent to fund activities associated with social
welfare.

Table 1 Composition of China's Defense Expenditure in 1997 (unit: billion yuan)

Compared with the defense expenditures of some other countries, China has a fairly low
level of defense spending (Table 2).

Table 2 Comparison of China's Defense Expenditure with Those of Some Other
Countries in 1997 (unit: US$ billion)
Note: The exchange rate, calculated by China's State Administration of Exchange
Control, was one US dollar=RMB 8.29 yuan in 1997.

Based on the above exchange rate, China's defense expenditure in 1997 was US$ 9.80
billion, which was 3.67 percent of the USA's, 61.25 percent of Russia's, 27.53 percent of
Britain's, 26.7 percent of France's, 22.79 percent of Japan's, and 56.98 percent of the
Republic of Korea's (ROK).

China's defense expenditure is low in relative terms, as well as in absolute terms. In the
past two decades the percentage of China's defense expenditure in the gross domestic
product (GDP) has declined successively (Table 3). Compared with the USA, Russia,
Britain, France, Japan and the ROK, China has a comparatively low burden of defense
expenditure (Table 4).

Table 3 The Percentage of China's Defense Expenditure in the GDP in 1978-1997


-----

Table 4 Comparison of the Percentage of China's Defense Expenditure in the GDP and
Total Financial Expenditure with Those of Some Other Countries in 1997
Notes: 1. Percentages of defense expenditure in total financial expenditure.
Percentages of defense expenditure in the GDP.
2. The above data are taken from defense, financial or other government reports
announced by said countries.

Reducing Military Personnel

In September 1997 China solemnly announced that it would reduce the number of its
military personnel by 500,000 within the coming three years on the basis of its
disarmament move in the 1980s, which had cut the number by one million. This
important strategic decision of unilateral disarmament once again fully expressed China's
genuine wish for peace. It was a new effort made by China to further promote the
lowering of the world's armament level, increase mutual trust and advance the cause of
peace for humanity.

Adhering to the defensive policy for national security, China has always controlled the
numbers and size of its armed forces within the limit allowed by the national strength and
necessary to maintain state security. After the founding of the PRC in 1949, China
undertook two disarmament steps -- one in 1955 and the other in 1958. In the mid-1980s
China's guideline for army building was strategically shifted from all-time preparedness
against a large-scale war of aggression to peacetime construction, and the size and
structure of the armed forces were adjusted accordingly. In 1985 the government decided
unilaterally to cut its troops by one million men in real terms. By 1990, the total reduction
had reached 1.039 million men. Since 1990 the size of the PLA has further shrunk
through successive adjustments. When the drawdown of 500,000 has been completed the
total size of the PLA will be 2.5 million men.

Different from many other countries, China includes all its border and coastal defense
forces, military service mobilization organs, administration organs of military-run
agricultural and sideline productions, civil cadres and active service personnel in the
reserve service forces in the overall strength of the PLA.

China's latest disarmament move will be carried out actively and steadily, and completed
within the planned three years. The reductions in the land, naval and air forces account
for 19 percent, 11.6 percent and 11 percent respectively. While the numbers of men are
being reduced, steps are being taken in tandem to optimize the structure, adjust the
composition and intra-relationship, and enhance the competence of the armed forces by
enhancing their scientific and technological knowledge, so as to raise the modernization
of the Chinese armed forces to a new level.

Participating in and Supporting National Construction

Participating in and supporting the country's construction is an important task entrusted
by the Constitution to the Chinese armed forces, and a reflection of the fundamental


-----

purpose of the people's army -- to serve the people wholeheartedly. Since the 1980s,
while fulfilling its education and training tasks, the Chinese army has taken an active part
in and fully supported the nation's economic construction, and through this it has made
significant contributions to the country's prosperity and development.

-- Turning military facilities over to the public or converting them to civilian use. While
cutting down large numbers of personnel, the Chinese armed forces have transferred part
of their military facilities to local authorities or opened them to the public to support the
country's construction. Over the past 20 years China's armed forces have opened 101
airports to the public, and opened or surrendered 29 harbors and docks, more than 300
special railway lines, 90 telecommunications lines, 1,000-some warehouses and over
three million square meters of land on former military reserves and some barracks
facilities.

-- Participating in emergency rescues and disaster relief work. China has a vast territory,
and local natural disasters are frequent. Whenever a natural disaster occurs, the armed
forces are always in the forefront of efforts to protect the people's lives and save the state
and people's property. Over the past two decades they have participated in emergency
rescues and disaster reliefs on more than 100,000 occasions. They have mobilized more
than 23 million men, and organized more than one million vehicle trips, and some 15,000
plane and ship journeys to save more than 10 million people and transport more than 200
million tons of materials out of perilous conditions.

-- Participating in the construction of key national and local projects. The armed forces
have participated in the construction of many key national and local projects and
undertaken urgent, difficult and dangerous tasks connected with them. In the past two
decades they have devoted more than 400 million work days and organized 25 million
vehicle trips to participate in and support 10,000-odd key projects, including 150 railway,
expressway and underground railway projects, 340 tunnels and culverts, 260 bridges,
4,100 kilometers of highways and railways, 50 docks, 40 civil and military-civil airports,
500 energy projects, 2,000 water conservancy projects, 20,000 kilometers of optical cable
telecommunication lines and 500 economic and technological development and tourism
development projects.

-- Bringing the superiority of talented personnel and technology into full play and
assisting people with the use of science and technology. Military academies, scientific
research and medical units, as well as special technological units actively support
national construction by transferring scientific and technological findings to the civilian
sector or by offering it assistance in tackling key technical problems and personnel
training. In the last ten years China's armed forces have supported more than 1,000
national economic construction projects with their advanced scientific and technological
achievements, solved urgent and key problems for more than 150 scientific research
projects, transferred 10,000-some scientific and technological findings to the civilian
sector, trained nearly one million scientific and technological personnel, and helped
civilian enterprises complete 900-odd technical transformation projects which enabled
320 enterprises to get out of the red and become profitable.


-----

-- Supporting agriculture and assisting in poverty-relief and development efforts. China is
a large agricultural country, so agriculture has always been the foundation of China's
national economy. In the past decade, to support agricultural development China's armed
forces have dredged more than 500 rivers, built 200,000-odd kilometers of irrigation
channels and dams and dikes, dug more than 1,000 reservoirs, and reclaimed wasteland
and leveled land of over two million hectares, thus laying a foundation for bumper
harvests. Army units stationed in poverty-stricken areas have made great efforts to assist
the local people to develop production, up to now helping nearly one million people in
23,000 poor areas get rid of poverty and live more comfortable lives. Especially, they
have concentrated on helping the poor in 20 key areas in the Yimeng and Taihang
mountains and other regions, assisting them to run 3,500-some village and township
enterprises. Moreover, they have carried out 12,000 scientific and technological projects
aimed at helping the poor to get rid of poverty, and offered agro-technique training
courses to some 4.5 million people. Military medical organizations at various levels and
army hospitals have sent medical teams to poor areas on 860 occasions, which have
supported more than 8,100 township hospitals with medical equipment worth upwards of
20 million yuan, and given free training to more than 20,000 medical personnel.

-- Participating in work for the public good. In the past decade the PLA has devoted more
than 100 million work days to the repair of bridges and roads, the tidying up and
beautifying of the environment, and the repair and construction of water, gas and power
supply projects. Altogether, it has completed over 100,000 projects for the public good
and planted more than 400 million trees. Besides, it has contributed 41.5755 million yuan
to the ``Hope Project,'' together with various kinds of goods and materials worth some 11
million yuan, and helped to build 697 ``Hope'' primary schools, which have enabled more
than 115,000 dropouts to return to school.

-- Training personnel competent both for military and civilian services. The Chinese
armed forces pay great attention to training qualified personnel for the country's
economic construction. To meet the needs of national economic construction and the
wishes of both officers and men, the Routine Service Regulations of the PLA stipulate
that every Saturday may be reserved for training personnel competent for both military
and civilian services. Saturdays are also when military personnel are organized to study
scientific and cultural subjects. Since the early 1980s, when the PLA started to organize
these special training courses, through on-the-job training nearly one million officers
have received academic certificates at or above the junior college level; more than 85
percent of the ordinary soldiers have received in-service technical training, and nearly
half of them have been awarded technician's certificates of various grades. When they
leave active service they have become or will become an important force promoting the
country's economic construction and the overall progress of Chinese society.

Stationing a Garrison in Hong Kong

The Chinese government resumed sovereignty over Hong Kong on July 1, 1997, and
stationed a garrison of the PLA in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region


-----

(HKSAR) to take charge of its defense affairs. The stationing of the PLA troops in the
Region is an important symbol of the Chinese government's resumption of exercise of
sovereignty over Hong Kong. It is also an important guarantee for the preservation of
state sovereignty and security and the maintenance of the Region's long-term prosperity
and stability.

The PLA troops entered Hong Kong strictly in accordance with provisions of the law.
The Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the PRC, passed at
the Third Session of the Seventh NPC in April, 1990, clearly stipulated that the Central
People's Government shall be responsible for administrating the defense affairs of the
HKSAR. The Garrison Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the PRC
was approved at the 23rd meeting of the Standing Committee of the Eighth NPC in
December 1996, and came into effect on July 1, 1997. The Garrison Law stipulates that
the Hong Kong Garrison shall not interfere in the local affairs of the HKSAR; that its
duties are to perform routine defense service, administrate military facilities, handle
relevant foreign-related military affairs, and ensure the security and stability of Hong
Kong; that its expenditures shall be borne by the Central People's Government; and that
the garrison troops shall be rotated. The law contains specific provisions on the duties
and rules of discipline of the garrison personnel, the judicature and other questions,
fundamentally guaranteeing that the Hong Kong Garrison fulfils its defense functions
along legal lines.

The PLA Hong Kong Garrison, composed of ground, naval and air forces, is under the
direction of the Central Military Commission of the PRC. While performing its defense
duties, the Hong Kong Garrison must abide by both national and HKSAR laws, as well as
the current rules and regulations of the PLA.

After its entry into Hong Kong, the PLA Hong Kong Garrison abided strictly by the
Basic Law and the Garrison Law, fulfilled its defense duties within legal framework,
actively organized military training, strengthened army-building along regularization
lines, studied Hong Kong's related laws, and acquainted the rank and file with the social
conditions in Hong Kong. According to the Garrison Law, the Garrison established
working contacts with the HKSAR government, and opened the barracks on the
Stonecutters Island and Chek Chu to the public to promote Hong Kong compatriots'
understanding of and trust in the garrison troops.

It is a long-term task for the PLA Hong Kong Garrison to fulfil its responsibility for
Hong Kong's defense affairs. The garrison troops will consistently adhere to the principle
of ``one country, two systems,'' strictly abide by the Basic Law and the Garrison Law,
and contribute to the preservation of the long-term prosperity and stability of Hong Kong.

IV. International Security Cooperation

As a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council and a large country in
the Asia-Pacific region, China attaches great importance to, and takes an active part in,
international security cooperation by sticking to its principles and promises, treating


-----

others in a sincere and friendly way, and developing cooperation. In recent years, China
has actively carried out exchanges with foreign armed forces on the basis of mutual
equality and mutual benefit. China has also actively participated in multilateral and
bilateral security dialogues and cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region, as well as in
United Nations peace-keeping operations, playing its due part in keeping peace in the
region and the world as a whole.

Foreign Military Contacts

As an important component of China's overall diplomacy, China's foreign military
contacts are subordinate to and serve the modernization of national defense and the
armed forces. China insists on dealing with its foreign military relations independently
and engaging in military exchanges and cooperation based on the Five Principles of
Peaceful Coexistence. In its contacts with foreign military circles, China has always
advocated the principles of mutual respect, enhancing understanding, developing
friendship, mutual benefit and cooperation. Chinese armed forces have been active in
participating in multilateral military diplomatic activities to bring the positive role of the
Chinese armed forces into full play in the sphere of international military affairs.

China has been active in developing an omni-directional and multi-level form of military
diplomacy. So far, Chinese armed forces have established relations with the armed forces
of more than 100 other countries. China has set up military attach*)_*'s offices in more
than 90 Chinese embassies abroad, and some 60 countries have set up their military
attach's offices in China. In the last 20 years, more than 1,300 Chinese military
delegations, of which some 180 were headed by senior officers, have visited over 80
countries. In the meantime, 2,100-some foreign military delegations involving several
tens of thousands of persons have visited China, more than half of which were highranking delegations headed by defense ministers, commanders-in-chief of the armed
forces or chiefs of the general staff.

China has always placed the development of military contacts with adjacent countries in
a prominent position. Following the principles of good-neighborliness and friendliness,
mutual benefit and cooperation and long-term stability, it has developed extensive and
beneficial contacts with the armed forces of those countries, especially contacts on the
senior level. In 1996 and 1997 alone, China sent more than 100 military delegations to
most of its adjacent countries, and hosted over 130 military delegations from such
countries. China has placed special stress on friendly military exchanges and cooperation
with developing countries, and has offered assistance in personnel training, equipment
and health care to over 70 countries. Since 1973, China has trained nearly 10,000 officers
at all levels as well as military technicians for developing countries, and sent over 8,000
experts to those countries. China is enthusiastic for expanding military relations with the
United States and other Western countries in Europe. Proceeding from the objective of
safeguarding world peace and the fundamental interests of the people all over the world,
Chinese armed forces have successively resumed and improved their relations with the
armed forces of those countries on the principle of increasing dialogue and narrowing
differences, resulting in the deepening of mutual understanding.


-----

Since the beginning of the 1990s China's naval vessels have visited nearly a score of
countries. From March to May 1997, two formations of Chinese naval vessels made
friendly visits to the United States, Mexico, Chile, Peru, Thailand, the Philippines and
Malaysia, which have enhanced the friendship between the armed forces of China and the
armed forces and people of those countries.

In their foreign contacts, Chinese armed forces stress technological exchanges in
specialized fields. They have developed extensive exchanges and cooperation with armed
forces in other parts of the world in the fields of scientific research, academic studies,
military education, armed forces administration, culture, sports, and medical and hygiene
work.

The positive, extensive foreign military contacts on the part of the Chinese armed forces
have promoted mutual understanding and trust between the PLA and other armed forces.
The Chinese armed forces, which have gone among the international community, have
presented themselves before the world as a civilized force and a force of peace, a force
which has made its due contributions to keeping regional peace and peace throughout the
world.

Promoting Confidence-Building Measures

China places great stress on and actively promotes cooperation in confidence-building
measures (CBM), considering the establishment of mutual trust between nations as an
effective way to maintain security. In recent years, China has reached agreements with
some neighboring countries on confidence-building measures and reduction of military
forces in border areas, which is an important step China has taken to develop relations
with other countries and promote regional peace and stability. These agreements reflect a
new kind of security concept vigorously advocated by China and embody some principles
and spirit of universal significance for Asian-Pacific security dialogues and cooperation.
These include mutual and equal security; seeking security by establishing mutual trust,
dialogue and cooperation without interfering in the internal affairs of other countries and
without aiming at a third party; preventing military forces from threatening or harming
other countries' security and stability; implementing and sticking to a national defense
policy that is defensive in nature; adopting suitable confidence-building measures in
border and disputed areas on a bilateral basis; and engaging in friendly contacts between
military forces.

In April 1996, China and Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan signed the
Agreement on Confidence-Building in the Military Field Along the Border Areas, which
stipulates that military forces deployed in the border areas shall not be used to attack each
other; each party shall refrain from staging military exercises directing against the other;
there shall be restrictions on the military exercises in terms of scale, area and the number
of such exercises; all the important military activities of one party in the areas between
the border and 100 kilometers from the border line shall be notified to the other which
shall be invited to observe the troop exercises; measures shall be taken to prevent
dangerous military activities and enhance friendly exchanges of their armed forces in the


-----

border areas.

In November 1996, China and India signed the Agreement on Confidence-Building
Measures in the Military Field Along the Line of Actual Control in the China-India
Border Areas. The agreement provides that each side should not engage in military
activities that threaten the other side or undermines peace, tranquility and stability in the
border areas; that they should strictly respect and observe the line of actual control in the
border areas and neither side should overstep the line of actual control in their activities
pending ultimate resolution of the boundary question; that they should reduce or limit the
size of field army, border defense forces, para-military forces and any other mutually
agreed category of armed forces and armaments deployed in the mutually agreed
geographical zones along the line of actual control to the mutually agreed ceilings; that
each side shall refrain from staging military exercises directing against the other in the
close proximity of the line of actual control in the border areas and restrict the scale of
military exercises and provide prior notification to the other with regard to military
exercises of certain scale in the close proximity of the line of actual control in the border
areas; that they should prevent air intrusions by military aircraft across the line of actual
control and dangerous military activities in the areas along the line of actual control; that
both sides should strengthen exchanges and cooperation between their military personnel
and establishments in the border areas along the line of actual control.

In addition, in 1994, China and Russia signed the Agreement on Prevention of Dangerous
Military Activities and the Joint Statement by the President of the People's Republic of
China and the President of the Russian Federation on Non-First-Use of Nuclear Weapons
and Detargeting of Strategic Nuclear Weapons Against Each Other. In January 1998,
China and the United States signed the Agreement Between the Ministry of National
Defense of the PRC and the Department of Defense of the USA on Establishing a
Consultation Mechanism to Strengthen Military Maritime Safety. In June of the same
year, President Jiang Zemin of China and President Clinton of the United States
announced that the two sides had decided not to target each other with the strategic
nuclear weapons under their respective control. In addition, confidential direct redline
telephone communication links have been established between the head of state of China
and the heads of state of Russia and the United States.

Regional Security Cooperation

China advocates regional-security dialogue and cooperation at different levels, through
various channels and in different forms. Such dialogue and cooperation should follow
these principles: participation on an equal footing, reaching unanimity through
consultation, seeking common ground while reserving differences, and proceeding in an
orderly way and step by step. China has participated in the ASEAN Regional Forum
(ARF), Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia (CICA),
Council on Security Cooperation in Asia and Pacific Region (CSCAP), Northeast Asia
Cooperation Dialogue (NEACD) and other activities, holding that all countries should
further mutual understanding and trust by discussions on security issues through these
important governmental and non-governmental channels, so as to promote regional peace


-----

and stability.

China has attended all the ARF foreign minister meetings and ARF senior official
meetings. Chinese representatives of foreign and defense affairs have attended official
and unofficial meetings within the framework of the forum, their topics of discussion
including promotion of confidence-building measures, peace keeping, maritime search
and rescue, the handling of emergencies and disaster relief, preventative diplomacy, nonproliferation, and guiding principles. In 1996 China and the Philippines jointly sponsored
the Conference on Confidence-Building Measures in Beijing. Between sessions of the
conference, which was crowned with success, foreign representatives were invited to visit
Chinese military units and observe military exercises. China supports the ARF's creative
explorations for the promotion of confidence-building measures and has made a series of
constructive suggestions and opinions in this regard. For example, China advocates
development of military medicine, science of military law and multilateral cooperation on
conversion of military technologies and facilities for civilian use. It encourages the
exchange of high-level visits by senior military officers, and port calls by naval vessels,
as well as exchanges of military personnel between different countries, and supports
cooperation in emergency rescue and disaster relief, maritime navigation safety, and
marine environmental protection. In addition, every year China submits to the forum a
statement on national defense policy and other related documents.

China has always been an active participant in the process of the CICA initiated by
Kazakhstan, regarding the purpose of the conference as basically suiting China's security
goal in Asia. It suggests that the conference develop steadily with full consideration of
Asia's regional peculiarities and diversities. In 1996 China formally joined the CSCAP,
and in 1997 established the CSCAP China Committee, which has always conscientiously
participated in the council's activities. Since 1993, when the NEACD was founded, China
has attended all NEACD meetings and, in 1996, hosted its fourth conference in Beijing.
Along with other member states, China has also helped the NEACD to achieve unanimity
on the guiding principle of cooperation between Northeast Asian countries.

China has held consultations in different forms with the United States, Russia, Japan,
France, Canada and Australia on issues of common interest in the areas of security and
defense. Officials and scholars of China's Ministry of National Defense and other related
departments have participated, in increasing breadth and depth, in various discussions
and other activities on Asian-Pacific security, which has promoted understanding and
trust between China and the countries concerned, and shown China's positive intentions
and efforts to maintain lasting peace in the Asia-Pacific region.

Participating in the UN Peace-Keeping Operations

As a permanent member of the UN Security Council, China has consistently engaged in
efforts to maintain international peace and security. It cherishes and supports the role of
the United Nations in keeping international peace and security under the guidance of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. In order to help UN peace-keeping
operations achieve success and develop in a healthy way, China holds that the following


-----

guiding principles should be stipulated and followed:

-- The aims and principles of the Charter of the United Nations must be adhered to,
especially the principles of respecting the sovereignty of all countries and noninterference in other countries' internal affairs.

-- Disputes must be settled using peaceful means, such as mediation, good office and
negotiation. Compulsory means should not be adopted indiscreetly, nor should military
means be resorted to even for humanitarian ends.

-- Double standards should be opposed. The policies and views of any one country or a
few countries should not be imposed on the UN Security Council, and military
interference by a small number of countries under the guise of the UN should not be
allowed.

-- In peace-keeping operations, the following principles, which have proved to be
effective in the past, should be adhered to: obtaining agreement from the country
concerned beforehand, strictly observing neutrality and prohibiting the use of force
except for self-defense.

-- Be practical and realistic. A peace-keeping operation should not be undertaken when
conditions are not yet ripe, nor should a peace-keeping force become a party to a conflict,
which would be a deviation from the fundamental purpose of peace-keeping operations.

Adhering to the above principles, China has participated in UN peace-keeping operations.
In 1990, China began to assign military observers to UN peace-keeping operations; since
then it has sent 437 military observers in 32 groups to join six UN peace-keeping
operations, viz, the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) in the
Middle East, United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM), Un ited
Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC), United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), United Nations Operation in Mozambique
(ONUMOZ) and United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL).

In 1992, the Chinese government dispatched an engineer unit to support the UNTAC
peace-keeping operations. A total of 800 men were sent in two batches, who, in 18
months, repaired or extended four airports, repaired four highways totaling 640
kilometers, built or rebuilt 47 bridges and completed many other service projects, making
useful contributions to the successful operations of the United Nations peace-keeping
forces in Cambodia.

China still has 32 military observers serving with the UNTSO, UNIKOM and
MINURSO. In May 1997, the Chinese government decided that in principle China would
take part in the UN's stand-by arrangements and would provide military observers,
civilian policemen, and engineering, medical, transportation and other logistic service
teams in due time for UN peace-keeping operations.


-----

Chinese personnel assisting UN peace-keeping operations have conscientiously fulfilled
their responsibilities and made great contributions to world peace. Some of them have
even sacrificed their lives. In the years to come, China will continue to participate in UN
peace-keeping operations in a positive and down-to-earth manner.

V. Arms Control and Disarmament

Since the end of the cold war the international security situation has tended to relax, and
great advances have been made in international arms control and disarmament. The
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction (CWC) was concluded in January 1993,
and came into effect in April 1997. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) was indefinitely extended in May, 1995. The Comprehensive Nuclear
Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) was opened for signature in the New York UN headquarters in
September 1996. Nuclear-weapon-free zones continue to expand. The Protocol on
Blinding Laser Weapons and the Amended Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on
the Use of Mines, Booby-Traps and Other Devices attached to the Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be
Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects (Convention on
Certain Conventional Weapons) were adopted in October 1995 and May 1996,
respectively. And in June 1997, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) passed
a protocol for the purpose of increasing the effectiveness of safeguards.

But in spite of such progress, there are still some problems crying out for solutions in the
sphere of disarmament. The United States and Russia still keep their large nuclear
arsenals. In addition, a few military powers continue to stick to their cold war mentality
and nuclear deterrence policy, strenuously developing highly advanced and sophisticated
weapons, especially advanced missile defense systems. The nuclear tests conducted by
India, and then by Pakistan, in May 1998 have not only seriously impeded international
non-proliferation efforts, but have produced a grave impact on regional and world peace
and stability.

The Chinese government highly stresses the importance of arms control and disarmament
work, and takes it as an important component of its overall diplomacy and defense policy.
The Chinese government holds that the international community should promote fair,
rational, comprehensive and balanced arms control and disarmament; the purpose of
disarmament should be to reinforce, not weaken or undermine, the security of all
countries; the universality of the international arms control treaties should be enhanced;
new treaties should be concluded through a broadly representative multilateral
negotiations mechanism; those countries having the largest and most sophisticated
conventional and nuclear arsenals should continue to fulfil their special responsibilities
for disarmament; efforts should be made to prevent a few countries directing the target of
disarmament at a broad spectrum of developing countries in order to deprive them of
their legitimate right and means for self-defense, at the same time taking advantage of
their own advanced military technology and superior economic strength to seek absolute
security and military superiority; the existing discriminatory and exclusive export control


-----

mechanisms and arrangements should be overhauled and rectified comprehensively, and
a fair and rational international non-proliferation system should be set up through
negotiations on the basis of universal participation.

China has steadfastly attended multilateral negotiations on arms control and
disarmament, and some related international conferences. In April 1997, China and
Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan signed the Agreement on Mutual
Reduction of Military Forces in the Border Areas. It stipulates that the five countries shall
reduce their military forces in the border areas to the minimum level compatible with
their friendly and good-neighborly relations, a level that shall not go beyond their defense
needs; none of the parties shall use or threaten to use force against the other party or
parties, neither shall they seek unilateral military superiority; they shall reduce and limit
the size of their ground force, air force, air aviation and border guard units as well as the
quantity of main categories of their armaments and military equipment deployed in the
border areas as deep as 100 kilometers from their border; they shall determine the
ceilings for the reduced size, modality and the time limit for the reduction of military
forces; combat vessels shall not be deployed in rivers in the above-mentioned areas; they
shall exchange relevant information and data on the military forces in the border areas;
and they shall monitor and verify the implementation of the Agreement. China has also
set up bilateral arms control consultation mechanisms with many other countries. China
has signed or ratified almost all the multilateral arms control treaties, and faithfully
fulfilled its obligations under those treaties, making a positive contribution to the
progress of international arms control and disarmament.

The Issue of Nuclear Weapons

As a nuclear-weapon state, China vigorously supports and participates in the international
non-nuclear proliferation efforts, promotes the process of nuclear disarmament and works
hard for the realization of the final goal of the complete prohibition and thorough
destruction of nuclear weapons worldwide.

China has consistently advocated the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of
nuclear weapons. At the 51st Session of the UN General Assembly in 1996 China clearly
put forward a five-point proposal on nuclear disarmament: 1. The major nuclear powers
should abandon the nuclear deterrence policy, and the states having the largest nuclear
arsenals should continue to drastically reduce their nuclear weapons stockpiles; 2. all
nuclear-weapon states should commit themselves not to be the first to use nuclear
weapons at any time and in any circumstances, undertake unconditionally not to use or
threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states or nuclear-weaponfree zones, and conclude a legally binding international document as soon as possible; 3.
all states which have deployed nuclear weapons outside their borders should withdraw all
these weapons home, and all nuclear-weapon states should pledge to support the proposal
on establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones, respect the status of such zones and undertake
corresponding obligations; 4. no state should develop or deploy outer space weapons or
missile defense systems, which harm strategic security and stability; 5. all states should


-----

negotiate and conclude an international convention on the complete prohibition and
thorough destruction of nuclear weapons.

From the first day it possessed nuclear weapons, China has solemnly declared its
determination not to be the first to use such weapons at any time and in any
circumstances, and later undertook unconditionally not to use or threaten to use nuclear
weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states or nuclear-weapon-free zones. China
vigorously supports the efforts of the relevant countries to establish nuclear-free zones on
a voluntary basis, and has signed and approved the relevant protocols of the Treaty for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of
Tlatelolco), the South Pacific Nuclear-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Rarotonga) and the
African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Pelindaba). In April 1995 China
issued an official statement, reiterating its commitment to unconditionally provide nonnuclear-weapon states and nuclear-weapon-free zones with negative security assurance,
and for the first time promised to provide them with positive security assurance.

In March 1992 China acceded to the NPT and has faithfully fulfilled its international
obligations to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and made contributions to the
indefinite extension of the treaty. China was represented at the negotiations on the CTBT
from beginning to end, and signed it on September 24, 1996, the first day the treaty was
opened for signature. China supports the early conclusion of the Convention on Banning
the Production of Fissile Materials for Nuclear Weapons or Other Nuclear Explosive
Devices (FMCT). For this purpose, the foreign ministers of China and the United States
issued a joint statement in October 1994, saying that the two countries would make joint
efforts to promote an early conclusion of a multilateral, non-discriminatory and
effectively verifiable FMCT. In April 1997, China and four other nuclear-weapon states 
- the United States, Russia, Britain and France -- issued a statement, reiterating their
stand for concluding, through negotiation, a FMCT as soon as possible on the basis of the
mandate contained in the Shannon Report. China supports the IAEA's Program for
Strengthening the Effectiveness and Promoting the Efficiency of the Safeguard System
(93 + 2 Program), and promises that, on the basis of voluntary safeguard, China will
negotiate and conclude with the IAEA a legally binding document at a proper time, and
will adopt measures corresponding to the obligations China undertakes in accordance
with the first article of the NPT.

As the international situation is tending to relax and relations between the major powers
continue to improve, China believes that the conditions are now ripe for nuclear-weapon
states to undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons against each other. So, in
January 1994, China formally presented a draft for the Treaty on the Non-First-Use of
Nuclear Weapons to the United States, Russia, Britain and France, proposing that the five
nuclear-weapon states hold discussions on the treaty as soon as possible. China holds that
such a treaty will help to promote mutual trust among nuclear-weapon states and further
reduce the danger of nuclear war. While energetically promoting negotiations for
conclusion of a multilateral treaty, China also actively seeks, together with other nuclearweapon states, to undertake, on a bilateral basis, not to be the first to use nuclear weapons


-----

against each other. So far, China and Russia have already made such a promise to each
other.

The Issue of Chemical and Biological Weapons

The Chinese government has always stood for the complete prohibition and thorough
destruction of chemical weapons. China signed the CWC in January 1993, ratified the
convention in December 1996 and deposited the instruments of ratification on April 25,
1997, thus becoming an original signatory state to the CWC. China supports the purpose
and goals of the CWC, and advocates that chemical weapons and facilities for their
production should be destroyed as soon as possible, in accordance with the related
provisions in the CWC. Meanwhile, China holds that the convention should promote
international economic, trade, and scientific and technological exchanges in the field of
chemical industry, ensuring that chemical industry technology truly benefits mankind.

China has been active and conscientious in fulfilling the obligations stipulated in the
CWC. It delivered the initial declaration and annual declaration in time and in their
entirety and has accepted inspections by the convention. It has also participated in every
one of the convention's executive council meetings and the two conferences of states
parties.

China has been a victim of chemical weapons. Large quantities of chemical weapons
abandoned by Japanese aggressor troops are found in China to this day, which still
threaten the lives and property of the local people and the environment in which they live.
In view of this, China demands that, in keeping with the stipulations of the convention,
any country that has left chemical weapons in another country destroy, as soon as
possible, such weapons wholly and thoroughly.

China advocates the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of biological
weapons. It opposes the production, development and stockpiling of biological weapons
by any country, and the proliferation of such weapons and related technology in any form
by any country. In November 1984 China acceded to the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and
Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction (BWC). As a state party to the BWC, China
has fully and conscientiously fulfilled its obligations under the convention. Since 1987
China has, year after year, reported to the United Nations on convention-related
information and data concerning confidence-building measures, in accordance with the
decisions of the Review Conferences of the BWC.

Having suffered grievously from biological weapons attacks in the past, China supports
work that helps comprehensively to strengthen the effectiveness of the convention. It has
actively participated in the work of drawing up a Protocol of the Ad Hoc Group of States
Parties to the BWC established in 1994, and has made contributions to the progress of the
negotiations on the Protocol. China holds, in view of the complexity of the problems
relating to the verification mechanism, that every country should, in a down-to-earth way,
seek effective and feasible verification measures, and formulate concrete steps to prevent


-----

abuse of verification, and to protect the rightful commercial and security secrets of states
parties. China considers that, while improving the convention's verification mechanism,
international cooperation and exchanges among states parties in the sphere of biotechnology for peaceful purposes should also be strengthened.

The Issue of Keeping Outer Space Weapon-Free

Outer space belongs to all mankind, and should be used exclusively for peaceful purposes
to benefit mankind. To this end, China stands for the complete prohibition and thorough
destruction of weapons deployed in outer space. It opposes the development of antisatellite weapons. China maintains that the international community, the big powers with
the capacity to utilize outer space in particular, should take the following realistic steps to
prevent a weaponized outer space: A complete ban on weapons of any kind in outer
space, including anti-missile and anti-satellite weapons, so as to keep outer space free of
weapons; a ban on the use of force or conduct of hostilities in, from or to outer space; and
all countries should undertake neither to experiment with, produce or deploy outer space
weapons nor to utilize outer space to seek strategic advantages on the ground, for
example, using disposition of the important parts of ground anti-missile systems in outer
space for the purpose of developing strategic defensive weapons. In addition,
negotiations should be held as soon as possible for the conclusion of a legally-binding
international agreement with the above-mentioned contents.

Since the beginning of the 1980s, as one of the co-sponsors of the UN General Assembly
resolutions on keeping outer space weapon-free, China has promoted negotiations on this
problem at the Geneva Conference on Disarmament and through other multilateral
mechanisms. As early as at the founding of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Conference on
Disarmament on the Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space, China submitted to it a
paper on China's Position on the Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space (CD/579).
Many countries have supported China's position.

The Issue of Anti-Personnel Landmines

China has all along attached great importance to the problem of threat to innocent people
caused by the indiscriminate use of anti-personnel landmines (APLs). It is in favor of
imposing proper and rational restrictions on the use and transfer of APLs in a bid to
achieve the ultimate objective of comprehensive prohibition of such landmines through a
phased approach. In the meantime, the Chinese government maintains that, in addressing
the problem of APLs, consideration should be given to both humanitarian concern and
the legitimate defense requirements of sovereign states. To safeguard the safety of their
people by sovereign states through legitimate military means, including the use of APLs
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations itself
is part and parcel of humanitarianism.

As a country with long land borders, China has to reserve the right to use APLs on its
territory pending an alternative solution is found and its requirements in security and
defense capability are catered for. China's use of APLs under legitimate circumstances is


-----

entirely aimed at preventing foreign military interference and aggression so as to
maintain national unity and territorial integrity and safeguard its people's well-being. This
not only represents China's legitimate national security and defense requirements, but
also accords with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations on the right
to self-defense.

The PLA has always exercised strict control over the use of APLs and prohibited the
indiscriminate use and laying of such landmines while actively studying the possible
alternatives to APLs. China has also actively participated in the revision of the Landmine
Protocol (Protocol II) to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCW) and
the discussions on the question of APLs at the UN Conference on Disarmament.

The Chinese government has all along adopted a very prudent and responsible attitude
toward landmine export. In December 1994, China joined in the UN General Assembly's
consultation on its resolution concerning the moratorium on the export of APLs. In April
1996, the Chinese government solemnly declared its suspension of export of APLs that
are not compatible with those APLs provided for in the Amended Landmine Protocol to
the CCW.

The Chinese government is of the view that the clearance of APLs is part and parcel of
the overall efforts in eliminating the threat to innocent civilians resulting from the
indiscriminate use of such landmines. It has consistently adopted a responsible attitude
toward post-war demining question and has done considerable fruitful work in this
regard. From the beginning of 1992 to the end of 1994, the PLA conducted its first largescale demining operation in the border areas of Yunnan Province and the Guangxi
Zhuang Autonomous Region, cleared a total of over one million landmines and explosive
devices and destroyed nearly 200 tons of disused or de-activated ammunitions and
explosive devices, covering an area of 108 square kilometers with over 170 border trade
passes and ports re-opened, and over 30,000 hectares of farmland, pasture and mountain
forests restored. At the end of 1997, the Chinese government decided to conduct its
second large-scale demining operation in the above areas starting from November 1997
up to December 1999.

The Chinese government has always done its utmost to assist APL-affected countries. It
furnished Cambodia and some other mine-affected countries with minedetection/clearance equipment, and also helped train demining personnel for these
countries, thus contributing to their smooth post-war rehabilitation. In November 1997,
the Chinese President Jiang Zemin declared that China would continue to actively
support international demining efforts and cooperation, including donation and provision
of assistance in the fields of demining training, technology and equipment through the
relevant international demining funds. The Chinese government also sent observers to
participate in the Signing Ceremony of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction
and the international demining roundtable (Mine Action Forum) held from 2 to 4
December 1997 in Ottawa.


-----

Control of the Export of Sensitive Materials and Military Equipment

The Chinese government agrees that necessary measures should be adopted to apply
effective international control to the transfer of sensitive materials and technologies in
order to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their carriers.
However, at the same time, China holds that international efforts to prevent such
proliferation should follow the principle of fairness and rationality, and opposes a double
standard whereby anti-proliferation is used as a pretext to infringe upon the sovereignty
of other countries and harm normal international cooperation and exchanges in the fields
of economy, trade and science and technology.

China attaches great importance to control over the export of sensitive materials, and has
implemented a series of administration measures regarding the transfer of sensitive
materials on the basis of international practice.

Regarding nuclear exports, China, a signatory to the NPT, has pursued a policy of not
supporting, encouraging or engaging in the proliferation of nuclear weapons and not
assisting any other country to develop such weapons. It has laid down three principles
regarding nuclear exports: They should serve peaceful purposes only; they should accept
the safeguards of the IAEA; and they should not be retransferred to a third country
without China's consent.

In November 1991 the Chinese government declared that it would report on a continuing
basis to the IAEA any export to or import from non-nuclear-weapon states of nuclear
materials of one effective kilogram or above. In July 1993 China officially promised that
it would voluntarily report to the IAEA any imports or exports of nuclear materials,
nuclear equipment and related non-nuclear materials. In May 1996 China promised that it
would not offer help to nuclear facilities which had not accepted the IAEA's safeguards,
including bans on exports of nuclear materials and personnel or technology exchanges
and cooperation. In May 1997, the Chinese government published the Circular on
Questions Pertaining to the Strict Implementation of China's Nuclear Exports Policy,
which explicitly stipulates that no nuclear materials, facilities or related technologies
exported by China may be supplied to or used by nuclear facilities which have not
accepted the IAEA's safeguards. The circular also has strict provisions regarding exports
of dual-use nuclear-related materials. In May 1997, China sent observers to attend a
meeting of the Zangger Committee, one of the mechanisms of international nuclear
export control, and formally joined the committee in October of that year. In September
1997, the Chinese government issued the Regulations of the People's Republic of China
on Nuclear Export Control, banning any kind of assistance to nuclear facilities which
have not accepted the IAEA's safeguards. In addition, nuclear exports are monopolized
by the units designated by the State Council and can not be operated by any other units or
individuals. The state practices a licensing system for nuclear exports, and has drawn up
the Detailed List of Nuclear Export Control in light of the commonly accepted listings of
this kind in the international sphere. On June 10, 1998, China promulgated the
Regulations on the Control of the Export of Dual-Use Nuclear Materials and Related


-----

Technology, imposing strict control on the export of nuclear-related dual-use materials
and related technology.

China has always been cautious and responsible regarding the exports administration of
chemicals. It does not export chemicals that can be used to manufacture chemical
weapons, nor does it export related technologies and equipment. It supports normal
international cooperation in chemical industry and exchanges of related scientific and
technological materials in accordance with the CWC, and opposes any export control
mechanism conflicting with the purpose of the convention.

In September 1990, the Chinese government drafted measures for strict control of the
export of chemicals and their production technologies and equipment. In December 1995,
it issued the Regulations of the People's Republic of China on the Supervision and
Control of Chemicals, and, in accordance with these regulations, issued the List of
Chemicals Subject to Supervision and Control and the Bylaws for the Implementation of
the Regulations in June 1996, stipulating that import and export of related chemicals are
under the centralized management of the competent departments of the chemical industry
under the State Council and operated by special companies designated by such
departments.

With regard to the transfer of military equipment and related technology, China respects
the right of every country to independent or collective self-defense and to acquisition of
weapons for this purpose in accordance with the principles contained in the Charter of the
United Nations, but at the same time it is concerned about the adverse effects on world
security and regional stability arising from excessive accumulations of weaponry.

For many years until the early 1980s, China did not engage in weapons exports, and since
then the volume of such exports has been limited. Beginning in the mid-1980s, China's
export of military products has been on the decrease: The volume of contracted business
was just over two billion US dollars-worth in 1987, dropped to US$ 600 million-worth in
1991, and did not exceed one billion US dollars-worth in the following years. The 199397 records of the UN register of conventional arms exports and imports of various
countries show that China's exports of conventional weapons are small compared to those
of some other countries.

China practices strict control of the transfer of conventional military equipment and
related technologies, and observes the following principles: The export of weapons must
help the recipient nation enhance its capability for legitimate self-defense; it must not
impair peace, security and stability of the relevant region and the world as a whole; and it
must not be used to interfere in the recipient state's internal affairs. Since 1992 China has
participated in the United Nations' register of conventional arms transfers (Tables 5 and
6).

Table 5 Data of China's Participation in the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms Transfers in 1992-1996 (Exports)


-----

Imte 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 Total

Combat tanks 97 121 82 51 3 354

Armored cars 2 2

Large-caliber guns 166 20 18 204

Operational aircraft 68 5 73

Attack helicopters

Naval vessels 2 6 1 5 14

Missiles and launchers 24 20 18 106 168

Table 6 Data of China's Participation in the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms Transfers in 1992-1996 (Imports)

Item 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 Total

Combat tanks

Armored cars

Large-caliber guns

Operational aircraft 26 22 48

Attack helicopters

Naval vessels 1 1 2

Missiles and launchers 144 144

In October 1997, the Chinese government published the Regulations of the People's
Republic of China on the Control of Military Products Export, stipulating that a licensing
system shall be practiced for China's weapons exports, and all external transfers of
domestic military products shall be carried out by the departments authorized by the
government and companies approved and registered by the government. The Regulations
state that the business activities of such departments and companies must remain strictly
within the projects approved by the government, that contracts of military products
transfers must require approval from the relevant competent government departments
before taking effect, and that important items of arms exports must be submitted to the
State Council and the Central Military Commission for approval.

China has been consistently cautious and responsible regarding the transfer of missiles.
China is not a member state of the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) and has
not joined its formulation and revision, but, in accordance with China's consistent
position on non-proliferation and its principles concerning arms exports, the Chinese
government promised to observe the then guidelines and parameters of the MTCR in
February 1992. In October 1994, China reaffirmed its promise and undertook the
obligation of not exporting ground-to-ground missiles inherently capable of reaching a
range of at least 300 kilometers with a payload of at least 500 kilograms. In line with the
above policy, China has exercised strict and effective control over the export of missiles
and related materials and has never done anything in violation of its commitments.

The principles and measures to prevent the proliferation of weaponry and unwarranted
transfers of military equipment that China has consistently upheld have helped to
promote the development of international arms control and disarmament in a wholesome
way, and to maintain world peace and regional stability.


-----

-----

中国的国防
http://www.gov.cn/zwgk/2005-05/26/content_1107.htm

中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室

一九九八年七月·北京

目 录

前 言

一、国际安全形势

二、国防政策

三、国防建设

国防体制

军事法制建设

国防费

裁减军队员额

参加和支援国家建设

驻军香港

四、国际安全合作

对外军事交往

建立信任措施

地区安全合作


-----

参与联合国维持和平行动

五、军控与裁军

核武器问题

化学和生物武器问题

外空非武器化问题

杀伤人员地雷问题

敏感物资和军事装备出口控制

前 言

人类历史即将进入２１世纪。把一个和平、稳定、繁荣的世界带入新世纪，是中国

政府和人民的愿望。

处在世纪之交的重要历史时期，中国正致力于现代化建设。中国需要并十分珍惜一

个长期的国际和平环境，特别是良好的周边环境。中国人民愿同世界各国人民一道

，为促进世界和平与发展的崇高事业，开创人类美好的未来，作出不懈的努力。

基于和平与发展的愿望，中国坚定不移地奉行防御性的国防政策，坚持国防建设服

从和服务于国家经济建设，加强国际和地区安全合作，积极参与国际军备控制与裁

军进程。事实证明，中国是负责任的大国，是维护世界和平与稳定的一支坚定力量

。

中国曾于１９９５年发表《中国的军备控制与裁军》白皮书，主要介绍了中国在军

控与裁军领域的实际努力与进展。在这里，将就中国国防建设的有关情况，作进一

步的介绍和阐述。

一、国际安全形势


-----

和平与发展是当今时代的主题。要和平、求合作、促发展已经成为不可抗拒的历史

潮流。

当前，国际安全形势总体上继续趋向缓和。冷战结束后，多极化趋势在全球或地区

范围内，在政治、经济等领域都有新的发展，世界上各种力量出现新的分化和组合

。大国关系经历着重大而深刻的调整，各种伙伴关系逐渐向机制化方向发展，各国

独立自主、联合自强、协调发展的意识正在加强。发展中国家总体实力增强，正在

成为国际舞台上的一支重要力量。多极化趋势和经济全球化的持续发展，使国与国

之间的相互依存和制约进一步加深，也有助于世界的和平、稳定与繁荣。维护世界

和平的因素正在不断增长。

武装冲突和局部战争对世界全局的影响明显减弱。在过去两大军事集团对峙的背景

下，一些地区的武装冲突和局部战争严重影响了世界的安全和稳定。冷战后的一个

时期，地区冲突频仍，并呈上升趋势。但近几年来，一些持续多年的冲突和战乱有

的已经得到解决，有的正走上政治解决的轨道或逐步降温。目前，因领土、资源争

端及民族、宗教纷争而引起的武装冲突和局部战争，其规模、强度和地域相对有限

，并得到不同程度的控制。国际社会的调解努力日益增加，能力不断增强。

军事因素在国家安全中仍占有重要地位。在新的国际安全环境中，世界多数国家在

注重运用政治、经济和外交等手段解决争端的同时，仍把军事手段以及加强军事力

量作为维护自身安全和国家利益的重要途径。一场以发展高技术武器为先导的军事

领域的深刻变革正在世界范围内兴起。这场变革发展迅猛，对军队的武器装备、体

制编制、作战训练及军事理论等方面将产生重大而深远的影响。为适应新的形势并

争取自身优势，许多国家纷纷调整国防政策和军事战略，普遍压缩军备规模，更加

注重质量建军。

经济安全在国家安全中的地位日益重要。在国际关系中，地缘政治、军事安全、意

识形态因素仍然发挥着不可忽视的作用，但经济因素的作用更趋突出，国家间经济

联系不断加强。以经济和科技为主的综合国力竞争进一步加剧，世界范围内围绕市

场和资源等经济权益的斗争日趋激烈，经济全球化的加快和区域集团化的加深使一

国的经济发展更容易受到外来因素的影响和冲击。因此，越来越多的国家把经济安


-----

全视为国家安全的一个重要方面，亚洲金融危机使经济安全问题更为突出，提出了

经济全球化过程中各国政府加强协调、共迎挑战的新课题。

亚太地区政治安全形势相对稳定。亚太地区多极化趋势加快发展，大国关系出现战

略性调整并逐步趋向稳定。尽管出现了亚洲金融危机，亚太地区仍是世界上最具经

济发展活力的地区之一，发展经济是各国的首要任务。亚太各国经济相互依存加深

，以和平手段解决彼此的争端，注重寻求共同利益的汇合点，加强合作与协调正在

成为本地区国家关系的主流。各种区域性和次区域性的多边合作不断发展，安全对

话与合作正在多层次、多渠道展开。

在世界和地区范围内仍存在一些不安定因素。霸权主义和强权政治仍然是威胁世界

和平与稳定的主要根源；冷战思维及其影响还有一定市场，扩大军事集团、强化军

事同盟给国际安全增加了不稳定因素；有的国家依仗军事优势对他国进行军事威胁

，甚至武装干涉；不公正、不合理的国际经济旧秩序仍在损害着发展中国家的利益

；因民族、宗教、领土、资源等因素而引发的局部冲突时起时伏，国与国之间的一

些历史遗留问题仍待解决；恐怖活动、武器扩散、走私贩毒、环境污染、难民潮等

跨国问题，也给国际安全造成了新的威胁。

１９９８年５月，印度不顾国际社会的强烈反对，悍然进行核试验，挑起南亚核军

备竞赛。之后，巴基斯坦针对印度核试验做出反应，也进行了核试验。印、巴相继

核试验是对国际防止核武器扩散努力的沉重打击，给南亚地区乃至世界和平与稳定

带来了严重的后果。国际社会加强防扩散机制的任务也更加紧迫。

历史证明，冷战时期以军事联盟为基础、以增加军备为手段的安全观念和体制不能

营造和平。在新形势下，扩大军事集团、加强军事同盟更有悖时代潮流。安全不能

依靠增加军备，也不能依靠军事同盟。安全应当依靠相互之间的信任和共同利益的

联系。通过对话增进信任，通过合作谋求安全，相互尊重主权，和平解决争端，谋

求共同发展。要争取持久和平，必须摒弃冷战思维，培育新型的安全观念，寻求维

护和平的新方式。中国认为，这种观念和方式应包括以下几个方面：

———

各国应在相互尊重主权和领土完整、互不侵犯、互不干涉内政、平等互利、和平共

处五项原则基础上建立国与国之间的关系。这是全球和地区安全的政治基础和前提


-----

。各国有权选择自己的社会制度、发展战略和生活方式，任何国家都不得以任何方

式、任何借口干涉他国内政，更不应进行军事威胁或侵犯。

———
各国应在经济领域加强互利合作，相互开放，消除经贸交往中的不平等现象和歧视

政策，逐步缩小国家之间的发展差距，谋求共同繁荣。这是全球和地区安全的经济

基础。维护正常和良好的经济、贸易和金融秩序，不仅要有完善的宏观经济管理体

制和健全的经济运行体系，而且要加强地区和世界的经济联系与合作，共同创造稳

定、安全的外部经济环境。

———

各国应通过对话与合作增进相互了解与信任，谋求以和平方式解决国家间的分歧和

争端。这是确保和平与安全的现实途径。安全是相互的，安全对话和合作旨在促进

信任，而非制造对抗，更不应针对第三国，不能损害别国的安全利益。

中国作为亚太国家，高度重视本地区的安全、稳定、和平与发展。中国的亚太安全

战略有３个目标，即：中国自身的稳定与繁荣，周边地区的和平与稳定，与亚太各

国开展对话与合作。为此，中国致力于与各国平等相待，友好合作，重视同地区各

国及各主要力量发展健康稳定的关系；积极参与地区经济合作，促进开放的地区主

义；坚持以和平方式处理和解决国家间的争端；积极参与地区安全对话与合作进程

。

中国在平等协商、互谅互让的基础上，同多数邻国妥善解决了边界领土问题。对于

与有关邻国现存的领土和海洋权益争议，中国主张以大局为重、协商解决，使之不

影响国家关系的正常发展和地区形势的稳定。中国明确提出，根据公认的国际法和

现代海洋法，包括《联合国海洋法公约》所确定的基本原则和法律制度，通过和平

谈判和磋商，妥善解决有关争议问题。

台湾是中国领土不可分割的一部分。结束海峡两岸分裂局面，实现祖国统一，是包

括台湾同胞在内的全体中国人民的崇高使命和共同愿望。中国政府坚持以“和平统

一、一国两制”的基本方针解决台湾问题，坚决反对任何制造“台湾独立”、“两个中

国”、“一中一台”等分裂国家的图谋和言行。台湾问题完全是中国内政。无论是直

接还是间接把台湾海峡划入任何国家或军事同盟的安全合作范围，都是对中国主权


-----

的侵犯和干涉。中国政府努力谋求以和平方式实现国家的统一，但不承诺放弃使用

武力。每一个主权国家都有权采取自己认为必要的一切手段包括军事手段，来维护

本国的主权和领土完整。中国政府在采取何种方式处理台湾问题上，并无义务对任

何国家或图谋分裂中国者作出承诺。中国政府反对任何国家对台军售。对台军售不

仅违反基本的国际法准则，也对中国的安全及地区的和平与稳定构成威胁。

中国政府始终不渝地奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，主张在和平共处五项原则和其

他公认的国际关系准则基础上，同所有国家建立和发展友好合作关系，并愿同各国

一道，为维护世界和平、促进国际安全与稳定作出不懈努力。

二、国防政策

中国政府坚定不移地奉行防御性的国防政策。《中华人民共和国宪法》明确规定，

中华人民共和国武装力量的任务是巩固国防，抵抗侵略，保卫祖国，保卫人民的和

平劳动，参加国家建设事业，努力为人民服务。中国的国家利益、社会制度、对外

政策和历史文化传统，决定中国必然实行防御性的国防政策。

中国始终把维护国家的主权、统一、领土完整和安全放在第一位。１８４０年鸦片

战争以后，中国逐渐变成半殖民地半封建国家，中华民族屡遭帝国主义列强的侵略

、压迫和欺凌。中国人民经过长期前赴后继的英勇奋斗才取得国家独立和民族解放

，因而极为珍惜来之不易的独立自主权利。保卫祖国，抵抗侵略，维护统一，反对

分裂，是中国国防政策的出发点和立足点。

中国正处于社会主义初级阶段，国家的根本任务是集中力量进行社会主义现代化建

设。中国人口多、底子薄，地区发展不平衡，生产力不发达的状况在相当长一段时

间内还会继续存在。中国面临着极为繁重的经济建设任务，国防建设必须服从和服

务于国家经济建设的大局。中国所选择的符合自己国情的社会制度、发展战略和生

活方式，不会产生侵略别国的因素。

中国的发展需要一个长期的国际和平环境特别是良好的周边环境。中国始终不渝地

奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，主张从中国人民和世界人民的根本利益出发来处理

国际事务，不同任何大国或国家集团结盟；主张通过协商和平解决国家间的纠纷和

争端，反对诉诸武力或以武力相威胁，反对霸权主义和强权政治；主张在和平共处


-----

五项原则的基础上，建立公正合理的国际政治经济新秩序，同所有国家发展友好合

作关系。中国永远是维护世界和平和地区稳定的重要力量。中国即使将来强大了，

也决不走对外侵略扩张的道路。

中国实行防御性的国防政策，还渊源于中国的历史文化传统。中国是一个有五千年

文明历史的国家，有爱好和平的传统。中国古代思想家曾提出过“亲仁善邻”的思想

，反映了自古以来中国人民就希望天下太平、同各国人民友好相处。这种思想表现

在军事上，就是主张用非军事手段来解决争端、慎重对待战争和战略上后发制人。

在几千年的历史进程中，爱和平，重防御，求统一，促进民族团结，共御外侮，始

终是中国国防观念的主题。新中国的国防政策，继承和发扬了中国优良的历史文化

传统。

中国的国防政策，主要包括以下内容：

———
巩固国防，抵抗侵略，制止武装颠覆，保卫国家的主权、统一、领土完整和安全。

这是中国国防政策的基本目标，也是中国宪法赋予中国武装力量的主要职责。中国

努力避免和制止战争，努力用和平方式解决国际争端和历史遗留问题。但是，在霸

权主义和强权政治依然存在的情况下，国家必须具有用军事手段捍卫主权、统一、

领土完整和安全的能力。中国的国防现代化建设完全是为了自卫，是保障国家现代

化建设和安全的需要。中国武装力量的规模是与保卫国家安全和利益的需要相适应

的。中国独立自主、自力更生地建设和巩固国防。

———

国防建设服从和服务于国家经济建设大局，国防建设与经济建设协调发展。这是中

国国防建设一个长期的基本方针。国防现代化需要国家的经济力量和技术力量的支

持，国防现代化水平只能随着国家经济实力的增强而逐步提高。国家坚持以经济建

设为中心，国防建设必须服从和服务于这个大局，军队积极参加和支援国家经济建

设。国家在集中力量进行经济建设的同时，加强国防建设，促进国防建设与经济建

设协调发展。

———

贯彻积极防御的军事战略方针。中国在战略上实行防御、自卫和后发制人的原则，


-----

坚持“人不犯我，我不犯人，人若犯我，我必犯人”。中国拥有少量核武器完全是出

于自卫的需要。中国坚持全民自卫原则和人民战争的战略思想，增强全民国防观念

，完善国防动员体制，加强国防后备力量建设；立足现有武器装备，继承和发扬优

良传统；适应世界军事领域的深刻变革，做好现代技术特别是高技术条件下的防卫

作战准备。

———

走有中国特色的精兵之路。在新的历史时期，中国军队努力加强质量建设，走有中

国特色的精兵之路，目标是建设一支有中国特色的革命化、现代化、正规化的人民

军队。减少数量，提高质量，是军队现代化建设的一条基本方针。中国军队依靠科

技强军，实现军队由数量规模型向质量效能型、由人力密集型向科技密集型的转变

；按照现代战争的特点，努力提高武器装备现代化建设的水平，改革和完善军队的

体制编制，改进部队的训练和院校教育的内容与方法。

———
维护世界和平，反对侵略扩张行为。中国坚持和平共处五项原则，独立自主地处理

对外军事关系，开展军事交流与合作，不搞霸权主义，不搞军事集团，不进行军事

扩张，不在国外驻军或建立军事基地。中国反对军备竞赛，主张根据公正、合理、

全面、均衡的原则，实行有效的军备控制和裁军。中国支持国际社会采取的有利于

维护世界和地区和平、安全、稳定的活动，支持国际社会为公正合理地解决国际争

端、军备控制和裁军问题所做的努力。

三、国防建设

中国的国防建设，是国家现代化建设的重要内容。在新的历史条件下，中国军队坚

持中国共产党的绝对领导，贯彻积极防御的战略方针，加强质量建设，依法治军，

勤俭建军，积极参加和支援国家经济建设，为国家的安全稳定和现代化建设作出了

重大贡献。

国防体制

中国根据宪法、国防法及其他有关法律，建立和完善国防体制。国家对国防活动实

行统一的领导。


-----

中华人民共和国全国人民代表大会是最高国家权力机关，决定战争和和平的问题，

并行使宪法规定的国防方面的其他职权。全国人民代表大会常务委员会是全国人民

代表大会的常设机关，决定战争状态的宣布，决定全国总动员或者局部动员，并行

使宪法规定的国防方面的其他职权。国家主席根据全国人民代表大会的决定和全国

人民代表大会常务委员会的决定，宣布战争状态，发布动员令，并行使宪法规定的

国防方面的其他职权。国务院领导和管理国防建设事业。中央军事委员会领导并统

一指挥全国武装力量。

中国人民解放军实行中央军事委员会领导下的总参谋部、总政治部、总后勤部、总

装备部体制。总参谋部负责组织领导全国武装力量的军事建设，组织指挥全国武装

力量的军事行动。总政治部负责管理全军党的工作，组织进行政治工作。总后勤部

负责组织领导全军后勤工作。总装备部负责组织领导全军武器装备建设工作。

中华人民共和国武装力量，由中国人民解放军现役部队和预备役部队、中国人民武

装警察部队、民兵组成。中国人民解放军现役部队是国家的常备军，主要担负防卫

作战任务，必要时可以依照法律规定协助维护社会秩序；预备役部队平时按照规定

进行训练，必要时可以依照法律规定协助维护社会秩序，战时根据国家发布的动员

令转为现役部队。中国人民武装警察部队担负国家赋予的安全保卫任务，维护社会

秩序。民兵在军事机关的指挥下，担负战备勤务、防卫作战任务，协助维护社会秩

序。中国人民解放军由陆军、海军、空军和第二炮兵组成，在全国范围内设立７个

军区。

国家对国防科研生产实行统一领导和计划调控。国务院负责领导和管理国防科研生

产，管理国防经费和国防资产。中央军事委员会批准武装力量的武器装备体制和武

器装备发展规划、计划，协同国务院领导和管理国防科研生产，会同国务院管理国

防经费和国防资产。国家实行国家军事订货制度，保障武器装备和其他军用物资的

采购供应。国家对国防经费实行财政拨款制度，并根据国防建设和经济建设的需要

，确定国防资产的规模、结构和布局，调整和处分国防资产。

国务院和中央军事委员会共同领导动员准备和动员实施工作。国家在和平时期进行

动员准备，将人民武装动员、国民经济动员、人民防空、国防交通等方面的动员准


-----

备纳入国家总体发展规划和计划，逐步完善动员体制，建立战略物资储备制度。国

家重视开展国防教育，并将国防教育纳入国民经济和社会发展计划。

军事法制建设

中国重视军事法制建设，把加强军事法制建设作为实现国防现代化和军队正规化的

基本途径和重要保障。国家为适应新时期国防和军队建设的需要，确立了依法治军

方针，全面加强军事法制建设，保障和推动中国的国防和军队建设沿着法制化轨道

前进。

１９８２年后，中国在国家立法体制中进一步健全了军事立法体制，即全国人民代

表大会及其常务委员会制定国防和军队建设的法律；中央军事委员会制定军事法规

，或者与国务院联合制定军事行政法规；各总部、各军兵种、各军区制定军事规章

，或者与国务院有关部门联合制定军事行政规章。中央军事委员会发布了《中国人

民解放军立法程序暂行条例》，从立法规划、计划到法规起草、审议及发布实施，

作了明确规定，实现了军事立法的规范化、制度化。

１０多年来，中国军事立法取得了显著成绩。全国人民代表大会及其常务委员会制

定了《中华人民共和国国防法》、《中华人民共和国兵役法》、《中华人民共和国

军事设施保护法》、《中华人民共和国人民防空法》、《中华人民共和国预备役军

官法》、《中华人民共和国香港特别行政区驻军法》、《中国人民解放军现役军官

服役条例》、《中国人民解放军军官军衔条例》等１２件国防和军队建设的法律以

及有关法律问题的决定。国务院、中央军事委员会制定了《国防交通条例》、《征

兵工作条例》、《民兵工作条例》、《中国人民解放军现役士兵服役条例》等４０

多件军事行政法规。中央军事委员会制定了《中国人民解放军司令部条例》、《中

国人民解放军政治工作条例》、《中国人民解放军后勤条例》、《中国人民解放军

内务条令》、《中国人民解放军纪律条令》、《中国人民解放军队列条令》等７０

多件军事法规；各总部、各军兵种、各军区制定了１０００多件军事规章。中国在

国防和军队建设的主要方面基本实现了有法可依，初步建立起具有中国特色的军事

法体系。中国军事立法在坚持符合本国国情、军情的同时，还注重与中国在国际军

事领域已经加入的条约、协定相衔接，使军事法的内容与国际法准则和惯例相一致

。


-----

国家在国防建设领域，依法确立和健全了从中央到地方的国防领导体制和运行机制

，建立了兵役制度、国防动员制度、国防科研生产制度、国防资产管理制度、军事

设施保护制度以及军人抚恤优待制度等基本国防制度；在军队建设领域，依法确立

了军队的性质、任务和建设方针，实行了军人衔级制度、军事训练制度、司令部工

作制度、政治工作制度、后勤保障制度、警备勤务制度、军纪奖惩制度等一系列重

要制度，保障了国防活动和军队建设在法律的规范和调控下有序地进行。

为了保证国家有关法律、法规在军队的统一实施，国家在军队中建立了军事执法体

制、军事司法体制和军事法制机构、法律服务组织，构成了比较完整的军事法制组

织体制。军事执法体制，主要由负责军事法实施的军队各级领导机关和职能部门构

成，并在军级以上单位设立了履行执法监督检查职能的纪律检查机构和财务审计机

构，全国大、中城市驻军建立了纠察处理违纪军人、违章军车的警备勤务机构。军

事司法体制，由国家设在中国人民解放军、军区级单位、军级单位的三级军事法院

和军事检察院构成，它们与军队各级保卫部门分别行使法律规定的职权，依法办理

军队内部发生的刑事案件。军事法制机构，由中央军委法制局和各总部、各军兵种

、各军区编设的法制机构或人员组成，负责管理全军和军队各单位的法制工作。法

律服务组织，由军队各级设立的法律顾问处和法律咨询站组成，专门为军队各级领

导机关决策和部队官兵的涉法问题提供法律咨询和服务。１９９７年底，中国军队

中的法律顾问处达到２４０多个，律师１３６０多人，基层法律咨询站达到４２５

０多个，法律咨询员６５７００多人。

中国重视在军队开展法制宣传教育，把法制宣传教育纳入部队教育训练的轨道。为

增强官兵的法律素质，根据国家关于在全体公民中进行法制宣传教育的统一部署，

１９８６年至１９９５年中国军队连续开展了两个五年普法教育活动。１９９６年

初，中国军队开始第三个五年普法教育。

国防费

中国一贯注重合理的国防费规模，根据国防需要和财力可能，按照综合平衡的原则

安排国防费用。改革开放以来，为集中力量进行经济建设，中国政府严格控制国防

支出，国防费一直处于较低的水平。


-----

中国政府对国防费始终坚持严格控制、严格管理、严格监督的原则，建立健全了完

善的管理体制和法规制度。国防费预算、决算由全国人民代表大会审查批准。国家

和军队的审计机关对预算的执行过程实施严格审计监督。

按支出项目分，中国国防费包括：人员生活费，主要用于军官、士兵、文职干部和

职工的工资、伙食、服装等；活动维持费，主要用于部队训练、工程设施建设及维

护和日常消耗性支出；装备费，主要用于武器装备的科研、试验、采购、维修、运

输和储存等。按保障范围，既包括现役部队，又包括民兵、预备役部队，并负担了

相当一部分社会性支出，主要用于部分退役军官的供养，军队子弟学校、幼儿园，

培养军地两用人才，支援国家经济建设和参加抢险救灾。

勤俭建军、艰苦奋斗是中国军队的优良传统。中国军队除开展清仓利库和修旧利废

等群众性节约活动外，还从事一些力所能及的农副工业生产和经营活动，主要目的

是为了安排随军家属和子女就业，改善基层部队官兵的物质文化生活。

改革开放以来，中国政府坚持国防建设服从和服务于国家经济建设的大局，较大幅

度地减少了国防投入。１９７９年至１９９４年的１６年间，国防费的绝对值年平

均增长６．２２％，与同期全国商品零售价格总指数年平均上涨７．３％相比，实

际负增长１．０８％。

１９９５年至１９９７年，中国年度国防费分别为６３６．７２亿元、７２０．０

６亿元和８１２．５７亿元人民币。年度国防费的增加，主要是在社会经济发展和

城乡居民人均收入提高的情况下，保证军队人员的生活水平能够同步提高，官兵的

生存生活条件得到改善。即使这样，这期间的国防费占同期国家财政支出的比例也

在逐年下降，分别为９．３％、９．１％和８．８％。

１９９７年度中国国防费的构成为（图表１）：人员生活费２９１．６２亿元人民

币，占３５．８９％；活动维持费２６５．３６亿元人民币，占３２．６６％；装

备费２５５．５９亿元人民币，占３１．４５％。从上述构成可以看出，国防费的

大部分用于人员生活和正常活动维持，而且还负担了４０多亿元人民币的社会性支

出，约占年度国防费的５％。

表１．１９９７年度中国国防费构成（单位：亿元人民币）


-----

与世界其他一些国家国防支出相比，中国国防支出的总体水平是比较低的（图表２

）。

表２．１９９７年度中国国防费与部分国家国防费比较（单位：亿美元）

（注：按１９９７年中国国家外汇管理局公布的汇率：１美元＝８．２９元人民币

）

按人民币对美元的汇价计算，１９９７年中国国防费仅为９８亿美元，只相当于美

国的３．６７％、俄罗斯的６１．２５％、英国的２７．５３％、法国的２６．７

％、日本的２２．７９％、韩国的５６．９８％。

中国国防支出的低水平，不仅反映在国防费的绝对值上，而且也反映在国家国防负

担的相对比例上。近２０年来，中国国防费占国内生产总值的比例一直在下降（图

表３）。

表３．１９７８—１９９７年中国国防费占国内生产总值（ＧＤＰ）比例

与美国、俄罗斯、英国、法国、日本、韩国等国家相比，中国国防负担的相对比例

也是较低的（图表４）。

表４．１９９７年度中国与部分国家国防费占国内生产总值（ＧＤＰ）和财政支出

比例的比较

注：表内数据来源于上述国家公布的国防报告、财政报告或其他政府文告。

裁减军队员额

１９９７年９月，中国庄严宣布：中国军队在８０年代裁减军队员额１００万的基

础上，将在今后３年内再裁减军队员额５０万。这一单方面裁军的重大战略决策，

再一次充分表明了中国热爱和平的真诚愿望，是中国为推动进一步降低世界军备水

平，增强相互信任，促进人类和平事业所作的新的努力。


-----

中国奉行防御性的国防政策，中国军队的数量与规模始终控制在维护国家安全需要

和国力许可的范围以内。中华人民共和国成立后，分别在１９５５年和１９５８年

进行了两次较大规模的裁军行动。８０年代中期，中国军队建设的指导思想实行战

略性转变，从过去随时准备应付大规模侵略战争转变到和平时期建设的轨道上来，

军队的规模和体制编制也进行了相应的调整。１９８５年，中国政府决定单方面裁

减军队员额１００万，至１９９０年实际裁减１０３．９万人。１９９０年后，中

国人民解放军经过陆续调整，其规模进一步缩小。再次裁减员额５０万后，中国人

民解放军总规模将保持２５０万人。

与世界多数国家的做法不同，中国把边海防部队、兵役动员机构、农副业生产管理

机构、文职人员，以及预备役部队中的现役人员，均计入中国人民解放军的总定额

。

中国此次裁军，将在３年内按计划、分步骤、积极稳妥地进行。其中，陆军拟裁减

１９％，海军拟裁减１１．６％，空军拟裁减１１％。在精简员额的同时，将优化

结构，调整编组，理顺关系，走质量建军、科技强军的道路，把中国军队现代化建

设提高到一个新水平。

参加和支援国家建设

参加和支援国家建设，是宪法赋予中国军队的一项重要任务，也是人民军队全心全

意为人民服务根本宗旨的体现。８０年代以来，中国军队在完成教育训练任务的同

时，积极参加和支援国家经济建设，为国家的繁荣和发展作出了重要贡献。

———

腾让、开放军事设施。中国军队在大量裁减员额的同时，向地方腾让、开放部分军

事设施，支援国家建设事业。近２０年来，军队先后向地方开放１０１个机场，开

放和腾让２９个港口码头、３００多条铁路专用线、９０条通信线路、１０００多

个仓库、３００多万平方米军事用地及部分营房设施。

———

参加抢险救灾。中国幅员辽阔，每年都有局部地区发生自然灾害。每当灾情发生，

军队总是挺身而出，奋勇保护人民生命安全，抢救国家和人民财产。近２０年来，


-----

全军共参加抢险救灾１０万多次，出动官兵２３００多万人次，机械车辆１００多

万台次，飞机、舰艇１．５万余架（艘）次，抢救遇险群众１０００多万人，抢运

各类物资２亿多吨。

———
参加国家和地方的重点工程建设。中国军队参加了国家和地方的许多重点工程建设

，并担负急难险重任务。近２０年来，全军共投入４亿多个劳动日，出动机械车辆

２５００万台次，参加和支援重点工程项目１万多项。主要有铁路、高速公路和地

铁工程１５０多项，隧道、涵洞３４０多个，桥梁２６０多座，公路、铁路４１０

０多公里，码头５０多个，民用、军民合用机场４０多个，能源工程５００多项，

水利工程２０００余项，通信光缆工程２万余公里，经济技术开发区和旅游开发区

建设５００多个。

———
发挥人才技术优势，开展科技助民。军队院校和科研、医疗单位，以及专业技术部

队，采取转让科技成果、协助技术攻关、帮助培训人才等方法，积极为国家建设服

务。１０年来，军队以高新科技成果支援国家经济建设项目１０００多个，解决国

家急需的科研攻关项目１５０多个，向社会转让科技成果１万多项，培训各类科技

人员近百万人，帮助地方企业技术改造９００多项，使３２０家面临困境的企业扭

亏为盈。

———

支援农业和扶贫开发工作。中国是一个农业大国，农业始终是国民经济的基础。为

了支持农业发展，近１０年来，军队疏通河道５００多条，修筑水渠、堤坝２０多

万公里，兴修水库上千座，开荒造田和平整土地２００多万公顷，为农业丰产打下

了基础。驻贫困地区的部队，大力帮助当地群众发展生产，累计建立扶贫帮困点２

．３万个，扶助近百万人口脱贫致富，军队集中力量支援了沂蒙山、太行山等２０

个重点地区的扶贫开发，帮助贫困地区创办乡镇企业３５００多家，实施科技扶贫

项目１．２万余个，培训农业科技人员４５０多万人次。各级医疗机构和驻军医院

，向贫困地区累计派出医疗队８６０队次，对口扶持乡镇医院８１００多所，支援

医疗设备价值２０００多万元，义务培训医务人员２万多人。


-----

———
参加社会公益事业建设。近１０年来，军队先后投入１亿多个劳动日，帮助修桥补

路、整治美化环境、修建供水供气供电工程等公益建设事业，共达１０万余项，植

树４亿多株。向希望工程捐款４１５７．５５万元，捐赠各类物资价值１１００多

万元，援建各类“希望小学”６９７所，直接帮助１１．５万多名失学儿童重返校园

。

———
培养军地两用人才。中国军队注重为国家经济建设事业造就和输送合格人才。根据

国家经济建设的需要和官兵的愿望，《中国人民解放军内务条令》专门规定每周六

可用于集体组织两用人才培训和科学文化学习。自８０年代初中国军队开始有组织

地开展培养军地两用人才工作以来，全军共有近百万名军官通过在职学习获得大专

以上学历；８５％以上的士兵在服役期间接受了多种民用技术培训，其中近半数获

得技术等级证书。他们在退出现役后，成为加强国家经济建设和促进社会全面进步

的一支重要力量。

驻军香港

１９９７年７月１日，中国政府恢复对香港行使主权，中国人民解放军驻香港部队

开始担负香港特别行政区的防务。中国人民解放军驻香港部队进驻香港，是中国政

府恢复对香港行使主权的重要标志，是维护国家主权和安全，保持香港长期繁荣稳

定的重要保证。

中国人民解放军进驻香港，严格遵循了法律规定。１９９０年４月，第七届全国人

民代表大会第三次会议通过的《中华人民共和国香港特别行政区基本法》，明确规

定中央人民政府负责管理香港特别行政区的防务，并派部队进驻香港。１９９６年

１２月，第八届全国人民代表大会常务委员会第二十三次会议通过《中华人民共和

国香港特别行政区驻军法》。１９９７年７月１日，该法正式施行。香港驻军法规

定，香港驻军不干预香港特别行政区的地方事务；香港驻军的任务是，担负防卫勤

务，管理军事设施，办理有关的涉外军事事宜，确保香港的安全稳定；香港驻军的

费用由中央人民政府负担；香港驻军实行人员轮换制度。香港驻军法还对驻军人员

的义务与纪律以及司法管辖等问题作了规定。这就从根本上保障了香港驻军依法履

行防务职责。


-----

中国人民解放军驻香港部队由陆军、海军和空军部队组成，隶属中华人民共和国中

央军事委员会领导。驻香港部队遂行防务，必须遵守全国性的法律和香港特别行政

区的法律，执行中国人民解放军现行的条令条例和规章制度。

中国人民解放军驻香港部队进驻香港之后，严格遵守香港基本法和香港驻军法，坚

持依法履行防务职责，积极组织部队训练，加强部队正规化建设，学习香港的有关

法律，使官兵熟悉香港的社会情况。按照香港驻军法的规定，与香港特区政府建立

了工作联系，向香港社会开放了昂船洲、赤柱两处军事营地，供香港同胞参观，增

强了香港市民对驻香港部队的了解和信任。

中国人民解放军驻香港部队履行香港防务职责，是一项长期的任务。驻香港部队将

始终遵循“一国两制”的方针，严格遵守香港基本法和香港驻军法，为确保香港的长

期繁荣稳定作出贡献。

四、国际安全合作

中国作为联合国安理会常任理事国和亚太大国，高度重视并积极参与国际安全合作

，坚持原则、信守承诺、以诚相待、注重友谊、发展合作。近年来，中国在相互平

等、互利互惠的基础上，积极开展与外国军队之间的交流。中国还积极参与亚太地

区的多边及双边安全对话与合作，以及联合国维持和平行动，为维护世界和地区的

和平发挥应有作用。

对外军事交往

对外军事交往是中国总体外交的一个重要组成部分，服从和服务于国防和军队现代

化建设。中国坚持在和平共处五项原则基础上，独立自主地处理对外军事关系，开

展军事交流与合作。中国在对外军事交往中，一贯主张互相尊重、增进了解、发展

友谊、互利合作。中国军队积极参与多边军事外交活动，充分发挥中国军队在处理

国际军事事务中的积极作用。

中国积极开展全方位、多层次的军事外交。目前中国军队已同世界上１００多个国

家的军队建立了联系，在９０多个驻外使馆中设立了武官处，在中国设立武官处的


-----

国家已达６０多个。近２０年来，中国派出了１３００多个军事代表团组访问了８

０多个国家，其中军队高级官员率团出访１８０多批。来访的外国军队代表团组２

１００多个，数万人次，其中外国的国防部长、三军总司令、总参谋长等高级代表

团占一半以上。

中国始终把发展同周边国家的军事交往置于突出地位，遵循睦邻友好、互利合作、

长期稳定的方针，与周边国家军队开展了大量有益的交往，特别是高层交往。仅１

９９６年、１９９７年两年，中国军队就派出１００余批代表团相继访问了周边大

多数国家，同时接待了周边国家的军事代表团１３０余批。中国特别注重与发展中

国家的友好军事交流与合作，曾先后向７０多个国家提供人员培训、装备器材、医

疗卫生等方面的援助。１９７３年以来，为发展中国家军队培训各级指挥和专业技

术人员近万名，向发展中国家派出专家８０００多名。中国积极发展与美国、欧洲

等西方国家的军事关系，从维护世界和平和各国人民的根本利益出发，本着加强对

话、减少分歧的原则，陆续恢复和改善了中国军队与上述国家军队的关系，加深了

相互了解。

９０年代以来，中国海军舰艇编队出访了近２０个国家。其中，中国海军两支舰艇

编队于１９９７年３月至５月分别对美国、墨西哥、智利、秘鲁以及泰国、菲律宾

、马来西亚进行了友好访问，增进了中国军队与上述国家军队和人民的友谊。

中国军队在对外交往中，注重开展专业技术交流，在科研、学术、军事教育、军队

管理、文化体育、医疗卫生等许多领域同世界各国军队进行了广泛的交流与合作。

中国军队积极活跃的对外军事交往，促进了中国军队同世界各国军队的相互了解和

信任。走向国际社会的中国军队向世界展示了中国军队文明之师、和平之师的形象

，在维护世界和地区和平中作出了应有的贡献。

建立信任措施

国家间建立信任是维护安全的有效途径，中国高度重视并积极推动建立信任措施合

作。近年来，中国与有关邻国达成了一些边境地区建立信任措施和边境裁军协定，

这是中国致力于国家关系的发展和地区和平稳定的重要举措。这些协定反映了中国

所积极倡导的新型安全观念，体现了一些对亚太安全对话与合作具有普遍意义的原


-----

则和精神，包括：相互同等安全；通过建立相互信任和对话合作谋求安全，安全合

作不干涉别国内政、不针对第三国；军事力量不得威胁或损害他国的安全与稳定；

实行和坚持防御性国防政策；在双边基础上，在边境和争议地区采取适宜的信任措

施；军事力量友好交往等。

１９９６年４月，中国与俄罗斯、哈萨克斯坦、吉尔吉斯斯坦、塔吉克斯坦签署《

关于在边境地区加强军事领域信任的协定》，规定：部署在边境地区的军事力量互

不进攻对方；不进行针对对方的军事演习；限制军事演习规模、范围和次数；相互

通报边界线两侧各１００公里区域内的重要军事活动；邀请对方观察实兵演习；预

防危险军事活动；加强双方边境地区军队之间的友好交往等。

１９９６年１１月，中国与印度签署《关于在边境实际控制线地区军事领域建立信

任措施的协定》，规定：不进行威胁对方或损害边境地区和平、安宁与稳定的任何

军事活动；在边界问题最终解决前，严格尊重和遵守中印边境地区的实际控制线，

任何一方的活动不得超过实际控制线；按共同商定的最高限额裁减或限制部署在实

际控制线地区共同商定的地理范围内的陆军、边防部队、准军事部队，以及其他双

方同意的武装力量和部分武器装备；不在实际控制线附近地区举行针对对方的军事

演习，限制军事演习规模，通报实际控制线附近地区一定规模的军事演习；防止发

生军用飞行器飞越实际控制线的侵犯事件；防止实际控制线地区危险军事活动；加

强实际控制线附近地区双方军事人员和机构的交往与合作等。

此外，１９９４年，中国与俄罗斯签署《关于预防危险军事活动的协定》，《中华

人民共和国主席和俄罗斯联邦总统关于互不首先使用核武器和互不将战略核武器瞄

准对方的联合声明》。１９９８年１月，中国与美国签署《关于建立加强海上军事

安全磋商机制的协定》。同年６月，中国国家主席江泽民与美国总统克林顿宣布，

双方决定，不把各自控制下的战略核武器瞄准对方。中国还与俄罗斯、美国建立了

国家元首间直通保密电话联系。

地区安全合作

中国支持在平等参与、协商一致、求同存异、循序渐进基础上，开展多层次、多渠

道、多形式的地区安全对话与合作。中国参加了东盟地区论坛（ＡＲＦ）、亚洲相


-----

互协作与建立信任措施会议（ＣＩＣＡ）、亚太安全合作理事会（ＣＳＣＡＰ）和

东北亚合作对话会（ＮＥＡＣＤ）等活动，主张通过这些政府和民间讨论安全问题

的重要渠道，增进各国相互了解与信任，促进地区和平与稳定。

中国参加了历届东盟地区论坛外长会议和高官会，中国外交与国防代表参加了论坛

框架内的建立信任措施、维和、海上搜救、抢险救灾、预防性外交、不扩散、指导

原则等各类官方和非官方会议。中国还于１９９６年在北京与菲律宾联合承办了建

立信任措施会议，其间邀请各国代表参观了中国军事单位和军事表演，会议取得了

圆满成功。中国支持东盟地区论坛在建立信任措施领域创造性的探索，并提出了一

系列建设性的建议和主张，如倡导军事医学、军事法学和军转民多边合作，鼓励高

层军事互访、军舰互访和人员交流，支持抢险救灾合作以及海上航行安全、海洋环

保合作等。中国还每年向论坛提交国防政策声明和其他相关文件。

中国一直积极参与哈萨克斯坦倡导的亚洲相互协作与建立信任措施会议进程，认为

会议宗旨与中国的亚洲安全目标基本一致，主张会议在充分考虑亚洲地区特殊性和

多样性的基础上稳步发展。中国于１９９６年正式加入亚太安全合作理事会，并于

１９９７年成立亚太安全合作理事会中国委员会，中国委员会一直认真参与理事会

的活动。自１９９３年东北亚合作对话会成立以来，中国参加了历次会议，并于１

９９６年在北京主办了第四次大会，中国还与其他成员一道，推动对话会就东北亚

国家合作指导原则达成一致。

中国与美国、俄罗斯、日本、法国、加拿大、澳大利亚等国，就共同关心的问题开

展了不同形式的安全或防务磋商。中国国防部和其他有关部门的官员及学者，日益

广泛和深入地参与关于亚太安全的各类研讨和相关活动，增进了中国与有关国家间

的了解与信任，体现了中国维护亚太持久和平的积极意愿和努力。

参与联合国维持和平行动

中国作为联合国安理会常任理事国，一贯致力于维护国际和平与安全，重视并支持

联合国在联合国宪章精神指导下，为维护国际和平与安全发挥其应有的作用。为使

联合国维和行动取得成功并健康发展，中国认为应该确立和遵循以下指导原则：

———遵循联合国宪章的宗旨和原则，特别是尊重国家主权和不干涉内政的原则。


-----

———

坚持以斡旋、调解、谈判等和平手段解决争端，不应该动辄采取强制性行动。即使

是人道主义行动，也不应诉诸军事手段。

———
反对实行双重标准，不能把个别或少数国家的政策主张强加给联合国安理会。不能

允许少数国家假联合国之名，行军事干涉之实。

———
采取维和行动，要遵循事先征得当事国的同意、严守中立、除自卫外不得使用武力

等被历史证明是行之有效的一系列原则。

———

坚持实事求是，量力而行。条件不成熟时不应实施维和行动，更不应该使之成为冲

突一方，偏离维和的根本方向。

中国本着上述精神参与了联合国维持和平行动方面的活动。自１９９０年首次向联

合国维和行动派遣军事观察员以来，中国已先后向“联合国中东停战监督组织”（Ｕ

ＮＴＳＯ）、“联合国伊拉克—

科威特观察团”（ＵＮＩＫＯＭ）、“联合国柬埔寨临时权力机构”（ＵＮＴＡＣ）

、“联合国西撒哈拉公民投票特派团”（ＭＩＮＵＲＳＯ）、“联合国莫桑比克行动”

（ＯＮＵＭＯＺ）和“联合国利比里亚观察团”（ＵＮＯＭＩＬ）等６项联合国维和

行动，派出军事观察员３２批４３７人次。

１９９２年，中国政府派遣工程兵部队参加联合国驻柬埔寨临时权力机构的维持和

平行动。中国政府分两批共派遣８００名赴柬维和官兵，在１８个月内完成了机场

、公路、桥梁等多项工程建设和维修任务，其中修复和扩建机场４个，修复公路４

条共６４０公里，新架设或修复桥梁４７座，并完成了其他大量的勤务工程，为保

障联柬维和部队行动的顺利实施作出了贡献。

目前中国仍有３２名军事观察员分别在“联合国中东停战监督组织”、“联合国伊拉

克—

科威特观察团”、“联合国西撒哈拉公民投票特派团”３个维和任务区执行任务。１


-----

９９７年５月，中国政府决定原则上参加联合国维和待命安排，并将在适当时候向

联合国维和行动提供军事观察员、民事警察和工程、医疗、运输等后勤保障分队。

中国派出参加联合国维和行动的人员认真履行了所承担的职责，有的还献出了宝贵

的生命，为维护世界和平作出了贡献。今后，中国仍将以积极务实的态度继续参加

联合国维和领域的活动。

五、军控与裁军

随着冷战结束，国际安全形势趋于缓和，国际军控与裁军取得较大进展：《关于禁

止发展、生产、储存和使用化学武器及销毁此种武器的公约》（《禁止化学武器公

约》）于１９９３年１月达成，并于１９９７年４月生效；《不扩散核武器条约》

于１９９５年５月实现无限期延长；《全面禁止核试验条约》于１９９６年９月在

纽约联合国总部开放供签署；世界无核区范围不断扩大；《禁止或限制使用某些可

被认为具有过分伤害力或滥杀滥伤作用的特定常规武器公约》（《特定常规武器公

约》）“激光致盲武器议定书”以及新的“地雷议定书”分别于１９９５年１０月和１

９９６年５月达成；１９９７年６月国际原子能机构通过了旨在加强保障监督有效

性的议定书。

然而，裁军领域仍面临亟待解决的问题。美、俄两国仍保留着庞大的核武库，少数

军事强国仍然坚持冷战思维和核威慑政策，大力发展高精尖武器，特别是先进的导

弹防御系统。１９９８年５月，由印度，随后由巴基斯坦进行的核试验，对国际防

扩散努力造成沉重打击，也对地区乃至世界和平与稳定产生了严重影响。

中国政府高度重视军控与裁军工作，并将其作为总体外交及国防政策的重要组成部

分。中国政府主张，国际社会应促进公正、合理、全面、均衡的军控与裁军；裁军

的目的是增进而不是减损各国的安全；应加强国际军控条约的普遍性；继续通过具

有普遍代表性的多边谈判机制谈判缔结新条约；拥有最大、最先进常规和核武库的

国家应继续履行其对裁军负有的特殊责任；应防止少数国家在凭借其先进军事科技

和经济实力谋求绝对安全和军事优势的同时，将裁军目标引向广大发展中国家，剥

夺其正当的自卫权利和手段；应全面整顿和改造现有歧视性和排他性的出口控制制

度和安排，在普遍参与的基础上，谈判制定公平合理的国际防扩散制度。


-----

中国积极参加多边军控与裁军谈判及相关国际会议。１９９７年４月，中国与俄罗

斯、哈萨克斯坦、吉尔吉斯斯坦和塔吉克斯坦签署《关于在边境地区相互裁减军事

力量的协定》，规定：将中国与四国边境地区的军事力量裁减到与睦邻友好关系相

适应的最低水平，使其只具有防御性，互不使用武力或以武力相威胁，不谋求单方

面军事优势；裁减和限制部署在边界线两侧各１００公里区域内的陆军、空军、防

空军航空兵的人员和主要种类的武器装备，并为其及边防部队的人员和武器装备规

定最高限额；在上述区域内不部署海军江河作战舰艇；确定裁减方式和期限；交换

边境地区军事力量的有关资料；对执行协定情况进行监督核查等。中国还与许多国

家建立了双边军控磋商机制。中国签署或批准了几乎所有的多边军控条约，并忠实

地履行条约义务，为推动国际军控与裁军事业的发展作出了积极贡献。

核武器问题

中国作为核武器国家，积极支持和参与防止核扩散的国际努力，推动核裁军进程，

致力于在全球范围内最终实现全面禁止和彻底销毁核武器的目标。

中国一贯主张全面禁止和彻底销毁核武器。１９９６年，中国在第五十一届联大明

确提出核裁军五点主张：第一，核大国放弃核威慑政策，拥有最大核武库的国家继

续大幅度削减其核武器；第二，所有核武器国家都承担在任何时候和任何情况下不

首先使用核武器的义务，都承诺无条件地不对无核武器国家和无核武器区使用或威

胁使用核武器，并尽早就此缔结国际法律文件；第三，所有在国外部署核武器的国

家都将这些武器全部撤回本国，所有核武器国家都承诺支持建立无核武器区的主张

，尊重无核武器区的地位，并承担相应的义务；第四，各国不发展、不部署外空武

器系统和破坏战略安全与稳定的导弹防御系统；第五，各国谈判缔结关于全面禁止

和彻底销毁核武器的国际公约。

中国从拥有核武器的第一天起就郑重声明，在任何时候、任何情况下都不首先使用

核武器，此后又无条件承诺不对无核武器国家和无核武器区使用或威胁使用核武器

。中国积极支持有关国家在自愿基础上建立无核区的努力，并已签署和批准了《拉

美及加勒比禁止核武器条约》、《南太无核区条约》以及《非洲无核武器区条约》

相关议定书。１９９５年４月，中国发表国家声明，重申无条件向无核武器国家和

无核武器区提供消极安全保证的承诺，并首次承诺提供积极安全保证。


-----

中国于１９９２年３月加入《不扩散核武器条约》，忠实履行了不扩散核武器的国

际义务，并为条约的无限期延长作出了贡献。中国自始至终参加了《全面禁止核试

验条约》的谈判，并于１９９６年９月２４日条约开放签署当日签署了该条约。中

国支持尽早缔结一项“禁止生产核武器用裂变材料公约”（“禁产公约”）。为此，中

美两国外长曾于１９９４年１０月发表联合声明，表示愿意共同努力，推动尽早达

成一项多边、非歧视性和可有效核查的“禁产公约”。１９９７年４月，中国与美、

俄、英、法四个核武器国家发表声明，重申五国关于支持在香农报告所载授权的基

础上尽早谈判缔结“禁产公约”的立场。中国支持国际原子能机构通过的旨在加强现

有保障监督体系有效性的计划（“９３＋２计划”），并承诺在自愿交保的基础上，

在适当时候与国际原子能机构谈判签署具有法律约束力的文件，采取与中国根据《

不扩散核武器条约》第一条所承担义务相适应的措施。

随着国际形势的缓和以及大国关系的不断改善，中国认为核武器国家之间承诺互不

首先使用核武器的条件已经成熟。因此，中国于１９９４年１月正式向美、俄、英

、法四国提出了《互不首先使用核武器条约》草案，并建议五个核国家尽早就此进

行磋商。中国认为，缔结这样一个条约将有利于增进核武器国家间的相互信任，进

一步减少核战争的危险。在积极推动谈判缔结多边条约的同时，中国还积极谋求与

其他核国家在双边基础上相互承诺不首先使用核武器。目前，中俄已相互作出了不

首先使用核武器的保证。

化学武器和生物武器问题

中国政府一贯主张全面禁止和彻底销毁化学武器。中国于１９９３年１月签署了《

禁止化学武器公约》，１９９６年１２月批准该公约并于１９９７年４月２５日交

存公约批准书，从而成为公约的原始缔约国。中国支持公约的宗旨和目标，主张应

尽快根据公约有关规定销毁化学武器及其生产设施；同时认为，公约应增进各国在

化学领域的经贸与科技交流，使化工技术真正造福于人类。

中国积极认真履行了《禁止化学武器公约》规定的各项义务，按时并完整地递交了

初始宣布和年度宣布，接受了公约组织的多次核查，并参加了公约组织的各次执行

理事会和两次缔约国大会。


-----

中国在历史上曾是化学武器的受害者，在领土上至今还遗留着侵华日军遗弃的大量

化学武器，这些化学武器仍在危害当地人民的生命安全和生存环境。为此，中国要

求在别国遗弃化学武器的国家按公约规定尽快干净彻底地销毁遗弃化武。

中国主张全面禁止和彻底销毁生物武器，既反对任何国家发展、生产、研制和储存

生物武器，也反对任何国家以任何方式扩散此种武器及其技术。中国于１９８４年

１１月参加了《禁止发展、生产和储存细菌（生物）及毒素武器和销毁此种武器的

公约》（《禁止生物武器公约》）。作为公约缔约国，中国认真、全面地履行了自

己所承担的义务。１９８７年以来，中国一直按公约审议会的决定，逐年向联合国

报告与《禁止生物武器公约》有关的建立信任措施方面的资料和情况。

中国在历史上也曾深受生物武器之害。中国支持全面加强《禁止生物武器公约》有

效性的工作，积极参加了于１９９４年设立的公约缔约国特设工作组有关制定《公

约》议定书的工作，并为议定书的谈判取得进展作出了贡献。中国认为，鉴于核查

机制所涉问题的复杂性，各国应以实事求是的态度，探寻有效、可行的核查措施，

并制定具体措施防止滥用核查，保护缔约国正当的商业和安全机密。中国认为，在

加强公约核查机制的同时，还应加强缔约国为和平目的进行的生物技术国际合作与

交流。

外空非武器化问题

外层空间属于全人类，应完全用于和平目的，造福于人类。为此，中国主张全面禁

止和彻底销毁外空武器。反对发展反卫星武器。中国主张，国际社会，特别是拥有

空间能力的大国，应采取切实行动防止外空武器化：全面禁止一切类型的外空武器

，包括反导弹和反卫星武器，实现外空非武器化；禁止在外空、从外空或向外空使

用武力或进行敌对行动；所有国家都承诺不试验、生产或部署外空武器，也不利用

外空谋求地面上的战略优势，如利用在外空部署地面反导系统的重要组成部分来研

制、发展战略防御武器；尽早谈判缔结包括上述内容的具有法律约束力的国际协定

。

自８０年代初起，中国就作为联大有关外空非武器化决议的联合提案国，推动在日

内瓦裁军谈判会议等多边机制中就此展开谈判。在裁军谈判会议外空特委会成立之


-----

初，中国即向其递交了《中国关于防止外空军备竞赛的立场文件》（ＣＤ／５７９

）。中国的立场得到了许多国家的支持。

杀伤人员地雷问题

中国历来十分重视杀伤人员地雷误伤平民的问题，支持对杀伤人员地雷的使用和转

让实行适当、合理的限制，分阶段地实现全面禁止杀伤人员地雷的最终目标。同时

，中国政府认为，在处理杀伤人员地雷问题时，应兼顾人道主义关切和主权国家正

当防卫需要两个方面。各国根据联合国宪章的宗旨和原则，以合法的军事手段，包

括使用杀伤人员地雷，保护本国人民的安全，这本身就是人道主义的重要组成部分

。

中国是一个有着漫长陆地边界的国家，在找到杀伤人员地雷替代办法并形成安全防

御能力以前，中国不得不保留在本国领土上使用杀伤人员地雷的权利。中国在合法

条件下使用杀伤人员地雷，完全是为了防止外来军事干涉和侵略，维护国家统一与

领土完整，保障人民安居乐业。这是中国正当安全防卫的需要，也符合联合国宪章

关于自卫权利的规定。

中国军队一向严格控制杀伤人员地雷的使用，禁止滥布滥用，同时还对杀伤人员地

雷替代办法进行研究。中国积极参加了《特定常规武器公约》“地雷议定书”的修订

工作和联合国裁军谈判会议处理杀伤人员地雷问题的讨论。

中国政府对地雷出口历来采取十分慎重和负责的态度。１９９４年１２月，中国参

加了联合国大会关于暂停出口杀伤人员地雷决议的协商。１９９６年４月，中国政

府郑重宣布暂停出口不符合《特定常规武器公约》新修订的“地雷议定书”所规定的

杀伤人员地雷。

中国政府认为，扫除已部署的杀伤人员地雷是解决杀伤人员地雷威胁平民安全问题

的一个重要组成部分。为此，中国政府在战后扫雷问题上一贯持认真负责的态度，

并做了大量富有成效的工作。１９９２年初至１９９４年底，中国军队在云南省和

广西壮族自治区边境地区，组织实施了第一次大规模扫雷行动，共排除各种地雷和

爆炸物１００多万枚，销毁废旧弹药及爆炸物品近２００吨，完成扫雷面积１０８

平方公里，打通边贸通道、口岸１７０多个；恢复弃耕地、弃荒牧场和山林３万多


-----

公顷。１９９７年底，中国政府再次决定，从１９９７年１１月至１９９９年１２

月，在上述地区实施第二次大规模扫雷行动。

中国政府一直尽力援助受杀伤人员地雷危害的国家，向柬埔寨等一些遭受雷害的国

家提供探雷器材，帮助培训扫雷人员，为有关国家顺利进行战后重建作出了贡献。

１９９７年１１月，中国国家主席江泽民宣布，中国将继续积极支持国际扫雷努力

和国际扫雷合作，包括向国际扫雷基金提供捐赠，在扫雷培训、技术和设备方面提

供援助。１９９７年１２月２日至４日，中国政府派观察员出席了在渥太华举行的

《关于禁止使用、储存、生产和转让杀伤人员地雷及销毁此种地雷的公约》签约大

会，并参加了同时举行的关于国际扫雷问题的圆桌会议。

敏感物资和军事装备出口控制

中国政府赞成采取必要措施对敏感物资和技术的转让实行有效国际监督，防止大规

模杀伤性武器及其运载工具的扩散。但同时认为，国际防扩散努力应遵循公平、合

理的原则，反对实行双重标准，不能以防扩散为名损害其他国家的主权，不能影响

正常的国际经贸、科技合作与交流。

中国高度重视敏感物资的出口管制问题，参照国际惯例，对敏感物资的转让实施了

一系列管理措施。

在核出口方面，作为《不扩散核武器条约》缔约国，中国奉行不主张、不鼓励、不

从事核武器扩散和不帮助别国发展核武器的政策，制定了核出口三原则，即：仅用

于和平目的；接受国际原子能机构的保障监督；未经中方同意不得转让第三方。

１９９１年１１月，中国政府宣布，在连续的基础上向国际原子能机构通报中国向

无核国家出口或从无核国家进口大于１有效公斤核材料的情况。１９９３年７月，

中国正式承诺，在自愿的基础上向国际原子能机构通报所有核材料、核设备及相关

非核材料的进出口情况。１９９６年５月，中国作出了不向未接受国际原子能机构

保障监督的核设施提供帮助的承诺，包括不对其进行核出口，不与其进行人员与技

术的交流与合作。１９９７年５月，中国政府颁布了《关于严格执行中国核出口政

策有关问题的通知》，明确规定，中国出口的核材料、核设备及其相关技术，均不

得提供给或用于未接受国际原子能机构保障监督的核设施。通知还对与核有关的双


-----

用途物项的出口作出了严格规定。１９９７年５月，中国派观察员出席了作为国际

核出口控制机制之一的“桑戈委员会”会议，并于同年１０月正式加入了该委员会。

１９９７年９月，中国政府颁布了《中华人民共和国核出口管制条例》，规定，不

得向未接受保障监督的核设施提供任何帮助；核出口由国务院指定的单位专营，任

何其他单位或个人均不得经营；国家对核出口实行许可证制度。同时，参考国际上

普遍接受的核出口控制清单制定了中国的《核出口管制清单》。中国已于１９９８

年６月１０日颁布了《核两用品及相关技术出口管制条例》，对与核有关的两用品

及相关技术的出口实行严格控制。

在化学品出口管理方面，中国政府一直持慎重、负责的态度。中国不出口以制造化

学武器为目的的化学品及技术和设备，支持根据《禁止化学武器公约》而进行的正

常国际化工合作和科学技术资料交换，反对任何与《公约》宗旨相冲突的出口管制

机制。

１９９０年９月，中国政府制定了关于严格控制化学品及其生产技术和设备的出口

管理措施。１９９５年１２月，中国政府颁布了《中华人民共和国监控化学品管理

条例》，并根据该条例于１９９６年６月发布了《各类监控化学品名录》和《条例

实施细则》，规定有关化学品进出口由国务院化学工业主管部门统一归口管理，指

定专门的公司经营。

在军事装备及其技术转让问题上，中国尊重各国根据联合国宪章的原则所享有的单

独或集体自卫权利以及为此目的获取武器的权利，同时也关切武器装备的过度积累

对世界安全和地区稳定所产生的不利影响。

中国在较长时间里没有武器装备的出口贸易，直到８０年代初才开始出口，且数量

十分有限。自８０年代中期以来，中国的军品出口一直呈递减趋势，合同成交额１

９８７年为２０多亿美元，而１９９１年仅６亿美元，此后几年也没有超过１０亿

美元。从１９９３年至１９９７年联合国公布的各国常规武器进出口登记情况来看

，中国的常规武器出口与一些国家相比数量很小。

中国对常规军事装备及其技术转让实行严格管制，并遵循以下原则：武器出口必须

有助于接受国的正当防卫能力；不损害有关地区和世界的和平、安全与稳定；不利


-----

用军贸干涉接受国的内政。从１９９２年起中国参加了历次联合国常规武器转让登

记（图表５、图表６）。

表５． １９９２—１９９６年中国参加联合国常规武器转让登记出口情况

装备种类

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

总计

作战坦克


-----

97

121

82

51

3

354

装甲战车

2


-----

2

大口径火炮

166

20

18

204


-----

作战飞机

68

5

73

攻击直升机


-----

军舰

2

6

1


-----

5

14

导弹及发射架

24

20

18

106

168

表６． １９９２—１９９６年中国参加联合国常规武器转让登记进口情况


-----

装备种类

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

总计

作战坦克


-----

装甲战车


-----

大口径火炮

作战飞机


-----

26

22

48

攻击直升机


-----

军舰

1

1


-----

2

导弹及发射架

144

144

１９９７年１０月，中国政府颁布了《中华人民共和国军品出口管理条例》，规定

中国的武器出口实行许可证制度，境内一切军品转让均由政府授权的部门和经政府

批准注册的公司对外经营，这些部门和公司须严格按照政府批准的项目从事经营活

动。军品转让合同，需经政府有关主管部门批准后才能生效，重大武器的出口报国

务院、中央军委批准。


-----

中国对导弹转让历来持十分慎重和负责的态度。中国不是《导弹及其技术控制制度

》（ＭＴＣＲ）的成员国，没有参加这一制度的制定和修改，但基于在防扩散方面

的一贯立场和有关武器出口的原则，中国政府于１９９２年２月承诺遵守《导弹及

其技术控制制度》当时的准则和参数。１９９４年１０月，中方重申这一承诺，承

担了不出口内在性能至少达到３００公里射程和５００公斤有效载荷的地对地导弹

的义务。中国根据上述政策，对导弹及相关物项的出口实行严格、有效的控制，从

未做过违反承诺的事情。

中国在防扩散及军事装备转让方面所坚持的原则和做法，有助于推动国际军控与裁

军沿着健康的方向发展，也有利于维护世界和平和地区稳定。


-----

