Ministry of National Defense


# China's National Defense in the New Era

[Source： Xinhuanet Editor：Li Jiayao 2019-07-24 14:41:49](http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/home.htm)

**Contents**

Preface

I. International Security Situation

II. China’s Defensive National Defense Policy in the New Era

III. Fulfilling the Missions and Tasks of China’s Armed Forces in the New Era

IV. Reform in China’s National Defense and Armed Forces

V. Reasonable and Appropriate Defense Expenditure

VI. Actively Contributing to Building a Community with a Shared Future for Mankind

Closing Remarks

Appendices

Acronyms

**Preface**

Today, with their interests and security intertwined, people across the world are becoming members of a

community with a shared future. China is at a critical stage of completing the building of a moderately

prosperous society in all respects and embarking on the new journey of building a modernized socialist

country in an all-round way. Socialism with Chinese characteristics has entered a new era.

The Chinese government is issuing China’s _National Defense in the New Era to expound on China’s_

defensive national defense policy and explain the practice, purposes and significance of China’s efforts to

build a fortified national defense and a strong military, with a view to helping the international community

better understand China’s national defense.


-----

The world today is undergoing profound changes unseen in a century. As economic globalization, the

information society, and cultural diversification develop in an increasingly multi-polar world, peace,

development and win-win cooperation remain the irreversible trends of the times. Nonetheless, there are

prominent destabilizing factors and uncertainties in international security. The world is not yet a tranquil

place.

**The International Strategic Landscape Is Going Through Profound Changes**

As the realignment of international powers accelerates and the strength of emerging markets and

developing countries keeps growing, the configuration of strategic power is becoming more

balanced. The pursuit of peace, stability and development has become a universal aspiration of the

international community with forces for peace predominating over elements of war. However,

international security system and order are undermined by growing hegemonism, power politics,

unilateralism and constant regional conflicts and wars.

International strategic competition is on the rise. The US has adjusted its national security and

defense strategies, and adopted unilateral policies. It has provoked and intensified competition

among major countries, significantly increased its defense expenditure, pushed for additional

capacity in nuclear, outer space, cyber and missile defense, and undermined global strategic

stability. NATO has continued its enlargement, stepped up military deployment in Central and

Eastern Europe, and conducted frequent military exercises. Russia is strengthening its nuclear and

non-nuclear capabilities for strategic containment, and striving to safeguard its strategic security

space and interests. The European Union (EU) is accelerating its security and defense integration to

be more independent in its own security.

Global and regional security issues are on the increase. International arms control and disarmament

efforts have suffered setbacks, with growing signs of arms races. The non-proliferation of weapons

of mass destruction remains problematic. The international non-proliferation regime is compromised

by pragmatism and double standards, and hence faces new challenges. Extremism and terrorism

keep spreading. Non-traditional security threats involving cyber security, bio-security and piracy are

becoming more pronounced. The Iranian nuclear issue has taken an unexpected turn, and there is

no easy political solution to the Syrian issue. The security of individual countries is becoming

increasingly intertwined, interlinked and interactive. No country can respond alone or stand aloof.


-----

Asia-Pacific countries are increasingly aware that they are members of a community with shared

destiny. Addressing differences and disputes through dialogue and consultation has become a

preferred policy option for regional countries, making the region a stable part of the global

landscape. The Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) is forging a constructive partnership of

non-alliance and non-confrontation that targets no third party, expanding security and defense

cooperation and creating a new model for regional security cooperation. The China-ASEAN Defense

Ministers’ Informal Meeting and the ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM-Plus) play

positive roles in enhancing trust among regional countries through military exchanges and

cooperation. The situation of the South China Sea is generally stable and improving as regional

countries are properly managing risks and differences. Steady progress has been made in building

a coordinated counter-terrorism mechanism among the militaries of the regional countries. A

balanced, stable, open and inclusive Asian security architecture continues to develop.

As the world economic and strategic center continues to shift towards the Asia-Pacific, the region

has become a focus of major country competition, bringing uncertainties to regional security. The US

is strengthening its Asia-Pacific military alliances and reinforcing military deployment and

intervention, adding complexity to regional security. The deployment of the Terminal High Altitude

Area Defense (THAAD) system in the Republic of Korea (ROK) by the US has severely undermined

the regional strategic balance and the strategic security interests of regional countries. In an attempt

to circumvent the post-war mechanism, Japan has adjusted its military and security policies and

increased input accordingly, thus becoming more outward-looking in its military endeavors. Australia

continues to strengthen its military alliance with the US and its military engagement in the Asia
Pacific, seeking a bigger role in security affairs.

Regional hotspots and disputes are yet to be resolved. Despite positive progress, the Korean

Peninsula still faces uncertainty. South Asia is generally stable while conflicts between India and

Pakistan flare up from time to time. Political reconciliation and reconstruction in Afghanistan is

making progress in the face of difficulties. Problems still exist among regional countries, including

disputes over territorial and maritime rights and interests, as well as discord for ethnic and religious

reasons. Security hotspots rise from time to time in the region.

**China’s Security Risks and Challenges Should Not Be Overlooked**


-----

increase in China’s overall national strength, global influence, and resilience to risks. China is still in

an important period of strategic opportunity for development. Nevertheless, it also faces diverse and

complex security threats and challenges.

The fight against separatists is becoming more acute. The Taiwan authorities, led by the Democratic

Progressive Party (DPP), stubbornly stick to “Taiwan independence” and refuse to recognize the

_1992 Consensus, which embodies the one-China principle. They have gone further down the path of_

separatism by stepping up efforts to sever the connection with the mainland in favor of gradual

independence, pushing for de jure independence, intensifying hostility and confrontation, and

borrowing the strength of foreign influence. The “Taiwan independence” separatist forces and their

actions remain the gravest immediate threat to peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait and the

biggest barrier hindering the peaceful reunification of the country. External separatist forces for

“Tibet independence” and the creation of “East Turkistan” launch frequent actions, posing threats to

China’s national security and social stability.

China’s homeland security still faces threats. Land territorial disputes are yet to be completely

resolved. Disputes still exist over the territorial sovereignty of some islands and reefs, as well as

maritime demarcation. Countries from outside the region conduct frequent close-in reconnaissance

on China by air and sea, and illegally enter China’s territorial waters and the waters and airspace

near China’s islands and reefs, undermining China’s national security.

China’s overseas interests are endangered by immediate threats such as international and regional

turmoil, terrorism, and piracy. Chinese diplomatic missions, enterprises and personnel around the

world have been attacked on multiple occasions. Threats to outer space and cyber security loom

large and the threat of non-traditional security issues posed by natural disasters and major

epidemics is on the rise.

**Global Military Competition Is Intensifying**

Major countries around the world are readjusting their security and military strategies and military

organizational structures. They are developing new types of combat forces to seize the strategic

commanding heights in military competition. The US is engaging in technological and institutional

innovation in pursuit of absolute military superiority. Russia is advancing its New Look military


-----

structure of their military forces.

Driven by the new round of technological and industrial revolution, the application of cutting-edge

technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI), quantum information, big data, cloud computing and

the Internet of Things is gathering pace in the military field. International military competition is

undergoing historic changes. New and high-tech military technologies based on IT are developing

rapidly. There is a prevailing trend to develop long-range precision, intelligent, stealthy or unmanned

weaponry and equipment. War is evolving in form towards informationized warfare, and intelligent

warfare is on the horizon.

Great progress has been made in the Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA) with Chinese

characteristics. However, the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) has yet to complete the task of

mechanization, and is in urgent need of improving its informationization. China’s military security is

confronted by risks from technology surprise and growing technological generation gap. Greater

efforts have to be invested in military modernization to meet national security demands. The PLA still

lags far behind the world’s leading militaries.

**II. China’s Defensive National Defense Policy in the New Era**

The socialist system of China, the strategic decision to follow the path of peaceful development, the

independent foreign policy of peace, and the best of cultural traditions – considering peace and

harmony as fundamentals – determine that China will pursue a national defense policy that is

defensive in nature.

**Resolutely Safeguarding China’s Sovereignty, Security and Development Interests**

This is the fundamental goal of China’s national defense in the new era.

China’s national defense aims:

- to deter and resist aggression;

- to safeguard national political security, the people’s security and social stability;

- to oppose and contain “Taiwan independence”;


-----

creation of “East Turkistan”;

- to safeguard national sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and security;

- to safeguard China’s maritime rights and interests;

- to safeguard China’s security interests in outer space, electromagnetic space and cyberspace;

- to safeguard China’s overseas interests; and

- to support the sustainable development of the country.

China resolutely safeguards its national sovereignty and territorial integrity. The South China Sea

islands and Diaoyu Islands are inalienable parts of the Chinese territory. China exercises its national

sovereignty to build infrastructure and deploy necessary defensive capabilities on the islands and

reefs in the South China Sea, and to conduct patrols in the waters of Diaoyu Islands in the East

China Sea. China is committed to resolving related disputes through negotiations with those states

directly involved on the basis of respecting historical facts and international law. China continues to

work with regional countries to jointly maintain peace and stability. It firmly upholds freedom of

navigation and overflight by all countries in accordance with international law and safeguards the

security of sea lines of communication (SLOCs).

To solve the Taiwan question and achieve complete reunification of the country is in the fundamental

interests of the Chinese nation and essential to realizing national rejuvenation. China adheres to the

principles of “peaceful reunification”, and “one country, two systems”, promotes peaceful

development of cross-Strait relations, and advances peaceful reunification of the country.

Meanwhile, China resolutely opposes any attempts or actions to split the country and any foreign

interference to this end. China must be and will be reunited. China has the firm resolve and the

ability to safeguard national sovereignty and territorial integrity, and will never allow the secession of

any part of its territory by anyone, any organization or any political party by any means at any time.

We make no promise to renounce the use of force, and reserve the option of taking all necessary

measures. This is by no means targeted at our compatriots in Taiwan, but at the interference of

external forces and the very small number of “Taiwan independence” separatists and their activities.

The PLA will resolutely defeat anyone attempting to separate Taiwan from China and safeguard

ti l it t ll t


-----

This is the distinctive feature of China’s national defense in the new era.

Though a country may become strong, bellicosity will lead to its ruin. The Chinese nation has always

loved peace. Since the beginning of modern times, the Chinese people have suffered from

aggressions and wars, and have learned the value of peace and the pressing need for development.

Therefore, China will never inflict such sufferings on any other country. Since its founding 70 years

ago, the People’s Republic of China (PRC) has never started any war or conflict. Since the

introduction of reform and opening-up, China has been committed to promoting world peace, and

has voluntarily downsized the PLA by over 4 million troops. China has grown from a poor and weak

country to be the world’s second largest economy neither by receiving handouts from others nor by

engaging in military expansion or colonial plunder. Instead, it has developed through its people’s

hard work and its efforts to maintain peace. China has made every effort to create favorable

conditions for its development through maintaining world peace, and has equally endeavored to

promote world peace through its own development. China sincerely hopes that all countries will

choose the path of peaceful development and jointly prevent conflicts and wars.

China is committed to developing friendly cooperation with all countries on the basis of the Five

Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. It respects the rights of all peoples to independently choose

their own development path, and stands for the settlement of international disputes through equal

dialogue, negotiation and consultation. China is opposed to interference in the internal affairs of

others, abuse of the weak by the strong, and any attempt to impose one’s will on others. China

advocates partnerships rather than alliances and does not join any military bloc. It stands against

aggression and expansion, and opposes arbitrary use or threat of arms. The development of

China’s national defense aims to meet its rightful security needs and contribute to the growth of the

world’s peaceful forces. History proves and will continue to prove that China will never follow the

beaten track of big powers in seeking hegemony. No matter how it might develop, China will never

threaten any other country or seek any sphere of influence.

**Implementing the Military Strategic Guideline for a New Era**

This is the strategic guidance for China’s national defense in the new era.

The military strategic guideline for a new era adheres to the principles of defense, self-defense and


-----

containing and winning wars, and underscores the unity of strategic defense and offense at

operational and tactical levels.

Implementing the military strategic guideline for a new era, China’s armed forces strive to keep in

alignment with and contribute to the general strategies of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and

the country, adopt a holistic approach to national security, strengthen the awareness of potential

dangers, crises and wars, and actively adapt to the new landscape of strategic competition, the new

demands of national security, and new developments in modern warfare, so as to effectively fulfill

their tasks and missions in the new era.

To respond to the security threats facing the country, China’s armed forces take solid steps to

strengthen military preparedness and comprehensively enhance combat capabilities for the new

era. Efforts have been made to build the military strategy into a balanced and stable one for the

new era, which focuses on defense and coordinates multiple domains. Based on the idea that

China’s national defense is the responsibility of all Chinese people, China’s armed forces give full

play to the overall power of the people’s war by innovating in its strategies, tactics and measures.

China is always committed to a nuclear policy of no first use of nuclear weapons at any time and

under any circumstances, and not using or threatening to use nuclear weapons against non
nuclear-weapon states or nuclear-weapon-free zones unconditionally. China advocates the

ultimate complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. China does not

engage in any nuclear arms race with any other country and keeps its nuclear capabilities at the

minimum level required for national security. China pursues a nuclear strategy of self-defense,

the goal of which is to maintain national strategic security by deterring other countries from using

or threatening to use nuclear weapons against China.

**Continuing to Strengthen the Military in the Chinese Way**

This is the path forward for China’s national defense in the new era.

Building a fortified national defense and a strong military commensurate with the country’s

international standing and its security and development interests is a strategic task for China’s

socialist modernization. Drawing lessons from history, China strengthens its national defense and

military to provide security guarantee for its peaceful development.


-----

comprehensively implement Xi Jinping’s thinking on strengthening the military, thoroughly deliver on

Xi Jinping’s thinking on military strategy, continue to enhance the political loyalty of the armed

forces, strengthen them through reform and technology, run them in accordance with the law, and

focus on the capabilities to fight and win. Efforts will be made to advance the integrated development

of mechanization and informationization, speed up the development of intelligent military, create a

modernized military force structure with Chinese characteristics, improve and develop socialist

military institutions with Chinese features, and constantly enhance the capabilities to fulfill the

missions and tasks in the new era.

The strategic goals for the development of China’s national defense and military in the new era are:

- to generally achieve mechanization by the year 2020 with significantly enhanced informationization

and greatly improved strategic capabilities;

- to comprehensively advance the modernization of military theory, organizational structure, military

personnel, and weaponry and equipment in step with the modernization of the country and basically

complete the modernization of national defense and the military by 2035; and

- to fully transform the people’s armed forces into world-class forces by the mid-21st century.

**In the Service of Building of a Community with a Shared Future for Mankind**

This is the global significance of China’s national defense in the new era.

The dream of the Chinese people is closely connected with the dreams of peoples around the world.

Peace, stability and prosperity in China present opportunities and benefits to the rest of the world. A

strong military of China is a staunch force for world peace, stability and the building of a community

with a shared future for mankind.

China’s armed forces advocate common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security,

uphold justice while pursuing shared interests, and actively participate in the reform of global

security governance system. Efforts are made to deepen bilateral and multilateral security

cooperation, promote a coordinated, inclusive and complementary cooperation among security

mechanisms, and contribute to a security architecture featuring equality, mutual trust, fairness,

justice, joint contribution and shared benefits.


-----

responsibilities and obligations, and provide more public security goods to the international

community to the best of their capacity. They actively participate in the UN peacekeeping operations

(UNPKOs), vessel protection operations, and international efforts in humanitarian assistance and

disaster relief (HADR), strengthen international cooperation in arms control and non-proliferation,

play a constructive role in the political settlement of hotspot issues, jointly maintain the security of

international passages, and make concerted efforts to respond to global challenges such as

terrorism, cyber security and major natural disasters, thus making a positive contribution to building

a community with a shared future for mankind.

**III. Fulfilling the Missions and Tasks of China’s Armed Forces in the New Era**

In the new era, to meet the strategic demands of national security and development, China’s armed

forces firmly implement the missions and tasks entrusted by the CPC and the people. They

endeavor to provide strategic support for consolidating the leadership of the CPC and the socialist

system, safeguarding national sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity, protecting China’s overseas

interests, and promoting world peace and development.

**Safeguarding National Territorial Sovereignty and Maritime Rights and Interests**

China has a land border of more than 22,000 km and a coastline of over 18,000 km, China

surpasses most of countries in the number of neighboring countries, the length of land border,

and the complexity of maritime security. Therefore, it is a daunting task for China to safeguard its

territorial sovereignty, maritime rights and interests, and national unity.

China’s armed forces maintain a rigorous guard against encroachment, infiltration, sabotage or

harassment so as to safeguard border security and stability. China has signed border cooperation

agreements with 9 neighboring countries and set up border meeting mechanisms with 12 countries.

China’s armed forces have established mechanisms for exchanges with neighboring countries at

three levels: national defense ministry, Theater Commands (TCs), and border troops. They conduct

regular friendly mutual visits, working meetings, joint patrols and joint exercises targeting

transnational crime with their foreign counterparts. They work together with Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,

Russia and Tajikistan to implement the border disarmament treaty. They strive to promote stability

and security along the border with India, and take effective measures to create favorable conditions

for the peaceful resolution of the Donglang (Doklam) standoff. They enhance control along the


-----

border areas. Since 2012, China’s border troops have completed over 3,300 joint patrols and

conducted over 8,100 border meetings with their foreign counterparts. They have cleared mines

from 58 square kilometers of land, closed 25 square kilometers of landmine area, and disposed of

170,000 explosive devices such as landmines along the borders with Vietnam and Myanmar.

China’s armed forces defend important waters, islands and reefs in the East China Sea, the South

China Sea and the Yellow Sea, acquire full situation awareness of adjacent waters, conduct joint

rights protection and law enforcement operations, properly handle maritime and air situations, and

resolutely respond to security threats, infringements and provocations on the sea. Since 2012,

China’s armed forces have deployed vessels on over 4,600 maritime security patrols and 72,000

rights protection and law enforcement operations, and safeguarded maritime peace, stability and

order.

China’s armed forces conduct air defense, reconnaissance and early warning, monitor China’s

territorial air and peripheral air space, carry out alert patrols and combat takeoff, and effectively

respond to emergencies and threats to maintain order and security in the air.

Aiming at safeguarding national unity, China’s armed forces strengthen military preparedness with

emphasis on the sea. By sailing ships and flying aircraft around Taiwan, the armed forces send a

stern warning to the “Taiwan independence” separatist forces.

**Maintaining Combat Readiness**

Maintaining combat readiness is an important assurance of effective response to security threats and

fulfillment of tasks. The Central Military Commission (CMC) and the TCs’ joint operations commands

perform combat readiness duties strictly, and conduct regular inspections and drills to ensure combat

readiness at all times. Consistent efforts are made to improve the capabilities of joint operations

command to exercise reliable and efficient command over emergency responses, and to effectively

accomplish urgent, tough and dangerous tasks. In 2018, the CMC conducted surprise inspections

throughout the armed forces and organized readiness drills for the units, covering 21 provinces,

autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the central government, and parts of the East

China Sea and South China Sea.

The PLA and the People’s Armed Police Force (PAP) give greater priority to combat readiness. Efforts


-----

when required and effectively carrying out readiness (combat) duties.

**Carrying Out Military Training in Real Combat Conditions**

Military training is the basic practice of the armed forces in peacetime. China’s armed forces put

military training in an important position and take combat effectiveness as the sole and fundamental

criterion. In order to enhance realistic training, they optimize the policy framework and criteria in this

respect, establish and improve the relevant supervision system, conduct supervision on military

training for emergencies and combat across the services, implement the responsibility system for

training and readiness, and organize extensive contests and competitions to encourage officers and

soldiers to step up military training.

Military training in real combat conditions across the armed forces is in full swing. Since 2012,

China’s armed forces have carried out extensive mission-oriented training tailored to the specific

needs of different strategic directions and exercises of all services and arms, including 80 joint

exercises at and above brigade/division level.

The TCs have strengthened their leading role in joint training and organized serial joint exercises

codenamed the East, the South, the West, the North and the Central, to improve joint combat

capabilities.

The PLA Army (PLAA) has organized training competitions and conducted live exercises

codenamed Stride and Firepower. The PLA Navy (PLAN) has extended training to the far seas and

deployed the aircraft carrier task group for its first far seas combat exercise in the West Pacific. It

has organized naval parades in the South China Sea and the waters and airspace near Qingdao,

and conducted a series of live force-on-force exercises codenamed Mobility and systematic all
elements exercises. The PLA Air Force (PLAAF) has strengthened systematic and all-airspace

training based on operational plans. It has conducted combat patrols in the South China Sea and

security patrols in the East China Sea, and operated in the West Pacific. It has completed a series

of regular system-vs.-system exercises such as Red Sword. The PLA Rocket Force (PLARF) has

organized force-on-force evaluation-oriented training and training based on operational plans at

brigade and regiment levels, strengthened training for joint strikes, and completed regular exercises

such as Heavenly Sword. The PLA Strategic Support Force (PLASSF) has made active efforts to

integrate into the joint operations systems. It has carried out confrontational training in new domains


-----

striven to align itself with the joint operations systems, and conducted exercises such as Joint

_Logistics Mission 2018. The PAP has developed to meet the requirements of nationwide coverage,_

effective connectivity, all-area response and integrated functions, and conducted a series of

exercises including Guard.

**Safeguarding Interests in Major Security Fields**

Nuclear capability is the strategic cornerstone to safeguarding national sovereignty and

security. China’s armed forces strengthen the safety management of nuclear weapons and facilities,

maintain the appropriate level of readiness and enhance strategic deterrence capability to protect

national strategic security and maintain international strategic stability.

Outer space is a critical domain in international strategic competition. Outer space security provides

strategic assurance for national and social development. In the interest of the peaceful use of outer

space, China actively participates in international space cooperation, develops relevant technologies

and capabilities, advances holistic management of space-based information resources, strengthens

space situation awareness, safeguards space assets, and enhances the capacity to safely enter,

exit and openly use outer space.

Cyberspace is a key area for national security, economic growth and social development. Cyber

security remains a global challenge and poses a severe threat to China. China’s armed forces

accelerate the building of their cyberspace capabilities, develop cyber security and defense means,

and build cyber defense capabilities consistent with China’s international standing and its status as

a major cyber country. They reinforce national cyber border defense, and promptly detect and

counter network intrusions. They safeguard information and cyber security, and resolutely maintain

national cyber sovereignty, information security and social stability.

**Countering Terrorism and Maintaining Stability**

China firmly opposes all forms of terrorism and extremism. As mandated by law, China’s armed

forces participate in operations for maintaining social order, prevent and combat violence and

terrorism, safeguard political security and social stability, and secure the public’s right to live and

work in peace.


-----

points on key passages, and armed urban patrols. In accordance with the law, the PAP supports civil

authorities in law enforcement operations to combat criminal gangs and terrorist activities, actively

participates in the maintenance of public order, and prevents and responds to potential threats to

China’s political security and social order, thus making a significant contribution to the Peaceful

China initiative. Since 2012, the PAP has deployed large numbers of troops annually in security

duties, counter-terrorism, emergency response, and maritime rights protection and law enforcement.

It has completed around 10,000 security assignments during major events such as the G20 Summit,

the APEC Economic Leaders’ Meeting, the Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation, the

BRICS Leaders Meeting, and the SCO Qingdao Summit, and participated in the response to 671

hostage situations, incidents of severe violence, and terrorist attacks. Since 2014, the PAP has

assisted the government of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region in taking out 1,588 violent terrorist

gangs and capturing 12,995 terrorists.

The PLA supports the civil authorities in maintaining social stability, provides security for major

events, and responds to emergencies in accordance with the law. It is mainly tasked with missions

such as counter-terrorism, NBCE detection and test, medical relief, and transport support. It

disposes of potential safety hazards in the waters and protects security in the air over and around

major event venues.

**Protecting China’s Overseas Interests**

Overseas interests are a crucial part of China’s national interests. One of the missions of China’s

armed forces is to effectively protect the security and legitimate rights and interests of overseas

Chinese people, organizations and institutions.

The PLA actively promotes international security and military cooperation and refines relevant

mechanisms for protecting China’s overseas interests. To address deficiencies in overseas operations

and support, it builds far seas forces, develops overseas logistical facilities, and enhances capabilities

in accomplishing diversified military tasks. The PLA conducts vessel protection operations, maintains

the security of strategic SLOCs, and carries out overseas evacuation and maritime rights protection

operations.

In August 2017, the PLA Djibouti Support Base entered service. The base has provided equipment

for the maintenance of four escort task groups, offered medical services for over 100 officers and


-----

teaching aids to local schools.

When the security situation in Yemen deteriorated in March 2015, a PLAN escort task group sailed

to the Gulf of Aden, berthed for the first time directly in an engagement area, and evacuated 621

Chinese citizens and 279 foreign citizens from 15 countries including Pakistan, Ethiopia, Singapore,

Italy, Poland, Germany, Canada, the UK, India and Japan.

**Participating in Disaster Rescue and Relief**

Participating in national development and protecting the public’s rights to work in peace are the

responsibilities of China’s armed forces mandated by the Constitution of the PRC. As stipulated in

the Regulations on Participation in Emergency Rescue and Disaster Relief by China’s Armed Forces, China’s

armed forces are mainly tasked with rescuing, transferring and evacuating trapped populations;

ensuring the security of important targets; salvaging and transporting important materials;

conducting specialized operations such as restoration of transport facilities including roads, bridges

and tunnels, maritime search and rescue, NBC rescue, epidemic control and medical relief;

eliminating or controlling other major threats, dangerous situations and disasters; and supporting

civil authorities in post-disaster reconstruction.

Since 2012, the PLA and the PAP have deployed 950,000 soldiers, 1.41 million militia, 190,000

vehicles and items of equipment, and sortied 26,000 vessels and 820 aircraft in emergency

response and disaster relief. They have participated in rescue and relief efforts such as the

earthquake in Ludian County of Yunnan Province, the rainstorm and flood in the middle and lower

reaches of the Yangtze River, and the removal of the barrier lake in the Yarlung Zangbo River. They

have assisted local governments to rescue and transfer over 5 million people, treated over 210,000

patients, transported over 360,000 tons of goods, and reinforced over 3,600 km of levees. In 2017,

the PLA Macao Garrison sent 2,631 soldiers and over 160 vehicles to assist the government of

Macao Special Administrative Region in its relief efforts in the wake of Typhoon Hato.

**IV. Reform in China’s National Defense and Armed Forces**

The history of the people’s armed forces is a history of reform and innovation. In the new era, China

is advancing defense and military modernization across the board and deepening reform in national

defense and armed forces in all respects, with a focus on removing institutional barriers and solving


-----

national security. Historic strides have been made in strengthening the armed forces.

**Reforming the Leadership and Command System**

The reform in the leadership and command system is a significant measure in response to the call

of a modern and specialized military capable of fighting and winning wars in the information age,

aiming to improve the operational effectiveness and development efficiency of the military. Adhering

to the general principle of “the CMC exercising overall leadership, the TCs responsible for military

operations and the services focusing on developing capabilities”, the PLA endeavors to enhance the

CMC’s centralized and unified leadership and its functions of strategic command and strategic

management. The PLA has dismantled the long-established systems of general departments,

military area commands (MAC) and the force composition with a dominating land force, and

established new leadership, management and operational command systems.

_Reorganizing and establishing new CMC functional organs. To optimize the functional and institutional_

setup of the CMC organs, the former General Staff Headquarters, General Political Department,

General Logistics Department and General Armaments Department have been reshuffled into 15

organs under the centralized CMC leadership to advise, execute and serve. Thus, the chains of

command, development, management and supervision are more streamlined, and the

responsibilities of decision-making, planning, execution and assessment are more properly

delegated.

_Improving the leadership and management system for services and arms. The PLA has:_

- Established the PLAA leading organs by integrating the functions of the former general

departments concerning the development of the land force;

- Established the PLASSF by combining strategic support forces across the services and CMC

organs;

- Renamed the Second Artillery Force the PLARF; and

- Established the PLAJLSF by integrating strategic and campaign level forces mainly for general
purpose support.


-----

_Establishing and improving the joint operations command system. By improving the joint operations_

command organ of the CMC and setting up those at the theater level, the PLA has established a

lean and efficient joint operations command system composed of permanent and specialized

commanding establishments for both peacetime and wartime operations. The former Shenyang,

Beijing, Lanzhou, Jinan, Nanjing, Guangzhou and Chengdu MACs have been reorganized into 5

TCs: Eastern Theater Command (ETC), Southern Theater Command (STC), Western Theater

Command (WTC), Northern Theater Command (NTC), and Central Theater Command (CTC). Thus,

a CMC-TCs-Troops operations command system has been established.

_Building and improving the law-based supervision system. The Chinese military has established the CMC_

Discipline Inspection Commission (CMCDIC, also the CMC Supervision Commission, CMCSC)

under the direct leadership of the CMC, and dispatched disciplinary inspection teams to the CMC

functional organs and all TCs. It has set up the CMC Politics and Law Commission (CMCPLC) and

established regional military courts and procuratorates. It has put into place the CMC Audit Office

(CMCAO), reformed the audit-based oversight system, and implemented PLA-wide resident auditing.

Thus, power is exercised in a way that decision-making, execution and supervision check each other

and function in coordination


-----

Reform in size, structure and force composition is a pivotal step to optimizing military organizational

structure and establishing a modern military force structure with Chinese characteristics. Following the

instruction to optimize structures, develop new-type forces, adjust proportions and reduce sizes, the

PLA is striving to transform from a quantity-and-scale model to that of quality and efficiency, as well

as from being personnel-intensive to one that is S&T-intensive.

_Adjusting scale and proportion, and restructuring force composition. 300,000 personnel have been cut to_

keep the total active force at 2 million. Reform measures have been taken to transfer more officer

positions to non-commissioned officers and civilian staff, downsize the leading organs at all levels by

reducing their subordinate sections, leadership hierarchies and staff, and streamline the institutions

and personnel in arts, sports, press, publication, logistical support, medical facilities, depots, and

educational and research institutes. Thus, the number of personnel in the leading organs at and

above regiment level has been cut by about 25%, and that of non-combat units by almost 50%. The

PLA has significantly downsized the active force of the PLAA, maintained that of the PLAAF at a

steady number, moderately increased that of the PLAN and PLARF, and optimized the force

structures of all services and arms. The PLA has restructured the defense reserves. The deployment

of combat forces has been adjusted for a strategic configuration that meets the demands of

safeguarding China’s national security in the new era.

_Reorganizing the troops and rebuilding new-type combat forces. The previous 18 group armies have been_

reorganized into 13 new ones. All major combat units of the PLA follow a group army-brigade
battalion system. Reform measures have been taken to reinforce the combat capacity of the arms,

reduce the command hierarchies and combine the troops at lower levels. New types of combat

forces have been enhanced to conduct special operations, all-dimensional offense and defense,

amphibious operations, far seas protection and strategic projection, aiming to make the force

composition complete, combined, multi-functional and flexible.

_Rebalancing and reorganizing military educational and research institutions. The PLA and the PAP have_

restructured the previous 77 universities and colleges into 44. The National Defense University

(NDU) and the National University of Defense Technology (NUDT) have been reorganized. China’s

armed forces have established the CMC Steering Committee on Military Scientific Research and

reorganized the Academy of Military Sciences (AMS) and the research institutes of the services.

Th th ilit i tifi h f h b b l d ith th AMS th l d th


-----

educational institutions and the troops as supplements.

**Reforming Military Policies and Institutions**

China’s armed forces take combat effectiveness as the criterion in the reform of military policies and

institutions and encourage the initiative, enthusiasm and creativity of all members of the armed

forces. Reform is designed to build and improve the system of socialist military policies and

institutions with Chinese characteristics.

They have deepened reform in the institutions for Party building in the military to uphold the

authority of the CPCCC and its centralized and unified leadership, and ensure the absolute

leadership of the CPC over the military. Rules and regulations including the Decision of China’s _Armed_

_Forces on Strengthening Party Building in the Military in the New Era have been formulated to improve_

the Party’s institutions in the military in order to enhance its political and theoretical buildup,

consolidate organizations, improve conduct, and enforce discipline.

They have innovated in policies and institutions for military force employment in a bid to effectively

perform all missions and tasks in the new era. Rules and regulations have been formulated

including the Regulations on Vessel Protection Operations (Trial). The institutions of military strategic

guidance, regulations on combat readiness duties, and rules and regulations on joint operations

have all been optimized.

They have reformulated policies and institutions to further develop combat capabilities. Laws and

regulations have been formulated and amended including the Law of the People’s Republic of China on

_National Defense Transportation, the Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Protection of Military_

_Installations and the Regulations on Civilian Personnel in the Military. Newly-updated military training_

regulations and outlines have been promulgated. They have made progress in establishing the

career officers system, optimizing the institutions of military welfare and support, improving the

military honors system, and refining policies and institutions in training, equipment development,

logistics, military research and national defense mobilization. Meanwhile, bigger legislative steps

have been taken in relation to military officers and military service.

They have reformed the policies and institutions for military management to elevate the efficacy of

military systems and boost quality development of the military. Rules and regulations have been


-----

_of the People’s Liberation Army (Trial), and the Regulations on Military Legislation. China’s armed forces_

are enhancing institutional innovation in strategic management, defense expenditure management,

and the military judicial system.

They have suspended all paid services. As of June, 2018, paid services provided by leading organs,

operational units, and military-affiliated public institutions at all levels had been basically suspended,

involving 15 sectors such as real estate lease, agricultural and associated products, and hospitality.

Over 100,000 such projects have been suspended as scheduled, accounting for 94% of the total.

The armed forces have achieved the goal of withdrawing from running businesses.

**Reshuffled PLA and PAP Troops**

The PLAA plays an irreplaceable role in maintaining China’s national sovereignty, security and

development interests. It comprises maneuver operation, border and coastal defense, and garrison

forces. Under the PLAA, there are 5 TC army commands, the Xinjiang military command, and the

Tibet military command. The ETC Army has under it the 71st, 72nd, and 73rd group armies; the STC

Army has the 74th and 75th group armies; the WTC Army has the 76th and 77th group armies; the

NTC Army has the 78th, 79th and 80th group armies; and the CTC Army has the 81st, 82nd and

83rd group armies. In line with the strategic requirements of maneuver operations as well as multi
dimensional offense and defense, the PLAA is speeding up the transition of its tasks from regional

defense to trans-theater operations, and improving the capabilities for precise, multi-dimensional,

trans-theater, multi-functional and sustained operations, so as to build a new type of strong and

modernized land force.

The PLAN has a very important standing in the overall configuration of China’s national security and

development. It comprises submarine, surface ship, aviation, marine, and coastal defense forces.

Under the PLAN, there are the ETC Navy (Donghai Fleet), the STC Navy (Nanhai Fleet), the NTC

Navy (Beihai Fleet), and the PLAN Marine Corps. Under the TC navies there are naval bases,

submarine flotillas, surface ship flotillas and aviation brigades. In line with the strategic requirements

of near seas defense and far seas protection, the PLAN is speeding up the transition of its tasks

from defense on the near seas to protection missions on the far seas, and improving its capabilities

for strategic deterrence and counterattack, maritime maneuver operations, maritime joint operations,

comprehensive defense, and integrated support, so as to build a strong and modernized naval

f


-----

aviation, airborne, ground-to-air missile, radar, ECM, and communications forces. Under the PLAAF,

there are 5 TC air force commands and one airborne corps. Under the TC air forces, there are air

bases, aviation brigades (divisions), ground-to-air missile brigades (divisions) and radar brigades. In

line with the strategic requirements of integrating air and space capabilities as well as coordinating

offensive and defensive operations, the PLAAF is accelerating the transition of its tasks from

territorial air defense to both offensive and defensive operations, and improving its capabilities for

strategic early warning, air strikes, air and missile defense, information countermeasures, airborne

operations, strategic projection, and integrated support, so as to build a strong and modernized air

force.

The PLARF plays a critical role in maintaining China’s national sovereignty and security. It

comprises nuclear missile, conventional missile and support forces, and subordinate missile bases.

In line with the strategic requirements of having both nuclear and conventional capabilities and

deterring wars in all battlespaces, the PLARF is enhancing its credible and reliable capabilities of

nuclear deterrence and counterattack, strengthening intermediate and long-range precision strike

forces, and enhancing strategic counter-balance capability, so as to build a strong and modernized

rocket force.

The PLASSF is a new type of combat force for safeguarding national security and an important

driver for the growth of new combat capabilities. It comprises supporting forces for battlefield

environment, information, communications, information security, and new technology testing. In line

with the strategic requirements of integrating existing systems and aligning civil and military

endeavors, the PLASSF is seeking to achieve big development strides in key areas and accelerate

the integrated development of new-type combat forces, so as to build a strong and modernized

strategic support force.

The PLAJLSF, as the main force for joint logistics as well as strategic and campaign level support, is

an important component of the modern military force with Chinese characteristics. It comprises the

support forces for inventory and warehousing, medical services, transport, force projection, oil

pipelines, engineering and construction management, reserve assets management, and

procurement. Under the PLAJLSF, there are 5 joint logistic support centers located respectively in

Wuxi (Jiangsu Province), Guilin (Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region), Xining (Qinghai Province),

Shenyang (Liaoning Province), and Zhengzhou (Henan Province), as well as the PLA General


-----

operations system to enhance the capabilities of integrated joint logistics, so as to build a strong and

modernized joint logistic support force.

The PAP shoulders important responsibilities in safeguarding national security, social stability and

public wellbeing. China has adopted a CMC-PAP-Troops leadership and command system with the

basic duties and nature of the PAP unchanged. The PAP is not in the force structure of the PLA. The

PAP border defense, firefighting and security guard forces have been decommissioned. The coast

guard under the leadership of State Oceanic Administration has been transferred to the PAP. PAP

goldmine, forest and hydroelectricity forces have been reorganized into specialized forces of non
active service under corresponding state authorities. Meanwhile, the PAP customs guard forces

have been withdrawn. In this way, the leadership, management, command and employment of the

PAP has become more coherent. Following adjustment and reorganization, the PAP is mainly

composed of the internal security corps, the mobile corps, and the coast guard. In line with the

strategic requirements of performing multiple functions and effectively maintaining social stability,

the PAP is enhancing capacity in guard duties, emergency response, counter-terrorism, maritime

rights protection, administrative enforcement and disaster relief, so as to build a strong and

modernized armed police force.

**Promoting Defense and Military Development in All Respects**

_Placing theoretical and political buildup at the top of the agenda of the armed forces. China’s armed forces_

unswervingly take Xi Jinping’s thinking on strengthening the military as the guidance, firmly uphold

General Secretary Xi Jinping as the core of the CPCCC and the whole Party, firmly uphold the

authority of the CPCCC and its centralized and unified leadership, and follow the CMC Chairman

responsibility system, in an effort to further strengthen the consciousness of the need to maintain

political integrity, think in big-picture terms, follow the leadership core and keep in alignment. In

accordance with the Decision on Issues Relating to the Military Political Work in the New Era issued in

December 2014, China’s armed forces have improved their political work and embarked on a new

journey of development. In order to fully strengthen the Party leadership and Party building of the

military in the new era, a CMC meeting on party building was held in August, 2018. Great efforts are

being made to cultivate revolutionary officers and soldiers of the new era with faith, ability, courage

and integrity, and build troops with iron-like faith, conviction, discipline and commitment.


-----

implementation of the strategy to develop the military through S&T in a bid to maintain and enhance

the strength of the areas where they lead, and intensify innovation in emerging areas. They have

made great progress in independent innovation in some strategic, cutting-edge and disruptive

technologies, and succeeded in developing strategic hi-tech products such as the Tianhe-2

supercomputer. Focusing on war and fighting wars, China’s armed forces have innovated in military

doctrines and delivered outcomes in military strategy, joint operations and informationization, which

have provided a theoretical support to defense and military development.

_Establishing a modernized weaponry and equipment system. China’s armed forces are optimizing the_

overall composition of weaponry and equipment, coordinating the efforts of all services and arms in

this regard, promoting the balanced development of main battle equipment, information systems,

and support equipment, with a view to comprehensively raising standardization, serial development

and interoperability. Old equipment is being phased out, and a system created that mainly

comprises new and high-tech weaponry and equipment. Type 15 tanks, type 052D destroyers, J-20

fighters, and DF-26 intermediate and long-range ballistic missiles have been commissioned.

_Building a combat-oriented modern logistics system. China’s armed forces are putting in place a support_

mechanism combining centralized and decentralized support, as well as general and special
purpose supplies, with PLAJLSF as the backbone force and service logistics units as supplements.

They are also building a joint, lean and efficient logistic support system with the strategic and

campaign level forces as the main force, the affiliated forces as the support, and the civil sectors as

supplements. Logistics units have been incorporated into TC-level joint training, trans-theater

training by services and arms, and joint exercises and training with foreign militaries to strengthen

the integrated training of logistical and operational forces. China’s armed forces have acquired a

rapid, multi-dimensional and precise support capability.

_Strengthening strategic management. Adopting demand-oriented planning and planning-led resource_

allocation, China’s armed forces have established and improved the strategic management

procedures of demand-planning-budgeting-execution-evaluation. They have completed a system of

strategic plans and programs composed of the development strategies of the military as a whole,

and its key areas, branches, and the PAP. They have regulated military strategic planning,

promulgated and implemented the Outline of the 13th Five-Year Plan for Military Development, and

optimized the mechanisms for evaluation, supervision and control.


-----

building a military legal system with Chinese characteristics and pressing ahead with a fundamental

transformation in how the military is run. They are strengthening oversight and supervision in military

training and combat readiness to uproot peacetime ills. They are promoting legal awareness through

public communication and education campaigns, establishing and improving the support mechanism

of legal consultation and service, and advancing law-based management in the military. China’s

armed forces are striving to manage the troops more strictly in all respects. They have fully

implemented military rules and regulations, restored and improved the traditional mechanism of

using bugles to communicate and command, carried out safety inspections to identify and tackle

potential problems, stepped up garrison military policing, strengthened the management of military

vehicles by targeted measures, and set up a mechanism of regular notification on garrison military

policing. These efforts have contributed to maintaining the positive image of the armed forces.

_Improving Party conduct, upholding integrity and continuing the fight against corruption. China’s armed_

forces are tightening political discipline and rules, investigating and dealing strictly with grave

violations of CPC discipline and state laws as in the cases of Guo Boxiong, Xu Caihou, Fang Fenghui,

and Zhang Yang. China’s armed forces punish corruption in strict accordance with CPC discipline

and relevant laws, and rectify any malpractice in key construction projects and the procurement of

equipment and material. Points-of-contact for discipline supervision have been designated at the

small-unit level to investigate and combat “micro corruption” and misconduct in all its forms among

service members. China’s armed forces have intensified political inspection by completing

disciplinary inspections and re-inspections over all CMC functional organs, the TCs, services, AMS,

NDU, NUDT and the PAP. They have worked to implement full-spectrum audit, intensify the audit of

major fields, projects and funds, and perform strict audits over the economic liabilities of officers in

positions of leadership. Active efforts have been made to monitor the cost-effectiveness of applied

funds, conduct whole-process audit, and combine civil and military efforts in auditing. Since 2012,

they have carried out audits over 39,000 units and 13,000 PLA and PAP officers in positions of

leadership at and above regiment level. As a result, notable achievements have been made in the

fight against corruption in China’s armed forces, and a healthy political atmosphere of integrity has

formed.

_Modernizing national defense mobilization. China has refined the system of national defense_

mobilization to enhance the development of its defense reserves. China is streamlining the number

of primary militia nationwide, driving deeper reform of militia and reserve forces in their size,


-----

active forces, and extending the function of national defense mobilization from mainly supporting the

land force to supporting all branches at a faster pace.

In the process of deepening the reform of the CPC and governmental institutions, the Ministry of

Veterans Affairs of the PRC has been set up. Through a series of preferential measures, the veteran

support system is progressing at provincial, prefectural, county, town and township (sub-district),

and village (community) levels. Substantial steps have been taken to enhance the government’s

efforts to support the military and their families, and to strengthen the military’s support to the

government and the people. China’s armed forces play an active role in poverty alleviation. The

relationships between the military and the government and between the military and the people are

getting even closer. There is a growing consensus across communities to respect and give

preferential treatment to all service members.

**V. Reasonable and Appropriate Defense Expenditure**

China attends to both development and security. It is making an integrated effort to build a

prosperous country and a strong military, and striving for the coordinated development of national

defense and the economy. Following the principle of building the armed forces through diligence and

thrift, China takes into consideration the development of the economy and the demands of national

defense, decides on the appropriate scale and composition of defense expenditure, and manages

and applies these funds in accordance with law.

Since reform and opening-up, China has increased its defense expenditure from a level of

sustainability to moderate growth. On the whole, defense expenditure has grown in tandem with the

growth of the national economy and government expenditure. Defense expenditure as a percentage

of GDP has fallen from a peak of 5.43% in 1979 to 1.26% in 2017. It has remained below 2% for the

past three decades. Defense expenditure as a percentage of government expenditure was 17.37%

in 1979 and 5.14% in 2017, a drop of more than 12 percentage points. The figures are on a clear

downward trend.


-----

**China’s Defense Expenditure Since 2012**

In the new era, to keep pace with the country’s modernization, China is focusing on building a

fortified national defense and a strong military commensurate with the country’s international

standing, and its national security and development interests. China is striving to narrow the gap

between its military and the world’s leading militaries, and make up the deficiencies in the military’s

capabilities in modern warfare. Defense expenditure is growing steadily and the breakdown of

spending is being continuously optimized.

In terms of usage, China’s defense expenditure is assigned to three sectors – personnel, training

and sustainment, and equipment. Personnel expenses mainly cover the salaries, allowances, food,

bedding, clothing, insurance, subsidies and pensions for officers, non-ranking officers, soldiers and

contracted civilians, as well as retirees supported from the defense budget. Training and sustainment

expenses mainly cover training of the troops, institutional education, construction and maintenance

of installations and facilities, and other expenditure on routine consumables. Equipment expenses


-----

forces and militia.

Since 2012, the increase in defense expenditure has been primarily spent for the following

purposes:

1. Adapting to national economic and social development, improving the wellbeing of service

personnel, ensuring regular increases in military salaries, and bettering the working, training and

living conditions of the troops;

2. Increasing input in weaponry and equipment development, phasing out the outdated, upgrading

the old, and developing and procuring the new, such as aircraft carriers, fighters, missiles and main

battle tanks, to steadily modernize weaponry and equipment;

3. Deepening national defense and military reform, supporting major reforms in military leadership

and command systems, force structure and composition, and policies and institutions;

4. Supporting training in real combat conditions, enhancing strategic-level training, joint training at

TCs’ level and training of services and arms, and improving the conditions for simulated, networked

and force-on-force training; and

5. Supporting diverse military tasks including the UNPKOs, vessel protection operations,

humanitarian assistance operations and disaster relief efforts.

From 2012 to 2017, China’s defense expenditure increased from RMB669.192 billion to

RMB1,043.237 billion. China’s GDP and government expenditure grew at average rates of 9.04% and

10.43% respectively, calculated on the price of the indicated years, while its defense expenditure

increased by an average of 9.42%. Defense expenditure accounted for 1.28% of GDP and 5.26% of

government expenditure on average. The percentage of China’s defense expenditure in GDP

remained stable and grew in coordination with the increase of government expenditure.

China applies strict mechanisms of fiscal allocation and budget management on its defense

expenditure. It pursues a level of defense spending that is demand-oriented, planning-led and

consistent with its capacity. It endeavors to strengthen unified management, coordinate existing and

incremental expenditure, gradually practice cost-effectiveness management, and steadily press

ahead with reform that is centered on efficacy and efficiency. To improve and strengthen budget


-----

of military funds, accelerating standardization in relation to defense expenditure, and improving the

management of assets and funds.

**Comparison of Defense Expenditure in the International Context**

Among countries ranking high in defense expenditure in 2017, China’s share of defense expenditure

in GDP and government expenditure, as well as per capita and per-serviceperson defense spending,

are all at a relatively low level.

China has become the world’s second largest economy. The fact that China’s defense expenditure

ranks second in the world is determined by the demands of its national defense, the size of its

economy, and the defensive nature of its national defense policy. In terms of total spending, China’s

defense expenditure in 2017 was less than a quarter of that of the US.

As a percentage of GDP, from 2012 to 2017, China’s average defense expenditure was about 1.3%.

Comparative figures were: the US about 3.5%, Russia 4.4%, India 2.5%, the UK 2.0%, France

2.3%, Japan 1.0%, and Germany 1.2%. China ranks 6th among these countries in terms of defense

expenditure as a percentage of GDP on average and is the lowest among the permanent members

of the UN Security Council (UNSC).


-----

As a ratio of spending to government expenditure, from 2012 to 2017, China’s average defense

expenditure was 5.3%. Comparative figures were: the US about 9.8%, Russia 12.4%, India 9.1%, the

UK 4.8%, France 4.0%, Japan 2.5%, and Germany 2.8%. China ranks 4th among these countries in

terms of defense expenditure as a percentage of government expenditure on average.

China’s per capita defense expenditure in 2017 was RMB750 – 5% of the US, 25% of Russia, 231%

of India, 13% of the UK, 16% of France, 29% of Japan, and 20% of Germany. China’s per
serviceperson defense expenditure was RMB521,600 – 15% of the US, 119% of Russia, 166% of

India, 27% of the UK, 38% of France, 35% of Japan, and 30% of Germany. China’s defense

expenditure ranks 7th and 6th in per capita and per-serviceperson terms respectively among these

countries.

China reports and releases its defense expenditure through various mechanisms. Since 1978, the

Chinese government has submitted annual budget reports to the National People’s Congress and

released the total amount of defense budget. In 1995, the Chinese government issued a white

paper, China: Arms Control and Disarmament, releasing data concerning its defense expenditure to the

world. Since 2007, China has joined the UN Standardized Instrument for Reporting Military Expenditures

and has submitted annually to the UN the basic data on its defense expenditure for the latest fiscal

year, reporting total spending as well as personnel expenses, training and sustainment expenses,

and equipment expenses for the active force, reserve force and the militia respectively, along with

an explanation of the application of China’s defense expenditure and its ratio to GDP.


-----

appropriate. Compared to other major countries, the ratios of China’s defense expenditure to GDP

and to government expenditure, as well as the per capita defense expenditure of the country, remain

at a relatively low level.

As the only major country yet to be completely reunified, and one of the countries with the most

complex peripheral security environment, China faces serious challenges in safeguarding

national sovereignty, territorial integrity, and maritime rights and interests. China is moving closer to

the center of the world stage, and the international community expects more international public

security goods from the Chinese military. In addition, China’s armed forces are moving towards

informationization and shouldering arduous tasks in following the trends of worldwide RMA and

speeding up RMA with Chinese characteristics. There is still a wide gap between China’s defense

expenditure and the requirements for safeguarding national sovereignty, security and development

interests, for fulfilling China’s international responsibilities and obligations as a major country, and for

China’s development. In step with national economic development, defense expenditure of China

will maintain a moderate and steady growth.

**VI. Actively Contributing to Building a Community with a Shared Future for Mankind**

Building a community with a shared future for mankind conforms to the trends of the times for

peaceful development, and reflects the common aspirations of all peoples throughout the world.

China’s armed forces have responded faithfully to the call for a community with a shared future for

mankind. They are actively fulfilling the international obligations of the armed forces of a major

country, comprehensively promoting international military cooperation for the new era, and striving

for a better world of lasting peace and common security.

**Resolutely Upholding the Purposes and Principles of the UN Charter**

As a founding member of the United Nations and a permanent member of the UNSC, China

unswervingly endorses the central role of the UN in international affairs, and resolutely upholds

international law and the basic norms governing international relations based on the purposes and

principles of the UN Charter. It firmly maintains multilateralism, advances democracy in international

relations, participates extensively in global security governance, actively engages in arms control

and disarmament, and endeavors to offer Chinese proposals for resolving major issues and

formulating important rules.


-----

Korean Peninsula issue, the Iranian nuclear issue and Syrian issue. China opposes hegemony,

unilateralism and double standards, promotes dialogues and consultations, and fully and earnestly

implements UNSC resolutions. China has actively participated in multilateral dialogues and

negotiations on cyberspace and outer space, and pushed for the formulation of widely accepted

international rules that are fair and equitable.

China actively participates in international arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation. China

objects to arms race and strives to protect global strategic balance and stability. To this end, China

has signed or acceded to dozens of relevant multilateral treaties including the Treaty on the Non
proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. In 2015 China announced the establishment of the USD1 billion

China-UN Peace and Development Fund in the following decade, which was officially put into

operation in 2016.

**Building a New-Model Security Partnership Featuring Equality, Mutual Trust and Win-Win**

**Cooperation**

China actively develops constructive relationships with foreign militaries. A new configuration of

foreign military relations which is all-dimensional, wide-ranging and multi-tiered is taking shape.

China has engaged in military exchanges with more than 150 countries and set up 130 offices of

military attachés and military representatives at Chinese diplomatic missions abroad, while 116

countries have established military attaché’s offices in China. In addition, China has put in place 54

defense consultation and dialogue mechanisms with 41 countries and international organizations.

Since 2012, high level Chinese military delegations have visited over 60 countries, and defense

ministers and commanders-in-chief from over 100 countries have visited China.

The military relationship between China and Russia continues to develop at a high level, enriching

the China-Russia comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination for a new era and playing a

significant role in maintaining global strategic stability. The Chinese and Russian militaries have

continued the sound development of exchange mechanisms at all levels, expanded cooperation in

high-level exchanges, military training, equipment, technology and counter-terrorism, and realized

positive interaction and coordination on international and multilateral occasions. Since 2012,

Chinese and Russian militaries have held 7 rounds of strategic consultations. From August to

September 2018, at the invitation of the Russian side, the PLA participated in Russia’s Vostok

t t i i f th fi t ti


-----

principles of non-conflict, non-confrontation, mutual respect and win-win cooperation. It strives to

make the military-to-military relationship a stabilizer for the relations between the two countries and

hence contribute to the China-US relationship based on coordination, cooperation and stability. In

2014, China’s Ministry of National Defense (MND) and the US Department of Defense signed the

_Memorandum of Understanding on Notification of Major Military Activities and Confidence-Building_

_Measures Mechanism and the Memorandum of Understanding Regarding the Rules of Behavior for Safety of_

_Air and Maritime Encounters. In 2015, the two countries agreed on the annexes on the military crisis_

notification mechanism and the rules of behavior for safety in air-to-air encounters. In 2017, the two

countries established a diplomatic and security dialogue and joint staff dialogue mechanism with a

view to actively strengthening strategic communication and managing risks and differences. The two

militaries carry out institutionalized exchanges between the defense authorities, armies, navies and

air forces, as well as practical cooperation in HADR, counter-piracy, and exchanges between

academic institutions. China resolutely opposes the wrong practices and provocative activities of the

US side regarding arms sales to Taiwan, sanctions on the CMC Equipment Development

Department and its leadership, illegal entry into China’s territorial waters and maritime and air

spaces near relevant islands and reefs, and wide-range and frequent close-in reconnaissance.

However, in China-US relations, the military-to-military relationship remains the generally stable one.

With a commitment to building a community with a shared future in its neighborhood, China

endeavors to deepen military partnership with its neighbors. The PLA keeps close contacts with the

military leaderships of the neighboring countries. Given more than 40 reciprocal military visits at and

above service commander level every year, high-level military exchanges have covered almost all of

China’s neighbors and contributed to growing strategic mutual trust. China has set up defense and

security consultations as well as working meeting mechanisms with 17 neighboring countries to

keep exchange channels open. In recent years, China has regularly held serial joint exercises and

training on counter-terrorism, peacekeeping, search and rescue, and tactical skills with its

neighboring countries, and carried out extensive exchanges and practical cooperation on border and

coastal defense, academic institutions, think tanks, education, training, medical science, medical

service, and equipment and technology. In addition, defense cooperation with ASEAN countries is

moving forward. The military relationships between China and its neighboring countries are

generally stable.


-----

cooperation in all areas are making sound progress. Targeting a China-Europe partnership for

peace, growth, reform and civilization, China conducts security policy dialogues, joint counter-piracy

exercises and personnel training with the EU. In 2016, China held a desktop exercise on non
combatant evacuation with the UK and a joint military medical exercise with Germany. In 2018,

China and the EU held the third China-EU high-level seminar on security policy.

China is strengthening military exchanges with developing countries in Africa, Latin America, the

Caribbean and the South Pacific by carrying out personnel training, conducting exchanges between

mid-and-junior level officers, and providing assistance in military development and defense

capabilities. In Beijing in 2018 China hosted the China-Africa Defense and Security Forum, the

China and Latin-America High-level

Defense Forum, and the Forum for Senior Defense Officials from Caribbean and South Pacific

Countries.

The PLA adheres to the principles of mutual trust, mutual benefit and win-win cooperation in

carrying out pragmatic exchanges and cooperation with foreign militaries. Since 2012, China has

held over 100 joint exercises and training with more than 30 countries. These engagements have

covered traditional and non-traditional security fields, in locations extending from China’s periphery

to the far seas, and the participating forces have expanded from land forces to multiple branches

including the army, navy and air force. Cooperation and exchanges in personnel training have

intensified. Since 2012, the PLA has sent over 1,700 military personnel to study in more than 50

countries. Over 20 Chinese military educational institutions have established and maintained inter
collegiate exchanges with their counterparts from more than 40 countries. Meanwhile, more than

10,000 foreign military personnel from over 130 countries have studied in Chinese military

universities and colleges.

China’s armed forces work to improve mechanisms for information release in order to

comprehensively and objectively explain China’s national defense and military development to

domestic and international audiences. In April 2011, China’s MND started to convene monthly press

conferences to release important information on national defense and the military. Since 2012,

multiple thematic press conferences have been held to brief on important events such as national

defense and military reform and downsizing the PLA. The MND has organized multiple visits to and

interviews with PLA units and academic institutions for nearly 100 domestic and foreign media.


-----

Information Office have attracted over 6 million followers.

**Building a Regional Security Cooperation Architecture**

In June 2001, China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan co-founded the

Shanghai Cooperation Organization. The SCO has now grown into a new type of comprehensive

regional cooperation organization covering the largest area and population in the world. The

Shanghai Spirit featuring mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality, consultation, respect for diverse

civilizations and pursuit of common development has come into being. With its commitment to

building an SCO community with a shared future and developing a new model of international

relations, the organization has made a new contribution to regional peace and development. In June

2017, the SCO expanded for the first time and admitted India and Pakistan as member states. In

April 2018, China hosted the first SCO Defense Ministers’ Meeting since the organization expanded

its membership. The member states continue to strengthen defense and security exchanges and

cooperation, including Peace Mission exercises, and Fanfare for Peace military tattoos, to further

promote good-neighborliness and strategic mutual trust, increase military cultural exchanges, and

enhance unity and friendship.

China actively supports the institutional development of the Conference on Interaction and

Confidence-Building Measures in Asia (CICA), advocates common, comprehensive, cooperative

and sustainable security in Asia, and plays an important role in building an Asian security

cooperation architecture.

In the principles of openness, inclusiveness and pragmatic cooperation, China actively participates

in multilateral dialogues and cooperation mechanisms including the ADMM-Plus, ASEAN Regional

Forum (ARF), Shangri-La Dialogue, Jakarta International Defense Dialogue and Western Pacific

Naval Symposium, regularly holds China-ASEAN defense ministers’ informal meetings, and

proposes and constructively promotes initiatives to strengthen regional defense cooperation. The

China-ASEAN Maritime Exercise-2018, the first between Chinese and ASEAN militaries, was held in

October 2018 and demonstrated the confidence and determination of the countries in maintaining

regional peace and stability.

China has initiated the Xiangshan Forum, a platform of exchange based in Beijing, in the spirit of

equality, openness, inclusiveness and mutual learning. In 2014, the Xiangshan Forum was


-----

Xiangshan Forum was renamed the Beijing Xiangshan Forum. More than 500 participants from 67

countries and 7 international organizations attended the forum and exchanged new ideas and

approaches for addressing regional security threats and challenges. Their discussions have played

an active role in promoting security dialogue and mutual trust in the Asia-Pacific region.

**Properly Coping with Disputes over Territory and Maritime Demarcation**

Upholding amity, sincerity, mutual benefit and inclusiveness in its neighborhood diplomacy, China is

committed to building an amicable relationship and partnership with its neighbors, and peaceful

resolution of disputes over territory and maritime demarcation through negotiation and consultation.

China has settled its border issues with 12 of its 14 land neighbors and signed treaties on good
neighborliness, friendship and cooperation with 8 countries on its periphery.

China holds it a priority to manage differences and enhance mutual trust in maintaining the stability

of its neighborhood. China has proposed a China-ASEAN defense ministers’ hotline and established

direct defense telephone links with Vietnam and the ROK. It has kept contact through telephone or

fax, and conducted border meetings and joint patrols, with the militaries of the countries on its land

borders on regular or irregular basis. Since 2014, five high-level border meetings between China

and Vietnam have been held. To implement the important consensus reached by the leaders of

China and India, the two militaries have exchanged high-level visits and pushed for a hotline for

border defense cooperation and mechanisms for border management and border defense

exchanges. Since the second half of 2016, China and the Philippines have increased dialogue on

maritime security, bringing the two sides back on track in addressing the South China Sea issue

through friendly consultation. In May 2018, the defense authorities of China and Japan signed a

memorandum of understanding on maritime and air liaison and put it into practice in June.

China and the ASEAN countries have comprehensively and effectively implemented the DOC, and

actively advanced the consultations on the COC. They are committed to extending practical

maritime security cooperation, developing regional security mechanisms and building the South

China Sea into a sea of peace, friendship and cooperation.

**Actively Providing International Public Security Goods**

China actively supports the UNPKOs. It is a major contributor to the UN peacekeeping budget and


-----

39,000 peacekeepers. 13 Chinese military personnel have sacrificed their lives in the UNPKOs. In

the missions, China’s peacekeepers have built and repaired over 13,000 kilometers of roads,

cleared and disposed of 10,342 mines and various items of unexploded ordnance, transported more

than 1.35 million tons of materials over a total distance of more than 13 million kilometers, treated

over 170,000 patients, and fulfilled over 300 armed escorts and long or short-distance patrols.

In September 2015, China joined the UN Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System (PCRS) and

built a peacekeeping standby force of 8,000 troops. In September 2017, China completed the

registration of PCRS Level 1. In October 2018, 13 Chinese PCRS Level 1 units scored high in the

UN assessment and were elevated to PCRS Level 2. Five among these units were elevated from

Level 2 to Level 3 in February 2019. China has made active efforts to train international

peacekeepers and trained over 1,500 individuals from dozens of countries. In December 2018,

2,506 peacekeepers from the PLA served in 7 UN missions and in the UN Department of

Peacekeeping Operations.

In line with relevant UNSC resolutions, since December 2008, the Chinese government has

dispatched naval ships to carry out regular vessel protection operations in the Gulf of Aden and the

waters off the coast of Somalia. Chinese PLAN task groups cooperate with multiple naval forces in

the area to safeguard international SLOCs. In the past decade, over 100 vessels and 26,000

officers and sailors have been regularly deployed in 31 convoys, each consisting of three to four

ships, in vessel protection operations. They have provided security protection for over 6,600

Chinese and foreign ships, and rescued, protected or assisted over 70 ships in distress.

China’s armed forces take an active part in the international efforts for HADR. Military professionals

are dispatched to conduct disaster relief operations in affected countries, provide relief materials

and medical aid, and strengthen international exchanges in this respect. Since 2012, China’s armed

forces have participated in the search for the missing Malaysian Airliner MH370, and in the relief

operations for Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines, the Ebola epidemic in West Africa, the water

scarcity in Maldives, the earthquake in Nepal, and the flood caused by a dam collapse in Laos.

Since it entered service a decade ago, the PLAN’s hospital ship Ark Peace has fulfilled 7 voyages

coded as Mission Harmony and visited 43 countries. During these visits, it provided medical services

to the local communities, organized medical exchanges, and helped over 230,000 people.


-----

cooperation within the framework of the SCO. China hosts and participates in joint counter-terrorism

exercises, cracks down on illegal trafficking of weapons, ammunition and explosives, cooperates

with SCO members to identify and cut off channels for terrorist infiltration, and promotes international

counter-terrorism intelligence exchange and information sharing. It hosts the Great Wall International

Forum on Counter-Terrorism, and actively participates in multilateral counter-terrorism mechanisms

such as the APEC Counter-Terrorism Working Group and the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum.

Bilateral counter-terrorism consultations have been held with certain countries. China initiated the

establishment of the Quadrilateral Cooperation and Coordination Mechanism (QCCM), a counter
terrorism cooperation and coordination mechanism by the militaries of Afghanistan, China, Pakistan

and Tajikistan. The QCCM has convened two military leaders’ meetings and conducted counter
terrorism exchange and cooperation, actively safeguarding regional security.

**Closing Remarks**

Peace is an aspiration for all peoples, and development is an eternal theme of humanity. Faced with

global security challenges that are becoming ever more intricate and choices that have to be made

at a crossroads of human development, China firmly believes that hegemony and expansion are

doomed to failure, and security and prosperity shall be shared. China will remain committed to

peaceful development and work with people of all countries to safeguard world peace and promote

common development.

Guided by Xi Jinping’s thinking on strengthening the military, China’s national defense in the new

era will stride forward along its own path to build a stronger military and endeavor to achieve the

great goal of developing world-class forces in an all-round way. China’s armed forces have the

determination, confidence and capability to prevail over all threats and challenges. They stand ready

to provide strong strategic support for the realization of the Chinese Dream of national rejuvenation,

and to make new and greater contributions to the building of a community with a shared future for

mankind.

**Appendices**

**Table 1 CMC Functional Organs**

|CMC Functional Organs|Duties|
|---|---|


-----

Mainly responsible for comprehensive coordination, consultation on decision-making, military legal
General Office
affairs, information service, supervision and inspection

|Joint Staff Department|Mainly responsible for combat planning, command and control, combat command support, studying and formulating military strategy and requirements, combat capability assessment, organizing and guiding joint training, construction for combat readiness, and day-to-day combat readiness duties|
|---|---|
|Political Work Department|Mainly responsible for Party building in the military, organization work, political education, and military human resources management|
|Logistic Support Department|Mainly responsible for the planning, policy making, research, standardization, inspection and supervision of logistic support|
|Equipment Development Department|Mainly responsible for planning, R&D, testing, authentication, procurement management, and information system buildup in equipment development|
|Training and Administration Department|Mainly responsible for organizing and guiding military training, training supervision, troops administration, and management of educational institutions|
|National Defense Mobilization Department|Mainly responsible for organizing and guiding national defense mobilization and defense reserves development, and commanding and managing provincial military commands|
|Discipline Inspection Commission|Mainly responsible for the Party’s discipline supervision and inspection in the military|
|Politics and Law Commission|Mainly responsible for organizing and guiding political and legal work as well as security protection|
|Science and Technology Commission|Mainly responsible for the strategic management of national defense S&T, organizing and guiding cutting-edge technological innovation, and promoting the CMI of S&T|
|Office for Strategic Planning|Mainly responsible for strategic planning of national defense and the military, organizing the formulation of development plans, and coordinating resource allocation|
|Office for Reform and Organizational Structure|Mainly responsible for planning and coordinating national defense and military reform, guiding and promoting the implementation of the reforms in major areas, and the organizational structure management of the armed forces|


-----

Office for International Military

Cooperation


Mainly responsible for international military exchanges and cooperation, and managing and coordinating
the work of the armed forces related to foreign affairs

|Audit Office|Mainly responsible for audit, supervision as well as organizing and guiding the audit of the armed forces|
|---|---|
|Agency for Offices Administration|Mainly responsible for serving and supporting the CMC’s functional organs|


**Table 2 Breakdown of China’s Defense Expenditure (2010-2017)**

(in RMB billion yuan)

**Training and Sustainment**
**Personnel Expense**

**Expense**

**Percentage** **Percentage**

**Amount** **Amount**

**(%)** **(%)**

34.9 170.047 31.9 177.359

34.3 189.943 31.5 206.342

29.2 232.994 34.8 240.626

27.0 269.971 36.4 270.860

28.6 267.982 32.3 323.738

31.0 261.538 28.8 365.383

31.3 266.994 27.4 403.589

30.8 293.350 28.1 428.835

Sources: Data on China’s defense expenditure submitted to the UN by the Chinese government

**Table 3 China’s Defense Expenditure Since 2012**

|Item Year|Personnel Expense|Col3|Training and Sustainment Expense|Col5|Equipment Expense|Col7|Total|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||Amount|Percentage (%)|Amount|Percentage (%)|Amount|Percentage (%)||
|2010|185.931|34.9|170.047|31.9|177.359|33.2|533.337|
|2011|206.506|34.3|189.943|31.5|206.342|34.2|602.791|
|2012|195.572|29.2|232.994|34.8|240.626|36.0|669.192|
|2013|200.231|27.0|269.971|36.4|270.860|36.6|741.062|
|2014|237.234|28.6|267.982|32.3|323.738|39.1|828.954|
|2015|281.863|31.0|261.538|28.8|365.383|40.2|908.784|
|2016|306.001|31.3|266.994|27.4|403.589|41.3|976.584|
|2017|321.052|30.8|293.350|28.1|428.835|41.1|1043.237|
|Sources: Data on China’s defense expenditure submitted to the UN by the Chinese government||||||||


-----

**Real Defense**

**Expenditure**

**Growth Rate**

**(Inflation-**

**adjusted) (%)**


**Total Defense**

**Expenditure**

**(RMB billion)**


**CPI**

**(Previous**

**Year =**

**100)**


**Growth Rate**

**of Government**

**Expenditure**

**(%)**


**Growth Rate**

**of Defense**

**Expenditure**

**(%)**


**Defense**

**Expenditure to**

**Government**

**Expenditure**

**(%)**


**Year**


**GDP**

**(RMB**

**billion)**


**Defense**

**Expenditure**

**to GDP (%)**

|2012|54036.74|669.192|102.6|15.29|11.02|1.24|5.31|8.42|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|2013|59524.44|741.062|102.6|11.32|10.74|1.24|5.29|8.14|
|2014|64397.4|828.954|102.0|8.25|11.86|1.29|5.46|9.86|
|2015|68905.21|908.784|101.4|15.87|9.63|1.32|5.17|8.23|
|2016|74358.55|976.584|102.0|6.75|7.46|1.31|5.20|5.46|
|2017|82712.17|1043.237|101.6|8.17|6.83|1.26|5.14|5.23|
|Sources: Statistical yearbooks and government documents released by the Chinese government and data on China’s defense expenditure submitted to the UN by the Chinese government|||||||||


**Table 4 Major Multilateral Treaties on Arms Control, Disarmament and**

**Non-Proliferation Joined by China**

**Treaties** **Time**

Signed in May 2014, approved in Apr.

Protocol to the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia 2015 by the Standing Committee of the

National People’s Congress

Protocol Additional to the Agreement Between the People’s Republic of

Signed in Dec. 1998, entered into force in

China and the International Atomic Energy Agency for the Application of

Mar. 2002

Safeguards in China

Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Signed in Sep. 1996

Signed in Apr. 1996, instrument of
Protocol I and II to the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty
ratification deposited in Oct. 1997

|Category|Treaties|Time|
|---|---|---|
||Protocol to the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia|Signed in May 2014, approved in Apr. 2015 by the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress|
||Protocol Additional to the Agreement Between the People’s Republic of China and the International Atomic Energy Agency for the Application of Safeguards in China|Signed in Dec. 1998, entered into force in Mar. 2002|
||Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty|Signed in Sep. 1996|


-----

**Category** **Treaties** **Time**

|Col1|Convention on Nuclear Safety|Signed in Sep. 1994, ratified in Apr. 1996|
|---|---|---|
||Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons|Acceded in Mar. 1992|
||Treaty on the Prohibition of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction on the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof|Acceded in Feb. 1991|
||Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material|Acceded in Feb. 1989|
||Agreement Between the People’s Republic of China and the International Atomic Energy Agency for the Application of Safeguards in China|Signed in Sep. 1988, entered into force in Sep. 1989|
||Additional Protocol II and III to the South Pacific Nuclear-Free Zone Treaty|Signed in Feb. 1987, instrument of ratification deposited in Oct. 1988|
||Additional Protocol II to the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean|Signed in Aug. 1973, instrument of ratification deposited in Jun. 1974|
|Chemical|Convention on the Prohibition of Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction|Signed in Jan. 1993, instrument of ratification deposited in Apr. 1997|
|Biological|Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction|Acceded in Nov. 1984|
||Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare|Statement issued to acknowledge the Protocol in Jul. 1952|
|Conventional|Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War (Protocol V) of Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or Have Indiscriminate Effects|Instrument of ratification deposited in Jun. 2010|


-----

**Category** **Treaties** **Time**

|Col1|Protocol Against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition, Supplementing the United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime|Signed in Dec. 2002|
|---|---|---|
||Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons Annexed to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects (Protocol IV)|Instrument of ratification deposited in Nov. 1998|
||Amended Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby-Traps and Other Devices Annexed to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects (Amended Protocol II)|Instrument of ratification deposited in Nov. 1998|
||Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects and Protocols I-III|Signed in Sep. 1981, instrument of ratification deposited in Apr. 1982; amendment of Article 1 of the Convention ratified in Jun. 2003, instrument of ratification deposited in Aug. 2003|
|Others|Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use of Environmental Modification Techniques|Acceded in Jun. 2005|
||Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space|Acceded in Dec. 1988|
||Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts, and the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space|Acceded in Dec. 1988|
||Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects|Acceded in Dec. 1988|
||Treaty on Principles Concerning the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space Including the Moon and other Celestial Bodies|Acceded in Dec. 1983|
||The Antarctic Treaty|Acceded in Jun. 1983|


-----

**Date of** **Participation or Statement by**
**Treaty** **Effective Date**

**Signature** **China**

**Agreement on Quadrilateral Cooperation and Coordination**
**Mechanism in Counter Terrorism by the Ministry of Defense/** **Signed in Aug. 2017, effective**

**Aug. 2017** **Aug. 2017**

**Armed Forces/ Military of Afghanistan, China, Pakistan, and** **in China**

**Signed in Jun. 2009, ratified in**
**Jun. 2009** **Jan. 2012**
**Dec. 2014**

**Agreement on Cooperation in Combating Illicit Trafficking** **Approved by the State Council**

**in May 2012, instrument of**

**Aug. 2008** **May 2010**

**approval deposited in Jul.**
**2012, effective in China**

**Agreement on the Procedure for Organizing and Conducting** **Approved in Jun. 2013,**
**Joint Anti-Terrorism Exercise within Territories of Member** **Aug. 2008** **Nov. 2013** **effective in China since Nov.**

**2013**

**Cooperation Agreement in the Sphere of Identifying and** **Approved by the State Council**
**Cutting off the Channels Used by the Individuals Involved in** **in May 2012, instrument of**

**Jun. 2006** **Nov. 2008**

**Terrorist, Separatist and Extremist Activities to Enter the** **approval deposited in Jul.**

**2012, effective in China**

**Table 6 Major Joint Exercises and Training by the PLA and**

**the PAP with Foreign Counterparts Since 2012**

|Agreement on Quadrilateral Cooperation and Coordination Mechanism in Counter Terrorism by the Ministry of Defense/ Armed Forces/ Military of Afghanistan, China, Pakistan, and Tajikistan|Aug. 2017|Aug. 2017|Signed in Aug. 2017, effective in China|
|---|---|---|---|
|Convention of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization Against Terrorism|Jun. 2009|Jan. 2012|Signed in Jun. 2009, ratified in Dec. 2014|
|Agreement on Cooperation in Combating Illicit Trafficking in Arms, Ammunition and Explosives between the Governments of the Member States of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization|Aug. 2008|May 2010|Approved by the State Council in May 2012, instrument of approval deposited in Jul. 2012, effective in China|
|Agreement on the Procedure for Organizing and Conducting Joint Anti-Terrorism Exercise within Territories of Member States of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization|Aug. 2008|Nov. 2013|Approved in Jun. 2013, effective in China since Nov. 2013|
|Cooperation Agreement in the Sphere of Identifying and Cutting off the Channels Used by the Individuals Involved in Terrorist, Separatist and Extremist Activities to Enter the Shanghai Cooperation Organization Member States|Jun. 2006|Nov. 2008|Approved by the State Council in May 2012, instrument of approval deposited in Jul. 2012, effective in China|

|No.|States/ Organizations|Codename|Location and Time|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|Belarus|United Shield-2017 Joint Anti- Terrorism Training|Held in Minsk, Belarus in Jul. 2017|
|2|Germany|Joint Rescue-2016 Joint Medical Exercise|Held in Chongqing, China in 2016|
|3|India|Hand in Hand Anti-Terrorism Joint Training|Held in Sichuan, China in Nov. 2013; in Maharashtra, India in Nov. 2014; in Yunnan, China in Oct. 2015; in Maharashtra, India in Nov. 2016; in Sichuan, China in Dec. 2018|


-----

**States/**
**No.** **Codename** **Location and Time**

**Organizations**

**Peace and Friendship Joint Military** **Tabletop exercise held in Malaysia in Dec. 2014; in**
**4** **Malaysia**

**Exercises** **Malaysia in Sept. 2015; in Malaysia in Nov. 2016**

**Friendship Joint** **Held in Ningxia, China in Dec. 2015; at National Counter**

**Anti-Terrorism Training** **Terrorism Center Pabbi, Pakistan in Oct. 2016**

**5** **Pakistan**

**A total of 6 training sessions held in China and Pakistan**
**Eagle/Shaheen Joint Training**
**from 2013 to 2018**

**Held in the Yellow Sea waters near Qingdao in Apr. 2012; in**
**Peter the Great Gulf in Jul. 2013; in the north maritime**
**and air space of the East China Sea to the east of Yangtze**
**River Estuary in May 2014; in the east of the maritime and**
**air space of the Mediterranean in May 2015; in Peter the**
**Great Gulf, off the coast of Vladivostok, and the maritime**

**Joint Sea Exercises**

**and air space of Sea of Japan in Aug. 2015; in Zhanjiang**
**and the east of the maritime and air space of Zhanjiang in**
**Sep. 2016; in the Baltiysk, St. Petersburg and southeast**

**6** **Russia**

**Baltic Sea in Jul. 2017; in Vladivostok and the designated**
**area between Peter the Great Gulf and the south Okhotsk**
**Sea in Sep. 2017**

**Aerospace Security**
**Computer-Enabled**

**Held in Russia in May 2016, and in China in Dec. 2017**

**Anti-Missile Command-and-Staff**

**Exercises**

**Explore-2016 Joint**

**7** **Saudi Arabia** **Anti-Terrorism Training of Special** **Held in China in Oct. 2016**

**Forces**

**Silk Road Cooperation-2015 Joint**

**Counter Terrorism Training for**

**8** **Sri Lanka** **Held in Colombo, Sri Lanka in Jun. 2015**

**Special**

**Operation Units**

**Cooperation-2016 Joint**
**9** **Tajikistan** **Held in Badakhshan, Tajikistan in Oct. 2016**

**Anti-Terrorism Exercise**

**Held in Thailand in Nov. 2015; in Thailand in Aug. 2017; in**
**10** **Thailand** **Falcon Strike Joint Training**
**Thailand in Sep. 2018**

|4|Malaysia|Peace and Friendship Joint Military Exercises|Tabletop exercise held in Malaysia in Dec. 2014; in Malaysia in Sept. 2015; in Malaysia in Nov. 2016|
|---|---|---|---|
|5|Pakistan|Friendship Joint Anti-Terrorism Training|Held in Ningxia, China in Dec. 2015; at National Counter Terrorism Center Pabbi, Pakistan in Oct. 2016|
|||Eagle/Shaheen Joint Training|A total of 6 training sessions held in China and Pakistan from 2013 to 2018|
|6|Russia|Joint Sea Exercises|Held in the Yellow Sea waters near Qingdao in Apr. 2012; in Peter the Great Gulf in Jul. 2013; in the north maritime and air space of the East China Sea to the east of Yangtze River Estuary in May 2014; in the east of the maritime and air space of the Mediterranean in May 2015; in Peter the Great Gulf, off the coast of Vladivostok, and the maritime and air space of Sea of Japan in Aug. 2015; in Zhanjiang and the east of the maritime and air space of Zhanjiang in Sep. 2016; in the Baltiysk, St. Petersburg and southeast Baltic Sea in Jul. 2017; in Vladivostok and the designated area between Peter the Great Gulf and the south Okhotsk Sea in Sep. 2017|
|||Aerospace Security Computer-Enabled Anti-Missile Command-and-Staff Exercises|Held in Russia in May 2016, and in China in Dec. 2017|
|7|Saudi Arabia|Explore-2016 Joint Anti-Terrorism Training of Special Forces|Held in China in Oct. 2016|
|8|Sri Lanka|Silk Road Cooperation-2015 Joint Counter Terrorism Training for Special Operation Units|Held in Colombo, Sri Lanka in Jun. 2015|
|9|Tajikistan|Cooperation-2016 Joint Anti-Terrorism Exercise|Held in Badakhshan, Tajikistan in Oct. 2016|


-----

**States/**
**No.** **Codename** **Location and Time**

**Organizations**

**Non-Combatant Evacuation**
**11** **UK** **Held in Nanjing in 2016; in London in 2017**

**Operation Desktop Exercises**

**Held in Beijing, Kunming and Chengdu in 2012; in Hawaii**

**The US-China Disaster** **in 2013; in Guangzhou and Haikou in 2015; in Seattle in**
**12** **US**

**Management Exchange** **2015; in Kunming in 2016; in Portland in 2017; in Nanjing**

**in 2018**

**China-Vietnam Joint Naval Patrols in** **Held in the shared fishing zone in the Beibu Gulf for 13**
**13** **Vietnam**

**the Beibu Gulf** **times from 2012 to 2018**

**Malaysia,** **Peace and Friendship 2018 Joint** **Held in Malaysia in Oct. 2018 by militaries of China,**
**14**

**Thailand** **Military Exercise** **Malaysia and Thailand**

**Held in Zhanjiang and the maritime and air space to the**
**15** **ASEAN** **Maritime Exercise-2018**
**east in Oct. 2018**

**Cooperation-2018.10.EU Joint**
**16** **EU** **Held in the west Gulf of Aden in Oct. 2018**

**Medical Exercise**

**Held in Khujand, Tajikistan in Jun. 2012; in Zhurihe**

**Peace Mission Joint** **Training Base in Inner Mongolia, China, in Aug. 2014; in**
**17** **SCO**

**Counter-Terrorism Exercises** **the Edelweiss Training Area in Balykchy, Kyrgyzstan, in**

**Sep. 2016; in Chebarkul, Chelyabinsk, Russia, in Aug. 2018**

**Table 7 Major Regional Security Dialogues and**

**Cooperation Platforms Joined by the PLA and the PAP**

**(Up to Dec. 2018)**

|11|UK|Non-Combatant Evacuation Operation Desktop Exercises|Held in Nanjing in 2016; in London in 2017|
|---|---|---|---|
|12|US|The US-China Disaster Management Exchange|Held in Beijing, Kunming and Chengdu in 2012; in Hawaii in 2013; in Guangzhou and Haikou in 2015; in Seattle in 2015; in Kunming in 2016; in Portland in 2017; in Nanjing in 2018|
|13|Vietnam|China-Vietnam Joint Naval Patrols in the Beibu Gulf|Held in the shared fishing zone in the Beibu Gulf for 13 times from 2012 to 2018|
|14|Malaysia, Thailand|Peace and Friendship 2018 Joint Military Exercise|Held in Malaysia in Oct. 2018 by militaries of China, Malaysia and Thailand|
|15|ASEAN|Maritime Exercise-2018|Held in Zhanjiang and the maritime and air space to the east in Oct. 2018|
|16|EU|Cooperation-2018.10.EU Joint Medical Exercise|Held in the west Gulf of Aden in Oct. 2018|
|17|SCO|Peace Mission Joint Counter-Terrorism Exercises|Held in Khujand, Tajikistan in Jun. 2012; in Zhurihe Training Base in Inner Mongolia, China, in Aug. 2014; in the Edelweiss Training Area in Balykchy, Kyrgyzstan, in Sep. 2016; in Chebarkul, Chelyabinsk, Russia, in Aug. 2018|

|Platform|Year of Inception|Description|
|---|---|---|


**China-Africa Defense and**

**2018**
**Security Forum**


**Hosted by China’s MND, the forum was held in Beijing from 26th Jun. to 10th Jul.,**
**2018. With the theme of “cooperation and mutual assistance”, in-depth discussions**
**were held on topics including China-Africa defense and security cooperation and**
**Africa’s security situation. 50 representatives attended from defense departments or**
**militaries of African countries and African Union, including 12 chiefs or deputy**
**chiefs of General Staff. It is the largest and highest-level mechanism for China-**
**Africa defense and security dialogue and cooperation.**


-----

**Year of**
**Platform** **Description**

**Inception**

|QCCM among the Military Forces of Afghanistan, China, Pakistan and Tajikistan|2016|The QCCM was built to provide coordination and mutual support in situation evaluation, evidence verification, intelligence sharing, capacity building, and training. China has always emphasized that the mechanism is not targeted against any other country or international organization and is ready to join all parties in expanding cooperation, increasing counter terrorism capacity, and safeguarding regional peace and stability. To date, two military leaders’ meetings have been held.|
|---|---|---|
|Great Wall Counter-Terrorism International Forum|2016|The inaugural session of the forum was held in Beijing in Nov. 2016 with the theme of “counter-terrorism in urban areas”. Representatives from 25 countries including Russia, France, Egypt and Brazil participated. The second forum was held in Beijing in May 2018 with the theme of “counter-terrorism in mountainous areas”. Representatives from 27 countries including France, Nigeria, Chile and Pakistan participated.|
|China and Latin America High-Level Defense Forum|2012|The biennial forum is hosted by China’s MND. With the theme of “enhancing mutual understanding and collaboration”, the forum aims to promote Latin- American militaries’ understanding of and trust in China and its military, and facilitate continued military exchanges and cooperation between the Chinese and Latin-American militaries. The forum is represented by defense and military leadership from major Spanish and Portuguese speaking countries.|
|ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting Plus|2010|ADMM-Plus is the largest and highest-level dialogue and cooperation mechanism on defense and security in the Asia-Pacific region. Since 2016, under the mechanism, the PLA has participated in a joint exercise on peacekeeping and demining in India, and exercises on maritime security and counter-terrorism in both Brunei and Singapore. From 2017 to 2020, China and Thailand co-chair the counter-terrorism expert working group.|
|Beijing Xiangshan Forum|2006|This annual forum is co-hosted by the China Association for Military Science and the China Institute for International Strategic Studies. The Xiangshan Forum was upgraded to a track-1.5 platform of international security and defense dialogue in 2014. It was renamed the Beijing Xiangshan Forum in 2018. The forum advocates the principles of equality, openness, inclusiveness and mutual learning. In Oct. 2018, the 8th Beijing Xiangshan Forum was held with the participation of over 500 representatives from 67 countries and 7 international organizations. The forum injected strong positive energy into regional and international security cooperation.|


**Shangri-La**

**Dialogue**


**2002**
**The dialogue is hosted by the International Institute for Strategic Studies, a think**
**tank based in London, and co-hosted by the Ministry of Defense of Singapore. It is**
**held in early June every year in the Shangri-La Hotel in Singapore. At the 17th**
**Shangri-La Dialogue in 2018, the Chinese delegation, on the topic of “Strategic**
**Implications of Military Capability Development in the Asia-Pacific”, explained the**
**important proposals of President Xi Jinping on building a new model of**
**international relations and a community with a shared future for mankind, and**
**actively promoted a joint effort with relevant countries to maintain regional security**


-----

|Platform|Year of Inception|Description Established in 2001 on the basis of the Shanghai Five (China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia and Tajikistan) mechanism, the SCO aims to enhance mutual|
|---|---|---|
|SCO|2001|trust, good-neighborliness and friendship among the member states, encourages the member states to effectively cooperate in such fields as politics, economy, culture and education. The organization is committed to maintaining and safeguarding regional peace, security and stability and building a new international political and economic order that is democratic, fair and equitable. The member states have signed important documents including the Treaty on Long-term Good-neighborly Relations, Friendships and Cooperation among the Shanghai Cooperation Organization Member States. From 9th to 10th Jun. 2018 in Qingdao, President Xi Jinping presided over the first Council of Heads of State of the SCO with an expanded membership, and stressed that member states will continue to uphold the Shanghai Spirit, make joint efforts to build an SCO community with a shared future, and promote a new model of international relations.|
|Chiefs of Defense Conference|1998|Initiated by the US PACOM, the conference is held annually and alternates between the US and other Asia-Pacific countries. China has participated every year since 2014. At the conference in Sep. 2017, the Chinese side focused on explaining President Xi Jinping’s vision of building a community with a shared future for mankind and the new proposals on security, and advocated that relevant countries should enhance strategic mutual trust and cooperate to meet global challenges.|
|ASEAN Regional Forum|1994|The forum has a membership of 27 countries and is the official multilateral platform for security dialogue and cooperation in the Asia-Pacific. Since 2015, China has hosted important meetings and events including the ARF Peacekeeping Experts’ Meeting, the ARF Defense Officials’ Dialogue, the ARF Heads of Defense Universities/Colleges/Institutions Meeting, and the ARF Security Policy Conference.|


**Table 8 Main UNPKOs the PLA Participated**

**(Up to Dec. 2018)**

|Starting Date|Mission Area|Troops|Mission Description|
|---|---|---|---|
|Jan. 2014|Mali (MINUSMA)|Force protection unit of 170 troops, engineering unit of 155 troops, and medical unit of 70 troops|In Mali, the engineering unit built and repaired 2,900 m of roads, leveled 400,000 m² of ground, and installed 667 prefabricated houses; the force protection unit conducted 2,710 armed patrols and security tasks; and the medical unit treated 8,120 patients.|


**In South Sudan, the engineering unit built and**
**maintained 5,365 km of roads, repaired 7 bridges, and**
**installed 72 prefabricated houses; the medical unit**
**treated 21,000 patients; the infantry battalion conducted**
**63 long/short-distance patrols, and carried out 216**
**armed escorts and 42 inspections in refugee camps,**
**covering a total mileage of 1,020,000 km.**


**South Sudan**
**Jan. 2012**

**(UNMISS)**


**Infantry battalion of 700**
**troops, engineering unit of**
**268 troops, and medical**
**unit of 63 troops**


-----

**In Darfur, Sudan, the engineering unit built and**
**repaired 89 km of roads, installed 400 prefabricated**
**houses and drilled 14 wells; the helicopter unit flew 800**
**sorties totaling 1,150 hours, transporting 5,500 persons**
**and 230 tons of materials.**


**Sudan**
**Nov. 2007**

**(UNAMID)**


**Engineering unit of 225**
**troops, helicopter unit of**
**140 troops**

|Apr. 2006|Lebanon (UNIFIL)|Multi-functional engineering unit of 180 troops, construction engineering unit of 200 troops, and medical unit of 30 troops|In Lebanon, the engineering unit cleared 10,342 mines and items of unexploded ordnance; completed maintenance tasks on houses and equipment; and received and treated 78,900 patients.|
|---|---|---|---|
|Apr. 2003|DR Congo (MONUSCO)|Engineering unit of 175 troops and medical unit of 43 troops|In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the engineering unit built 4,650 km of roads and 214 bridges; and the medical unit treated 35,000 patients.|
|Notes: In addition to the units, the PLA has sent over 80 military observers, staff officers and military officers under UN contract to the 5 above-mentioned UNPKOs, UNTSO, MINURSO and UN Headquarters.||||


**Table 9 Major International HADR Operations Participated by the PLA Since 2012**

**Starting Date** **Countries Concerned** **Mission Description**

**Papua New Guinea, Vanuatu,**

**Fiji, Tonga, Venezuela,** **The PLAN hospital ship Ark Peace sailed over 30,000 nautical miles for the tasks**

**Grenada, The Commonwealth** **of Mission Harmony-2018, diagnosed and treated 50,884 people, hospitalized 288**

**Jun. 2018**

**of Dominica, Antigua and** **people, performed 288 surgical operations, and provided auxiliary examinations**
**Barbuda, The Dominican** **for more than 20,000 people.**

**Republic, Ecuador and Chile**

**After the collapse of the Xe Pian-Xe Namnoy hydropower dam, under**
**construction in southern province Attapeu of Laos, the PLA sent its medical unit**
**participating in the Peace Train-2018 humanitarian medical relief joint exercise**

**Jul. 2018** **Laos**

**to the disaster-hit area by land and air, taking ambulances, epidemic prevention**
**vehicles, first-aid equipment and medicine with them, to join the rescue, medical**
**treatment and epidemic prevention efforts.**

**The PLAN task group visited Sri Lanka at a time when the country had been hit**
**by a severe flood. The task group participated immediately in the disaster relief**

**Aug. 2017** **Sri Lanka**

**efforts by sending a medical team to the affected area to provide medical services**
**and epidemic prevention, and donating relief materials including rubber boats.**

**Jun. 2016** **Vietnam**
**After the air crash in Vietnam, the PLA sent naval vessels and aircraft to assist in**

|Starting Date|Countries Concerned|Mission Description|
|---|---|---|
|Jun. 2018|Papua New Guinea, Vanuatu, Fiji, Tonga, Venezuela, Grenada, The Commonwealth of Dominica, Antigua and Barbuda, The Dominican Republic, Ecuador and Chile|The PLAN hospital ship Ark Peace sailed over 30,000 nautical miles for the tasks of Mission Harmony-2018, diagnosed and treated 50,884 people, hospitalized 288 people, performed 288 surgical operations, and provided auxiliary examinations for more than 20,000 people.|
|Jul. 2018|Laos|After the collapse of the Xe Pian-Xe Namnoy hydropower dam, under construction in southern province Attapeu of Laos, the PLA sent its medical unit participating in the Peace Train-2018 humanitarian medical relief joint exercise to the disaster-hit area by land and air, taking ambulances, epidemic prevention vehicles, first-aid equipment and medicine with them, to join the rescue, medical treatment and epidemic prevention efforts.|
|Aug. 2017|Sri Lanka|The PLAN task group visited Sri Lanka at a time when the country had been hit by a severe flood. The task group participated immediately in the disaster relief efforts by sending a medical team to the affected area to provide medical services and epidemic prevention, and donating relief materials including rubber boats.|


-----

|Starting Date Aug. 2015|Countries Concerned Myanmar|Mission Description In the severe flood in Myanmar, the PLA deployed 2 transport aircraft to deliver|
|---|---|---|
|||3 batches of tents, blankets and generators.|
|May. 2015|Nepal|After the strong earthquake in Nepal, the PLA sent 8 specialized teams totaling 1,088 people including rescue teams, medical and epidemic prevention teams, and transport teams to the affected area. They treated 5,294 people, 2 decontaminated an area of 940,000 m, airlifted 690 tons of relief materials and restored over 330 km of roads.|
|Jan. 2015|Malaysia|After the severe flood in Malaysia, the PLAAF sent aircraft to transport relief materials such as tents, water pumps and water purification facilities.|
|Dec. 2014|Maldives|In the severe water scarcity in Male, the capital city of Maldives, the PLAN submarine support ship Changxingdao used its ship borne desalting devices to provide fresh water for the affected population. The PLAAF provided emergency delivery of over 40 tons of bottled water by an IL-76.|
|Aug. 2014|The Republic of Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau|After the outbreak of Ebola in west Africa, the PLA sent 524 medical staff in 7 groups to conduct epidemic prevention operations. They built a treatment center, hospitalized 938 suspected patients and trained more than 3,000 local medical staff.|
|Mar. 2014|Malaysia, Australia|After the Malaysian Airliner MH370 lost contact, the PLAN sent 9 surface vessels, 6 ship borne helicopters and 2,185 service members to the search missions in the Malacca Strait, the Adman Sea, and waters in southwest and west to Australia. The vessels sailed 98,000 nautical miles in 7,679 sailing hours and 2 searched 744,000 km of sea. The PLAAF sent 2 IL-76 and 1 Y-8C to Malaysia and Australia on multinational joint search and rescue missions. The PLAAF organized 35 search flight sorties totaling 267 hours and 3 minutes, and covering a total flight distance of 167,000 km.|
|Nov. 2013|The Philippines|After Typhoon Haiyan struck the Philippines, the PLAN hospital ship Ark Peace was sent to conduct medical aid operations. In total, it treated 2,208 injured people, hospitalized 113 people, performed 44 surgical operations, transported 757 people in 76 helicopter sorties and 718 people in 104 boat sorties.|


**Table 10 Participation of the PLA in the Fanfare for Peace Military Tattoos**

|No.|Date|Location|Participating Bands|Activities|
|---|---|---|---|---|


**1st** **20th-29th Aug.**

**2014**


**Beijing and Inner**

**9 military bands from**
**Mongolia, China**
**China Kazakhstan**


**The opening ceremony and marching performance**
**in China’s National Indoor Stadium a parade and a**


-----

**j**

**exercise in Zhurihe Training Base in Inner**
**Mongolia**

|2nd|29th-30th Jun. 2015|St. Petersburg, Russia|12 military bands from Russia, Kazakhstan, China, Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan, over 300 people in total|A concert and a parade at the Palace Square of Russia and a pageant performance in the Peter and Paul Fortress|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|3rd|7th-8th Jun. 2016|Astana, Kazakhstan|7 military bands from Kazakhstan, China, Kyrgyzstan, Russia and Tajikistan, nearly 350 people in total|A concert in the concert hall of the Military Museum of Kazakhstan, a pageant performance at Bayterek Square, and a parade for the defense ministers on the square in front of the National Opera House|
|4th|26th-28th Aug. 2017|Shanghai, China|6 military bands from China, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan, Russia and Tajikistan, 426 people in total|The opening ceremony and marching performance in Yuanshen Gymnasium, a pageant performance at the Expo Park of Shanghai, and a second performance in the Yuanshen Gymnasium|
|5th|21st-25th Apr. 2018|Beijing, China|8 military bands from China, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, India, Pakistan, Russia and Belarus, over 400 people in total|The opening ceremony and marching performance at the Juyongguan Pass of the Great Wall with the defense ministers in the audience, a parade in the Beijing’s Olympic Park and a second performance at the Juyongguan Pass of the Great Wall|


**Acronyms**

|ADMM-Plus|ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting Plus|
|---|---|
|AI|artificial intelligence|
|AMS|Academy of Military Sciences|
|ARF|ASEAN Regional Forum|


-----

## ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations

 BRICS Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa

 CICA Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia

 CMC Central Military Commission

 CMCAO CMC Audit Office

 CMCDIC CMC Discipline Inspection Commission

 CMCPLC CMC Politics and Law Commission

 CMCSC CMC Supervision Commission

 CMI civil-military integration

 COC Code of Conduct in the South China Sea

 CPC Communist Party of China

 CPCCC CPC Central Committee

 CPI consumer price index

 DOC Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea

|BRICS|Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa|
|---|---|
|CICA|Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia|
|CMC|Central Military Commission|
|CMCAO|CMC Audit Office|
|CMCDIC|CMC Discipline Inspection Commission|
|CMCPLC|CMC Politics and Law Commission|
|CMCSC|CMC Supervision Commission|
|CMI|civil-military integration|
|COC|Code of Conduct in the South China Sea|
|CPC|Communist Party of China|
|CPCCC|CPC Central Committee|
|CPI|consumer price index|


-----

## ECM electronic countermeasures

|EU|European Union|
|---|---|
|GDP|gross domestic product|
|HADR|humanitarian assistance and disaster relief|
|IT|information technology|
|MAC|Military Area Command|
|MINURSO|United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara|
|MINUSMA|United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali|
|MND|Ministry of National Defense|
|MONUSCO|United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the DR Congo|
|NATO|North Atlantic Treaty Organization|
|NBC|nuclear, biological and chemical weapons|
|NBCE|nuclear, biological and chemical weapons and explosives|


-----

## NUDT National University of Defense Technology

 PACOM Pacific Command

 PAP People’s Armed Police

 PCRS Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System

 PLA People’s Liberation Army

 PLAA PLA Army

 PLAAF PLA Air Force

 PLAJLSF PLA Joint Logistic Support Force

 PLAN PLA Navy

 PLARF PLA Rocket Force

 PLASSF PLA Strategic Support Force

 PRC People’s Republic of China

 QCCM Quadrilateral Cooperation and Coordination Mechanism

 RMA R l ti i Milit Aff i

|PACOM|Pacific Command|
|---|---|
|PAP|People’s Armed Police|
|PCRS|Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System|
|PLA|People’s Liberation Army|
|PLAA|PLA Army|
|PLAAF|PLA Air Force|
|PLAJLSF|PLA Joint Logistic Support Force|
|PLAN|PLA Navy|
|PLARF|PLA Rocket Force|
|PLASSF|PLA Strategic Support Force|
|PRC|People’s Republic of China|
|QCCM|Quadrilateral Cooperation and Coordination Mechanism|


-----

## R&D research and development

 SCO Shanghai Cooperation Organization

 SLOCs sea lines of communication

 S&T science and technology

 TC Theater Command

 ETC Eastern Theater Command

 STC Southern Theater Command

 WTC Western Theater Command

 NTC Northern Theater Command

 CTC Central Theater Command

 THAAD Terminal High Altitude Area Defense

 UN United Nations

 UNMISS UN Mission in South Sudan

 UNAMID UN African Union Hybrid Operation in Darfur

|SCO|Shanghai Cooperation Organization|
|---|---|
|SLOCs|sea lines of communication|
|S&T|science and technology|
|TC|Theater Command|
|ETC|Eastern Theater Command|
|STC|Southern Theater Command|
|WTC|Western Theater Command|
|NTC|Northern Theater Command|
|CTC|Central Theater Command|
|THAAD|Terminal High Altitude Area Defense|
|UN|United Nations|
|UNMISS|UN Mission in South Sudan|


-----

## UNIFIL UN Interim Force in Lebanon

|UNSC|UN Security Council|
|---|---|
|UNPKO|UN peacekeeping operation|
|UNTSO|UN Truce Supervision Organization|


[About Us](http://eng.mod.gov.cn/xb/AboutUs/index.html) | [Site Map](http://eng.mod.gov.cn/xb/AboutUs/index.html#a2) | [Chinese Edition](http://www.mod.gov.cn/)


-----

