Xinhua: 'Full Text' of White Paper on China's National Defense in 2002 Paper
http://english.people.com.cn/features/ndpaper2002/nd.html

Beijing, Dec. 9 (XINHUA) -- The Information Office of the State Council
issued here Monday a white paper about China's national defense.  Following
is the full text of the paper titled "China's National Defense in 2002":

Foreword

The world needs peace, the people want cooperation, nations long for
development and society aspires for progress.  These are the irresistible
trends of our times.  The Chinese people, like the people of all other
countries, do not want to see any new war, hot or cold, and turbulence in any
region of the world, but yearn for lasting peace, stability and tranquility,
as well as common development and universal prosperity in the world.

China has entered the new phase of development for building a well-off
society in an all-round way and speeding up socialist modernization.  To
continue to propel the modernization drive, to achieve national reunification
of the motherland, and to safeguard world peace and promote common development
are the three historical tasks of the Chinese people in the new century.  The
16th National Congress of the Communist Party of China, which attracted
worldwide attention, has drawn up a grand blueprint for China's development in
the new century.  A developing China needs a peaceful international
environment and a favorable climate in its periphery.  And its development
will make even greater contributions to world peace and human progress.
China steadfastly follows a road of peaceful development, pursues an
independent foreign policy of peace and implements a national defense policy
that is defensive in nature.

To further introduce China's national defense policy and progress in
national defense development in the past two years, this white paper, China's
National Defense in 2002, is hereby published.

I.  The Security Situation

The international situation is undergoing profound changes as the world
has entered the new century.  World multi-polarization and economic
globalization are developing amid twists and turns.  Science and technology
are advancing with each passing day.  Competition in the overall national
strength has become increasingly fierce.  And mankind is faced with new
opportunities for development and new challenges.

Peace and development remain the themes of the present era.  Economic
interdependence among nations has been deepened.  The role played by global
and regional economic cooperation organizations is on the increase.  And


-----

economic security has been given even more attention.  Economic development,
scientific and technological progress, and the enhancement of overall national
strength are the main strategic trends of all countries.  The major
countries, while cooperating with and seeking support from each other, are
nonetheless checking on and competing with one another.  But since the
terrorist attacks against the United States on September 11, 2001, they have
stepped up their coordination and cooperation.  The developing countries are
actively pushing forward the establishment of a fair and rational new
international order, and playing an important role in the promotion of world
peace and development.  A new world war is unlikely in the foreseeable
future. To preserve peace and promote development represents the common
aspiration of all peoples.

The Asia-Pacific region has, on the whole, continued to enjoy its peace
and stability, and remains the most dynamic region economically with the
greatest development potential in the world. Strengthening dialogue and
cooperation, maintaining regional stability and promoting common development
have become the mainstream policy of the Asian countries.  The Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation (APEC) is heading for closer cooperation.  The
cooperation in East Asia with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) and China, Japan and the Republic of Korea (10+3) as the major
channel, has become more practical.  China and the ASEAN have reached
consensus on the establishment of a free trade area within 10 years,
initiating full cooperation in the field of non-traditional security issues.
Cooperation for the development of the Mekong River valley is about to unfold.
The ASEAN Regional Forum has made substantive achievements in the transition
from confidence-building measures to preventive diplomacy.  The Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) has made outstanding progress in building
mutual trust and developing state-to-state relationship based on partnership
rather than alliance, as well as in anti- terrorism cooperation.  The
reconstruction of Afghanistan is under way.  The situation in the South China
Sea area has been basically stable, as the relevant countries have signed the
Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea.

However, uncertainties impeding peace and development are also on the
increase.  The world is far from being tranquil.  The old international
political and economic order, which is unfair and irrational, has yet to be
changed fundamentally.  Economic development of the world is materially
unbalanced, and the North- South gap is further widening.  The developing
countries have gained less from the economic globalization process, and some
of them are in danger of being marginalized.  Democracy in international
relations remains elusive, and there are new manifestations of hegemonism and
power politics.  In certain regions, disputes caused by ethnic, religious,
territorial, resources or other issues crop up from time to time, leading even
to armed conflicts and local wars.  Terrorism, transnational crimes,
environmental degradation, drug trafficking and other non- traditional


-----

security threats are becoming more and more pronounced. Terrorism, in
particular, is posing a real threat to both global and regional security.

Rapid and drastic changes are taking place in the military field around
the world, and a new serious disequilibrium has occurred in the balance of
military power.  The extensive applications in the military field of new and
high technologies led by IT have stretched the battlefield into
multidimensional space which includes the land, sea, air, outer space and
electron. Medium- and long-distance precision strikes have become an important
pattern of operations.  The form of war is becoming increasingly
information-oriented.  All major countries have made adjustments in their
military strategies and stepped up the modernization by relying on high
technologies.  As far as military technology is concerned, the gap between
the developed and developing countries is wider than ever before.  The
developing countries are facing a serious challenge in their effort to
safeguard sovereignty and security.

Factors of instability still exist in the Asia-Pacific region.
Traditional security problems left over from history are yet to be resolved,
and new ones have appeared.  In certain countries, non- traditional security
issues are looming large.  The danger posed by terrorist, separatist and
extremist forces to the region's security cannot be rooted out in a short
time.  Tension in South Asia has not been fundamentally changed.
Afghanistan has not regained full stability.  Reconciliation on the Korean
Peninsula is moving haltingly.  Certain countries are stepping up their
military deployment and strengthening their military alliances in the AsiaPacific region.  Other countries have time and again enlarged the terms of
reference and scope of operations of their armed forces.

The basic pattern and trend of development in the cross-Taiwan Straits
relationship remain unchanged.  As the Taiwan compatriots are more vocal in
their demand for peace, tranquility and development, cross-Straits economic,
trade, cultural and personnel exchanges have become more frequent, and the
opening of three direct links in mail, air and shipping, and trade between the
two sides represents the popular will and the trend of the times.  But the
root cause of tension between the two sides has not been eliminated.  While
refusing to accept the one-China principle, and stubbornly clinging to the
position of "Taiwan independence," the leader of Taiwan has even gone so far
as to dish up the separatist proposition of "one country on each side," and
carried out all sorts of separatist moves with an incremental tactic.  The
Taiwan separatist force is the biggest threat to peace and stability in the
Taiwan Straits.  By continuing to sell weapons and military equipment to
Taiwan and elevating relations with the Taiwan authorities, a handful of
countries have interfered in China's internal affairs, inflated the arrogance
of the separatist forces and undermined China's peaceful reunification.


-----

Threats to world security have come in multiple forms and assumed global
dimension, which has increased the common interests of countries on the issue
of security.  To enhance mutual trust through dialogue, to promote common
security through cooperation, and to cultivate a new security concept
featuring mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality and cooperation, have become
the requirements of the trend of our era.  China is always a staunch force
for safeguarding world peace and promoting common development.  China will
unremittingly put the new security concept into practice, oppose all kinds of
hegemonism and power politics, and combat terrorism in all forms and
manifestations.  China will strive, together with other countries in the
world, to create an international environment of long-term peace, stability
and security.

II.  National Defense Policy

Strengthening national defense is a strategic task in China's
modernization drive, and a key guarantee for safeguarding China's security and
unity and building a well-off society in an all-round way.  China has
consistently pursued a national defense policy that is defensive in nature.

The fundamental basis for the formulation of China's national defense
policy is China's national interests.  It primarily includes: safeguarding
state sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and security; upholding
economic development as the central task and unremittingly enhancing the
overall national strength; adhering to and improving the socialist system;
maintaining and promoting social stability and harmony; and striving for an
international environment of lasting peace and a favorable climate in China's
periphery.  China takes all measures necessary to safeguard its national
interests and, at the same time, respects the interests of other countries,
standing for peaceful settlement of disputes and differences among nations by
means of consultation.

The goals and tasks of China's national defense are, in the main, as
follows:

-- To consolidate national defense, prevent and resist aggression.
China's territorial land, inland waters, territorial seas and territorial
airspace are inviolable.  In accordance with the requirements of national
defense in the new situation, China persists in unified leadership over
national defense activities, pursues the principle of independence and
self-defense by the whole people, implements the military strategy of active
defense, strengthens the building of its armed forces and that of its frontier
defense, sea defense and air defense, takes effective defensive and
administrative measures to defend national security and safeguard its maritime
rights and interests.  In the event of aggressions, China will resolutely
resist in accordance with the Constitution and laws.


-----

-- To stop separation and realize complete reunification of the
motherland.

China is a unitary multi-ethnic country jointly created by its people of
all ethnic groups.  The Chinese government forbids discrimination and
oppression against any ethnic group, as well as any act aimed at undermining
ethnic harmony and splitting the country.  Taiwan is an inalienable part of
China.  The Chinese government will, in keeping with the basic principles of
"peaceful reunification" and "one country, two systems" and the eight-point
proposal on developing cross-Straits relations and advancing the process of
peaceful national reunification at the present stage, strive for prospects of
peaceful reunification with the utmost sincerity and the maximum effort.  But
it will not forswear the use of force.  China resolutely opposes arms sales
to Taiwan or entering into a military alliance in any form with Taiwan by any
country.  China's armed forces will unswervingly defend the country 's
sovereignty and unity, and have the resolve as well as the capability to check
any separatist act.

-- To stop armed subversion and safeguard social stability.

China's Constitution and laws prohibit any organization or individual from
organizing, plotting or carrying out armed rebellion or riot to subvert the
state power or overthrow the socialist system.  China opposes all forms of
terrorism, separatism and extremism.  Regarding maintenance of public order
and social stability in accordance with the law as their important duty, the
Chinese armed forces will strike hard at terrorist activities of any kind,
crush infiltration and sabotaging activities by hostile forces, and crack down
on all criminal activities that threaten public order, so as to promote social
stability and harmony.  ( More)  09/12/2002 10:12 GMT

-- To accelerate national defense development and achieve national
defense and military modernization.

China follows an approach of coordinating national defense building and
economic development, striving for a high cost- effectiveness and promoting
defense and military modernization on the basis of economic growth.  Taking
Mao Zedong's military thinking and Deng Xiaoping's thinking on armed forces
building in the new period as the guide to action, and fully implementing the
important thought of the "Three Represents," (meaning the Communist Party of
China must always represent the requirements of the development of China's
advanced productive forces, the orientation of the development of China's
advanced culture, and the fundamental interests of the overwhelming majority
of the people in China) the Chinese military persists in taking the road of
fewer but better troops with Chinese characteristics, pushes forward the
various reforms in response to the trend in military changes in the world, and


-----

strives to accomplish the historical tasks of mechanization and IT
application, thereby bringing about leapfrog development in the modernization
of the military.

-- To safeguard world peace and oppose aggression and expansion.

China will never seek hegemony, nor will it join any military bloc or
crave for any sphere of influence.  China opposes policies of war, aggression
and expansion, stands against arms race and supports efforts of the
international community to solve international disputes in a fair and
reasonable manner.  It endorses all activities conducive to maintaining the
global strategic balance and stability, and actively participates in
international cooperation against terrorism.

China implements a military strategy of active defense.  Strategically,
China pursues a principle featuring defensive operations, self-defense and
attack only after being attacked.  In response to the profound changes in the
world's military field and the requirements of the national development
strategy, China has formulated a military strategic guideline of active
defense in the new period.

This guideline is based on winning local wars under modern, especially
high-tech conditions.  In view of the various factors threatening national
security, China has prepared for defensive operation under the most difficult
and complex circumstances.  The People's Liberation Army ( PLA), in
implementing the strategy of building a strong military through science and
technology, has accelerated the R&D of defense weaponry and equipment, trained
high-quality military personnel of a new type, established a scientific
organizational structure, developed theories for military operations with
Chinese characteristics, and strengthened its capability for joint, mobile and
multi-purpose operations.

This guideline stresses the deterrence of war.  In accordance with the
needs of the national development strategy, the PLA, by employing military
means flexibly and in close coordination with political, economic and
diplomatic endeavors, improves China's strategic environment, reduces factors
of insecurity and instability, and prevents local wars and armed conflicts so
as to keep the country from the harm of war.  China consistently upholds the
policy of no first use of nuclear weapons, and adopts an extremely restrained
attitude toward the development of nuclear weapons.  China has never
participated in any nuclear arms race and never deployed nuclear weapons
abroad.  China's limited nuclear counterattack ability is entirely for
deterrence against possible nuclear attacks by other countries.

This guideline highlights and carries forward the concept of people's war.
In the face of new changes in modern warfare, China persists in relying on


-----

the people in national defense building, enhancing the popular awareness of
national defense, and instituting an armed force system of combining a small
but capable standing army with a powerful reserve force; upholds the principle
of combining peacetime footing with wartime footing, uniting the army with the
people, and having a reserve among the people, improving the mobilization
mechanism with expanded mobilization scope, and establishing a national
defense mobilization system in line with the requirements of modern warfare;
and adheres to flexible applications of strategies and tactics, creating new
ways of fighting so as to give fuller play to the strength of a people' s war.

III.  The Armed Forces

The armed forces of the People's Republic of China (PRC) are composed of
the People's Liberation Army, the Chinese People's Armed Police Force and the
militia.  The Central Military Commission (CMC) of the PRC directs and
assumes unified command of the nation's armed forces.

The People's Liberation Army

The PLA is a people's army created and led by the Communist Party of China
(CPC), and the principal body of China's armed forces.  The PLA is made up of
both active and reserve components.  Its total force is maintained below the
2,500,000-strong mark.  The active components of the PLA are the country's
standing army, consisting of the Army, Navy, Air Force and the Second
Artillery Force, whose main task is to conduct operations of defense, and, if
necessary, help to maintain social order in accordance with the law.  Through
the General Staff Headquarters, the General Political Department, the General
Logistics Department and the General Armaments Department, the CMC exercises
operational command over the whole PLA and leadership for the development of
the PLA.

The PLA was established on August 1, 1927, and consisted of land forces
only in its early days.  The Army is responsible primarily for military
operations on land.  At present, the Army has no independent leading organ,
and the functions of the leading organ are exercised by the four general
headquarters/departments.  The seven military area commands, namely, those of
Shenyang, Beijing, Lanzhou, Jinan, Nanjing, Guangzhou and Chengdu, exercise
direct leadership over the Army units under their command.  The Army has such
arms as infantry, armor, artillery, air defense, Army aviation, engineering,
chemical defense and communications, as well as other specialized units such
as those of electronic counter-measure (ECM), reconnaissance and mapping.
The infantry, maneuvering and operating on foot or on armored personnel
carriers or infantry fighting vehicles, is composed of mountain infantry,
motorized infantry and mechanized infantry (armored infantry).  The armored
corps (tank corps), equipped basically with tanks and other armored vehicles


-----

and support vehicles, carries out ground assaults.  The artillery corps,
equipped basically with artillery for suppression and anti-tank purposes, and
missiles for antitank and other operational-tactical purposes, carries out
ground fire strikes.  The air defense corps, equipped basically with antiaircraft artillery and ground-to-air missile systems, carries out
ground-to-air operations.  The Army aviation corps, equipped with attack,
transport, and other specialized helicopters and light fixed-wing aircraft,
carries out air maneuvers and provides support for ground operations.  The
engineering corps, responsible for engineering support, is composed of
engineering and other specialized units of pontoons, construction, camouflage,
field water supply, and engineering maintenance.  The chemical defense corps,
responsible for chemical defense operations, is composed of chemical defense,
flame-throwing and smoke-generating units.  The communications corps,
responsible for military communications, is composed of specialized units
engaged in communications, communications engineering, communications
technical support, aviation navigation and military postal service.  The
Army, in accordance with its different duties and responsibilities, is also
divided into field mobile, sea border defense, frontier defense, and garrison
troops. (陆军按其担负的任务还划分为野战机动部队、海防部队、边防部队、警卫
警备部队等) The organizational order of the field mobile troops is normally
combined corps, division (brigade), regiment, battalion, company, platoon and
squad.  The organizational systems of the sea border defense, frontier
defense and garrison troops are decided in accordance with their operational
tasks and geographical conditions.

The Navy of the PLA was established on April 23, 1949.  Its primary
missions are, independently or jointly with the Army and Air Force, to guard
against enemy invasion from the sea, defend the state's sovereignty over its
territorial waters, and safeguard the state's maritime rights and interests.
The Navy has such arms as the submarine, surface, naval aviation, coastal
defense and marine corps, as well as other specialized units.  Under the
Navy, there are three fleets, namely, the Beihai, Donghai and Nanhai fleets,
as well as the Naval Aviation Department.  Each fleet has bases, maritime
garrison commands, flotillas and squadrons under its command.  The submarine
force is composed both of conventional and nuclear-powered units, with
underwater attack and some nuclear counterattack capabilities respectively.
The nuclear-powered submarine force, which assumes the strategic nuclear
counterattack mission, is under the direct command of the CMC.  The surface
force has combat and support units, which have anti-ship, anti-submarine, air
defense, mine warfare and shore attack capabilities.  The naval aviation is
composed of bomber, fighter-bomber, attacker, fighter, anti-submarine and
reconnaissance units, and security, ECM, transport, rescue and air refueling
units, which have reconnaissance, security, anti-ship, anti-submarine and air
defense capabilities.  The organizational order is: Naval Aviation
Department, fleet aviation, and aviation division and regiment.  The naval
coastal defense force is composed of shore-to-ship missile and coastal


-----

artillery units, which have capabilities to defend China's coasts.  The
marine corps has infantry, artillery, armor and engineering units, as well as
reconnaissance, chemical defense and communications units.  It is a rapid
assault force for amphibious operations.

The Air Force of the PLA was established on November 11, 1949.  Its
primary missions are organizing homeland air defense to protect the
territorial air, and providing air security for key facilities; organizing
relatively independent air offensive operations; independently or jointly with
the Army, the Navy or the Second Artillery Force, engaging in joint operations
against enemy invasion from the air, or in conducting air strikes against the
enemy.  Adopting a system of combining aviation with ground-to- air defense
forces, the Air Force consists of the aviation, surface-to-air missile,
anti-aircraft artillery and airborne units, as well as communications, radar,
ECM, chemical defense, technical reconnaissance and other specialized units.
The Air Force has an air command in each of the seven military areas of
Shenyang, Beijing, Lanzhou, Jinan, Nanjing, Guangzhou and Chengdu.  In the
major direction and target zones, there are air corps or corps- level air
bases.  The aviation is composed of fighter, attacker, bomber,
reconnaissance, transport and support units, usually in the organizational
order of division, regiment, group and squadron. An aviation division
generally has under its command two to three aviation regiments and related
stations.  The aviation regiment is the basic tactical unit.  Due to
differences in weaponry and tasks, the number of aircraft in an aviation
regiment ranges from 20 to 40.  The ratio of aircraft to pilots (aircrew) is
usually
1:1.2. (空军实行空防合一的体制，由航空兵、地空导弹兵、高射炮兵、空降兵以及

通信、雷达、电子对抗、防化、技术侦察等专业部（分）队组成。空军下辖沈阳、

北京、兰州、济南、南京、广州、成都七个军区空军，在重要方向和重要目标区设

有军或相当于军的基地。航空兵由歼击、强击、轰炸、侦察、运输航空兵及保障部

（分）队组成，通常按师、团、大队、中队体制编成。航空兵师一般下辖2个至3个

航空兵团和驻地场站，航空兵团是基本战术单位。由于武器装备和担负的任务不同

，各类航空兵团编制飞机数量，通常在20架至40架之间不等；飞机和飞行员（机组

）之比，通常是1 : 1.2。) The ground-to-air missile force and anti-aircraft artillery
force are usually organized into divisions (brigades), regiments, battalions
and companies, and the airborne force into corps, divisions, regiments,
battalions and companies.

The Second Artillery Force of the PLA was established on July 1, 1966.
It is composed of the ground-to-ground strategic nuclear missile force, the
conventional operational-tactical missile force, and the support units.  The
strategic nuclear missile force, under the direct command of the CMC,


-----

constitutes the main part of China' s limited nuclear counterattack
capability.  It is equipped with land-based strategic nuclear missile
systems.  Its primary missions are to deter the enemy from using nuclear
weapons against China, and, in the case of a nuclear attack by the enemy, to
launch an effective counterattack in self-defense independently or jointly
with the strategic nuclear forces of other services, at the order of the
supreme command.  The conventional operational-tactical missile force is
equipped with conventional operational and tactical missile systems.  Its
task is to carry out fire assaults with conventional missiles.

The PLA's reserve force, established in 1983, is a force with its own
preset organizational structure, with reserve personnel as the base and active
personnel as the backbone.  The reserve force operates a unified
organizational system.  The divisions, brigades and regiments of the reserve
force are conferred designations and military banners.  The reserve force
implements orders and regulations of the PLA, and is incorporated into the
PLA's order of battle.  In peacetime, it is led by the provincial military
districts or garrison commands, and in wartime, after mobilization, it is
commanded by the designated active unit or carries out combat missions
independently.  It receives military training in peacetime in accordance with
the relevant regulations, and, if necessary, helps to maintain social order in
accordance with the law.  In wartime, it may be called into active service in
pursuance of a state mobilization order.

The PLA forces stationed in Hong Kong and Macao are under the direct
leadership of the CMC.  The PLA Hong Kong Garrison is mainly composed of
ground, naval and air units.  The PLA Macao Garrison is mainly composed of a
ground force, with some naval and air force personnel on its staff.

The Chinese People's Armed Police Force

The Chinese People's Armed Police Force was established on June 19, 1982.
It consists of internal security forces, gold mine, forest, water
conservancy, electricity power, and transportation forces.  The frontier
police force, fire brigades and security guards are also included into the
Armed Police Force.  The internal security forces are composed of contingents
and mobile divisions.  The Armed Police Force is constructed in accordance
with the PLA's guiding concept, purpose and principles of army building, as
well as its orders, rules and regulations, combined with characteristics of
the Armed Police Force.  It implements the Military Service Law of the PRC,
and enjoys the same benefits as those of the PLA.  The basic missions of the
Armed Police Force are to maintain state security and social stability,
protect facilities and objects significant to the state, safeguard people' s
lives and properties, and assist the PLA in wartime in defensive operations.

The Armed Police Force is subordinate to the State Council, and is under


-----

the dual leadership of the State Council and the CMC.  The Armed Police Force
receives unified leadership and management, and its command is delegated to a
relevant organ at each level.  The Armed Police Force has three echelons of
leadership, namely, general headquarters, contingent (division) and detachment
( regiment).  The General Headquarters of the Armed Police Force, as the
chief commanding organ of the Armed Police Force, commands and administers
internal security forces, and gold mine, forest, water conservancy,
electricity power, and transportation forces.  In the nationwide
administrative hierarchy, the Armed Police contingents, detachments, and
squadrons are instituted at province, prefecture, and county levels
respectively.  When performing a public security task or relevant work, the
Armed Police Force unit is subordinate to the leadership and command of the
public security organs at the same level.

In peacetime, the tasks of the Armed Police Force include performing guard
duties at fixed points, dealing with contingencies, combating terrorism and
supporting national economic development.  Guard duties at fixed points
chiefly mean, among others, security guard, watch and ward, prison and
detention guard, escort and patrol.  It is specifically responsible for
protecting the security of state-designated objects to be guarded, important
visiting foreign dignitaries, leading organs of the Party and government at
and above the provincial level, embassies and consulates of foreign countries
in China, important national and international conferences, and sites of
large-scale cultural and sports activities; posting peripheral armed guards at
prisons and detention houses; providing armed protection for key departments
in charge of confidential work and critical parts of important airports, radio
stations, state economic departments, and national defense works, as well as
important bridges and tunnels along trunk railway lines, and specially
designated large road bridges; and performing armed patrol and other security
duties in state-designated large and medium-sized cities or specific zones.
Dealing with contingencies chiefly means handling, according to law, sudden
illegal incidents endangering state security or social order, such as revolts,
riots and disturbances, fights with weapons and other group activities that
endanger public security.  Combating terrorism chiefly means performing antiattack, anti-hijacking and anti-explosion tasks.  Supporting national
economic development chiefly means gold mine prospecting, preventing and
fighting forest fire, participation in key state energy and transportation
projects, and emergency rescue and disaster relief in cases of serious
calamities.

The Militia

The militia is an armed mass organization not released from production.
It is a reserve force of the PLA and the basis for the prosecution of a
people's war under modern conditions.  The General Staff Headquarters
administers the building of the militia under the leadership of the State


-----

Council and the CMC.  Under the command of military organs, the militia in
wartime helps the standing army in its military operations, conducts
independent operations, and provides combat support and manpower replenishment
for the standing army.  In peacetime, it undertakes the tasks of performing
combat readiness support, taking part in emergency rescue and disaster relief
efforts, and maintaining social order.

In accordance with provisions in the Military Service Law of the PRC, male
citizens from 18 to 35 years of age who are fit for military service,
excluding those enlisted for active service, shall be regimented into militia
units to perform reserve service. The militia has two categories: the primary
and the ordinary.  A selected group of militiamen under the age of 28,
including soldiers discharged from active service and other persons who have
received or are selected for military training, shall be regimented into the
primary militia; other male citizens belonging to the age group of 18 to 35,
who are qualified for reserve service shall be regimented into the ordinary
militia.  The primary militia may recruit female citizens when necessary.
Rural towns and townships, administrative villages, urban sub-districts, and
enterprises and institutions of a certain scale are the basic units in which
the militia is organized.  Primary militiamen are separately organized for
concentrated military training in militia military training bases of
administrative areas at the county level.  Currently, there are emergency
detachments, and such specialized technical detachments as anti-aircraft
artillery, anti- aircraft machineguns, portable air defense missiles, ground
artillery, communications, chemical defense, engineering and reconnaissance
detachments.

To ensure that militiamen are always ready to respond to the call in case
of a contingency, the Chinese government has formulated a militia combat
readiness system, whereby combat readiness education is carried out regularly
among the militia with the purpose of enhancing their national defense
awareness, and exercises are conducted in accordance with combat readiness
plans to enhance the militia's operational capabilities.

IV.  National Defense Building

China's national defense building is an important part of the country's
modernization drive.  To meet the needs of safeguarding its national
security, China insists on modernizing its national defense according to its
own conditions

Legal System

During the past two years, the legal system relating to China's national
defense has made much headway.  In March 2000, the National People's Congress
(NPC) enacted the Legislation Law of the PRC, which for the first time


-----

expressly defined the legislative power of the CMC and all general
headquarters/ departments, all services and arms, and all military area
commands. The CMC may formulate military statutes in accordance with the
Constitution and laws.  The general headquarters/departments, services and
arms, and military area commands may, within their respective authorities,
formulate military regulations in accordance with the law and the military
statutes, decisions and orders of the CMC.  The military statutes and
regulations are implemented within the armed forces.  Procedures for
formulation, amendment and nullification of military statutes and regulations
shall be stipulated by the CMC in accordance with the principles specified in
the provisions of the said Law.  The above stipulations have provided for the
important position of the military legislative system within the overall
legislative system of the state.

Since 2000, China has issued 3 decisions, 56 statutes and 420 regulations
in respect of laws and law-related issues concerning national defense and
armed forces building.  The National Defense Education Law of the PRC enacted
by the Standing Committee of the NPC has provided a legal basis for national
defense education.  The newly revised Law of the PRC on Officers in Active
Service has further perfected the military service system pertaining to PLA
officers.  The State Council and the CMC have joint1ly formulated the
Implementation Measures for the Law of the PRC on Protecting Military
Facilities, which expressly provides for the organizational leading system
regarding the protection of military facilities, as well as specific
protection and penalty measures.  The newly revised Routine Service
Regulations of the PLA and Discipline Regulations of the PLA provide a
powerful legal guarantee for enhancing the effort of running the armed forces
according to law under the new conditions.

To safeguard the interests of national defense and the legitimate rights
and interests of military personnel in an age of reform and opening-up, China
has reformed its military judicial system.  Authorized by the Supreme
People's Court of the PRC, military courts have begun to adjudicate civil
cases within the armed forces, including cases on contract, marriage and
family, real estate, intellectual property rights, damage claims in medical
accidents, and applications for adjudication of the missing or death of
servicemen, thus exercising the function of civil adjudication inside the
armed forces.  Relevant organs of local governments at various levels and the
armed forces are trying to create a favorable legal environment for national
defense and armed forces building by establishing and improving the mechanism
of protecting the legitimate rights and interests of the service personnel and
their families.

Under unified arrangement by the state, the Chinese armed forces launched
in 2001 the Fourth Five-Year Program on Education to Popularize Knowledge of
Laws.  The main contents include studying the Constitution, basic laws of the


-----

state and laws and regulations in relation to national defense and armed
forces building, performance of the armed forces' functions, development of
the socialist market economy, and the vital interests of the officers and men.
The contents of the military law, the law of war and armed conflicts, etc.,
have been included in the legal courses at military colleges and schools, and
the training programs of the armed forces.  The PLA has set up courses for
field-grade officers of the Army, Navy and Air Force on the armed conflict law
once every two years, and organized lectures on the armed conflict law for
officers of the division level and above, who are enrolled at the National
Defense University every year.

Mobilization

At each level of the people's government from the county up to the state,
there is a national defense mobilization commission, which has under it,
offices and coordinating bodies responsible for the mobilization of the
people's armed forces, national economy and transportation, civil air defense,
and national defense education.  The premier of the State Council takes the
position of chairman of the State National Defense Mobilization Commission,
and vice-premiers of the State Council and vice- chairmen of the CMC are
vice-chairmen.  Other members include heads of relevant ministries and
commissions under the State Council, leaders of the general
headquarters/departments of the PLA and heads of their subordinate offices.
The chairman of the local national defense mobilization commission is the
principal leader of the local government at the same level.  The
vice-chairmen are the deputy leaders at the local government of the same level
and principal leaders of the military organ at the same level.

The state conducts mobilization preparations in peacetime by integrating
mobilization of the armed forces, the national economy and transportation,
civil air defense, and defense education into the state's overall development
plan and relevant programs.  Mobilization of the armed forces refers to the
mobilization of the active and reserve forces of the PLA, the Armed Police
Force, the militia and the reserve personnel, as well as the mobilization of
appropriate weapons, equipment and logistical materials.  Its main task is to
prepare in peacetime for manpower mobilization and, in case of need, call up
the reservists and other citizens of service age, ensure a quick expansion and
reorganization of the PLA, and expansion of the other forces, and organize the
masses to support and join in the operations of the armed forces.
Mobilization of the national economy includes mobilization of industry,
agriculture, science and technology, material supplies, commerce and trade,
and finance.  Its main task is, in peacetime, to integrate the preparation
for mobilization with economic development in an organized and planned way,
and in time of war, reallocate economic resources, and exercise centralized
control and use of national financial and material resources so as to increase
the production of weapons, equipment and other military supplies, and meet the


-----

needs of war.  Mobilization for civil air defense includes mobilization of
civilians and people with special civil air defense skills, material and
technical support for civil air defense projects, and civil air defense
early-warning systems. Its main task is to mobilize social forces in
construction of air defense projects, establish and train specialized air
defense service, conduct civil air defense publicity and education, organize
evacuations and sheltering, assist in air defense operations, and deal with
the aftermath of air raids.  Mobilization of transportation includes
mobilization of transportation, communications and postal services.  Its main
task is to organize in peacetime the formation of professional transportation
and communications support force, defense infrastructure construction,
equipment build-up, war material storage and mobilization preparations of
civil transportation means and in time of war, organize the rush repair and
construction of transportation and communications facilities, and
transportation support for troop movement and material supply.

In recent years, some army units and local governments have, pursuant to
relevant laws and regulations, jointly organized defense mobilization drills
for transportation and air defense.  China is further improving its defense
mobilization laws and regulations, perfecting its defense mobilization system,
and actively promoting modernization in this area.

Education

China emphasizes popularizing and strengthening national defense education
with patriotism at its core, strives to enhance the national defense awareness
of the whole people, and helps citizens perform defense duties
conscientiously.

The nationwide defense education is under the leadership of the State
Council, with the assistance of the CMC.  The State Defense Education Office
is responsible for the planning, organization, direction and coordination of
the nation's defense education.  Local people's governments at all levels
exercise leadership over defense education in their respective administrative
areas.  All relevant departments perform their respective duties, cooperate
with one another, and, combined with their own work, ensure that defense
education activities are carried out smoothly.  The National Defense
Education Law of the PRC was formally promulgated and came into force on April
28, 2001, putting China's national defense education on the legal track.

China implements a military training system in institutions of higher
learning, senior middle schools and schools corresponding to senior middle
schools.  Since 1985, more than 200,000 officers and men have helped these
institutions and schools organize military training for students, and more
than 30 million students have been trained.  In the past several years, the
percentage of university and college freshmen receiving military training has


-----

reached about 60%.  Commencing in 2002, students of all regular institutions
of higher learning and senior middle schools are obliged to take military
training in accordance with relevant regulations and plans.

On August 31, 2001, the NPC Standing Committee set the third Saturday of
September every year as the National Defense Education Day.  This has
provided a vehicle for the participation of the entire population in national
defense educational activities, which helps ensure enhanced and continued
implementation of the educational programs in this area.

Defense Expenditure

The Chinese government has always been strict in its control, management
and supervision of defense spending, and has established a complete system of
relevant laws and regulations for that purpose.  Pursuant to the National
Defense Law of the PRC, the entire defense expenditure comes from the state
financial budget.  In order to meet the defense needs, the Chinese government
exercises a system of financial appropriation of defense funds, and implements
administration in accordance with the Budget Law of the PRC.  China's defense
budget and final accounts are reviewed and approved by the NPC.  The state
and armed forces' auditing organs exercise strict auditing and supervision of
the execution process of the budget.

In recent years, in line with financing and budgeting reforms in the
government, the administration of defense expenditure has undergone a whole
array of reforms, including reform in the defense expenditure budgeting
method, centralized payment for weapon and equipment procurement, and a
tendering and bidding system for the procurement of defense materials,
projects and services.  Defense funds are therefore managed in a more just,
fair and transparent way.

Based on the continuous economic growth, China's defense expenditure has
increased somewhat.  The proportion of annual defense spending in the GDP was
1.09% in 1995, and 1.50% in 2001 ( see Chart 1).  However, China's defense
expenditure has been kept at a fairly low level, and the increased part is
basically of a compensatory nature.  From 1979 to 2001, the proportion of
defense expenditure in the state financial spending is on a declining curve
(see Chart 2) from 17.37% in 1979 to 7.65% in 2001 -- a drop of nearly 10
percentage points.  Chart 1: Percentage of China's Annual Defense Expenditure
in GDP ( 1995-2001) 1995:1.09%; 1996:1.06%; 1997:1.09%; 1998:1.19%;
1999:1.31%; 2000:1. 35%; 2001:1.50% Chart 2: Percentage of China's Defense
Expenditure in the Total State Financial Expenditure (1979-2001) 1979:17.37%;
1983:12.57%; 1987:9.27%; 1991:9.75%; 1995:9.33%; 1998: 8.66%; 2001:7.65%.

China's defense spending was 120.754 billion yuan (RMB) in 2000, and
144.204 billion yuan in 2001.  The budget for defense expenditure in 2002 is


-----

169.444 billion yuan (see the following table), accounting for 7.60%, 7.65%
and 8.03% of the state financial expenditure in the same year, respectively.
Table: Breakdown of China's Annual Defense Expenditures in 2000, 2001 and 2002
(unit: RMB100 million yuan) Item Year/Personnel: 2000/405.50; 2001/461.63;
2002/540.43 Item Year/Maintenance & Operations: 2000/412.74; 2001/485.81;
2002/581.23 Item Year/ Equipment: 2000/389.30; 2001/494.60; 2002/572.78 Item
Year/Total: 2000/1,207.54; 2001/1,442.04; 2002/1,694.44

The increased defense expenditure in recent years has primarily been for
the following purposes: (1)Increase of personnel expenses. Along with the
socio-economic development and the per-capita income rise of rural and urban
residents, it is necessary to improve the living standards and conditions of
military personnel. The past decade has witnessed the increase of the board
expenses in the armed forces on five occasions, and an 84% salary raise for
officers and 92% allowance raise for soldiers.  (2)Establishment and gradual
improvement of a social security system for servicemen. In accordance with the
requirements of the market economy, China has, since 1998, established such
systems as injury and death insurance for servicemen, medical insurance for
demobilized servicemen and housing subsidies for servicemen, and adjusted and
enhanced living expense standards for PLA retirees.  (3)Increase of expenses
of a maintenance nature.  Since the armed forces stopped commercial
activities in 1998, the budget for training has increased year by year.  With
the gradual improvement of living facilities and progressive office
automation, expenses of a maintenance nature have kept rising.  (4)Increase
of expenses spent on cooperation with the international community in
anti-terrorism activities.  (5)Appropriate increase of expenses for the
improvement of military equipment to enhance defense capabilities under the
conditions of modern technologies, particularly high technologies.

On the whole, China's defense expenditure has remained at a fairly low
level in the world in 2002 (see Chart 3).  Compared with the USA, Russia, UK
and France, the percentage of China's defense expenditure in its GDP and the
state financial expenditure is also fairly low (see Chart 4). Chart 3:
Comparison of Defense Expenditures of Some Countries in 2002 (unit: 100
million US dollars) USA:3,479.9; Russia:91; UK:348; France:244; Germany:207;
Japan:405; China:204 Note 1: The exchange rate used here is based on that
announced by China's State Administration of Exchange Control in 2002, which
is 1.0 US dollar equals about 8.28 RMB yuan. Note 2: Statistics in the chart
are sourced from the national defense reports, financial reports and other
government reports published by the said countries. Chart 4: Comparison of the
Percentages of Defense Expenditure in the GDP and Financial Expenditure of
China and Some Other Countries in 2001 Percentage of defense expenditure in
the GDP: USA:3.04%; Russia:2.41%; UK:2.50%; France:1.96%; Germany:1.10%;
Japan:0.95%; China:1.50% Percentage of defense expenditure in financial
expenditure: USA:16.55%; Russia:18.35%; UK:6.1%; France:11.08%; Germany:9.80%;
Japan:5.98%; China:7.65% Note: Statistics in the chart are sourced from the


-----

national defense reports, financial reports and other government reports
published by the said countries.

Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense

China's defense-related science, technology and industry is the state's
strategic industry, and the important industrial and technological foundation
for national defense modernization, as well as a major driving force for the
development of the national economy, science and technology.  China builds
and develops its defense-related science, technology and industry
independently, enhances the overall level and economic efficiency of defenserelated science, technology and industry, and promotes the coordinated
development of national defense and economy.

The Commission of Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense of
the PRC is an organ under the State Council in charge of work in this regard.
It is responsible for researching and formulating principles and policies, as
well as laws, rules and regulations in respect of the development of
defense-related science, technology and industry; deliberating the development
plan for defense-related science, technology and industry, and overseeing the
overall planning of and proper connections between defense-related research,
production and construction; organizing qualification examination and approval
work for research and manufacture of military products; examining and
verifying contracts in respect of scientific research and production between
the military and the producers; coordinating, supervising and inspecting
execution of ordering contracts so as to ensure the production and supply of
military equipment; exercising administration of the nuclear, space, aviation,
shipbuilding and weaponry industries; giving guidance to the administration of
the military-related electronics sector; organizing, studying and implementing
reform of the system of defense-related science, technology and industry;
organizing adjustment of the capability, structure and layout of the
defense-related science, technology and industry; drawing up plans for
investment in fixed assets in respect of defense-related science, technology
and industry, and for technical transformation and development of defense
conversion technologies, and organizing the implementation of such plans; and
conducting foreign exchanges and international cooperation in the field of
defense-related science, technology and industry.

After decades of development, China has formed a defense- related
science, technology and industry system, which is by and large complete in
disciplines and coordinated with regard to means of research and production;
trained and fostered a contingent of professionals with a good mastery of
advanced technology and a sound work style; and laid an important material and
technological foundation for independent research and manufacture of military
equipment in China.  Currently, China has 11 military industrial group
corporations, namely, China National Nuclear Corporation, China Nuclear


-----

Engineering and Construction Corporation, China Aerospace Science and
Technology Corporation, China Aerospace Science and Industry Corporation,
China Aviation Industry Corporation I, China Aviation Industry Corporation II,
China State Shipbuilding Corporation, China Shipbuilding Industry Corporation,
China North Industries Group Corporation, China South Industries Group
Corporation, and China Electronic Science and Technology Corporation. [Chinese
characters render this name as China Electronic Technology Group Corporation.] Each
is responsible for the organization and administration of its R&D and
manufacture, and exercising the rights of an investor authorized by the state
over state-owned assets in its subordinate enterprises.

China's defense-related science, technology and industry gives priority to
the development of new- and high-tech weaponry and equipment, and strives to
raise their modernization level.  It is imperative to speed up the adjustment
of capability, structure and layout, enhance capability in research and
production of new- and high-tech weaponry, streamline the work force of
military industry, optimize the industrial layout, and gradually establish a
new system of defense-related science, technology and industry.  It is
imperative to further strengthen the development of defense- related science
and technology, promote the progress of science and technology, concentrate
resources to make breakthroughs in a number of key technologies, enhance the
capability of self- reliance and innovation and sustained development
capability in defense-related science, technology and industry, and strive to
achieve leapfrog technological progress.  It is imperative to bring up
talented people and create a well-structured contingent of high- caliber
people in a whole array of disciplines needed for the development of
defense-related science, technology and industry.  At present, in China's
defense-related science, technology and industry, 141 academicians of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences and the Chinese Academy of Engineering are active,
of which 52 are academicians of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, 95 are
academicians of the Chinese Academy of Engineering, and 6 belong to both
academies.

The Chinese government has always stressed the peaceful use of military
industrial technology, and encouraged and supported defense-related science,
technology and industry to bring its technological and human resource
advantages into full play, and develop dual-purpose technologies and new- and
high-tech industries, and thus promoted the development of the national
economy.  Nuclear power for civil use should be industrialized.  Civil
aerospace technologies have made remarkable achievements in the applied
satellite, carrier rocket, and manned spaceship.  The "Long March" series of
carrier rockets have successfully launched 27 foreign-made satellites,
entitling China to a position in the international commercial satellite
launching service market.  In 1999, 2001 and 2002, China successfully
launched in succession three experimental unmanned spaceships, marking a
breakthrough for China in mastering basic manned spaceship technology.  This


-----

has provided a solid foundation for China to send a manned spaceship into
space.  The aviation industry for civil use, while strengthening
technological research, expanding sub-contracting scope for production, and
improving existing plane models, has made important headway in manufacturing
general-purpose aircraft and the "Xinzhou 60" aircraft, and has begun the R&D
of new feeder liners.  The shipbuilding industry for civil use has already
become a highly competitive pillar export industry among China's
electromechanical industries.  In recent years, China's shipbuilding output
has continuously increased, ranking third in the world for seven consecutive
years.  The accomplished shipbuilding output in 2001 accounted for six
percent of the world 's total.

China's defense-related science, technology and industry endeavors to
establish and perfect an organizational system and an operational mechanism
tailored to the needs of national defense building and the socialist market
economy.  It encourages a specialized division of labor, gradually forms a
new multi-tiered cooperative system of principal weaponry contractors, subcontractors and suppliers of parts and components.  It also presses forward
with the strategic reorganization of military industrial enterprises and
institutions, optimizes the allocation of resources, develops core industries,
and gradually forms a batch of internationally competitive conglomerates.  It
makes efforts to deepen the reform of military industrial enterprises,
establish a modern enterprise system, and push forward the diversification of
investors of the enterprises and transformation of operational mechanisms so
as to enable these enterprises to turn into market competitors operating
independently and responsible for their own profits or losses.  The
defense-related science, technology and industry stresses the reform of its
sci-tech system, strengthens the organic integration of production, education
and research, and transforms the defense-related science and technology into
actual productivity.  In addition, the defense-related science, technology
and industry adheres to opening-up, and actively participates in international
exchanges and cooperation in line with the principles of the complementarity
of each other's strengths, reciprocity, mutual benefit and common development.

Land and Sea Border Defense

China pursues a policy of good neighborliness and friendship.  It defends
and administers its land borders and seas under its jurisdiction, safeguards
the country's territorial sovereignty and maritime rights and interests, and
secures both its land and sea borders strictly in accordance with treaties and
agreements it has signed with neighboring countries, and the United Nations
Convention on Law of the Sea.

China advocates settling unresolved border and maritime demarcation issues
through negotiation, and demarcating maritime boundaries with neighboring


-----

countries or countries contiguous to opposite coasts based on the principle of
equity, and opposes the use of force or provocative acts.  China has solved
or basically solved boundary issues left over by history with most of its
adjacent countries.  In December 2000, China and Viet Nam entered into the
Beibu Gulf Demarcation Agreement.  In May 2002, China and Tajikistan signed
the Supplementary Agreement on the Boundary Between the People's Republic of
China and the Republic of Tajikistan.

China attaches importance to having frontier defense exchanges and
cooperation with neighboring countries, and jointly maintaining order along
the borders.  China has signed treaties, agreements and understandings with
Mongolia, Russia, Myanmar, Viet Nam, Laos and India on border control and
handling border affairs, setting up confidence-building measures, and
preventing dangerous military activities.  Since 1995, the Chinese Ministry
of National Defense has signed frontier cooperation agreements with the
General Administration of Frontier Defense of the Russian Federation and the
Administration of Frontier Guards of Mongolia.  In January 2002, Chinese
Ministry of National Defense and the National Security Commission of
Kazakhstan signed the Frontier Defense Cooperation Agreement Between China and
Kazakhstan.  In April 2002, China sent a delegation to attend the meeting of
leaders of frontier defense authorities of the member states of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) held in Alma-Ata.  At the meeting, the leaders
of the frontier defense authorities of China, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan
and Tajikistan agreed that the frontier defense authorities of the five states
will, within the framework of the relevant documents of the SCO and in
accordance with the circumstances of the areas of common borders of the member
states, strengthen exchanges of information in respect of frontier defense;
further deepen corresponding bilateral and multilateral cooperation; take
effective measures for the joint fight against terrorism, separatism and
extremism, and for preventing cross-border criminal activities of all forms;
safeguard order along the common borders of member states; and provide
powerful guarantee for the development of good neighborliness and friendship
and economic, trade and cultural relations between the member states.
China's frontier authorities and frontier troops faithfully implement relevant
treaties, agreements and understandings, actively establish or improve the
systems for consultation, frontier defense talks and meetings with
counterparts of neighboring countries, carry out frontier defense contacts and
cooperation at various levels, and deal appropriately with border affairs.
Therefore, mutual understanding, trust and friendship between China and
neighboring countries have been increased, and a peaceful and friendly
atmosphere along borders has been created.

The Chinese government attaches importance to border area development and
endeavors to promote transportation, communications, culture, education,
public health, radio and television services in border areas.  Since 1996,
the State Frontier Defense Commission has organized the construction of


-----

frontier defense infrastructure on a large scale in nine overland frontier
provinces and autonomous regions, which has effectively improved the
administrative conditions of border areas, and given impetus to economic and
social development there.  While earnestly performing their duties and
unremittingly improving themselves, the land and sea border defense forces
have actively participated in and supported local economic development and the
building of spiritual civilization.  This has helped to strengthen the
relations between the armed forces and the local governments, and between the
military and civilians, and to safeguard political and social stability, and
the unity of ethnic groups in frontier regions.

Civil Air Defense

China's civil air defense sector implements the concept of people's war.
In view of wartime requirements, and based on the economic capability of the
country, it relies on the broad masses, gives play to the initiatives of the
central and local governments, ensures its readiness to provide effective
protection.  The basic tasks of civil air defense include: spreading
knowledge of air defense among the people; building all types of protection
projects; setting up a civil air defense communications and warning system;
making plans for personnel and material evacuation; organizing and training
specialized air defense contingents; guarding and protecting important
facilities of the national economy; and in wartime, organizing and directing
people to protect themselves against air-raids.  In accordance with the needs
for preparation against war, China has identified cities and regions for the
conduct of civil air defense, and urban civil air defense is taken as the
focal point of civil air defense.

The civil air defense sector adopts a system of joint leadership by the
people's governments and military organs.  The State Council and the CMC
exercise leadership over civil air defense nationwide.  Authorized by the
State Council and the CMC, the military area commands exercise leadership over
civil air defense in their respective regions.  Local people's governments at
the county level and above and the corresponding military organs exercise
leadership over civil air defense in their respective administrative areas.
The administrative organ in charge of nationwide civil air defense is in the
General Staff Headquarters, and those in charge of the military area civil air
defense are in the headquarters of the military area commands.  The
administrative organs in charge of civil air defense at the county level and
above are in the people's governments at the same level.  The relevant
departments in charge of planning, programming and construction in the
people's governments at the county level and above are responsible for
relevant civil air defense within their respective scopes of duties.

The civil air defense sector adheres to the policy of long-term readiness,
construction of key projects, and combination of peacetime footing with


-----

wartime footing, and implements the principle of developing in coordination
with economic construction and in combination with urban construction.  In
peacetime, the state carries out civil air defense construction, divides
cities into different categories for protection, incorporates civil air
defense construction into the national socio-economic development program,
integrates the civil air defense construction plan into the overall urban
development plan, and ensures the smooth operation of the civil air defense
communications and warning system.  The state protects civil air defense
facilities from being damaged, adopts a preferential policy toward
construction of air defense facilities, and encourages and supports
enterprises, institutions, social organizations and individuals to invest in
civil air defense construction projects.  In peacetime, the state encourages
submission of civil air defense projects to the service of economic
development and people's daily needs; the use of civil air defense
communications and warning facilities for emergency rescue and disaster
relief, and assumption by civil air defense organs and specialized contingents
of rescue and relief missions assigned by people's governments.  To meet the
needs of the changing situations, civil air defense will gradually be
integrated with disaster prevention, and capabilities in rapid- reaction,
damage-resistance, emergency rescue and self-improvement will be enhanced so
as to cope with modern warfare and serious disasters and accidents, and
effectively protect citizens' lives and property.

China has promulgated and implemented the Civil Air Defense Law of the
PRC, and formulated a number of auxiliary civil air defense regulations.
China sets store by cooperation and exchanges in respect of civil air defense
with countries worldwide, and joined the International Civil Defense
Organization in 1992.

Participating in and Supporting the Development of the Western Region

The development of China's western region is important to the country's
economy, politics and national defense.  In accordance with the strategic
decision for the large-scale development of the western region made by the
state, the CMC has established a special leading group and a dedicated office,
and made unified arrangements.  The PLA and the Armed Police Force have
contributed more than 1.5 million troops and 450,000 motor vehicles and
machines to actively participate in and support the western region development
efforts.

Concentrating strength on supporting the construction of key
infrastructure projects.  The Chinese armed forces regard the participation
in the construction of transportation, energy, water conservancy and
communications projects as the focal points in supporting the development of
the western region.  They have engaged in the expansion or reconstruction of
8 airports, 3 national highways and 4 expressways; the construction of 9


-----

energy facilities such as pipelines, natural gas fields and oil-and-gas
fields; the construction of 7 hydropower stations and 19 trunk diversion
channels; and the laying of 8 optic telecommunications cables totaling more
than 20,000 km.

Taking part in the protection and construction of the ecological
environment.  The armed forces stationed in the western region have, in order
to improve the ecological environment, taken an active part in activities such
as forestation, sand prevention and control, closing mountains to facilitate
forestation, and restoring the reclaimed land to forests and grasslands.
They have planted trees in an area of more than 3 million mu (one mu equals
one fifteenth of a hectare), sown grass on more than 1.8 million mu of land,
and restored more than 1.5 million mu of reclaimed land to forests and
grasslands.  Technical troops specializing in mapping, meteorology, water
supply and aviation have provided such services as geographic survey, weather
forecast, water source exploration, aerial sowing and artificial precipitation
in the western region.

Providing talented personnel, and intellectual and technical support.
Chinese armed forces have selected and transferred professionals from military
colleges and schools, hospitals and scientific research institutes to support
the development of the western region; arranged, in a planned way, demobilized
officers to work in the western region; encouraged or persuaded demobilized
soldiers from densely populated areas to settle in the west; and assigned
increased numbers of soldiers from the western region to units stationed in
developed areas, so as to help the cultivation of talents and the renewal of
thinking for the development of the western region.  Some colleges and
schools, hospitals and scientific research institutes have actively provided
services to the western region by way of jointly running schools, sponsoring
short-term training courses, offering diseases prevention and treatment
assistance, and transferring achievements of scientific and technological
research.

Opening and developing military facilities.  On the premise of ensuring
military security, the armed forces have opened 5 military airports, more than
200 military rail lines, 30 oil pipelines, 70 communication lines and more
than 100 rear area warehouses for civilian use.  Some of the military farms,
real estate, support enterprises and army horse-breeding farms have been
handed over to local authorities.  The armed forces have improved such
facilities for preparation against war as air traffic control and frontier
defense roads, in order to support the development of the civil
transportation.

Carrying out activities to help the poor and needy.  The armed forces
stationed in the western region have sent officers and men to help repair
roads, install electricity lines, sink wells, teach useful skills and develop


-----

a diversified economy.  These efforts have enabled more than 200,000 local
people to get rid of poverty. The armed forces have also helped build or
enlarge more than 300 middle and primary schools, and helped more than 50,000
school dropouts return to class.  In addition, 100 PLA hospitals have made
arrangements with 105 local county hospitals in the poor areas of the western
region to provide assistance.

V.  Armed Forces Building

In compliance with the general requirements of being qualified politically
and competent militarily and having a fine style of work, strict discipline
and adequate logistical support, and focusing on the two historic tasks of
being capable of winning and never degenerating, the PLA strives to strengthen
its overall development and form a revolutionary, modernized and regularized
people's army.

Military Training

The PLA strives to adapt itself to the characteristics of modern warfare,
takes enhancement of the capability of defensive operations under high-tech
conditions as the main objective, and continuously strengthens and improves
military training.

Over the past two years, the PLA has quickened its steps in transforming
the training -- from the conventional training to one featuring new
technology.  It has made full use of modern science and technology to
organize and implement military training.  In October 2000, the General Staff
Headquarters organized a large- scale high-tech military exercise in the
vicinity of Beijing and used such new and high technologies as computer
networking, reconnaissance sensing, ECM and simulation to drill and test the
new operational concepts, weaponry and training methods.  The latest
achievements gained in military training featuring new technologies were
exchanged among the troops.

In line with the new generation of operational doctrines, the PLA focuses
on the studies and training of joint operations.  The annual regular
exercises organized by the military area commands and services and arms all
concentrate on joint operations.  In the spring and summer of 2001, both
Nanjing and Guangzhou military area commands organized field exercises with
joint landing operations as the backdrop, focusing on the coordination of
joint and combined arms landing operation, and drew useful lessons on how to
organize, support and manage joint training, ground force amphibious landing
training, and training of rapid reserve mobilization.  In addition, the
general headquarters/departments organized successive studies and exercises of
communications and command at the joint operational level, training of landing
and mountain operations, and research on methods of joint penetration


-----

operations, and explored the features and patterns of integrated network and
electronic warfare.

The PLA has enforced new military training regulations and strengthened
regularized training.  On the basis of extensively absorbing the achievements
of the armed forces' training reform and the experience gained in troop
training featuring new technologies, the General Staff Headquarters revised
and adjusted the system of content of the PLA's military training, promulgated
the Outline of Military Training and Evaluation in July 2001, and organized a
training course of the Outline in a combined corps in northern China in
September 2001.  In September 2002, the CMC promulgated the new Regulations
on Military Training of the PLA comprehensively and systematically
standardizing the organization, leadership and administration of military
training.

The PLA has continued to deepen the reform of institutional education.
In line with the general concept of "running schools in large scale,
modernizing teaching, regularizing administration and outsourcing logistic
support," the PLA has further improved its new system of institutional
education and established a teaching system consonant with military, sci-tech
and educational developments.  In recent years, on the basis of fulfilling
the major construction tasks of 18 colleges and schools, 60 disciplines and 31
laboratories, the PLA has launched the Key Construction Project of Military
Colleges and Schools, whereby efforts are being focused on 67 domains of
disciplines and specialties, and 178 research centers.  So far 58 have been
qualified as state-level key disciplines and specialties.  The general
headquarters/departments have promulgated the first catalogue of disciplines
and specialties of the PLA's colleges and schools, thus setting up a new
system of disciplines and specialties.  Deepening teaching reform with
teaching content as the focal point, colleges and schools of the PLA have
formulated a new teaching program, implemented a key teaching material
development project, and perfected the teaching appraisal system.  At the
same time, informationization and networking of teaching have been promoted,
and an information network platform for the armed forces' teaching and
scientific research has been initially put in place, giving shape to a
training information network linking PLA's colleges and schools and having
nearly 100,000 websites and centers.

Political Work

The political work of the PLA is the ideological and organizational work
of the CPC in the armed forces.  It is the fundamental guarantee for the
absolute leadership of the Party over the armed forces, and the assurance on
maintaining and improving combat effectiveness of the troops.  It is the
lifeline of the PLA.


-----

The PLA's political work implements the aim of serving the people
wholeheartedly; guarantees the Party's absolute leadership over the armed
forces; adheres to the principle of seeking unity between officers and men and
between the military and the people, and demoralizing and disintegrating the
enemy, with ideological- political education as the central link; operates a
system featuring political democracy, economic democracy and military
democracy; and enforces the Three Main Rules of Discipline and the Eight
Points for Attention.  The PLA's political work implements the Party
committee (Party branch) system, political leader system and political organ
system.  The Party committee (Party branch) system stipulates that a Party
committee shall be set up in a unit at or above the regiment level, a
grass-roots Party committee in a unit at the battalion or corresponding level,
and a Party branch in a unit at the company or corresponding level.  Party
committees (Party branches) at various levels are the core of the centralized
leadership and unity of the unit concerned.  The system of leading cadres
assuming separate responsibilities under the unified collective leadership of
the Party committee (Party branch) is the fundamental system for Party
leadership over the armed forces.  The political leader system stipulates
that a political commissar shall be appointed to a unit at or above the
regiment level, a political director to a battalion, and a political
instructor to a company.  The political commissar, political director and
political instructor, together with the chief military officers at the same
level, are the chief leaders of their units, assuming joint responsibility for
all work in their units under the leadership of the Party committees (Party
branches) at the same level.  The political commissar, political director and
political instructor are organizers of the day-to-day work of the Party
committees ( Party branches) and leaders of political work.  The political
organ system stipulates that a political department (section) shall be set up
in a unit at or above the regiment level, and a general political department
for the PLA; and that the political organs are the leading body of the
political work in a unit, responsible for administering Party work and
organizing the implementation of the political work.

The political work of the PLA persists in advancing with the times,
breaking new ground and making innovations, keeping pace with profound changes
in the international situation and the military field, adapting itself to the
rapid development of the socialist market economy, striving to provide strong
spiritual motivation for winning future high-tech wars, and furnishing a
reliable political guarantee for maintaining the nature, character and work
style of the people's army.  In recent years, the CPC Central Committee has
promulgated the new Regulations on the Political Work of the PLA, the CMC has
promulgated the Outline for Armed Forces Construction at the Grass-Roots
Level, and the General Political Department has released Decisions on Some
Issues Concerning the PLA Ideological-Political Work Under the Conditions of
the Reform and Opening-up and the Development of a Socialist Market Economy
and Opinions on Strengthening and Improving Ideological-Political Education of


-----

the Army in the New Situation.  The PLA has actively studied and implemented
the important thought of the "Three Represents," organized the rank and file
to study the Constitution and other state laws, the Party's basic theories,
and scientific and cultural knowledge, and conducted education in patriotism,
collectivism and revolutionary heroism by establishing military history
museums in units at and above the regiment level, and honor exhibition in
companies.  The PLA has issued an ethical code for servicemen, organized the
composition of moral songs, set up a PLA-wide publicity, cultural and
information network, improved cultural facilities in barracks, set up cultural
clubs in companies, and established cultural centers in units at and above the
regiment level.  The PLA has carried out psychological education and legal
consultation, and has established psychological education and legal
consultation mechanisms that rely mainly on brigade or regiment political
organs and grass- roots political officers and integrate the political work
system with the related specialty system.

Logistical Support

The PLA strives actively to reform its logistical structure and system,
construct a modern logistical support system and constantly enhance its
logistical support capabilities.

The introduction of the joint logistics system is a major reform of the
logistical support system of the PLA.  The joint logistics system is based on
military area commands.  It combines regional support with organic system
support and general supply support with special supply support.  Unified
general-purpose material supply and service support are provided by military
area commands, and special material supply and service support are provided by
the services and arms through their organic channels.  The General Logistics
Department is in charge of the PLA's joint logistics work.  The military area
command's joint logistics department is in charge of the joint logistics work
within a theater of war.  And the joint logistics sub-department is mainly
responsible for organizing and implementing the general-purpose support of the
services and arms within its support area.  After more than two years'
practice of reform, the joint logistics system has been standardized gradually
with notably improved efficiency.  The system will be further developed into
one that integrates the three armed services, unites the army with the people,
and combines peacetime and wartime footing.

In order to streamline the logistical support organizations and improve
the cost-effectiveness of defense expenditures, the PLA has carried out a
reform featuring the socialization of logistical support in non-combat units
at and above the corps level, and in military colleges and schools and
hospitals in large and medium- sized cities.  After nearly three years of
effort, substantial progress has been achieved in this regard, including
reform in food and commercial services, barracks, and the administration of


-----

civilian employees.  Reform has also been carried out, on a trial basis, in
non-military transportation, fuel supply and the monetized supply of clothing.
So far, the PLA has already had more than 1,500 messes run by civilian
services, more than 1,000 post exchanges integrated into civilian service
systems, more than 1, 800 barracks managed by real estate companies,
approximately 300 support enterprises and farms transferred to central and
local authorities, reducing a total number of more than 300,000 institutional
and business employees.  In order to promote the reform of socialization of
military logistical support and to ensure the development of the reform, in
September 2002, the State Council and the CMC issued an Announcement
Concerning the Issues of Advancing the Reform of Military Logistical Support,
and in October, the CMC approved and transmitted the General Logistics
Department's Opinions on Some Issues Concerning the Socialization of Military
Logistical Support.

In March 2001, the PLA began to reform the budgetary planning system.
Drawing on the internationally adopted budgeting method, the PLA reformed its
budgeting form, method and content extensively, with emphasis placed on
implementation of the zero- base budget method, so as to give full play to the
budget's macro- control role and gradually establish a new budgeting pattern
featuring the concentration of financial power and resources, scientific
distribution of military expenditures, concrete and transparent itemization,
and tight supervision and control.

In January 2002, the PLA carried out an across-the-board reform of the
procurement system, focusing mainly on concentrated procurement and
procurement through public bidding, and set up a mechanism for sectional
management, which features cooperation with proper division of labor and
mutual restriction.  High-value, large-quantity, general-purpose materials
are procured in a concentrated way by relying mainly on the material
procurement departments.  Bulk materials with one-time procurement value
exceeding RMB 500,000 yuan, and projects newly built, expanded, or revamped
each involving an investment of over RMB 2 million yuan are undertaken through
public bidding.

Currently, the method of combining military support with social support,
government house with self-owned house, and supply in kind with supply in
money is adopted for PLA officers' housing system.  Officers of all ranks and
all military branches are provided with appropriate housing support.
Active-service officers live mainly in government houses.  Retired officers
are entitled mainly to purchase the houses they are living in or other
affordable houses.  Demobilized officers and noncommissioned officers
transferred to civilian posts should be ensured of housing benefits mainly by
subsidies and incorporation into the social security system.

The PLA constantly strengthens the development of its logistical equipment


-----

and upgrades its logistical support means.  In 2001, it carried out
coordinative experiments in the overall support capability of logistical
equipment organically and systematically; developed logistical equipment in
seven aspects -- rapid maritime rescue and treatment of the wounded, shore
party support, air field support, mobility support for missile units,
air-dropped material support, individual support and field logistics command;
and completed the demonstration, R&D and testing of 86 kinds of new equipment.
In order to obtain and process information on the resources, requirements
and conditions of logistical support real-time and in a precise and
transparent way, the PLA is doing research on a video logistics system.  In
July 2002, the CMC promulgated the Regulations on the Logistical Equipment of
the PLA to promote the regularized development of logistical equipment.

Weaponry and Equipment

In line with the needs of high-tech military developments and defense
operations, the PLA conscientiously implements the principle of building a
strong military through science and technology and giving first place to
quality, so as to upgrade and accelerate the development of military
equipment.

The weaponry and equipment management system and mechanism have further
improved.  Following the founding of the General Armaments Department in
April 1998, the services and arms, military area commands and combat units at
the corps, division and regiment levels have all set up their armaments
departments (sections), and further strengthened unified leadership over
weaponry and equipment development, and the across-the-board and life-cycle
management of military equipment, thus effectively improving the overall
efficiency.  In December 2000, the CMC promulgated the first Regulations on
Armaments of the PLA, which standardizes the organization and leadership,
division of responsibilities and management procedures of the PLA's
armament-related work.  The CMC promulgated the Regulations on the Armament
Maintenance Work of the PLA in June 2002, and the Outline of Operational
Equipment Support of the PLA in October 2002.  These rules and regulations
concerning armament-related work have promoted the development of the work
along scientific, regularized and legal lines.

The modernization level of weaponry and equipment has undergone constant
improvement.  The PLA persists in stressing self-reliance and independent
innovation, and actively develops military equipment with advanced foreign
technology.  In compliance with the needs of future defense operations in
high-tech conditions, the PLA mainly develops weaponry and equipment featuring
new and high technology, while upgrading and modernizing current weaponry and
equipment selectively, so as to accomplish the historical tasks of
mechanization and IT-application of military equipment.  A Chinese- style
weaponry and equipment system, with a relatively complete variety and a good


-----

structure, has thus come into shape.

Weaponry and equipment management capability has been notably enhanced.
The PLA manages and uses existing weaponry and equipment conscientiously and
in a proper way, and constantly enhances its ability to manage new-type
weapons.  The forces at and below the corps level have universally
established and improved rules and regulations for weaponry management,
exercised standardized management of equipment-related finance, and carried
out examination and appraisal relating to the scientific, institutional and
regular management of weaponry and equipment.  At the same time, they have
organized training courses in the use and management of new-type equipment,
trained personnel in equipment management and technological support, improved
the management of support facilities, and succeeded in developing the combat
and support capabilities of military equipment organically and systematically.

The weapon and equipment procurement system is being gradually reformed.
The PLA seeks actively to meet the requirements of the socialist market
economy and improvement of weapons and equipment, and vigorously promotes the
reform.  The armament departments perform the functions of the principal
responsible party in weapon and equipment ordering, and institutes contractual
management in the research, procurement and maintenance of weapons and
equipment in accordance with state and PLA regulations.  In recent years, the
PLA has persisted in introducing the mechanism of competition into its
procurement process, gradually instituted a public bidding and tendering
system, introduced and improved mechanisms of competition, appraisal,
supervision and motivation, further strengthened the fostering of
factory-based military representatives, and perfected the quality
certification system, thereby improving the efficiency of the weapon and
equipment expenditures, and the cost-effectiveness of weaponry research and
production.

Cadre Training

The PLA persists in taking the training of high-quality military personnel
of a new type as a fundamental measure for promoting a leapfrog development of
the armed forces' modernization.

Cadres of the PLA include officers and non-ranking cadres.  In recent
years, the PLA has constantly raised the training level of officer candidates,
adjusted the sources of officer candidates, and established a scientific and
justified system for training such candidates, resulting in a marked
improvement in the training level, quality and efficiency of military
personnel.  At present, more than 80% of the PLA's cadres have received
junior college or higher education.  More than 30,000 have doctor's or
master's degrees, and many of them hold leading posts at the division or
regiment level.  At the same time, in order to draw on the useful armed


-----

forces building experiences of other countries, particularly developed
countries, the PLA has since 1996 sent nearly 1,000 servicemen to study in
over 20 countries, a considerable number of them being commanding or technical
officers at the division or regiment level.

Both the Law of the PRC on Officers in Active Service passed by the
Standing Committee of the NPC in December 2000 and the Regulations on
Non-Ranking Officers of the PLA issued by the CMC in June 1999 explicitly
stipulate that commanding officers and non- ranking officers without technical
specialty, as well as ranking officers with technical specialty and
non-ranking officers with technical specialty should receive training at
relevant colleges and schools or other training institutions before their
promotion; and that cadres in leading organs should have undergone training at
appropriate colleges or schools.  Cadre's on-the-job training is gradually
undergoing a change from academic credentials education to all-round
continuing education.  Except for a small number of cadres who have to take
academic credentials education, the overwhelming majority of cadres would
update their knowledge mainly through short-term training.

In May 2000, the State Council and the CMC promulgated the Decision on
Establishing a System for Training Military Cadres by Reliance on Regular
Institutions of Higher Learning, clearly stressing the role of regular higher
education in the modernization of national defense and the armed forces, so as
to widen the channel for the selection and training of high-caliber personnel
for the military.  So far, more than 50 institutions of higher learning,
including Peking University and Tsinghua University, have undertaken the task
of training personnel for the armed forces, providing a large batch of
outstanding personnel for the PLA each year.

To meet the requirement of building a strong military through science and
technology, the PLA pays great attention to the training of high-level
personnel.  In the past two years, the PLA's mobile post-doctoral stations
and doctor's or master's degree authorization centers have increased by large
margins, the academic degree authorization system has been improved gradually,
and the training scale has been enlarged substantially.  In May 2002, the
Academic Degree Commission under the State Council examined and approved the
Plan of Setting Up Specialties for the Master Degree of Military Science, and
decided on the setting up of specialties for the master degree of military
science as an experiment, marking a new stage in the training of high-level
professionals for the armed forces.

The PLA regards the exchange of cadres as an important channel for
training and tempering them and raising their quality.  The Law of the PRC on
Officers in Active Service further clarifies and standardizes the exchange of
officers.  The Regulations on the Appointment and Removal of the PLA Officers
in Active Service promulgated by the CMC in January 2002 lays down concrete


-----

stipulations on the condition, scope, organization and implementation of
officer exchange.  In accordance with the Interim Provisions on the Rotation
of Cadres of the PLA Garrison in Hong Kong promulgated in December 1998, a
regular rotation system has been instituted for all cadres of the garrison
force in Hong Kong, and three batches of cadres have so far been rotated.  A
rotation system of this kind has also been instituted for the PLA Garrison in
Macao.

VI.  International Security Cooperation

International security cooperation is playing an increasingly important
role in maintaining world and regional peace and stability.  The Chinese
government pays great attention to and actively participates in international
security cooperation, and advocates the development of international security
cooperation on the basis of the UN Charter, the Five Principles of Peaceful
Coexistence, and other universally recognized norms of international
relations.

Regional Security Cooperation

Conducting dialogue and cooperation with Asia-Pacific countries is an
important content of China's policy concerning Asia-Pacific security, and a
component part of its policy of good- neighborliness and friendship.  China
persists in building a good- neighborly relationship and partnership with its
neighbors and strengthens regional cooperation constantly.  Over the past two
years, China has worked hard to boost the formation and development of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), and continued to support and
participate in the ASEAN Regional Forum ( ARF), Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-Building Measures in Asia (CICA), Council on Security Cooperation
in the Asia- Pacific Region (CSCAP), Northeast Asia Cooperation Dialogue
(NEACD) and other activities for multilateral security dialogue and
cooperation, thus playing a positive role in deepening regional security
cooperation with Asian characteristics.

In June 2001, China, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and
Uzbekistan founded the SCO.  This organization is a regional multilateral
cooperation body established on the basis of the " Shanghai Five." Since its
founding, it has signed and published in succession the Shanghai Convention on
Combating Terrorism, Separatism and Extremism, the joint communique of the
defense ministers, the statement of the prime ministers, the statement of
leaders of the law-enforcement and security departments, and the joint
statement of the foreign ministers.  At the SCO St.  Petersburg Summit held
in June 2002, the heads of state of the six countries signed three important
legal and political documents -- the Charter of the SCO, the Agreement on a
Regional Anti-Terrorist Agency and the Declaration of the Heads of State of
the SCO Member Countries.  The SCO has initiated a new security concept, a


-----

new pattern for regional cooperation, and state-to-state relations of a new
type, strengthened trust and cooperation in the military field, beefed up
substantive cooperation in the fight against terrorism, separatism and
extremism, and reached a consensus on mutual assistance in preventing and
peacefully solving international conflicts.  The SCO propagates the "Shanghai
Spirit" that features mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality, consultation,
respect for diverse civilizations and seeking common development, and actively
promotes the establishment of a fair and rational new international political
and economic order, thus advancing regional security and stability.

China endorses the CICA aim and principle of strengthening trust and
cooperation and safeguarding regional security, and has developed constructive
and friendly cooperation with all its member countries.  In June 2002, the
first CICA summit meeting passed the Alma-Ata Document and the Declaration on
Eliminating Terrorism and Promoting Dialogue Among Civilizations.  The CICA
has scored important achievements in its activities.

China supports the ARF in its continuous advance toward its set goal.
China has consistently taken an active part in the ARF foreign ministers'
meetings, senior officials' meetings and unofficial meetings.  China has
undertaken the project of the ARF ocean information website and formally
opened it to service; attended the ARF experts' group meeting on
confidence-building measures against transnational crimes; submitted a country
report on the question of transnational crimes; and regularly submitted annual
security prospect reports to the ARF.  At the Eighth ARF Foreign Ministers'
Conference, held in 2001, China declared its readiness to support the ARF's
efforts to gradually develop dialogue and cooperation in non-traditional
security fields, and reiterated its proposal on reporting on, and sending
personnel to observe, multilateral joint military exercises.  In May 2002,
China submitted to the ARF Senior Officials' Conference the Document
Concerning China's Stand in Strengthening Cooperation in Non- Traditional
Security Fields.  At the Ninth ARF Foreign Ministers' Conference, held in
July 2002, China submitted the Document Concerning China's Stand in Regard to
the New Security Concept, emphasizing the need to jointly cultivate a new
security concept, enhance trust through dialogue, and promote security through
cooperation.  The Joint Declaration of ASEAN and China on Cooperation in the
Field of Non-Traditional Security Issues released in November 2002, initiated
full cooperation between ASEAN and China in the field of non-traditional
security issues.  In September 2002, China held the ARF seminar on military
logistics outsourcing support in Beijing.

Cooperation between ASEAN and China, Japan and the Republic of Korea
(10+3) is an important channel for East Asian leaders to exchange views on
strengthening cooperation in the region, and is conducive to enhancing mutual
understanding, trust and mutually beneficial cooperation among East Asian
countries.  China values and actively participates in this cooperation.  It


-----

advocates that it should be expanded into all-directional cooperation on the
existing basis, that dialogue and cooperation in the political and security
fields be gradually developed on the principles of achieving unity through
consultation and making steady advance, and that this cooperation be started
with cooperation in the non- traditional fields of security.  After more than
four years' development, this cooperation has made marked progress.

The Chinese armed forces have participated in security dialogue and
cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region.  In January 2002, Chinese officers
observed the naval mine clearance exercise sponsored by Singapore in the West
Pacific region.  In April 2002, Chinese officers observed the submarine
search and rescue exercise sponsored by Japan in the West Pacific region.  In
May 2002, China sent officers to observe the "Cobra Gold" joint military
exercises staged by the United States, Thailand and Singapore.  China intends
to selectively and gradually participate in more multilateral joint military
exercises in the non-traditional fields of security in the future.

Anti-Terrorism Cooperation

In recent years, terrorist activities have notably increased, and
constitute a real threat to world peace and development.  The " September 11"
terrorist attack, which caused a great loss of lives and property, has aroused
the universal concern of the international community.  China, too, is a
victim of terrorism.  The "East Turkistan" terrorist forces are a serious
threat to the security of the lives and property of the people of all China's
ethnic groups, as well as to the country's social stability.  On September
11, 2002, the UN Security Council, in response to a common demand from China,
the United States, Afghanistan and Kyrgyzstan, formally included the "East
Turkistan Islamic Movement " on its list of terrorist organizations.  The
Chinese government has always resolutely opposed and condemned all forms of
terrorism, and has actively adopted effective measures to fight against
terrorist activities.

The Chinese government is of the view that the international community
should strengthen dialogue and consultation and develop cooperation, join
hands in preventing and fighting against international terrorist activities,
and make efforts to eradicate the root cause of terrorism.  The fight against
terrorism requires conclusive evidence, clear targets and conformity with the
purpose and principles of the UN Charter, and the universally acknowledged
norms of international laws.  In this regard, the leading role of the UN and
its Security Council should be brought into full play, and all actions taken
should be conducive to the long-term interest of preserving regional and world
peace.  Terrorism should not be confused with a specific nation or religion,
neither should dual standards be adopted in the fight against terrorism.  The
international community should make common efforts to resolutely condemn and
attack terrorism whenever and wherever it occurs, whoever it is directed


-----

against and in whatever form it appears.  In fighting terrorism, it is
necessary to address both its symptoms and root cause, and adopt comprehensive
measures, especially in solving the question of development, narrowing the
North-South gap, and ending regional conflicts.

China supports and has conscientiously implemented a series of resolutions
on the anti-terrorism issue passed by the United Nations and its Security
Council, and has submitted to the Security Council Anti-Terrorism Commission a
report on the implementation of Security Council Resolution No.  1373.
China has acceded to the International Convention on Stopping Terrorist
Explosions, and signed the International Convention on Severing Financial Aid
to Terrorism.  China has acceded to 10 and signed another one of the 12
international anti-terrorism conventions.  China has also held anti-terrorism
consultations respectively with the USA, Russia, UK, France, Pakistan and
India, and has taken an active part in the work of the Security Council
Anti-Terrorism Commission.  China actively helped the Shanghai Conference of
APEC Leaders in bringing about the anti-terrorism statement, motivated the
heads of government, defense ministers, leaders of law- enforcement and
security departments, and foreign ministers of the SCO member nations in
issuing a common statement, and actively supported the SCO in establishing a
permanent regional anti- terrorist organization.  China and Kyrgyzstan
conducted a joint anti-terrorism military exercise in October 2002.  China
pays great attention to international anti-terrorist cooperation in the
financial field.  Although China is not a member of the ad hoc working group
for combating the financial action of money laundering, it consistently
supports the group's work.  China has given the group a full introduction of
its measures for anti- terrorism in the financial field.

Participation in UN Peace-keeping Operations

As a permanent member of the UN Security Council, China has always valued
and supported the UN in its efforts to play a positive role in safeguarding
international peace and security under the guidance of the purpose and
principles of the UN Charter. China adopts an active attitude toward the
reform of peace-keeping operations, and hopes that further efforts will be
made to strengthen the role of the UN in peace-keeping operations and to make
these operations more efficient.  China supports the active measures taken by
the UN Secretariat in this regard, and welcomes the progress made by the UN
General Assembly and the Security Council in deliberating the Prasmy's Report
on Reforming the UN's Peace-keeping Operations.

Since its first dispatch of military observers to the UN peacekeeping
activities in 1990, the PLA of China has successively taken part in 10 UN
peace-keeping operations.  So far it has sent more than 650 military
observers, liaison officers, advisors or staff officers and 800 (in two
batches) engineering officers and men to the UN peacekeeping operations.  At


-----

present, 53 Chinese military observers are still serving in 6 regions, and 2
staff officers working in the UN peacekeeping department.  Four Chinese
servicemen have laid down their lives, and dozens have been wounded in UN
peace-keeping operations.

After its first dispatch of 15 policemen to UN peace-keeping operations in
January 2000, the Chinese government has sent in succession 198 civilian
policemen to serve with UNTAET and UNMIBH.

In May 1997, the Chinese government decided, in principle, to take part in
the UN's stand-by arrangements for its peace-keeping operations.  In January
2002, China formally participated in the Class-A stand-by arrangements
mechanism for the UN peace-keeping operations, and it is ready to provide the
UN peace-keeping operations with engineering, medical, transportation and
other logistical support teams at appropriate times.  China is able to
provide these operations with 1 UN standard engineering battalion, 1 UN
standard medical team and 2 UN standard transportation companies.

Military Exchanges and Cooperation

The PLA has actively conducted military exchanges and cooperation with
other countries.  The areas of its external contacts are being gradually
expanded, with the content of the contacts increasingly richer and forms more
flexible and diversified.

China has established military relations with more than 100 countries, and
over 100 military attache's offices in Chinese embassies abroad.  Meanwhile,
more than 70 countries have set up military attache's offices in China.  Over
the past two years, the PLA has carried out over 130 important exchange
projects, sent high-level delegations to over 60 countries, and hosted over 90
important military leaders' delegations from some 60 countries.  From May to
September 2002, Chinese naval ships undertook their first round-the-world
navigation, visiting 10 countries, covering a total of over 30,000 nautical
miles.  The PLA's foreign military academic exchanges and technical
cooperation have also constantly developed in breadth and depth.  It has
exchanged visits of more than 100 delegations or groups of military experts
with several dozen countries, and the scale of exchanges of military students
has expanded step by step.  Between October and November 2001, China held the
Third Symposium on International Issues at the National Defense University,
with officers from 18 countries participating.  In October 2002, the Fourth
Symposium was held at the National Defense University, with officers from 31
countries participating.

China actively promotes military relations with countries around the
world.  The relations between the armed forces of China and Russia, under the
guidance of the Sino-Russian Treaty of Good Neighborliness, Friendship and


-----

Cooperation, have been strengthened and developed continuously, and high-level
contacts between the armed forces of the two sides have maintained their
momentum.  In September 2001, the special meeting of the China-US Military
Maritime Consultation Agreement was held in Guam, which led to the thawing of
the once suspended Sino-US military relations.  In October 2002, it was
agreed between the heads of state of both countries that the military
exchanges should be resumed.  Sino- Japanese military ties were resumed at
the end of 2001.  Meanwhile, China-EU military relations have developed
smoothly.  Chinese military delegations at various levels have made
successful military visits on invitation to many countries in Northeast,
Southeast, South and Central Asia regions.  China's frontier commands have
exchanged visits with their counterparts in neighboring countries.  China
continues to provide a number of developing countries with aid in personnel
training, equipment, logistical materials and medical care, and will seek to
widen the scope of contacts in the future.  It has also intensified its
efforts for contacts with West Asian and African countries, and sustained
military contacts with Latin American countries.

The PLA has repeatedly sent personnel to attend multilateral security
conferences in the Asia-Pacific region, the Asia-Pacific Region Defense
Authority Officials Forum, the NEACD, the ARF, the West Pacific Naval Forum,
and other activities for multilateral security.  The PLA has also held
security consultations and meetings with the defense or other military
departments of countries such as Australia, France, Germany, India, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan, Russia, Thailand, UK and USA, thereby
enhancing mutual trust and understanding with them.

VII.  Arms Control and Disarmament

After the end of the Cold War, a series of achievements were made in the
field of international arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation.
However, this momentum has been hampered by a host of negative developments in
recent years.  In the current situation, it is vitally important to maintain
the global strategic balance and stability and the legal system governing
international arms control and disarmament.  The existing legal system is an
important component of the global collective security framework centered
around the United Nations.  The Chinese government is willing, together with
the international community, to contribute to the maintenance of the legal
system for international arms control and disarmament, and the advancement of
the process of arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation.

Nuclear Disarmament

China has consistently advocated the complete prohibition and thorough
destruction of nuclear weapons.  On the very first day it came into
possession of nuclear weapons, China solemnly declared that at no time and


-----

under no circumstances would it be the first to use such weapons.  Later,
China undertook unconditionally not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons
against non-nuclear-weapon states or nuclear-weapon-free zones, and has
consistently urged all nuclear-weapon states to enshrine these commitments in
a legal form.  China has always exercised utmost restraint on the development
of nuclear weapons, and its nuclear arsenal is kept at the lowest level
necessary for self-defense only.  China holds that countries having the
largest nuclear arsenals bear a special and primary responsibility toward
nuclear disarmament, and that they should take the lead in drastically
reducing their nuclear arsenals and destroy the reduced nuclear weapons.
China welcomes the new treaty signed by the US and Russia on the reduction of
their offensive strategic weapons, and hopes that these two countries will
adopt effective measures to ensure the " verifiability" and "irreversibility"
of nuclear disarmament, and continue to further the process of nuclear
disarmament, so as to genuinely promote world peace and stability.

The Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) is an important step
taken in the process of nuclear disarmament.  As one of the first countries
to sign the Treaty, China has always actively participated in the work of the
Preparatory Commission of the Treaty Organization, and earnestly carried out
the preparatory work for the implementation of the Treaty in China.  The
Chinese government has submitted the Treaty to the NPC Standing Committee for
examination and approval.  Together with the international community, China
is ready to work for the early entry into force of the Treaty.  China
maintains that the conclusion of a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) will
help to accelerate the process of nuclear disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation, and supports an early start of the negotiations on such a
Treaty on the basis of a comprehensive and balanced work plan of the
Conference on Disarmament (CD).

Chemical and Biological Disarmament

China has consistently advocated the complete prohibition and thorough
destruction of chemical weapons.  As a State Party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC), China actively supports its purposes and objectives and has
conscientiously and strictly fulfilled all its obligations under the
Convention.  China has set up a national authority for the implementation of
the Convention, and submitted its initial declaration and all sorts of annual
declarations in time.  So far, China has accepted 55 inspections by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), and has
co-sponsored, together with the OPCW, several training courses and symposiums
for inspectors.

Today, large quantities of chemical weapons abandoned by the Japanese
invaders still remain on Chinese soil.  China urges Japan to earnestly
implement the obligations under the CWC for the destruction of these weapons,


-----

and expedite the pace of the relevant work in accordance with the Memorandum
on the Destruction of Japanese Abandoned Chemical Weapons in China between the
governments of China and Japan, so as to commence as soon as possible the
substantive part of the destruction process.

China has always stood for the complete prohibition and thorough
destruction of biological weapons.  China acceded to the Biological Weapons
Convention (BWC) in 1984, and has fully and conscientiously fulfilled its
obligations under the Convention.  Since 1987, China has, on an annual basis,
provided the UN with information on confidence-building measures, in
accordance with the decisions of the Review Conferences of the Convention.

China supports the enhancement of the effectiveness of the BWC in a
comprehensive manner, and has actively participated in the work of the ad hoc
group of the states parties to the Convention set up for the negotiation of a
BWC protocol.  China regrets that the protocol has not been reached as
scheduled and that the Fifth Review Conference of the Convention has had to
adjourn.  China holds that the conclusion of a protocol with balanced
contents and effective measures through multilateral negotiations remains the
best way to enhance the effectiveness of the BWC.  China is willing, together
with all other parties concerned, to continue to explore measures along this
line on the basis of the universal participation of all countries and within a
multilateral framework.

Missile Defense and Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space

China's stand on the issue of missile defense is consistent and clear-cut.
China understands the relevant countries' concern over the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and their means of delivery.  But, like
many other countries, China holds that this issue should be resolved through
political and diplomatic means, with the common efforts of the international
community.

China regrets the abrogation of the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty (ABM).
It is China's consistent view that maintaining the global strategic stability
and the international system of arms control, disarmament and
non-proliferation is vitally important and in conformity with the fundamental
interests of all countries. China hopes that the relevant countries will heed
the opinions of the international community, and act prudently on the issue of
missile defense.  At the same time, China is willing to conduct constructive
dialogue with all the parties involved, and make joint efforts to safeguard
international peace and security.

China is concerned about certain countries' joint research and development
of theater missile defense (TMD) systems with a view to their deployment in
the Northeast Asian region.  This will lead to the proliferation of advanced


-----

missile technology and be detrimental to peace and stability in the
Asia-Pacific region.  China resolutely opposes any country which provides
Taiwan with TMD assistance or protection in any form.

Outer space belongs to all mankind, and the peaceful use of outer space is
the common aspiration of all humanity.  At present, outer space is faced with
the danger of weaponization, and protection of outer space from weaponization
and an arms race has become a very urgent and realistic issue.  The
international community should negotiate and conclude the necessary legal
instrument as soon as possible to prohibit the deployment of weapons in outer
space and the use or threat of use of force against objects in outer space, so
as to ensure peace and tranquility therein.  China holds that the Conference
on Disarmament in Geneva is the suitable place for negotiations on this
matter.  China has submitted several working papers to the Conference,
putting forward its suggestions on the main points of a future international
legal instrument.  In June 2002, China, Russia and some other countries
jointly submitted to the Conference a working paper titled Possible Elements
for a Future International Legal Agreement on the Prevention of the Deployment
of Weapons in Outer Space, the Threat or Use of Force Against Outer Space
Objects (Draft), setting forth their concept on the general structure and
concrete contents of such a document.  The above-mentioned working paper has
received favorable responses from many countries.  China hopes that the
Conference will carry out substantive work on this issue at an early date, and
start negotiating an international legal instrument, thus making positive
efforts for the prevention of the weaponization of outer space and an arms
race therein.

Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction and Their Means of
Delivery

China has always been opposed to the proliferation of WMD and their means
of delivery.  It supports the international community's active efforts of
non-proliferation, and has made its own contributions in this area.  China
maintains that the efforts of non-proliferation should not be confined to
non-proliferation itself and should also include the identification and
resolution of its root causes.  Establishing a fair and rational new
international order and realizing the universal improvement of international
relations are the fundamental way to eliminate the threat of WMD.  Preventing
terrorist organizations and other non- state entities from obtaining WMD is a
common task confronting the international community.  China is willing,
together with the international community, to make common efforts for the
establishment of a fair, rational and effective multilateral nonproliferation regime based on the participation of all countries.

China is a State Party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT).  It has always abided by its obligations under the Treaty, and


-----

pursues a policy of not advocating, not encouraging and not engaging in the
proliferation of nuclear weapons, and not helping other countries to develop
nuclear weapons.  China has also formulated three principles governing its
nuclear exports: guarantees for peaceful use only, acceptance of the
safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and no
re-transfer to the third country without prior approval of China.  In order
to strengthen its nuclear export control mechanism, China joined the Zangger
Committee in 1997, and has established and improved on its relevant domestic
legal system.  China promulgated, respectively in September 1997 and June
1998, the Regulations on the Control of Nuclear Export and Regulations on the
Control of Nuclear Dual-Use Items and Related Technologies Export, under which
China exercises control over the export of materials and technologies included
in the list of the Zangger Committee and the list of nuclear dual-use items
and technologies currently in use internationally.  These regulations
stipulate that China's nuclear exports shall be done exclusively by
specialized companies designated by the government, that a licensing system
shall be instituted for nuclear export, and that China shall not provide any
assistance to any nuclear facility which is not under the IAEA safeguards.
In order to strengthen the effectiveness of the IAEA safeguard system and
fulfill its own non-proliferation obligations, China formally notified the
IAEA on March 28, 2002 that it had completed the domestic legal procedures
necessary for the entry into force of the Protocol Additional to the Agreement
Between China and IAEA for the Application of Safeguards in China, and that
the Protocol became effective for China on the same day.  China was the first
of the nuclear-weapon states to complete the above-mentioned procedures.

China is in favor of IAEA making its contributions to the protection
against potential nuclear terrorist activities in accordance with purposes and
principles of its Statute, and will provide appropriate assistance to the
anti-terrorism activities of the Agency.  Strengthening the physical
protection of nuclear facilities and material is conducive to nuclear
non-proliferation and prevention of nuclear terrorism.  China has actively
participated in the revision of the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material, and is ready to make every effort to facilitate this
process.

China strictly adheres to its obligations under the CWC and BWC, and will
not in any way help or encourage any country to obtain chemical or biological
weapons.  China has consistently adopted a prudent and responsible attitude
toward the export of chemicals or biological agents, as well as related
production equipment and technologies.  To ensure that exports of such
material from China are not used for manufacturing chemical or biological
weapons, the Chinese government has promulgated and implemented the
Regulations of the PRC on the Administration of the Controlled Chemicals, and
the detailed rules for its implementation, thereby placing the export of
related material under stringent control.  The Amendments to the Criminal Law


-----

of the PRC promulgated in December 2001 designates as criminal offenses such
acts of endangering public security as using, illegally manufacturing,
trafficking, transporting and stockpiling radioactive substances, toxic
materials or infectious disease pathogens, and stipulates corresponding
penalties for these acts.  In order to further strengthen the export control
of the chemicals and dual-use biological products and related technologies and
equipment, the Chinese government promulgated in October 2002 the Measures on
Export Control of Certain Chemicals and Related Equipment and Technologies
(including its control list), the Regulations of the PRC on the Export Control
of Dual-Use Biological Agents and Related Equipment and Technologies
(including its control list), and the newly revised Regulations of the PRC on
the Administration of Arms Export.

In recent years, the question of missile proliferation has aroused
extensive concern in the international community.  China also attaches great
importance to this issue.  The international community should, on the basis
of such principles as non- discrimination and undiminished security for all
countries, seek a solution to this issue through dialogue and cooperation,
including exploring the possibility of establishing a new multilateral
mechanism.  China supports the United Nations in its efforts to play an
important role in this field, and has actively participated in the UN Group of
Governmental Experts on Missiles.  China adopts an open attitude toward the
new proposals made by countries concerned, and has, with a constructive
stance, participated in international discussions on the International Code of
Conduct Against Ballistic Missile Proliferation and the Proposal on a Global
System for Non-proliferation of Missile Technologies.  With respect to the
prevention of missile proliferation, the Chinese government has always adopted
a serious, conscientious and responsible attitude, has not helped any country
to develop ballistic missiles that can be used to deliver nuclear weapons, and
has exercised strict control over the export of missiles and related material
and technologies.  In August 2002, the Chinese government formally
promulgated the Regulations on the Export Control of Missiles and
Missile-Related Items and Technologies and its control list.  This is a major
measure taken by the Chinese government to implement its policy of missile
non- proliferation, further tightening control over the export of missiles and
related material and technologies, and strengthening the administration of
exports on a legal basis.  In the future, China will, based on its own export
control practice, continue to improve its legal system of export control.  It
is also willing to enhance exchanges and cooperation with all countries in
this respect, actively participate in the discussions concerning the
international non-proliferation mechanisms, and work for the final
establishment of a fair, rational and effective international nonproliferation regime.

Small Arms and Anti-Personnel Landmines


-----

China has always treated seriously the issue of illicit trafficking and
excessive accumulation of small arms, and consistently taken a responsible
attitude toward the manufacture and transfer of such arms.  China has also
actively participated in the endeavors of the international community in this
regard.  With a constructive attitude, China attended the UN Conference on
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects in July
2001, and is taking actions to implement the Program of Action adopted at the
Conference.  China has actively participated in the negotiations of the
Firearms Protocol to the UN Convention Against Transnational Organized Crimes,
making its contributions to the conclusion of the Protocol.  China is
positively considering signing the Protocol.  Both the Law of the PRC on the
Control of Firearms and the Regulations of the PRC on the Administration of
Arms Export have contained detailed stipulations on the manufacture,
transportation, sales, equipment, and entry and exit control of firearms and
ammunition, put in place strict controls over the export of small arms and
other military items, and laid out severe penalties for violations.  In 2001,
China launched a nationwide campaign to eliminate illegal firearms, in the
course of which large quantities of illegal firearms were confiscated and
destroyed.

Since its ratification of the Amended Protocol II to the Convention on
Certain Conventional Weapons in 1998, China has continued to carry out its
commitment not to export anti-personnel landmines (APL) that are not in
conformity with the standards set out in the Protocol, and has made
considerable progress in other aspects of the implementation of the Protocol.
The PLA has held a number of training courses on the Protocol.  Relevant
departments are now formulating a series of rules and standards in accordance
with the provisions of the Protocol, including the state military standards
related to the technical performance of APLs and marking of minefields.

China continues to promote domestic and international mine clearance
efforts.  China is now basically safe from landmine hazards on its own
territory.  In 2001, China donated large quantities of demining equipment to
Cambodia, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Mozambique, Rwanda, Namibia and Angola.  In
2002, it contributed more than 3 million US dollars for international mine
clearance cooperation, mainly in aid to the demining operations in Eritrea and
Lebanon.  Apart from providing the two countries with demining equipment,
China has sent a group of mine clearance experts to Eritrea to give
on-the-spot guidance.


-----

2002年中国的国防

中华人民共和国 国务院新闻办公室

二零零二年十二月·北京

目 录

前 言

一、 安全形势

二、 国防政策

三、 武装力量

四、 国防建设

五、 军队建设

六、 国际安全合作

七、 军备控制与裁军

附 录

附1:2000年以来发布的主要军事法律法规

附2:2001-2002年中国军队主要对外交往情况

附3:2001-2002年中国军队参与有关安全磋商情况

附4:中国参加的联合国维持和平行动

附5:2000年以来中国军队参与协助日本处理日本遗弃在华化学武器情况

前 言

世界要和平，人民要合作，国家要发展，社会要进步，是不可阻挡的时代潮流。中

国人民和各国人民，都不愿看到世界上任何地区再发生新的热战、冷战和动乱，都

渴望世界持久和平和稳定安宁，渴望世界共同发展和普遍繁荣。

中国已进入全面建设小康社会、加快推进社会主义现代化的新的发展阶段。推进现

代化建设、完成祖国统一、维护世界和平与促进共同发展，是中国人民在新世纪的


-----

三大历史任务。举世瞩目的中国共产党第十六次全国代表大会，描绘了新世纪中国

发展的宏伟蓝图。发展中的中国需要一个和平的国际环境和良好的周边环境，中国

的发展将对世界和平和人类进步事业做出更大贡献。中国始终不渝地走和平发展的

道路，奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，实行防御性的国防政策。

为进一步介绍中国的国防政策和近两年国防建设情况，现发表《2002年中国的国防

》白皮书。

一、安全形势

进入新世纪，国际局势正在发生深刻变化。世界多极化和经济全球化的趋势在曲折

中发展，科技进步日新月异，综合国力竞争日趋激烈。人类面临着新的发展机遇和

挑战。

和平与发展仍是当今时代的主题。各国经济相互依存加深，全球和区域经济合作组

织的作用增强，经济安全更加受到重视。发展经济和科技，增强综合国力，是各国

的主要战略趋向。大国之间既相互借重、合作，又相互制约、竞争。2001年9月11

日美国发生恐怖袭击事件之后，大国关系协调与合作的一面上升。广大发展中国家

积极推动建立公正合理的国际新秩序，为促进世界的和平与发展发挥着重要作用。

新的世界大战在可预见的时期内打不起来。维护和平，促进发展，是各国人民的共

同愿望。

亚太地区总体保持和平稳定，依然是世界上最具经济活力和发展潜力的地区。加强

对话合作，维护地区稳定，促进共同发展，已成为亚洲各国政策的主流。亚太经济

合作组织（APEC）向更加紧密的合作迈进。以东盟与中国、日本、韩国（10＋3

）为主渠道的东亚合作更加务实。中国与东盟就十年内建立自由贸易区达成共识，

启动了在非传统安全领域的全面合作。湄公河流域开发合作即将全面展开。东盟地

区论坛从建立信任措施向预防性外交阶段的过渡取得实质性成果。上海合作组织在

建立互信、发展结伴而不结盟的国家关系和反恐怖主义合作方面取得明显进展。阿


-----

富汗重建进程启动。朝鲜半岛总体缓和的趋势得到保持。南海地区形势基本稳定，

有关各方签署了《南海各方行为宣言》。

但是，影响和平与发展的不确定因素也在增加，世界还很不安宁。不公正不合理的

国际政治经济旧秩序没有根本改变。世界经济发展很不平衡，南北差距进一步扩大

，发展中国家在经济全球化进程中获益较少，有的面临被边缘化的危险。国际关系

民主化远未实现，霸权主义和强权政治有新的表现。一些地区因民族、宗教、领土

、资源等问题引发的争端时起时伏，武装冲突和局部战争不断发生。恐怖主义、跨

国犯罪、环境恶化、毒品等非传统安全问题日趋突出，尤其是恐怖主义已对国际和

地区安全构成现实威胁。

世界军事变革迅猛发展，军事力量对比出现新的严重失衡。以信息技术为核心的高

新技术在军事领域广泛应用，战场向陆、海、空、天、电多维空间扩展，中、远程

精确打击成为重要作战样式，战争形态正在向信息化方向发展。世界主要国家普遍

进行军事战略调整，加快以高技术为基础的军队现代化建设。发展中国家与发达国

家的军事技术差距进一步拉大。发展中国家维护国家主权和安全的斗争面临严峻挑

战。

亚太地区仍存在不稳定的因素。历史遗留的传统安全问题尚未消失并出现新的情况

，非传统安全问题在一些国家日趋突出。恐怖主义、分裂主义、极端主义势力对地

区安全的危害短期内难以根除。南亚紧张局势没有根本改变。阿富汗局势尚未完全

稳定。朝鲜半岛和解进程依然曲折。某些国家在亚太地区继续加强军事部署，强化

军事同盟, 有 的国家还不断扩大武装力量的职能和活动范围。

台湾海峡两岸关系的基本格局和发展趋势没有改变。台湾同胞求和平、求安定、求

发展的意愿日益增强，两岸经贸、文化等领域的交流和人员往来日益密切，两岸直

接通邮、通航、通商是民心所向、大势所趋。但是，两岸关系紧张的根源没有消除

。台湾当局领导人拒不接受一个中国原则，顽固坚持"台湾独立"立场，甚至抛出海


-----

峡两岸"一边一国"的分裂主张，并以渐进的手法进行各种分裂活动。台湾分裂势力

是对台海地区和平与稳定的最大威胁。极少数国家在台湾问题上干涉中国内政，继

续售台武器装备，提升与台关系，助长了台湾分裂势力的气焰，损害了中国的和平

统一进程。

当今世界安全威胁呈现多元化、全球化的趋势，各国在安全上的共同利益增多。通

过对话增进相互信任，通过合作促进共同安全，树立互信、互利、平等和协作的新

安全观，是当今时代发展的要求。中国永远是维护世界和平、促进共同发展的坚定

力量。中国将坚持不懈地实践新安全观，反对各种形式的霸权主义和强权政治，反

对一切形式的恐怖主义。中国将同世界各国一道，努力营造长期稳定、安全可靠的

国际和平环境。

二、国防政策

建立巩固的国防是中国现代化建设的战略任务，是维护国家安全统一和全面建设小

康社会的重要保障。中国始终奉行防御性的国防政策。

中国制定国防政策的根本依据，是中国的国家利益。它主要包括：维护国家主权、

统一、领土完整和安全；坚持以经济建设为中心，不断提高综合国力；坚持和完善

社会主义制度；保持和促进社会的安定团结；争取一个长期和平的国际环境和良好

的周边环境。中国采取一切必要手段维护国家利益，同时也尊重别国的利益，主张

通过协商和平解决国与国之间的纠纷和争端。

中国国防的目标和任务，主要有以下内容：

——
巩固国防，防备和抵抗侵略。中国的领陆、内水、领海、领空神圣不可侵犯。中国

根据新形势下国家防卫的需要，坚持对国防活动的统一领导，坚持独立自主和全民

自卫原则，实行积极防御军事战略，加强武装力量建设和边防、海防、空防建设，


-----

采取有效的防卫和管理措施，保卫国家安全，维护海洋权益。一旦国家遭受侵略，

中国将依照宪法和法律，坚决进行抵抗。

——
制止分裂，实现祖国完全统一。中国是全国各族人民共同缔造的统一的多民族国家

。中国政府禁止对任何民族的歧视和压迫，也禁止任何破坏民族团结和制造国家分

裂的行为。台湾是中国不可分割的一部分。中国政府按照"和平统一、一国两制"的

基本方针和现阶段发展两岸关系、推进祖国和平统一进程的八项主张，以最大的诚

意、尽最大的努力争取和平统一的前景，但决不承诺放弃使用武力。中国坚决反对

任何国家向台湾出售武器或与台湾进行任何形式的军事结盟。中国武装力量坚决捍

卫国家主权和统一，有决心、有能力制止任何分裂行径。

——

制止武装颠覆，维护社会稳定。中国宪法和法律禁止任何组织或个人组织、策划、

实施武装叛乱或武装暴乱，颠覆国家政权，推翻社会主义制度。中国坚决反对一切

形式的恐怖主义、分裂主义和极端主义。中国武装力量把依法维护社会秩序和社会

稳定作为重要职责，严厉打击各种恐怖活动，打击敌对势力的渗透和破坏活动，打

击危害社会稳定的各种犯罪活动，促进社会的安定团结。

——

加强国防建设，实现国防和军队现代化。中国坚持国防建设与经济建设协调发展的

方针，坚持走一条经费投入比较少而效益比较高的道路，在经济发展的基础上推进

国防和军队现代化。中国军队坚持以毛泽东军事思想、邓小平新时期军队建设思想

为指导，全面贯彻"三个代表"重要思想，坚定不移地走中国特色的精兵之路，积极

推进各项改革，适应世界军事变革的趋势，努力完成机械化和信息化建设的双重历

史任务，实现军队现代化的跨越式发展。

——
维护世界和平，反对侵略扩张。中国不称霸，不参加军事集团，不谋求势力范围，

反对战争政策、侵略政策和扩张政策，反对军备竞赛。中国支持国际社会为公正合

理地解决国际争端所做的努力，支持一切有利于维持全球战略平衡和稳定的活动，

积极参与国际反恐怖主义合作。


-----

中国实行积极防御军事战略，在战略上坚持防御、自卫和后发制人的原则。为适应

世界军事领域的深刻变革和国家发展战略的要求，中国制定了新时期积极防御的军

事战略方针。

这一方针立足于打赢现代技术特别是高技术条件下的局部战争。中国综合考虑威胁

国家安全的各种因素，着眼于最困难、最复杂的情况做好防卫作战准备。人民解放

军实施科技强军战略，加快国防科研和武器装备发展，培养高素质新型军事人才，

建立科学的体制编制，发展具有中国特色的作战理论，增强联合作战、机动作战和

执行多种任务的能力。

这一方针注重遏制战争的爆发。根据国家发展战略的需要，人民解放军灵活运用各

种军事手段，同政治、经济、外交等斗争密切配合，改善中国的战略环境，减少不

安全、不稳定因素，努力遏制局部战争和武装冲突的爆发，使国家建设免遭战争的

冲击。中国始终奉行不首先使用核武器政策，对发展核武器采取极为克制的态度。

中国从不参加核军备竞赛，也从不在国外部署核武器。中国保持有限的核反击力量

，是为了遏制他国对中国可能的核攻击。

这一方针坚持和发展人民战争思想。面对现代战争的新变化，中国坚持依靠人民群

众加强国防建设，增强全民国防观念，实行精干的常备军与强大的后备力量相结合

的武装力量体制；坚持平战结合、军民结合、寓兵于民的方针，完善动员体制和机

制，拓宽动员领域和范围，建立适应现代战争要求的国防动员体系；坚持灵活机动

的战略战术，创造现代条件下适合人民群众参战的新战法，发挥人民战争的整体威

力。

三、武装力量


-----

中华人民共和国武装力量，由中国人民解放军、中国人民武装警察部队、民兵组成

。中华人民共和国中央军事委员会领导并统一指挥全国武装力量。

中国人民解放军

中国人民解放军是中国共产党缔造和领导的人民军队，是中国武装力量的主体。人

民解放军由现役部队和预备役部队组成，总员额保持在250万以内。现役部队是国

家的常备军，由陆军、海军、空军和第二炮兵组成，主要担负防卫作战任务，必要

时可以依照法律规定协助维护社会秩序。中央军委通过总参谋部、总政治部、总后

勤部、总装备部对全军实施作战指挥和建设领导。

人民解放军建立于1927年8月1日，建立之初仅由陆军组成。陆军主要担负陆地作战

任务，目前没有设置独立的领导机关，领导机关职能由四总部代行，沈阳、北京、

兰州、济南、南京、广州、成都七个军区直接领导所属陆军部队。陆军由步兵、装

甲兵、炮兵、防空兵、陆军航空兵、工程兵、防化兵、通信兵等兵种及电子对抗兵

、侦察兵、测绘兵等专业兵组成。步兵徒步或乘装甲输送车、步兵战车实施机动和

作战，由山地步兵、摩托化步兵、机械化步兵（装甲步兵）组成。装甲兵（坦克兵

）以坦克及其他装甲车、保障车辆为基本装备，遂行地面突击任务。炮兵以各种压

制火炮、反坦克火炮、反坦克导弹和战役战术导弹为基本装备，遂行地面火力突击

任务。防空兵以高射炮、地空导弹武器系统为基本装备，遂行对空作战任务。陆军

航空兵装备攻击直升机、运输直升机和其他专用直升机及轻型固定翼飞机，遂行空

中机动和支援地面作战任务。工程兵担负工程保障任务，由工兵、舟桥、建筑、伪

装、野战给水工程、工程维护等专业部（分）队组成。防化兵担负防化保障任务，

由防化、喷火、发烟等部（分）队组成。通信兵担负军事通信任务，由通信、通信

工程、通信技术保障、航空兵导航和军邮勤务等专业部（分）队组成。陆军按其担

负的任务还划分为野战机动部队、海防部队、边防部队、警卫警备部队等。野战机

动部队的编制序列一般是：集团军、师（旅）、团、营、连、排、班。海防部队、

边防部队和警卫警备部队，根据担负的作战任务和地理条件，确定编组方式。


-----

人民解放军海军成立于1949年4月23日，主要任务是独立或协同陆军、空军防御敌

人从海上的入侵，保卫领海主权，维护海洋权益。海军由潜艇部队、水面舰艇部队

、航空兵、岸防兵和陆战队等兵种及专业部（分）队组成。海军下辖北海、东海、

南海三个舰队和海军航空兵部。舰队下辖基地、水警区、舰艇支队、舰艇大队等。

潜艇部队编有常规动力潜艇部队和核动力潜艇部队，具有水下攻击和一定的核反击

能力。担负战略核反击任务的核动力潜艇部队，直接由中央军委指挥。水面舰艇部

队编有战斗舰艇部队和勤务舰船部队，具有在海上进行反舰、反潜、防空、水雷战

和对岸攻击等作战能力。海军航空兵编有轰炸航空兵、歼击轰炸航空兵、强击航空

兵、歼击航空兵、反潜航空兵、侦察航空兵部队和警戒、电子对抗、运输、救护、

空中加油等保障部（分）队，具有侦察、警戒、反舰、反潜、防空等作战能力，其

编制序列为：航空兵部，舰队航空兵，航空兵师、团。海军岸防兵编有岸舰导弹部

队和海岸炮兵部队，具有海岸防御作战能力。海军陆战队编有陆战步兵、炮兵、装

甲兵、工程兵及侦察、防化、通信等部（分）队，是实施两栖作战的快速突击力量

。

人民解放军空军成立于1949年11月11日，主要任务是组织国土防空，保卫国家领空

和重要目标的空中安全；组织相对独立的空中进攻作战；在联合战役中，独立或协

同陆军、海军和第二炮兵作战，抗击敌人从空中入侵，或从空中对敌实施打击。空

军实行空防合一的体制，由航空兵、地空导弹兵、高射炮兵、空降兵以及通信、雷

达、电子对抗、防化、技术侦察等专业部（分）队组成。空军下辖沈阳、北京、兰

州、济南、南京、广州、成都七个军区空军，在重要方向和重要目标区设有军或相

当于军的基地。航空兵由歼击、强击、轰炸、侦察、运输航空兵及保障部（分）队

组成，通常按师、团、大队、中队体制编成。航空兵师一般下辖2个至3个航空兵团

和驻地场站，航空兵团是基本战术单位。由于武器装备和担负的任务不同，各类航

空兵团编制飞机数量，通常在20架至40架之间不等；飞机和飞行员（机组）之比，

通常是1 :

1.2。地空导弹兵、高射炮兵通常按师（旅）、团、营、连体制编成。空降兵按军

、师、团、营、连体制编成。


-----

人民解放军第二炮兵组建于1966年7月1日，由地地战略核导弹部队、战役战术常规

导弹部队及相应保障部（分）队组成。战略核导弹部队是一支具有一定规模和实战

能力的主要核反击作战力量，直接由中央军委指挥。战略核导弹部队装备地地战略

核导弹武器系统，主要任务是遏制敌人对中国使用核武器，并在敌人对中国发动核

袭击时，遵照统帅部命令，独立或联合其他军种的战略核部队对敌人实施有效自卫

反击。战役战术常规导弹部队装备常规战役战术导弹武器系统，遂行常规导弹火力

突击任务。

人民解放军预备役部队组建于1983年，是以现役军人为骨干、预备役人员为基础，

按规定的体制编制组成的部队。预备役部队实行统一编制，师、旅、团授予番号、

军旗，执行人民解放军的条令、条例，列入人民解放军序列，平时归省军区（卫戍

区、警备区）建制领导，战时动员后归指定的现役部队指挥或单独遂行作战任务；

平时按照规定进行训练，必要时可以依照法律规定协助维护社会秩序，战时根据国

家发布的动员令转为现役部队。

人民解放军驻香港、澳门部队隶属于中央军委。驻香港部队由陆军、海军和空军等

部队组成。驻澳门部队主要由陆军部队组成，在机关编有少量的海、空军人员。

中国人民武装警察部队

中国人民武装警察部队组建于1982年6月19日，由内卫部队和黄金、森林、水电、

交通部队组成，列入武警序列的还有公安边防、消防、警卫部队。内卫部队由各总

队和机动师组成。武警部队根据人民解放军的建军思想、宗旨、原则，按照其条令

、条例和有关规章制度，结合武警部队特点进行建设，执行《中华人民共和国兵役

法》，享受人民解放军的同等待遇。武警部队的基本任务是：维护国家安全和社会

稳定，保卫国家重要目标，保卫人民生命财产安全，战时协助人民解放军进行防卫

作战。


-----

武警部队属于国务院编制序列，由国务院、中央军委双重领导，实行统一领导管理

与分级指挥相结合的体制。武警部队设总部、总队（师）、支队（团）三级领导机

关。武警总部是武警部队的领导指挥机关，领导管理武警内卫部队和黄金、森林、

水电、交通部队。在中国各级行政区划内，省级设武警总队，地区级设武警支队，

县级设武警中队。在执行公安任务和相关业务建设方面，武警部队接受同级公安部

门的领导和指挥。

和平时期，武警部队主要担负固定目标执勤、处置突发事件、反恐怖任务，并支援

国家经济建设。固定目标执勤，主要是担负警卫、守卫、守护、看押、看守和巡逻

等勤务。具体负责国家列名警卫对象和来访重要外宾，省级以上党政领导机关和各

国驻华使、领馆，国际性、全国性重要会议和大型文体活动现场的安全警卫；对监

狱和看守所实施外围武装警戒；对重要机场、电台和国家经济、国防建设等重要部

门的机密要害单位或要害部位实施武装防守保卫；对铁路主要干线上的重要桥梁、

隧道和特定的大型公路桥梁实施武装防守保护；对国家规定的大中城市或特定地区

实施武装巡查警戒。处置突发事件，主要是对突然发生的危害国家安全或者社会秩

序的违法事件依法实施处置，包括处置叛乱事件、骚乱及暴乱事件、群体性治安、

械斗事件等。反恐怖，主要是反袭击、反劫持、反爆炸。支援国家经济建设，主要

有黄金地质勘察、森林防火灭火，参加国家能源、交通重点项目建设，遇有严重灾

害时，参加抢险救灾。

民兵

民兵是不脱离生产的群众武装组织，是人民解放军的后备力量，是进行现代条件下

人民战争的基础。民兵工作在国务院、中央军委领导下，由总参谋部主管。民兵在

军事机关的指挥下，战时担负配合常备军作战、独立作战、为常备军作战提供战斗

勤务保障以及补充兵员等任务，平时担负战备执勤、抢险救灾和维护社会秩序等任

务。


-----

按照《中华人民共和国兵役法》的规定，凡年满18岁至35岁符合服兵役条件的男性

公民，除征集服现役者外，编入民兵组织服预备役。民兵分为基干民兵和普通民兵

。28岁以下退出现役的士兵和经过军事训练的人员，以及选定参加军事训练的人员

，编为基干民兵。其余18岁至35岁符合服预备役条件的男性公民，编为普通民兵。

根据需要，也可吸收女性公民参加基干民兵。农村的乡镇、行政村，城市街道和具

有一定规模的企业事业单位，是民兵的基本组建单位。基干民兵单独编组，在县级

行政区内的民兵军事训练基地集中进行军事训练，目前编有应急分队和高炮、高机

、便携式防空导弹、地炮、通信、防化、工兵、侦察等专业技术分队。

为使民兵在遇有情况时能够召之即来，中国政府建立了民兵战备制度，定期在民兵

中开展以增强国防观念为目的的战备教育，有针对性地按战备预案进行演练，提高

遂行任务的能力。

四、国防建设

中国的国防建设，是国家现代化建设的重要组成部分。为适应保障国家安全的需要

，中国坚持从自己的国情出发，建设现代化国防。

国防法制

近两年来，中国国防法制建设取得积极进展。2000年3月全国人大通过的《中华人

民共和国立法法》，首次以国家基本法律的形式，对中央军委以及各总部、军兵种

、军区的立法权限做出明确规定：中央军委根据宪法和法律，制定军事法规；各总

部、军兵种、军区，可以根据法律和中央军委的军事法规、决定、命令，在其权限

范围内，制定军事规章；军事法规、军事规章在武装力量内部实施；

军事法规、军事规章的制定、修改和废止办法，由中央军委依照该法规定的原则规

定。这一规定，确立了军事立法在国家立法体制中的重要地位。


-----

2000年以来，中国制定了国防和武装力量建设方面的法律以及有关法律问题的决定

3件、法规56件、规章420件。全国人大常委会制定的《中华人民共和国国防教育法

》，为开展国防教育提供了法律依据。新修订的《中华人民共和国现役军官法》，

进一步完善了人民解放军的军官服役制度。国务院、中央军委联合制定的《中华人

民共和国军事设施保护法实施办法》，明确规定了军事设施保护工作的领导组织体

系以及具体的保护措施和处罚办法。新修订的《中国人民解放军内务条令》、《中

国人民解放军纪律条令》，对新形势下加强依法治军提供了有力的法规保障。

为维护改革开放中的国防利益和军人合法权益，中国对军事司法制度进行了改革。

根据中华人民共和国最高人民法院授权，军事法院开始审理军队内部包括合同、婚

姻家庭、房地产、知识产权、医疗事故损害赔偿纠纷及申请军人失踪或死亡等在内

的民事案件，履行军队内部民事审判职能。地方各级政府和军队有关部门正在努力

建立和完善维护军人及其家属合法权益的工作机制，为国防和军队建设创造良好的

法制环境。

根据国家的统一部署，中国武装力量从2001年开始进行第四个五年普法教育活动，

主要内容包括学习宪法和国家的基本法律，以及与国防和武装力量建设、履行军队

职能、发展社会主义市场经济、官兵切身利益相联系的法律法规等。军事法、战争

与武装冲突法等内容已经纳入军事院校的法律课程，并列入部队的训练大纲。人民

解放军每两年举办一次有陆、海、空军校级军官参加的武装冲突法讲习班，每年为

国防大学在校军、师职以上学员举办武装冲突法专题讲座。

国防动员

中国国家和地方县级以上人民政府设有国防动员委员会。各级国防动员委员会下设

有人民武装动员、国民经济动员、人民防空、交通战备、国防教育等办公室和综合

协调机构，负责承办相关工作。国家国防动员委员会主任由国务院总理担任，副主

任由国务院、中央军委的副职领导担任，委员由国家有关部委和解放军各总部的领


-----

导及所属办公室的领导担任。地方各级国防动员委员会主任由本级政府的主要领导

担任，副主任由本级政府的副职领导和同级军事机关的主要领导担任。

国家在和平时期进行动员准备，将武装力量动员和国民经济动员、人民防空动员、

交通动员以及国防教育纳入国家总体发展规划和计划。武装力量动员包括人民解放

军现役部队和预备役部队、武警部队、民兵和预备役人员，以及相应的武器装备和

后勤物资动员等，主要任务是平时做好兵员动员准备，在需要时征召预备役人员和

适龄公民入伍，保障军队迅速扩编、改编和扩充其他武装组织，并组织参战支前，

配合部队作战。国民经济动员包括工业动员、农业动员、科技动员、物资动员、商

业贸易动员、财政金融动员等，主要任务是平时结合经济建设有组织、有计划地进

行动员准备，战时根据需要调整经济资源配置，集中控制和调动国家的财力、物力

，增加武器装备和其他军用物资的生产，保障战争需要。人民防空动员包括群众防

护动员、人防专业队伍动员、人防工程物资技术保障动员、人防预警保障动员等，

主要任务是动员社会力量进行防空设施建设，组建和训练防空专业队伍，开展人民

防空宣传教育，组织人员疏散隐蔽，配合防空作战，消除空袭后果。交通动员包括

交通运输和邮电通信动员，主要任务是平时组织交通、通信行业的专业保障队伍建

设、国防基本设施建设、装备建设、战备物资储备、民用运力动员准备，战时组织

交通、通信设施的抢修、抢建，组织部队机动、物资补给等方面的交通运输保障。

近年来，军队和地方政府有关部门根据相关法规，联合组织实施了交通运输、联合

防空袭等国防动员演练。中国正进一步健全国防动员法规，完善国防动员体制，积

极推动国防动员建设不断向现代化方向发展。

国防教育

中国重视普及和加强以爱国主义为核心的国防教育，努力增强全民国防观念，使公

民自觉履行国防义务。


-----

全国的国防教育工作由国务院领导，中央军委协同国务院开展全民国防教育。国家

国防教育办公室负责规划、组织、指导和协调全国的国防教育工作。地方各级人民

政府领导本行政区域内的国防教育工作。各有关部门结合业务工作，各尽其责，相

互配合，确保国防教育活动的顺利开展。2001年4月28日《中华人民共和国国防教

育法》正式颁布实施，标志着中国国防教育事业走上了法制化轨道。

中国在高等学校、高级中学和相当于高级中学的学校施行军事训练制度。自1985年

以来，军队先后派出20余万名官兵协助学校组织学生的军事训练，训练在校学生30

00多万人。近年来每年受训的大学生占入校新生的60%左右。自2002年起，全国所

有普通高等学校和高级中学的学生都将按照有关规定和计划参加军事训练。

2001年8月31日，全国人大常委会决定，每年9月的第三个星期六为全民国防教育日

。全民国防教育日为全民参与国防教育活动提供了一个大众化、社会化的载体，是

推动全民国防教育深入持久开展的有效形式。

国防费

中国政府对国防费始终坚持严格控制、严格管理、严格监督的原则，建立了完善的

管理体制和法规制度。中国政府依据《中华人民共和国国防法》，保障国防事业的

必要经费，将国防费全部纳入国家财政预算安排，对国防费实行财政拨款制度，并

按《中华人民共和国预算法》实施管理。国防费预算、决算由全国人大审查批准。

国家和军队的审计机关对预算的执行过程实施严格审计监督。

近几年来，按政府财政预算改革的统一要求，对国防费管理进行了一系列改革：改

革国防费预算编制办法；对武器装备采购资金实行集中统一支付

；对国防物资、工程、服务实行招投标采购制度。国防费管理更加公开、公平、公

正。


-----

在国家经济不断增长的基础上，中国的国防费有所增加。中国年度国防费占国内生

产总值（GDP）的比例，1995年为1.09%，2001年为1.50%（见图表1）。但是，中

国国防费的增长一直保持较低幅度，主要是补偿性增长。1979年至2001年，国防费

占同期国家财政支出的比例总体呈下降趋势（见图表2），1979年为17.37%，2001

年为7.65%，2001年与1979年相比，下降近十个百分点。

2000年、2001年中国年度国防费分别为1207.54亿元人民币、1442.04亿元人民币，2

002年中国年度国防费预算数为1694.44亿元人民币（见图表3），占同期国家财政

支出比重分别为7.60%、7.65%和8.03%。

近几年增加的国防费主要用于：(一)增加军队人员生活支出。在社会经济发展和城

乡居民人均收入提高的情况下，保证军队人员生活水平能够同步提高，官兵的生活

条件得到改善。十年来，五次提高部队伙食费标准，干部工资和战士津贴分别增长

84%和92%。(二)建立和逐步完善军人社会保障制度。按照市场经济的要求，自199

8年以来，中国先后建立了军人伤亡保险、军人退役医疗保险、军人住房补贴等制

度，并调整和完善了军队离退休人员生活费标准。(三)增加军队维持性支出。自19

98年军队停止经商后，为确保部队军事训练需要，逐年增加军事训练经费。随着部

队生活设施的逐步改善和办公自动化的发展，军队的维持性支出增大。(四)为配合

国际社会打击恐怖主义增加支出。(五)为提高现代技术特别是高技术条件下的防卫

作战能力，适度增加了部分装备建设经费。

2002年中国国防支出的总体水平在世界上仍然相对较低（见图表4）。与美国、俄

罗斯、英国、法国等国家相比，中国国防费占国内生产总值和国家财政支出的比重

也是较低的（见图表5）。


-----

国防科技工业

中国国防科技工业是国家战略性产业，是国防现代化的重要工业和技术基础，是国

民经济和科学技术发展的重要推动力量。中国独立自主地建设和发展国防科技工业

，提高国防科技工业的整体水平和经济效益，促进国防建设与经济建设协调发展。

中华人民共和国国防科学技术工业委员会是主管国防科技工业的国务院组成部门，

负责研究拟制国防科技工业发展的方针、政策和法律、法规、规章；研究国防科技

工业发展规划，做好国防科研、生产、建设的统筹和衔接；组织军品科研生产的资

格审查和许可；审核科研生产单位与军方签订的科研生产合同，协调、监督、检查

订货合同的执行，保障军事装备的生产供应；对核、航天、航空、船舶、兵器工业

等行业实施行业管理，指导军工电子行业管理；组织研究和实施国防科技工业体制

改革，组织国防科技工业能力、结构和布局调整；负责编制国防科技工业固定资产

投资、军转民技术改造及技术开发的规划、计划并组织实施；负责国防科技工业的

对外交流与国际合作。

经过几十年的发展，中国已形成了专业门类基本齐全、科研生产手段基本配套的国

防科技工业体系，培养造就了一支具有较高技术水平和优良作风的国防科技工业人

才队伍，为中国自主研制生产武器装备奠定了重要的物质和技术基础。中国目前共

有11个军工集团公司，即中国核工业集团公司、中国核工业建设集团公司、中国航

天科技集团公司、中国航天科工集团公司、中国航空工业第一集团公司、中国航空

工业第二集团公司、中国船舶工业集团公司、中国船舶重工集团公司、中国兵器工

业集团公司、中国兵器装备集团公司和中国电子科技集团公司。各军工集团公司负

责本集团内军品科研生产任务的组织和管理工作，同时作为国家授权的投资机构，

对所属企业的国有资产行使出资人权利。

中国国防科技工业优先发展高新技术武器装备，努力提高现代化水平。加快能力、


-----

结构和布局调整，加强高新技术武器装备科研生产能力，精干军工队伍，优化产业

布局，逐步建立国防科技工业新体系。进一步加强国防科技建设，促进科技进步，

集中力量突破一批关键技术，提高国防科技工业自主创新能力和持续发展能力，努

力实现技术发展的跨越。加强人才培养，造就一支适应国防科技工业发展需要的专

业配套、结构合理、素质精良的人才队伍。目前中国国防科技工业共有141名中国

科学院院士和中国工程院院士，其中中国科学院院士52名，中国工程院院士95名，

双院士6名。

中国政府一贯重视和平利用军工技术，鼓励并支持国防科技工业发挥技术、人才等

方面的优势，发展军民两用技术和高新技术产业，促进了国民经济建设。民用核电

向产业化方向发展。民用航天在应用卫星、运载火箭技术、载人航天等方面取得长

足进步。中国长征系列运载火箭成功发射27颗国外制造的卫星，在国际商业卫星发

射服务市场中占有一席之地。1999年、2001年和2002年中国成功发射三艘无人试验

飞船，标志着中国已突破载人飞船的基本技术，为实现中国载人航天飞行奠定了坚

实基础。民用飞机工业在加强技术研究、扩大转包生产、改进现有机型的同时，在

通用飞机、"新舟60"飞机生产上取得重要进展，并开始研制新型支线飞机。民用船

舶工业已成为全国机电行业中具有较强国际竞争力的出口支柱型产业。近年来，造

船产量持续增长，连续七年位居世界第三位。2001年造船完工量占世界份额的6%

。

中国国防科技工业努力建立和完善适应国防建设和社会主义市场经济要求的体制和

运行机制。推进专业化分工协作，逐步建立由武器装备主承包商、分包商和零部件

供应商组成的分层次的新型社会协作体系。推进军工企事业单位战略性重组，优化

资源配置，发展核心产业，逐步形成一批具有国际竞争力的大型企业集团。深化军

工企业改革，建立现代企业制度，推进企业投资主体多元化和经营机制转换，促进

军工企业成为自主经营、自负盈亏的市场竞争主体。推进国防科技工业科技体制改

革，加强产、学、研有机结合，促进国防科技成果转化为现实生产力。坚持对外开

放，按照优势互补、互惠互利、共同发展的原则，积极参与国际交流与合作。

边防海防


-----

中国奉行睦邻友好政策，严格按照与相邻国家签订的条约、协定、协议和联合国海

洋法公约，对陆地边界和管辖海域实施防卫、管辖，维护国家领土主权和海洋权益

，保卫边防海防安全。

中国主张通过谈判解决边界和海域划界问题，按照公平原则划定与海岸相向相邻国

家的海域界限，反对使用武力或采取激化事态的行动。目前，中国已与大多数邻国

解决或基本解决了历史遗留的边界问题。2000年12月，中国与越南签订了北部湾划

界协定。2002年5月，中国与塔吉克斯坦签订了《中华人民共和国和塔吉克斯坦共

和国关于中塔国界的补充协定》。

中国注重发展与相邻国家的边防交往与合作，共同维护边界秩序。中国分别与蒙古

、俄罗斯、缅甸、越南、老挝、印度等国签订了有关边界管理和处理边境事务，以

及在边境地区建立信任措施、预防危险军事活动等方面的条约、协定和协议。1995

年以来，中国国防部相继与俄罗斯联邦边防总局、蒙古国边防军管理局签署了边防

合作协议。2002年1月，中国国防部与哈萨克斯坦民族安全委员会签署了《中哈边

防合作协议》。2002年4月，中国派出代表团参加了在阿拉木图举行的上海合作组

织成员国边防部门领导人会晤。中、俄、哈、吉、塔五国边防部门领导人商定：五

国边防部门将在上海合作组织有关文件规定的框架内，根据成员国共同国界地区的

形势，加强边防信息交流，进一步深化相应的双边和多边合作，采取有效措施共同

打击恐怖主义、分裂主义、极端主义和预防各种形式的跨界犯罪活动，维护成员国

共同边界地区的良好秩序，为发展成员国之间的睦邻友好、经贸和文化关系提供有

力的保障。中国边防部门和边防部队忠实履行有关条约、协定和协议，积极与邻国

相应边防管理机构建立健全磋商和边防会谈会晤机制，开展各个层次的边防交往与

合作，妥善处理各种边境事务，增进了相互了解、信任与友谊，形成了和平友好的

边界氛围。

中国政府重视边疆地区建设，大力发展边境地区的交通、通信、文教卫生和广播电


-----

视事业。1996年以来，国家边防委员会在九个陆地边境省区组织了大规模的边防基

础设施建设，有效改善了边境管理条件，带动和促进了边疆地区的经济和社会发展

。边防和海防部队在认真履行职责、不断加强自身建设的同时，积极参与和支援地

方的经济建设和精神文明建设，进一步密切了军政军民关系，维护了边疆地区的政

治、社会稳定和民族团结。

人民防空

中国人民防空贯彻人民战争思想，从战时需要出发，根据国家经济能力，依靠广大

人民群众，发挥中央和地方的积极性，充分准备，严密防护。人民防空的基本任务

包括：对人民群众进行防空知识教育；修建各种类型的防护工程；建立人民防空通

信和警报系统；制定人员和物资疏散计划；组织和训练防空专业队伍；对国民经济

的重要目标进行防护；战时组织指挥人民群众进行防空袭斗争。中国根据战备需要

，确定开展人民防空工作的城市和地区，把城市人民防空作为人民防空的重点。

人民防空实行人民政府和军事机关共同领导体制。国务院、中央军委领导全国的人

民防空工作；军区根据国务院、中央军委的授权领导本区域的人民防空工作；县级

以上地方各级人民政府和同级军事机关领导本行政区域的人民防空工作。国家、军

区人民防空主管部门分别设在总参谋部、军区司令部，县级以上地方人民防空主管

部门设在同级人民政府。县级以上人民政府的计划、规划、建设等有关部门在各自

的职责范围内负责有关的人民防空工作。

人民防空坚持长期准备、重点建设、平战结合的方针，贯彻与经济建设协调发展、

与城市建设相结合的原则。国家在和平时期进行人民防空建设，对城市实行分类防

护，将人民防空建设纳入国民经济和社会发展计划，将人民防空工程建设规划纳入

城市总体规划，保障人民防空通信、警报的畅通。国家保护人民防空设施不受侵害

，对人民防空设施建设采取优惠政策，鼓励、支持企业事业组织、社会团体和个人

投资进行人民防空工程建设。国家鼓励平时利用人民防空工程为经济建设和人民生

活服务，鼓励利用人民防空通信、警报设施为抢险救灾提供服务，鼓励人民防空主


-----

管部门和防空专业队伍承担人民政府赋予的抢险救灾任务。根据形势发展的需要，

人民防空将逐步实行防空防灾一体化，努力提高快速反应能力、整体抗毁能力、应

急救援能力和自我发展能力，以便能够应付现代战争和重大灾害事故，有效保护公

民的生命和财产安全。

中国已经颁布实施《中华人民共和国人民防空法》，制定了与之配套的一系列人民

防空法规。中国重视与世界各国进行民防合作与交流，并于1992年加入"国际民防

组织"。

参加和支援西部大开发

开发中国西部地区，具有重要的经济、政治和国防意义。根据国家西部大开发的战

略决策，中央军委成立了专门领导小组及其办公室，做出统一部署。人民解放军和

武警部队先后出动兵力150多万人次，动用机械车辆45万台次，积极参加和支援西

部大开发。

集中力量援建基础设施重点工程。各部队把参加交通、能源、水利、通信等工程建

设作为支援西部大开发的重点，先后参与8个机场和3条国道、4条高速公路的改扩

建，参加输油管道、天然气开发、油气田基地等9项能源设施的施工，承担7座水电

站、19条引水干渠的建设，完成8条通信光缆共2万多公里的敷设任务。

参加生态环境保护和建设。驻西部地区部队为改善驻地生态环境，积极参加植树造

林、防沙治沙、封山育林、退耕还林还草等工作，共植树300余万亩，种草180余万

亩，退耕150余万亩。测绘、气象、给水、航空等技术部队为西部地区提供了大地

勘测、气象预报、水源探测、飞播造林、人工降水服务。

提供人才、智力和技术支援。各部队从院校、医院、科研院所选调专业技术人才支

援西部开发，有计划地安排干部转业到西部地区工作，鼓励和动员人口稠密地区的


-----

退役士兵到西部地区安家落户，扩大西部地区兵员到经济发达地区服役数量，加速

西部地区人才培养和观念更新。一些院校、医院和科研院所还通过开展联合办学、

短期培训、防病治病、转让科技成果等途径，积极为西部地区开发建设提供服务。

开放、开发军事设施。在确保军事安全的前提下，军队先后向地方开放了5个军用

机场、200多条铁路专用线、30条输油管线、70条通信线路和100多所后方仓库。将

部分农场、房地产、保障性企业、军马场转让和移交地方使用。加强空中交通管制

和边防公路等战备设施建设，支持民用交通运输业的发展。

开展扶贫帮困活动。驻西部地区部队派出官兵帮助驻地修道路、架电线、打水井，

传授实用技术，发展多种经营，使20多万贫困群众走上致富道路。各部队还帮助新

建和扩建中小学300多所，帮助5万余名失学儿童重返校园。军队100所医院对西部

贫困地区105所县医院进行了对口支援。

五、军队建设

人民解放军按照政治合格、军事过硬、作风优良、纪律严明、保障有力的总要求，

紧紧围绕打得赢、不变质两个历史性课题，加强全面建设，努力建成一支革命化、

现代化、正规化的人民军队。

军事训练

人民解放军适应现代战争特点，以提高高技术条件下防卫作战能力为主要目标，不

断加强和改进军事训练。

近两年来，人民解放军加快实现由传统练兵方式向科技练兵的转变，充分运用现代

科学技术组织实施军事训练。2000年10月，总参谋部在北京附近地区组织了一次高

科技军事大演兵，应用计算机网络技术、侦察传感技术、电子对抗技术、仿真模拟


-----

技术等高新技术手段，演练和检验新的作战思想、武器装备和训练方法，交流了全

军部队科技练兵的最新成果。

根据新一代作战条令，人民解放军突出了对联合作战问题的研究和演练。各军区、

军兵种组织的年度例行性演习均把联合作战作为重要课题。2001年春夏季节，南京

、广州军区部队分别组织了以联合登陆作战为背景的实兵演习，演练了诸军兵种联

合登陆作战的协同方法，总结了联合训练、陆军部队两栖训练、国防后备力量快速

动员训练等方面的一整套训练、保障和管理经验。总部机关还相继组织了联合战役

通讯指挥研练、登陆和山地作战训练以及联合突防战法研讨，并探索了网电一体战

的特点和作战样式。

人民解放军施行新一代军事训练法规，加强正规化训练。在广泛吸取全军训练改革

成果和科技练兵经验的基础上，总参谋部修改和调整了全军军事训练内容体系，于

2001年7月颁布了《军事训练与考核大纲》，并于2001年9月在华北某集团军组织了

全军新训练大纲集训。2002年9月，中央军委颁布了新的《中国人民解放军军事训

练条例》，更为全面系统地规范了军事训练的组织领导与管理。

人民解放军继续深化院校改革。根据"规模化办校、现代化教学、正规化管理、社

会化保障"的总体思路，进一步完善了新型院校体系，并建立起与军事、科技、教

育发展相适应的教学体系。近年来，在完成对18所院校、60个学科和31个实验室重

点建设任务的基础上，启动了"军队院校重点建设工程"，对67个学科专业领域、17

8个学科专业领域点实施重点建设，58个学科专业已进入国家级重点学科。总部颁

发了全军院校第一部专业目录，初步构建起新的学科专业体系。全军院校以教学内

容为重点深化教学改革，制定新一代教学大纲，实施重点教材建设工程，完善教学

工作评价制度。同时，加强教学的信息化、网络化建设，初步建成全军教学科研信

息网络化平台，形成了拥有近10万个信息站点的全军院校军事训练信息网络。

政治工作


-----

人民解放军的政治工作是中国共产党在军队中的思想工作和组织工作，是实现党对

军队的绝对领导、巩固和提高部队战斗力的根本保证，是人民解放军的生命线。

人民解放军的政治工作，贯彻全心全意为人民服务的宗旨，保证党对军队的绝对领

导，以思想政治教育为中心环节，实行官兵一致、军民一致、瓦解敌军的原则，实

行政治民主、经济民主、军事民主的制度，执行三大纪律八项注意。军队政治工作

实行党委（支部）制度、政治首长制度和政治机关制度。党委（支部）制度规定，

军队团级以上部队和单位设立党的委员会，营和相当于营的单位设立党的基层委员

会，连和相当于连的单位设立党的支部。党的各级委员会（支部）是各该单位统一

领导和团结的核心。党委（支部）统一的集体领导下的首长分工负责制，是党对军

队领导的根本制度。政治首长制度规定，军队团级以上部队和单位设立政治委员，

营设立政治教导员，连设立政治指导员；政治委员、政治教导员、政治指导员与同

级军事主官同为所在单位的首长，在同级党委（支部）的领导下，对所属单位的各

项工作共同负责；政治委员、政治教导员、政治指导员是党委、支部日常工作的组

织者，是政治工作的领导者。政治机关制度规定，军队团级以上部队和单位设立政

治部（处），全军设总政治部；政治机关是所属部队和单位政治工作的领导机关，

负责管理党的工作，组织进行政治工作。

人民解放军的政治工作坚持与时俱进、开拓创新，适应国际局势和军事领域的深刻

变化，适应社会主义市场经济的迅速发展，努力为打赢未来高技术战争提供强大的

精神动力，为保持人民军队的性质、本色和作风提供可靠的政治保证。近些年来，

中共中央颁布了新的《中国人民解放军政治工作条例》，中央军委颁布了《军队基

层建设纲要》，总政治部制定了《关于改革开放和发展社会主义市场经济条件下军

队思想政治建设若干问题的决定》和《关于加强和改进新形势下军队思想政治教育

的意见》。人民解放军积极学习和贯彻"三个代表"重要思想，组织官兵学习党的基

本理论、国家宪法法律和科学文化知识，开展爱国主义、集体主义和革命英雄主义

教育，团以上单位设立军史馆，连队设立荣誉室。颁发军人道德规范，组织创作军

人道德组歌，建设全军宣传文化信息网，完善军营文化设施，连队建立俱乐部，驻


-----

地集中的团以上单位建立文化活动中心。开展心理教育和法律咨询工作，建立以旅

团政治机关和基层政治干部为主、政治工作系统和相关专业系统相结合的心理教育

、法律咨询工作机制。

后勤保障

人民解放军积极改革后勤体制和制度，构建现代后勤保障体系，不断提高后勤保障

能力。

实行联勤保障，是军队后勤保障体制的一次重大改革。联勤保障体制以军区为基础

，采取区域保障与建制保障相结合、通用保障与专用保障相结合的方式。通用物资

供应和通用勤务保障由军区统一组织，专用物资供应和专用勤务保障由军兵种按建

制系统组织实施。总后勤部主管全军的联勤工作，军区联勤部主管战区内的联勤工

作，联勤分部主要负责组织实施保障区域内诸军兵种部队的通用保障。经过两年多

的改革实践，联勤保障逐步规范，保障效益明显提高，开始向三军一体、军民兼容

、平战结合的方向发展。

为精干后勤保障机构和提高国防费的使用效益，人民解放军在非作战部队的军以上

机关和驻大中城市的军队院校、医院等单位，推行了后勤保障社会化改革。经过近

三年的努力，后勤保障社会化改革在饮食保障、商业服务、营房保障和职工管理制

度改革等方面取得实质性进展，并在生活用车、油料保障、服装货币化供应等方面

进行了尝试。目前，全军已有1500多个食堂交给地方服务保障机构承办，1000多个

军人服务社纳入社会商业体系，1800多个营院不同程度实行了物业管理，近300个

保障性企业和农场移交国家和地方，共减少企事业单位职工30多万人。为推进军队

后勤保障社会化改革和确保改革健康发展，2002年9月，国务院、中央军委发出《

关于推进军队后勤保障社会化有关问题的通知》

；10月，中央军委批转了《总后勤部关于实行军队后勤保障社会化若干问题的意见

》。


-----

2001年3月，军队开始对预算编制制度进行改革。借鉴国际上通行的预算方法，全

面改革军队预算编制形式、方法和内容，重点推行零基预算等方法，以充分发挥预

算的宏观调控作用，逐步建立起财权财力集中、军费分配科学、项目具体透明、监

督制约严密的预算新模式。

2002年1月，军队全面推行采购制度改革，实行以集中采购和招标采购为主，建立

分工协作、相互制约的分段管理运行机制。对批量大、价值高、通用性强的物资，

主要依托物资采购机构进行集中采购。对一次性采购金额达到50万元以上的大宗物

资和投资在200万元以上的新建、扩建或装修改造工程，实行招标采购。

人民解放军军官住房保障制度，目前采取军队保障与社会保障相结合、公寓住房与

自有住房相结合、实物供应与货币分配相结合的办法。不同职级、不同类别的军官

，实行相应的住房保障。在职军官主要住用公寓房。离退休军官主要是购买现有住

房或经济适用住房。转业复员干部和士官住房主要是采取领取住房补贴，纳入社会

保障系统加以解决。

人民解放军不断加强后勤装备建设，提高后勤保障手段的现代化水平。2001年，军

队进行了后勤装备成建制、成系统形成综合保障能力的配套试验，发展了海上伤员

快速救治、岸滩保障、野战机场保障、导弹部队机动保障、空投物资保障、单兵保

障和野战后勤指挥等七个方面的后勤装备，完成了86种新装备的论证、研制和试验

。为实时、准确、透明地获取和处理后勤保障资源、保障需求、保障状态等信息，

军队正在组织可视后勤系统研究。2002年7月，中央军委颁布施行《中国人民解放

军后勤装备条例》，促进了后勤装备的正规化建设。

武器装备


-----

人民解放军适应军事高科技发展和防卫作战需要，认真贯彻科技强军、质量建军方

针，加快武器装备发展，努力提高武器装备现代化水平。

武器装备管理体制和机制进一步完善。1998年4月总装备部成立以后，各军兵种、

军区直至军、师、团级作战部队均成立了装备部（处），进一步加强了武器装备建

设的集中统一领导和武器装备全系统、全寿命管理，有效提高了武器装备建设的整

体效益。2000年12月，中央军委颁布了第一部《中国人民解放军装备条例》，规范

了军队装备工作的组织领导、职责分工和管理程序。2002年6月、10月，中央军委

先后颁布了《中国人民解放军装备维修工作条例》和《中国人民解放军战役装备保

障纲要》。装备工作的一系列法规制度，促进了武器装备工作向科学化、正规化、

法制化方向发展。

武器装备现代化水平不断提高。人民解放军坚持以自力更生、自主创新为主，并积

极借鉴国外先进技术发展武器装备。根据未来高技术条件下防卫作战需要，人民解

放军重点发展高新技术武器装备，有选择地对现役武器装备进行现代化改装，努力

实现武器装备机械化、信息化双重历史使命，初步形成了种类比较齐全、结构比较

合理的具有中国特色的武器装备基本体系。

武器装备管理能力明显增强。人民解放军认真管好用好现有武器装备，不断提高新

型武器装备的管理能力。军以下部队普遍建立健全武器装备管理规章制度，实行装

备财务规范化管理，开展武器装备管理科学化、制度化、经常化的考评活动。同时

，组织新型装备使用和管理集训，培养装备管理和技术保障人才，完善管理配套设

施，做好武器装备成建制、成系统形成作战能力和保障能力的工作。

武器装备采购制度改革逐步深化。人民解放军积极适应社会主义市场经济和武器装

备发展的需要，大力推进武器装备采购制度改革。军队装备部门行使装备订货甲方

责任主体职能，武器装备科研、订购和维修按照国家和军队有关法规实行合同制管


-----

理。近年来，军队在武器装备采购工作中，坚持以竞争为核心，逐步实行招投标制

度，建立和完善竞争、评价、监督和激励机制，进一步加强驻厂军事代表队伍建设

，完善质量认证体系，提高了武器装备经费使用效益和武器装备科研生产质量。

干部培养

人民解放军坚持把培养高素质新型军事人才，作为推进军队现代化建设跨越式发展

的根本性措施。

人民解放军的干部包括军官和文职干部。近年来，军队不断提高生长干部的培训层

次，调整生长干部的来源结构，建立了科学合理的生长干部培训体制，军事人才培

训层次、质量和效益得到明显提高。目前，全军干部中大专以上文化程度的已超过

80%。3万多名军队干部获得博士、硕士学位，其中不少已走上师、团职领导岗位

。与此同时，为借鉴世界各国特别是发达国家军队建设的有益经验，1996年至今，

人民解放军先后向20多个国家派出军事留学人员近千名，其中相当一部分是师、团

职军事指挥干部和专业技术干部。

2000年12月全国人大常委会通过的《中华人民共和国现役军官法》和1999年6月中

央军委颁布的《中国人民解放军文职干部条例》明确规定，指挥军官和非专业技术

文职干部每晋升一级职务、专业技术军官和专业技术文职干部每晋升一级专业技术

职务，应当经过相应的院校或者其他训练机构培训；在机关任职的干部应当经过相

应的院校培训。军队在职干部的培训正在逐步实现由学历教育向全面的继续教育转

变。除少量干部进行学历教育外，绝大多数干部的知识更新主要通过短期培训解决

。

2000年5月，国务院、中央军委颁布了《关于建立依托普通高等教育培养军队干部

制度的决定》，明确要充分发挥普通高等教育在国防和军队现代化建设中的作用，


-----

拓宽选拔培养高素质军队建设人才的途径。目前，北京大学、清华大学等50余所高

等学校承担了为军队培养干部的任务，每年向军队输送大批优秀人才。

为适应科技强军的要求，军队高度重视对高层次人才的培养工作。近两年来，全军

博士后流动站和博士、硕士学位授权点有了大幅度增加，学位授权体系逐步完善，

培养规模有了较大增长。2002年5月，国务院学位委员会审议通过了《军事学硕士

专业学位设置方案》，决定设置和试办军事学硕士专业学位，标志着军队高层次应

用型专门人才的培养迈上一个新的台阶。

人民解放军把干部交流作为培养锻炼干部、提高干部素质的重要途径。《中华人民

共和国现役军官法》对军官的交流做了进一步明确和规范。2002年1月中央军委颁

布的《中国人民解放军现役军官职务任免条例》，对军官交流的条件、范围以及组

织实施等做出了具体规定。根据1998年12月颁发的《中国人民解放军驻香港部队干

部轮换暂行规定》，驻香港部队干部实行全员定期轮换制度，目前已轮换三批。参

照驻香港部队的做法，驻澳门部队也已开始实行干部全员轮换。

六、国际安全合作

国际安全合作在维护世界与地区和平稳定中发挥着越来越重要的作用。中国政府高

度重视并积极参与国际安全合作，主张在《联合国宪章》、和平共处五项原则以及

其他公认的国际关系准则的基础上，开展国际安全合作。

地区安全合作

同亚太各国开展对话与合作是中国亚太安全政策的重要内容，是中国睦邻友好政策

的组成部分。中国坚持与邻为善、以邻为伴，不断加强区域合作。两年来，中国努

力推动上海合作组织的形成与发展，继续支持和参加东盟地区论坛（ARF）、亚洲

相互协作与信任措施会议（CICA）、亚太安全合作理事会（CSCAP）、东北亚合


-----

作对话会（NEACD）等多边安全对话与合作进程，为深化具有亚洲特色的区域安

全合作发挥了积极作用。

2001年6月，中国、俄罗斯、哈萨克斯坦、吉尔吉斯斯坦、塔吉克斯坦、乌兹别克

斯坦六国成立了上海合作组织。这一组织是在"上海五国"机制基础上成立的区域性

多边合作组织。它成立以来，先后签署发表了《打击恐怖主义、分裂主义和极端主

义上海公约》、国防部长联合公报、总理声明、执法安全部门领导人声明和外交部

长联合声明。在2002年6月召开的上海合作组织圣彼得堡峰会上，六国元首签署了

《上海合作组织宪章》、《关于地区反恐怖机构的协定》和《上海合作组织成员国

元首宣言》三份重要法律、政治文件。上海合作组织倡导新型安全观、新型区域合

作模式和新型国家关系，加强了军事领域的信任与合作，强化了在打击恐怖主义、

分裂主义和极端主义方面的实质性协作，达成了在防止与和平解决国际冲突中相互

协助的共识。上海合作组织弘扬互信、互利、平等、协商、尊重多样文明、谋求共

同发展的上海精神，积极推动建立公正合理的国际政治经济新秩序，促进了地区安

全与稳定。

中国赞同亚洲相互协作与信任措施会议（简称"亚信"）关于加强信任合作、维护地

区安全的宗旨和原则，与各成员国开展建设性的友好合作。2002年6月，"亚信"首

次元首峰会通过了《阿拉木图文件》和《关于消除恐怖主义和促进文明对话的宣言

》。"亚信"进程取得了重要成果。

中国支持东盟地区论坛朝着既定目标不断前进。中国一直积极参加东盟地区论坛外

长会议、高官会议及非官方会议。中国承办了论坛海洋信息网站项目并正式开通，

参加了论坛建立信任措施的跨国犯罪专家小组会议，提交了跨国犯罪问题的国别报

告，并定期向论坛提交年度安全展望报告。在2001年举行的第八届论坛外长会议上

，中国提出支持论坛逐步开展非传统安全领域的对话与合作，并再次重申关于通报

和派员观察多边联合军事演习的建议。2002年5月，中国向论坛高官会议提交了"关

于加强非传统安全领域合作的中方立场文件"。在2002年7月举行的第九届论坛外长

会议上，中国提交了"中国关于新安全观的立场文件"，强调应共同培育一种新型的


-----

安全观念，通过对话增进信任，通过合作促进安全。2002年11月，中国与东盟发表

《关于非传统安全领域合作联合宣言》，启动了中国与东盟在非传统安全领域的全

面合作。中国还于2002年9月在北京举办了东盟地区论坛军队后勤保障社会化研讨

会。

东盟与中、日、韩（10＋3）合作是东亚领导人就加强本地区合作交换意见的重要

渠道，有利于增进东亚国家的相互了解、信任与互利合作。中国重视并积极参与这

一合作，主张在现有基础上将其拓展为全方位合作，在侧重经济合作的同时，本着

协商一致、稳步推进的原则，逐步开展政治和安全领域的对话与合作，并从非传统

安全领域的合作开始。经过四年多的发展，这一合作已取得明显进展。

中国军队参与了亚太地区安全对话与合作。中国于2002年1月派员观摩了新加坡主

办的西太平洋地区海军扫雷演习，2002年4月派员观摩了日本主办的西太平洋地区

潜艇搜救演习，2002年5月派员观摩了美国、泰国、新加坡"金色眼镜蛇"联合军事

演习。今后，中国还将有选择地逐步参与非传统安全领域的多边联合军事演习。

反恐怖主义合作

近年来，恐怖主义活动明显上升，对世界和平与发展构成了现实威胁。"9·11"事件

造成重大生命和财产损失，引起国际社会普遍关注。中国是恐怖主义的受害者，"

东突厥斯坦"恐怖势力严重危害中国各族人民群众的生命财产安全和社会稳定。200

2年9月11日，联合国安理会根据中国、美国、阿富汗、吉尔吉斯斯坦的共同要求，

正式将"东突厥斯坦伊斯兰运动"列入其颁布的恐怖组织名单。中国政府历来坚决反

对并谴责一切形式的恐怖主义，并积极采取有效措施打击恐怖主义活动。

中国政府主张，国际社会应加强对话和磋商，开展合作，共同防范和打击国际恐怖

活动，努力消除产生恐怖主义的根源。打击恐怖主义要证据确凿，目标明确，符合

《联合国宪章》的宗旨和原则及公认的国际法准则，充分发挥联合国和安理会的主


-----

导作用，一切行动应有利于维护地区及世界和平的长远利益。不能将恐怖主义与特

定的民族或宗教混为一谈。不能对打击恐怖主义采取双重标准。无论恐怖主义发生

在何时何地、针对何人、以何种方式出现，国际社会都应共同努力，坚决予以谴责

和打击。反对恐怖主义要标本兼治，采取综合措施，其中解决发展问题、缩小南北

差距、解决地区冲突十分重要。

中国支持并认真执行联合国及安理会通过的一系列关于反对恐怖主义问题的决议，

并已向安理会反恐委员会提交了执行安理会第1373号决议情况的报告。中国加入了

《制止恐怖主义爆炸的国际公约》，签署了《制止向恐怖主义提供资助的国际公约

》。在12项国际反恐怖主义公约中，中国已加入10项，签署了1项。中国还与美国

、俄罗斯、英国、法国、巴基斯坦、印度等国分别进行了反恐磋商，并积极参加了

安理会反恐委员会的工作。中国积极推动亚太经济合作组织领导人上海会议发表反

恐声明，推动上海合作组织成员国政府首脑、国防部长、执法安全部门领导人和外

长发表共同声明，并积极支持该组织建立地区反恐常设机构。2002年10月，中国还

与吉尔吉斯斯坦举行了联合反恐军事演习。中国高度重视金融领域的国际反恐合作

。中国虽不是反洗钱金融行动特别工作组成员，但一贯支持该工作组的工作，并已

向该工作组全面介绍了中国在金融反恐领域的措施。

参与联合国维持和平行动

中国作为联合国安理会常任理事国，一贯重视并支持联合国在《联合国宪章》宗旨

和原则指导下，为维护国际和平与安全发挥积极作用。中国对改革维和行动持积极

态度，希望进一步加强联合国维和行动的作用并提高其效能，支持联合国秘书处就

此采取的各项积极措施，对联大、安理会审议"关于改革联合国维和行动的普拉希

米报告"取得的进展表示欢迎。

自1990年首次向联合国维和行动派遣军事观察员以来，中国军队已先后参加了10项

联合国维和行动，共派出军事观察员、军事联络官、军事顾问和参谋军官650多人

次，派出工程兵部队两批800人次。目前，中国仍有53名军事观察员分别在6个任务


-----

区执行任务，有2名参谋军官在联合国维和部工作。中国军队先后有4人在联合国维

和行动中牺牲，数十人负伤。

继2000年1月首次派遣15名民事警察执行联合国维和任务后，中国政府先后向"联合

国东帝汶过渡行政当局"（UNTAET）和"联合国驻波斯尼亚和黑塞哥维那特派团"

（UNMIBH）派遣了198名民事警察。

1997年5月，中国政府决定原则上参加联合国维和待命安排。2002年1月，中国正式

参加联合国维和行动第一级待命安排机制，并准备在适当时候向联合国维和行动提

供工程、医疗、运输等后勤保障分队，可向联合国维和行动提供1个联合国标准工

程营、1个联合国标准医疗分队、2个联合国标准运输连。

军事交流与合作

中国人民解放军积极开展对外军事交流与合作，对外交往的领域逐步扩大，内容日

趋丰富，形式更加灵活多样。

中国已与100多个国家建立了军事关系，在100多个驻外使馆开设武官处，有70多个

国家在中国设立了武官处。近两年来，人民解放军共进行130多项重要交往项目，

高级军事代表团出访60多个国家，并接待了60多个国家90余批军队重要领导人来访

。2002年5月至9月，中国海军舰艇编队首次进行环球航行访问，航行3万余海里，

访问了10个国家。人民解放军对外军事学术交流与专业技术合作也不断向深度和广

度发展，同数十个国家进行了上百次专业技术团组交流活动，与外军互派军事留学

生的规模逐步扩大。2001年10月至11月，中国在国防大学举办了第三期国际问题研

讨班，有来自18个国家的军官参加。2002年10月，中国在国防大学举办第四期国际

问题研讨班，有来自31个国家的军官参加。

中国积极发展与世界各国的军事关系。中俄两军关系在《中俄睦邻友好合作条约》


-----

的指导下不断加强和发展，两军高层往来保持良好势头。2001年9月，中美海上军

事安全磋商机制专门会议在关岛举行，一度中断的中美军事关系开始恢复。2002年

10月，中美两国元首会晤时同意恢复两军交往。中日军事关系于2001年底得到恢复

。中国与欧盟的军事关系发展顺利。中国各级军事代表团应邀对东北亚、东南亚、

南亚、中亚地区多个国家的军队进行了成功访问。中国沿边军区与相邻国家的边防

部队开展了互访和交流。中国继续向一些发展中国家提供人员培训、装备器材、后

勤物资、医疗卫生等方面的援助，并积极拓展新的交往领域。与西亚和非洲国家交

往的力度加大，与拉美国家的军事交往继续发展。人民解放军多次派员参加亚太地

区多边安全会议、亚太地区防卫当局官员论坛、东北亚合作对话会、东盟地区论坛

会议、西太平洋地区海军论坛以及各类多边安全研讨会等活动。人民解放军还与澳

大利亚、法国、德国、印度、日本、哈萨克斯坦、吉尔吉斯斯坦、巴基斯坦、俄罗

斯、泰国、英国、美国等国的国防和军队有关部门进行了安全磋商和会晤，增进了

彼此的信任与了解。

七、军备控制与裁军

冷战结束后，国际军控、裁军与防扩散领域取得了一系列成果，但近年来的一系列

消极事态却使这一良好势头受挫。在当前形势下，维护全球战略平衡与稳定和国际

军控与裁军法律体系至关重要。现有国际军控与裁军法律体系，是以联合国为中心

的全球集体安全框架的重要组成部分。中国政府愿与国际社会一道，为维护国际军

控与裁军法律体系，推进军控、裁军与防扩散进程做出贡献。

核裁军问题

中国一贯倡导全面禁止和彻底销毁核武器。中国自拥有核武器之日起就郑重声明，

在任何时候、任何情况下都不首先使用核武器，此后又承诺无条件地不对无核武器

国家和无核武器区使用或威胁使用核武器，并一直推动所有核国家以法律形式确定

上述承诺。中国对发展核武器始终采取极为克制的态度，中国核武库的规模仅保持

在自卫所需的最低水平。中国认为，拥有最大核武库的国家对核裁军负有特殊、优

先责任，应率先大幅度削减其核武库，并对削减下来的核武器予以销毁。中国欢迎


-----

美俄签署新的削减进攻性战略武器条约，希望美俄采取切实措施，确保核裁军的"

可核查"和"不可逆"，并继续推进核裁军进程，真正促进世界的和平与稳定。

《全面禁止核试验条约》是核裁军进程中的重要一步。作为条约首批签约国，中国

一直积极参与条约组织筹委会的工作，认真落实国内各项履约准备。中国政府已将

条约提交全国人大常委会审议批准。中国愿与国际社会共同努力，推动条约早日生

效。谈判缔结"禁止生产核武器用裂变材料条约"（简称"禁产条约"）有助于推动核

裁军进程和防止核武器扩散，中国支持在裁军谈判会议达成全面、平衡的工作计划

的基础上，尽早启动条约谈判。

化学和生物武器裁军问题

中国一贯主张全面禁止和彻底销毁化学武器。作为原始缔约国，中国积极支持《禁

止化学武器公约》的宗旨和目标，认真、严格履行公约规定的各项义务。中国设立

了专门的国家履约机构，按时、完整地提交了初始宣布和各类年度宣布，接待了禁

止化学武器组织的55次核查，并与该组织联合举办了视察员培训班、研讨会。

中国领土上至今还有日本遗弃的大量化学武器。中方敦促日方按照中日两国政府签

署的《关于销毁中国境内日本遗弃化学武器的备忘录》有关精神，切实履行《禁止

化学武器公约》的销毁义务，加快相关工作进程，尽早启动日本遗弃在华化学武器

的实质性销毁工作。

中国一贯主张全面禁止和彻底销毁生物武器。中国于1984年加入《禁止生物武器公

约》，认真、全面履行了自己所承担的义务。1987年以来，中国一直按照公约审议

会议的决定，逐年向联合国报告与公约有关的建立信任措施方面的资料和情况。

中国支持全面加强公约有效性的工作，积极参加了公约缔约国特设工作组谈判制定

公约议定书的工作，对议定书未能按期达成、公约五审会被迫休会感到遗憾。中国


-----

认为，通过多边谈判，制定一项内容平衡、措施有效的议定书，仍是加强《禁止生

物武器公约》有效性的最佳途径。中国愿与各方一道，继续探讨在各国普遍参与及

多边框架内加强公约有效性的措施。

导弹防御和防止外空军备竞赛问题

中国在导弹防御问题上的立场是一贯的和明确的。中国理解有关国家在大规模杀伤

性武器及其运载工具扩散问题上的安全关切，但同许多国家一样，认为这一问题应

在国际社会共同努力下，通过政治和外交手段加以解决。

中国对《反弹道导弹条约》失效感到遗憾。中国始终认为，维护全球战略稳定及国

际军控、裁军和防扩散体系至关重要，符合各国的根本利益，希望有关国家认真听

取国际社会的意见，在反导问题上慎重行事。同时，中国也愿意与各方展开建设性

对话，为维护国际和平与安全共同努力。

中国对有关国家在东北亚地区联合研发并着眼于部署战区导弹防御系统感到关切。

这将导致先进导弹技术的扩散，也不利于亚太地区的和平与稳定。中国坚决反对任

何国家向台湾提供任何形式的战区导弹防御援助或保护。

外层空间属于全人类，和平利用外空是全人类的共同愿望。当前外空面临武器化的

危险，防止外空武器化和外空军备竞赛，已成为十分紧迫的现实问题。国际社会应

尽早谈判缔结必要的法律文书，禁止在外空部署武器和对空间物体使用或威胁使用

武力，确保外空的和平与安宁。中国认为日内瓦裁军谈判会议是进行此项谈判的合

适场所。中国曾多次向裁谈会提交有关工作文件，就未来的国际法律文书要点提出

建议。2002年6月，中国又和俄罗斯等国一道，联合向裁谈会提交了题为"防止在外

空部署武器、对外空物体使用或威胁使用武力国际条约（草案）"的工作文件，就

未来外空法律文书的总体结构和具体内容提出了设想。上述工作文件得到了许多国


-----

家的支持和响应。中国希望，裁谈会能早日就此开展实质性工作，谈判缔结相关国

际法律文书，为防止外空武器化和外空军备竞赛做出积极努力。

防止大规模杀伤性武器及其运载工具扩散问题

中国一贯反对扩散大规模杀伤性武器及其运载工具，支持国际社会在防扩散领域的

积极努力，并以实际行动为防扩散事业做出了贡献。中国认为，防扩散努力不应仅

限于防止大规模杀伤性武器扩散本身，而需寻找和解决其根源。建立公正、合理的

国际新秩序，实现国际关系的普遍改善，才是消除威胁的根本途径。防止恐怖组织

等非国家实体获取大规模杀伤性武器，是国际社会面临的共同任务。中国愿与国际

社会一道，为建立各国普遍参与的公平、合理、有效的多边防扩散机制而共同努力

。

中国是《不扩散核武器条约》缔约国，一向恪守条约义务，奉行不主张、不鼓励、

不从事核武器扩散和不帮助别国发展核武器的政策。中国还制定了核出口三原则：

保证用于和平目的；接受国际原子能机构的保障监督；未经中方许可，不得转让第

三国。为加强核出口控制机制，中国于1997年加入了桑戈委员会，并逐步建立和完

善了相应的国内法律体系。1997年9月和1998年6月，中国颁布了《核出口管制条例

》和《核两用品及相关技术出口管制条例》，对桑戈委员会清单和国际现行核两用

品清单包括的物项和技术的出口进行管理。上述条例规定，中国的核出口项目由政

府指定的专门公司经营，对核出口实行许可证制度，不向未接受国际原子能机构保

障监督的核设施提供任何帮助。为加强保障监督制度的有效性和履行防扩散义务，

中国于2002年3月28日正式通知国际原子能机构，中国已完成保障监督附加议定书

生效的国内法律程序，该附加议定书同日起对中国生效。中国是核武器国家中第一

个完成上述程序的国家。

中国支持国际原子能机构根据规约宗旨和原则为防范潜在的核恐怖活动做出贡献，

将适时为机构反核恐怖活动提供适当帮助。加强对核设施和核材料的实物保护，有


-----

利于防止核扩散和防范核恐怖活动。中国积极参加了《核材料实物保护公约》的修

约工作，愿为顺利完成修约工作做出努力。

中国严格履行《禁止化学武器公约》和《禁止生物武器公约》规定的义务，不以任

何方式协助、鼓励任何国家获得化学武器和生物武器。中国一贯对化学品、生物剂

及有关生产设备和技术的出口持慎重、负责的态度。为确保中国出口的上述物项不

被用于制造化学武器和生物武器的目的，中国政府颁布实施了《中华人民共和国监

控化学品管理条例》及其实施细则等法律法规，严格管理相关物项的出口。2001年

12月颁布的《中华人民共和国刑法修正案》，将投放、非法制造、买卖、运输及储

存放射性、毒害性和传染病病原体等物质，危害公共安全的行为定为刑事犯罪，并

规定了相应的惩罚措施。为进一步加强对化学品和生物两用品及其相关技术和设备

出口的管理，中国政府又于2002年10月颁布了《有关化学品及相关设备和技术出口

管制办法》（含出口控制清单）、《中华人民共和国生物两用品及相关设备和技术

出口管制条例》（含出口控制清单）和新修改的《中华人民共和国军品出口管理条

例》。

近年来，导弹扩散问题引起国际社会的广泛关注。中国对此同样十分重视。国际社

会应在确保各国安全不受减损、非歧视性的原则基础上通过对话与合作寻求解决办

法，包括探讨建立新的多边机制的可能性。中国支持联合国在该领域发挥重要作用

，积极参加了联合国导弹问题政府专家组的工作。中国对有关国家提出的新建议持

开放态度，以建设性的姿态参加了关于"防止弹道导弹扩散国际行为准则"草案和"

全球导弹监控机制"倡议的国际讨论。在导弹防扩散方面，中国政府一向采取严肃

、认真、负责任的态度，不以任何方式帮助任何国家发展可被用于运载核武器的弹

道导弹，对导弹及其相关物项和技术的出口实行严格控制。2002年8月，中国政府

正式颁布了《中华人民共和国导弹及相关物项和技术出口管制条例》及《管制清单

》。这是中国政府贯彻本国的导弹防扩散政策，进一步加强导弹及相关物项和技术

出口控制，推进出口管理法制化的一项重大举措。今后，中国将根据自己的出口控

制实践，继续推进完善出口监管法制化进程，也愿与各方加强交流与合作，积极参


-----

加有关国际防扩散机制的讨论进程，为最终建立公正、合理、有效的国际防扩散机

制而努力。

小武器和杀伤人员地雷问题

中国一向认真对待小武器非法贸易及其过度积累造成的各种问题，对小武器的生产

、转让一贯持负责任的态度，并积极参与国际社会的各种努力。中国于2001年7月

以建设性态度参加了联合国小武器非法贸易各方面问题大会，现正以实际行动落实

会议通过的《行动纲领》。中国积极参加了《联合国打击跨国有组织犯罪公约》所

附"枪支议定书"的谈判，为达成议定书做出了贡献，目前正积极研究签署该议定书

的问题。《中华人民共和国枪支管理法》和《中华人民共和国军品出口管理条例》

对枪支和弹药的生产、运输、销售、配备及进出境管理做了详细规定，建立了对小

武器等军品出口的严格管理制度，并明确了严厉的违法处罚措施。2001年，中国还

在全国开展了打击非法枪支专项治理活动，收缴并销毁了大量非法枪支。

自1998年批准《特定常规武器公约》新修订的"地雷议定书"以来，中国继续履行不

出口不符合议定书规定的杀伤人员地雷的承诺，并在履约的其他方面取得较大进展

。中国人民解放军举办了一系列普及议定书相关知识的地雷业务培训班。有关部门

正根据议定书制定一系列规章和标准，其中包括杀伤人员地雷技术性能和雷场标示

等方面的国家军用标准。

中国继续推动国内和国际扫雷努力。中国国内的雷患已基本清除。2001年，中国向

柬埔寨、埃塞俄比亚、厄立特里亚、莫桑比克、卢旺达、纳米比亚、安哥拉等七国

捐献了一大批扫雷设备和器材。2002年，中国用于国际扫雷合作的资金达300多万

美元，主要用于向厄立特里亚和黎巴嫩两国提供扫雷援助。除向两国提供扫雷器材

外，中国还向厄立特里亚派出了专家小组，现场指导扫雷。


-----

