China’s National Defense in 2006

Information Office of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China

December 2006, Beijing

2006年中国的国防

中华⼈民共和国

国务院新闻办公室

⼆○○六年⼗⼆⽉·北京

新华⺴北京12⽉29⽇电

China's National Defense in 2006

(Xinhua)

Updated: 2006-12-29 17:40

The Information Office of the State Council published a white paper titled "China's

National Defense in 2006" here Friday. Following is the full text:

http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2006-12/29/content_771191.htm
http://www.china.org.cn/english/China/194332.htm
http://news.xinhuanet.com/politics/2006-12/29/content_5546076.htm

Preface
I. The Security Environment
II. National Defense Policy
III. China's Leadership and Administration System for National Defense
IV. The People's Liberation Army
V. People's Armed Police Force
VI. National Defense Mobilization and Reserve Force
VII. Border and Coastal Defense
VIII. Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense
IX. Defense Expenditure
X. International Security Cooperation

Appendices [not available on 12/29/06]
Appendix I The Leading System of the Chinese People' Liberation Army
Appendix II Major International Exchanges of the Chinese Military 2005-2006
Appendix III Participation in Security Consultations (2005-2006)
Appendix IV Joint Exercises with Foreign Armed Forces (2005-2006)
Appendix V Participation in UN Peacekeeping Operations (Up to Nov. 30, 2006)
Appendix VI Major Military Regulations Promulgated 2005-2006


-----

Preface 前 ⾔

To uphold world peace, promote common development and seek cooperation and winwin is the common wish of the people around the world and an irresistible trend of our
times. Committed to peace, development and cooperation, China pursues a road of
peaceful development, and endeavors to build, together with other countries, a
harmonious world of enduring peace and common prosperity.
维护世界和平，促进共同发展，谋求合作共赢，是各国⼈民的共同愿望，也是不可
抗拒的当今时代潮流。中国⾼举和平、发展、合作的旗帜，坚持⾛和平发展道路，
与世界各国⼀道，共同致⼒于建设⼀个持久和平、共同繁荣的和谐世界。

Never before has China been so closely bound up with the rest of the world as it is today.
The Chinese government works to advance both the fundamental interests of the Chinese
people and the common interests of the peoples of the rest of the world, and pursues a
defense policy which is purely defensive in nature. China's national defense, in keeping
with and contributing to the country's development and security strategies, aims at
maintaining national security and unity, and ensuring the realization of the goal of
building a moderately prosperous society in an all-round way. China is determined to
remain a staunch force for global peace, security and stability.
中国与世界从未像今天这样紧密相连。中国政府把中国⼈民的根本利益与各国⼈民
的共同利益结合起来，坚持奉⾏防御性的国防政策。中国的国防服从和服务于国家
发展战略和安全战略，旨在维护国家安全统⼀，确保实现全⾯建设⼩康社会的宏伟
⺫标。中国永远是维护世界和平、安全、稳定的坚定⼒量。

China's national defense and military modernization, conducted on the basis of steady
economic development, is the requirement of keeping up with new trends in the global
revolution and development in military affairs, and of maintaining China's national
security and development. China will not engage in any arms race or pose a military
threat to any other country. At the new stage in the new century, we will take the
scientific development outlook as an important guiding principle for the building of
national defense and military affairs, vigorously advance the revolution in military affairs
with Chinese features, and strive to realize an all-round, coordinated and sustainable
development in our country's national defense and military capabilities.
中国在经济不断发展的基础上推进国防和军队现代化，是适应世界新军事变⾰发展
趋势、维护国家安全和发展利益的需要。中国不会与任何国家进⾏军备竞赛，不会
对任何国家构成军事威胁。新世纪新阶段，中国把科学发展观作为国防和军队建设
的重要指导⽅针，积极推进中国特⾊军事变⾰，努⼒实现国防和军队建设全⾯协调
可持续发展。

I. The Security Environment
⼀、安全形势

Peace and development remain the principal themes in today's world, and the overall
international security environment remains stable. But, uncertainties and destabilizing
factors are on the increase, and new challenges and threats are continuously emerging.


-----

和平与发展仍然是当今时代的主题。国际安全形势总体稳定的基本态势进⼀步发展
，但不稳定不确定因素也在增多，新挑战新威胁不断出现。

World peace and security face more opportunities than challenges. The world is at a
critical stage, moving toward multi-polarity. Progress is expected in addressing the
serious imbalances in the international strategic alignment. The major international forces
compete with and hold each other in check. But, they also maintain coordination and
practical cooperation in their mutual relationships, and draw on each other's strengths.
Some major developing countries and regional groupings have grown in power, and the
developing world as a whole is becoming stronger. Economic globalization accelerates
and science and technology make rapid progress; there are profound changes in the
international division of labor, global and regional economic cooperation is being
vigorously promoted, leading to increasing interdependence among countries. More
dialogues are being conducted on traditional security issues, and cooperation in nontraditional security is developing in depth. To address development and security issues
through coordination, cooperation and multilateral mechanism is the preferred approach
of the international community. The United Nations' status and role in world affairs are
being upheld and strengthened. World wars or all-out confrontation between major
countries are avoidable for the foreseeable future.
世界和平与安全⾯临的机遇⼤于挑战。世界格局处于向多极化过渡的重要时期，国
际战略⼒量对⽐严重失衡的局⾯有望改善。各主要⼒量既相互牵制和竞争，⼜相互
协调、彼此借重和务实合作。⼀些发展中⼤国和区域集团实⼒增强，发展中国家整
体⼒量上升。经济全球化趋势深⼊发展，科技进步突⻜猛进，国际分⼯体系深刻变
动，全球和区域经济合作⽣机勃勃，国家间相互依存的利益关系逐步加深。传统安
全领域的对话不断增多，⾮传统安全领域的合作深⼊发展。各国更加重视通过国际
协调合作和多边机制解决发展和安全问题。联合国在国际事务中的地位和作⽤得到
维护和加强。世界⼤战和⼤国全⾯对抗在较⻓时期内可以避免。

The international community is increasingly facing comprehensive, diverse and complex
security threats. The world is not yet peaceful. Political, economic and security problems
and geographical, ethnic and religious contradictions are interconnected and complex.
Hegemonism and power politics remain key factors undermining international security.
Non-traditional security threats present greater danger, and local turmoil caused by war is
on and off, and some hotspots cannot be removed in a short time. The impact of
economic globalization is spreading into the political, security and social fields. Global
economic development is uneven, and the gap between the North and the South is
widening. Security issues related to energy, resources, finance, information and
international shipping routes are mounting. International terrorist forces remain active,
shocking terrorist acts keep occurring. Natural disasters, serious communicable diseases,
environmental degradation, international crime and other transnational problems are
becoming more damaging in nature.
国际社会⾯临的安全威胁⽇趋综合化、多样化和复杂化，天下仍不太平。国际政治
、经济、安全⽭盾以及地缘、民族和宗教等⽭盾错综复杂，霸权主义和强权政治仍
是影响国际安全的重要因素，⾮传统安全威胁更加突出，局部战乱时起时伏，⼀些
地区热点短期内难以消解。经济全球化的影响从经济领域向政治、安全和社会领域


-----

扩展，世界经济发展不平衡，南北差距继续扩⼤，能源资源、⾦融、信息和运输通
道等⽅⾯的安全问题上升。国际恐怖势⼒依然猖獗，重⼤恐怖事件不断发⽣。⾃然
灾害、严重疫病、环境恶化、国际犯罪等跨国性问题危害越来越⼤。

A revolution in military affairs is developing in depth worldwide. Military competition
based on informationization is intensifying. There has not been major change in the
imbalances in relative military strength. Some developed countries have increased their
input into the military and speeded up R&D of high-tech weaponry to gain military
superiority. Many developing countries are also upgrading their armaments and
modernizing their military forces. The situation regarding the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction remains grave and complex. The international nonproliferation regime faces major challenges. The practice of a small number of countries
that have intensified their military alliances and resorted to force or threats of force in
international affairs has shown new developments, which hinder efforts to improve
international security.
世界新军事变⾰向纵深发展，以信息化为主要特征的军事竞争加剧，军事⼒量对⽐
失衡的局⾯没有明显改变。⼀些发达国家加⼤军事投⼊，加快研发⾼新武器装备，
抢占新的军事制⾼点。许多发展中国家也在更新武器装备，加强军队现代化建设。
防⽌⼤规模杀伤性武器扩散形势严峻复杂，国际防扩散机制⾯临重⼤挑战。少数国
家强化军事同盟、在国际事务中使⽤武⼒或以武⼒相威胁的做法有新的发展，不利
于国际安全形势的改善。

The overall security environment in the Asia-Pacific region remains stable. The regional
economy maintains an unprecedented strong momentum of growth, and a framework of
open and mutually beneficial cooperation based on equality and in diversified forms is
taking shape in the region. Multilateral security dialogue and cooperation are being
enhanced. The Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) has entered a new stage of
substantive growth, contributing to the establishment of a new mode of state-to-state
relations. ASEAN has made steady progress in community-building and in talks on
establishing free trade areas with other countries. East Asian cooperation, which is
conducted mainly through the ASEAN plus China, Japan and the ROK (10+3) channel,
has expanded in scope and its institutional building is improving constantly, continuing to
play a major role in promoting peace, stability and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific region.
The East Asia Summit has provided a new platform for East Asian cooperation.
Moreover, significant progress has been made in South Asian regional cooperation. There
is improvement in the relations between India and Pakistan.
世界新军事变⾰向纵深发展，以信息化为主要特征的军事竞争加剧，军事⼒量对⽐
失衡的局⾯没有明显改变。⼀些发达国家加⼤军事投⼊，加快研发⾼新武器装备，
抢占新的军事制⾼点。许多发展中国家也在更新武器装备，加强军队现代化建设。
防⽌⼤规模杀伤性武器扩散形势严峻复杂，国际防扩散机制⾯临重⼤挑战。少数国
家强化军事同盟、在国际事务中使⽤武⼒或以武⼒相威胁的做法有新的发展，不利
于国际安全形势的改善。

There are growing complexities in the Asia-Pacific security environment. There is a new
adjustment going on in the strategic alignment and relations among major countries in the


-----

region, and new changes have occurred in the hotspots in the region. The United States is
accelerating its realignment of military deployment to enhance its military capability in
the Asia-Pacific region. The United States and Japan are strengthening their military
alliance in pursuit of operational integration. Japan seeks to revise its constitution and
exercise collective self-defense. Its military posture is becoming more external-oriented.
The DPRK has launched missile tests and conducted a nuclear test. Thus, the situation on
the Korean Peninsula and in Northeast Asia has become more complex and challenging.
Iraq and Afghanistan continue to face turbulence. The Middle East has become more
volatile. A settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue is not yet in sight. Territorial disputes,
conflicting claims over maritime rights and interests, and ethnic and religious discords
undermine trust and cooperation among states. The threat of terrorism, separatism and
extremism remains serious. In addition, some countries face growing internal problems
caused by social and economic transition.
亚太地区安全中的复杂因素继续增多。战略⼒量和⼤国关系开始新的调整，热点问
题有新的变化。美国加快调整军事部署，增强在亚太地区的军事能⼒。美⽇强化军
事同盟，推进军事⼀体化。⽇本谋求修改和平宪法和⾏使集体⾃卫权，军事外向化
趋势明显。朝鲜试射导弹，进⾏核试验，朝鲜半岛和东北亚局势更趋复杂严峻。伊
拉克、阿富汗局势仍然动荡，中东形势更加复杂。解决伊朗核问题进程曲折。领⼟
和海洋权益争端、民族和宗教纠纷仍影响着国家间的互信与合作。恐怖主义、分裂
主义、极端主义威胁依然严峻。⼀些国家经济社会发展进⼊转型期，内部⽭盾趋于
上升。

China's overall security environment remains sound. China is committed to building a
moderately prosperous society in an all-round way and a socialist harmonious society,
and it enjoys steady economic growth, political stability, ethnic harmony and social
progress. Its overall national strength has considerably increased, as has its international
standing and influence. China's practical cooperation with major countries continues to
grow, its friendly relations with its neighboring countries have developed steadily, and it
is forging strong ties with other developing countries. This has given rise to a new
relationship of mutual benefit and win-win between China and other countries. The
Chinese government has taken a number of significant measures to improve relations
across the Taiwan Straits, thus promoting cross-Straits relations toward peace and
stability.
中国的安全环境总体有利。中国致⼒于全⾯建设⼩康社会和构建社会主义和谐社会
，经济发展、政治稳定、民族团结、社会进步的局⾯得到巩固，综合国⼒显著提升
，国际地位和国际影响提⾼。中国与主要⼤国的务实合作继续发展，与周边国家的
睦邻友好不断推进，与⼲⼤发展中国家的全⾯交往深⼊发展，与各国互利共赢的格
局逐步形成。中国政府采取⼀系列改善和发展台湾海峡两岸关系的重⼤措施，推动
两岸关系形势朝着和平稳定⽅向发展。

However, China's security still faces challenges that must not be neglected. The growing
interconnections between domestic and international factors and interconnected
traditional and non-traditional factors have made maintaining national security a more
challenging task. The struggle to oppose and contain the separatist forces for "Taiwan
independence" and their activities remains a hard one. By pursuing a radical policy for


-----

"Taiwan independence," the Taiwan authorities aim at creating "de jure Taiwan
independence" through "constitutional reform, " thus still posing a grave threat to China's
sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as to peace and stability across the Taiwan
Straits and in the Asia-Pacific region as a whole. The United States has reiterated many
times that it will adhere to the "one China" policy and honor the three joint communiqués
between China and the United States. But, it continues to sell advanced weapons to
Taiwan, and has strengthened its military ties with Taiwan. A small number of countries
have stirred up a racket about a "China threat," and intensified their preventive strategy
against China and strove to hold its progress in check. Complex and sensitive historical
and current issues in China's surrounding areas still affect its security environment.
但是，中国的安全仍⾯临不容忽视的挑战。国内和国际因素关联性增强，传统和⾮
传统安全因素相互交织，维护国家安全的难度加⼤。反对和遏制“台独”分裂势⼒及
其活动的⽃争复杂严峻。台湾当局实⾏激进“台独”路线，加紧通过推动所谓“宪政
改造”谋求“台湾法理独⽴”，对中国的主权和领⼟完整、台海及亚太地区的和平稳
定构成严重威胁。美国多次重申坚持⼀个中国政策、遵守中美三个联合公报、反对
“台独”的⽴场，但是美国继续向台湾出售先进军事装备，并与台湾加强军事联系和
往来。少数国家炒作“中国威胁论”，加强对中国的战略防范与牵制。周边复杂⽽敏
感的历史和现实问题，仍对中国的安全环境产⽣影响。

China persists in continuing its peaceful development road. Balancing developments in
both domestic and international situations, it is well prepared to respond to complexities
in the international security environment. Guided by a security strategy of promoting
both development and security, China strives to build a socialist harmonious society at
home and a harmonious world to ensure both its overall national security and enduring
peace in the world. It endeavors to enhance both development and security, both internal
security and external security and both traditional security and non-traditional security;
works to uphold its sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity and promote national
development; and strives to sustain the important period of strategic opportunity for
national development. China is committed to fostering a cooperative relationship of
mutual benefit and win-win with other countries and working with them to promote
common security.
中国坚持⾛和平发展道路，统筹国内国际两个⼤局，妥善应对纷繁复杂的国际安全
形势。中国依据发展与安全相统⼀的安全战略思想，对内努⼒构建社会主义和谐社
会，对外积极推动建设和谐世界，谋求国家综合安全和世界持久和平；统筹发展与
安全、内部安全与外部安全、传统安全与⾮传统安全，维护国家主权、统⼀和领⼟
完整，维护国家发展利益，维护国家发展的重要战略机遇期；努⼒构建互利共赢的
合作关系，促进与其他国家的共同安全。

II. National Defense Policy
⼆、国防政策

China pursues a national defense policy which is purely defensive in nature. China's
national defense provides the guarantee for maintaining China's security and unity, and
realizing the goal of building a moderately prosperous society in an all-round way. To


-----

build a powerful and fortified national defense is a strategic task of China's
modernization drive.
中国奉⾏防御性的国防政策。中国的国防，是维护国家安全统⼀，确保实现全⾯建
设⼩康社会⺫标的重要保障。建⽴强⼤巩固的国防是中国现代化建设的战略任务。

China pursues a three-step development strategy in modernizing its national defense and
armed forces, in accordance with the state's overall plan to realize modernization. The
first step is to lay a solid foundation by 2010, the second is to make major progress
around 2020, and the third is to basically reach the strategic goal of building
informationized armed forces and being capable of winning informationized wars by the
mid-21st century.[i]
依据国家总体规划，国防和军队现代化建设实⾏三步⾛的发展战略，在2010年前打
下坚实基础，2020年前后有⼀个较⼤的发展，到21世纪中叶基本实现建设信息化军
队、打赢信息化战争的战略⺫标。

China's national defense policy for the new stage in the new century is defined as
follows:
新世纪新阶段中国的国防政策，主要包括以下内容：

- Upholding national security and unity, and ensure the interests of national

development. This includes guarding against and resisting aggression, defending
against violation of China's territorial sea and air space, and borders; opposing and
containing the separatist forces for "Taiwan independence" and their activities, taking
precautions against and cracking down on terrorism, separatism and extremism in all
forms. The People's Liberation Army (PLA) is dedicated to performing its historical
missions for the new stage in the new century, namely, providing an important source
of strength for consolidating the ruling position of the Communist Party of China
(CPC), providing a solid security guarantee for sustaining the important period of
strategic opportunity for national development, providing a strong strategic support
for safeguarding national interests, and playing a major role in maintaining world
peace and promoting common development. It improves its capabilities of countering
various security threats, accomplishes diversified military tasks, and ensures that it
can effectively respond to crises, maintain peace, deter and win wars under complex
circumstances.
维护国家安全统⼀，保障国家发展利益。防备和抵抗侵略，确保国家领海、领
空和边境不受侵犯。反对和遏制“台独”分裂势⼒及其活动，防范和打击⼀切形
式的恐怖主义、分裂主义和极端主义。⼈民解放军坚决履⾏新世纪新阶段的历
史使命，为中国共产党巩固执政地位提供重要的⼒量保证，为维护国家发展的
重要战略机遇期提供坚强的安全保障，为维护国家利益提供有⼒的战略⽀撑，
为维护世界和平与促进共同发展发挥重要作⽤，不断提⾼应对多种安全威胁、
完成多样化军事任务的能⼒，确保能够在各种复杂形势下有效应对危机、维护
和平，遏制战争、打赢战争。


-----

- Achieving the all-round, coordinated and sustainable development of China's national

defense and armed forces. China pursues a policy of coordinated development of
national defense and economy. It keeps the modernization of China's national defense
and armed forces as an integral part of its social and economic development, so as to
ensure that the modernization of its national defense and armed forces advance in step
with the national modernization drive. China works in a comprehensive way to ensure
that its armed forces are revolutionary in nature, modernized and regularized. It
strives to ensure coordination between the revolution in military affairs with Chinese
features and preparations for military struggle, mechanization and informationization,
combat force building of services and arms, current and long-term development, and
efforts devoted to the main and secondary strategic directions. China works to deepen
the adjustment and reform of its military organizations and structures, as well as
policies and systems, address deep-seated impediments and problems in its military
structures and mechanisms which hinder the development of its armed forces, boost
innovation in its military organizational structure and military management, and
improve efficiency in its military modernization drive.
实现国防和军队建设全⾯协调可持续发展。坚持国防建设与经济建设协调发展
的⽅针，把国防和军队现代化建设融⼊经济社会发展体系之中，使国防和军队
现代化进程与国家现代化进程相⼀致。全⾯加强军队的⾰命化现代化正规化建
设，科学统筹中国特⾊军事变⾰与军事⽃争准备、机械化建设与信息化建设、
诸军兵种作战⼒量建设、当前建设与⻓远发展、主要战略⽅向建设与其他战略
⽅向建设。深化体制编制和政策制度调整改⾰，注重解决体制机制上制约军队
发展的深层次⽭盾和问题，着⼒推进军事组织体制创新和军事管理创新，提⾼
军队现代化建设的效益。

- Enhancing the performance of the armed forces with informationization as the major

measuring criterion. The PLA, taking mechanization as the foundation and
informationization as the driving force, promotes the composite development of
informationization and mechanization to achieve overall capability improvement in
the fields of firepower, assault, mobility, protection and information. The PLA
pursues a strategy of strengthening itself by means of science and technology, and
works to accelerate change in the generating mode of war fighting capabilities by
drawing on scientific and technological advances. The PLA seeks to raise its
capabilities of independent innovation in weaponry and equipment, as well as
defense-related science and technology, and strives to make major breakthroughs in
some basic, pioneering and technological fields of strategic importance. It is stepping
up its efforts to build a joint operational command system, training system and
support system for fighting informationized wars and enhance the building of systems
integration of services and arms. The PLA is carrying out a strategic project for
training a large contingent of new-type and high-caliber military personnel suited to
the task of informationization of the armed forces and competent for operational tasks
under conditions of informationization. The PLA is also working to make its training
more technology-intensive and innovative in training programs, means and methods.
加强以信息化为主要标志的军队质量建设。坚持以机械化为基础，以信息化为
主导，推进信息化机械化复合发展，实现军队⽕⼒、突击⼒、机动能⼒、防护


-----

能⼒和信息能⼒整体提⾼。实施科技强军战略，依靠科技进步加快战⽃⼒⽣成
模式的转变。提⾼武器装备和国防科技的⾃主创新能⼒，⼒争在⼀些基础性、
前沿性、战略性技术领域取得重⼤突破。加紧构建适应信息化战争需要的联合
作战指挥体制、训练体制和保障体制，加强诸军兵种的综合集成建设。实施⼈
才战略⼯程，培养⼤批适应军队信息化建设、胜任信息化条件下作战任务的⾼
素质新型军事⼈才。提⾼训练的科技含量，创新训练内容、⽅式和⼿段。

- Implementing the military strategy of active defense. The PLA ensures that it is well

prepared for military struggle, with winning local wars under conditions of
informationization and enhancing national sovereignty, security, and interests of
development as its objective. It will upgrade and develop the strategic concept of
people's war, and work for close coordination between military struggle and political,
economic, diplomatic, cultural and legal endeavors, uses strategies and tactics in a
comprehensive way, and takes the initiative to prevent and defuse crises and deter
conflicts and wars. The PLA will establish step by step a modern national defense
mobilization system that is centralized and unified, well structured, rapid in reaction,
and authoritative and efficient. Taking joint operations as the basic form, the PLA
aims to bring the operational strengths of different services and arms into full play.
The Army aims at moving from regional defense to trans-regional mobility, and
improving its capabilities in air-ground integrated operations, long-distance
maneuvers, rapid assaults and special operations. The Navy aims at gradual extension
of the strategic depth for offshore defensive operations and enhancing its capabilities
in integrated maritime operations and nuclear counterattacks. The Air Force aims at
speeding up its transition from territorial air defense to both offensive and defensive
operations, and increasing its capabilities in the areas of air strike, air and missile
defense, early warning and reconnaissance, and strategic projection. The Second
Artillery Force aims at progressively improving its force structure of having both
nuclear and conventional missiles, and raising its capabilities in strategic deterrence
and conventional strike under conditions of informationization.
贯彻积极防御的军事战略⽅针。⽴⾜于打赢信息化条件下的局部战争，着眼维
护国家主权、安全和发展利益的需要，做好军事⽃争准备。创新发展⼈民战争
的战略思想，坚持军事⽃争与政治、经济、外交、⽂化、法律等各领域的⽃争
密切配合，综合运⽤各种⼿段和策略，主动预防、化解危机，遏制冲突和战争
的爆发。逐步建⽴集中统⼀、结构合理、反应迅速、权威⾼效的现代国防动员
体系。以联合作战为基本作战形式，发挥诸军兵种作战优⻓。陆军逐步推进由
区域防卫型向全域机动型转变，提⾼空地⼀体、远程机动、快速突击和特种作
战能⼒。海军逐步增⼤近海防御的战略纵深，提⾼海上综合作战能⼒和核反击
能⼒。空军加快由国⼟防空型向攻防兼备型转变，提⾼空中打击、防空反导、
预警侦察和战略投送能⼒。第⼆炮兵逐步完善核常兼备的⼒量体系，提⾼信息
化条件下的战略威慑和常规打击能⼒。

- Pursuing a self-defensive nuclear strategy. China's nuclear strategy is subject to the

state's nuclear policy and military strategy. Its fundamental goal is to deter other
countries from using or threatening to use nuclear weapons against China. China


-----

remains firmly committed to the policy of no first use of nuclear weapons at any time
and under any circumstances. It unconditionally undertakes not to use or threaten to
use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states or nuclear-weapon-free
zones, and stands for the comprehensive prohibition and complete elimination of
nuclear weapons. China upholds the principles of counterattack in self-defense and
limited development of nuclear weapons, and aims at building a lean and effective
nuclear force capable of meeting national security needs. It endeavors to ensure the
security and reliability of its nuclear weapons and maintains a credible nuclear
deterrent force. China's nuclear force is under the direct command of the Central
Military Commission (CMC). China exercises great restraint in developing its nuclear
force. It has never entered into and will never enter into a nuclear arms race with any
other country.
坚持⾃卫防御的核战略。中国的核战略贯彻国家的核政策和军事战略，根本⺫
标是遏制他国对中国使⽤或威胁使⽤核武器。中国始终奉⾏在任何时候、任何
情况下都不⾸先使⽤核武器的政策，⽆条件地承诺不对⽆核武器国家和⽆核武
器区使⽤或威胁使⽤核武器，主张全⾯禁⽌和彻底销毁核武器。中国坚持⾃卫
反击和有限发展的原则，着眼于建设⼀⽀满⾜国家安全需要的精干有效的核⼒
量，确保核武器的安全性、可靠性，保持核⼒量的战略威慑作⽤。中国的核⼒
量由中央军事委员会直接指挥。中国发展核⼒量是极为克制的，过去没有、将
来也不会与任何国家进⾏核军备竞赛。

- Fostering a security environment conducive to China's peaceful development. China

maintains military contacts with other countries on the basis of the Five Principles of
Peaceful Coexistence, and develops cooperative military relations that are nonaligned, non-confrontational and not directed against any third party. China takes part
in international security cooperation, strengthens strategic coordination and
consultation with major powers and neighboring countries, and conducts bilateral or
multilateral joint military exercises. It promotes the establishment of just and
effective collective security mechanisms and military confidence-building
mechanisms, and works with other countries to prevent conflicts and wars. China
stands for effective disarmament and arms control that are just, reasonable,
comprehensive and balanced in nature. China opposes nuclear proliferation, and
endeavors to advance the process of international nuclear disarmament. China
observes the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, honors its international
obligations, and participates in UN peacekeeping operations, international counterterrorism cooperation and international disaster relief operations. It plays an active
part in maintaining global and regional peace and stability.
营造有利于国家和平发展的安全环境。按照和平共处五项原则开展对外军事交
往，发展不结盟、不对抗、不针对第三⽅的军事合作关系。参与国际安全合作
，加强与主要⼤国和周边国家的战略协作和磋商，开展双边或多边联合军事演
习，推动建⽴公平、有效的集体安全机制和军事互信机制，共同防⽌冲突和战
争。⽀持按照公正、合理、全⾯、均衡的原则，实现有效裁军和军备控制，反
对核扩散，推进国际核裁军进程。遵守联合国宪章的宗旨和原则，履⾏国际义


-----

务，参加联合国维和⾏动、国际反恐合作和救灾⾏动，为维护世界和地区和平
稳定发挥积极作⽤。

III. China's Leadership and Administration System for National Defense
三、国防领导管理体制

China has established and keeps improving a leadership and administration system for
national defense in accordance with the Constitution, the National Defense Law and other
relevant laws. The state exercises unified leadership over national defense activities.
China's armed forces are under the leadership of the Communist Party of China (CPC).
The Central Military Commission (CMC) of the CPC and that of the People's Republic of
China (PRC) are completely the same in their composition and in their function of
exercising leadership over the armed forces. The CMC chairman has overall
responsibility for its work.
中国根据宪法、国防法及其他有关法律，建⽴和完善国防领导管理体制。国家对国
防活动实⾏统⼀的领导。中国的武装⼒量受中国共产党领导。党的中央军事委员会
和国家的中央军事委员会，组成⼈员和对军队的领导职能完全⼀致。中央军委实⾏
主席负责制。

The National People's Congress (NPC) elects the chairman of the CMC of the PRC and,
upon nomination by the chairman, decides on the choice of all other members of the
CMC. The NPC decides on war and peace and exercises other functions and powers
relating to national defense as prescribed by the Constitution. When the NPC is in recess,
its Standing Committee decides on the proclamation of a state of war, decides on the
general or partial mobilization of the country, and exercises other functions and powers
relating to national defense as prescribed by the Constitution. The president of the PRC,
in pursuance of the decisions of the NPC and its Standing Committee, may proclaim a
state of war, issue mobilization orders, and exercise other functions and powers relating
to national defense as prescribed by the Constitution.
全国⼈民代表⼤会选举国家中央军委主席，根据中央军委主席的提名，决定中央军
委其他组成⼈员的⼈选；决定战争和和平的问题，并⾏使宪法规定的国防⽅⾯的其
他职权。全国⼈⼤常委会在全国⼈民代表⼤会闭会期间决定战争状态的宣布，决定
全国总动员或者局部动员，并⾏使宪法规定的国防⽅⾯的其他职权。国家主席根据
全国⼈⼤及其常委会的决定，宣布战争状态，发布动员令，并⾏使宪法规定的国防
⽅⾯的其他职权。

The State Council directs and administers national defense building in the following
areas: making national defense development programs and plans, formulating principles,
policies and administrative regulations for defense building, administering defense
expenditure and assets, directing and administering national defense scientific research
and production, directing and administering work related to mobilization of the national
economy, mobilization of people's armed forces, people's air defense and national
defense traffic, directing and administering the work of supporting the military and
giving preferential treatment to families of servicemen and martyrs, as well as the
resettlement of servicemen discharged from active service. It also directs national defense


-----

education and, jointly with the CMC, the building of the Chinese People's Armed Police
Force (PAPF) and the militia, the work concerning enlistment and reserve service, and
the administration of border, coastal and air defenses, and exercises other functions and
powers relating to national defense building as prescribed by law. Under the State
Council are the Ministry of National Defense (MND) and other departments concerning
national defense building.
国务院领导和管理国防建设事业，编制国防建设发展规划和计划，制定国防建设⽅
⾯的⽅针、政策和⾏政法规，管理国防经费和国防资产，领导和管理国防科研⽣产
，领导和管理国民经济动员⼯作和⼈民武装动员、⼈民防空、国防交通等⽅⾯的有
关⼯作，领导和管理拥军优属和退役军⼈安置⼯作，领导国防教育⼯作，与中央军
委共同领导⼈民武装警察部队、民兵的建设和征兵、预备役⼯作以及边防、海防、
空防的管理⼯作，并⾏使法律规定的与国防建设事业有关的其他职权。国务院设有
国防部以及其他与国防建设事业有关的部⻔。

The CMC directs and exercises unified command of China's armed forces. It has the
following functions and powers: deciding on the military strategy and operational
guidelines of the armed forces, directing and administering the building of the PLA,
submitting proposals related to national defense to the NPC or its Standing Committee,
formulating military regulations, issuing decisions and orders, deciding on the structure
and organization of the PLA, appointing and removing, training, evaluating, and
rewarding and punishing members of the armed forces, approving systems and
development programs and plans for weaponry and equipment, and exercising other
functions and powers as prescribed by law.
中央军委领导和统⼀指挥全国武装⼒量，决定军事战略和武装⼒量的作战⽅针，领
导和管理⼈民解放军的建设，向全国⼈⼤或者全国⼈⼤常委会提出议案，制定军事
法规，发布决定和命令，决定⼈民解放军的体制和编制，任免、培训、考核和奖惩
武装⼒量成员，批准武器装备体制和发展规划、计划，并⾏使法律规定的其他职权
。

The PLA's General Staff Headquarters, General Political Department, General Logistics
Department and General Armaments Department are departments of the CMC
respectively responsible for military, political, logistical and equipment work. The
General Staff Headquarters organizes and directs the development of China's armed
forces, and organizes and commands their military operations. Under it are departments
in charge of operations, intelligence, communications, military training and arms,
adjutant and force structure, mobilization, electronic countermeasures, Army aviation,
foreign affairs, etc. Its main functions and powers are to put forward proposals on major
issues of military building and operations, organize and exercise strategic command,
formulate programs, rules and regulations for military work, and organize and direct war
preparations, as well as military training and mobilization. The General Political
Department administers the armed forces' Party work, and organizes their political work.
Under it are departments in charge of Party affairs, personnel, publicity, security,
discipline inspection, civil-military affairs, etc. Its main responsibilities are to ensure the
armed forces' compliance with and implementation of the lines, principles and policies of
the Party and the Constitution and laws of the state, draw up general and specific policies


-----

for political work, formulate rules and regulations for political work, and make
arrangements for, supervise and provide guidance to the political work of the armed
forces. The General Logistics Department administers the logistical work of the armed
forces. Under it are departments in charge of financial matters, quartermaster materials
and petroleum, oils and lubricants, health administration, military transportation, capital
construction and barracks, auditing, etc. Its main responsibilities are to formulate
programs, rules and regulations for logistical construction, deploy logistical forces,
organize logistical mobilization and provide logistical support, carry out the application,
allocation, budgeting and final accounting of military expenditure, and conduct material
procurement. The General Armaments Department administers the provision of
equipment for the armed forces. Under it are departments in charge of overall planning,
equipment for all services and arms, procurement for Army's military equipment R&D,
general-purpose equipment support, electronic information infrastructure, etc. Its main
responsibilities are to formulate strategies, programs and plans, policies, and rules and
regulations for equipment development, organize equipment R&D, experimentation,
procurement, combat service, maintenance and support, and administer the PLA's funds
for equipment buildup.
⼈民解放军总参谋部、总政治部、总后勤部、总装备部，是中央军委的军事、政治
、后勤、装备⼯作机关。总参谋部组织领导全国武装⼒量军事建设和组织指挥全国
武装⼒量军事⾏动，设有作战、情报、通信、军训和兵种、军务、动员、电⼦对抗
、陆军航空兵、外事等部⻔，主要职权是提出军事建设和军事⽃争重⼤问题的建议
，组织实施战略指挥，拟制军事⼯作规划和法规，组织领导战备⼯作、军事训练和
动员⼯作等。总政治部负责管理全军党的⼯作，组织进⾏政治⼯作，设有组织、干
部、宣传、保卫、纪律检查、群众⼯作等部⻔，主要职责是保证党的路线⽅针政策
和国家的宪法、法律在军队的贯彻执⾏，制定政治⼯作⽅针政策，拟制政治⼯作法
规，部署、检查和指导全军政治⼯作等。总后勤部主管全军后勤⼯作，设有财务、
军需物资油料、卫⽣、军事交通运输、基建营房、审计等部⻔，主要职责是拟制后
勤建设规划和法规，部署后勤⼒量、组织后勤动员、实施后勤⽀援，负责军费的申
请、分配和预决算，以及物资采购保障等。总装备部主管全军装备⼯作，设有综合
计划、军兵种装备、陆军装备科研订购、通⽤装备保障、电⼦信息基础等部⻔，主
要职责是拟制装备发展战略、规划计划和政策法规，组织装备科研、试验、采购、
战勤和维修保障⼯作，掌管全军装备建设经费等。

The Army has no independent leading body, and the leadership of it is exercised by the
four general headquarters/departments. A military area command exercises direct
leadership over the Army units under it. The Army has 18 combined corps, which are
mobile combat troops. The Navy, Air Force and Second Artillery Force, each of which
has a leading body consisting of the headquarters, the political department, the logistics
department and the armaments department, direct the military, political, logistical and
equipment work of their respective troops, and take part in the command of joint
operations. The Navy organizes and commands maritime operations conducted
independently by its troops or in support of maritime operations. There are three fleets
under the Navy, namely, the Beihai Fleet, Donghai Fleet and Nanhai Fleet. Each fleet has
flotillas, aviation divisions, etc. under its command. The Air Force organizes and
commands air operations conducted independently by itself or with Air Force personnel


-----

as the main fighting force, as well as air defense operations in the capital area. It has an
air command in each of the seven military area commands of Shenyang, Beijing,
Lanzhou, Jinan, Nanjing, Guangzhou and Chengdu, respectively. Under an air command
are aviation divisions, ground-to-air missile divisions (brigades and regiments),
antiaircraft artillery brigades (regiments), radar brigades (regiments) and other support
troops. In major directions and key target areas there are also corps- or division-level
command posts. The Second Artillery Force organizes and commands its own troops in
case of launching nuclear counterattacks with strategic missiles and conducting
operations with conventional missiles. Under it are missile and training bases, and
relevant support troops.
陆军未设独⽴的领导机关，由四总部⾏使领导机关职能，各军区直接领导所属陆军
部队。陆军机动作战部队共有18个集团军。海军、空军和第⼆炮兵领导各⾃部队的
军事、政治、后勤、装备⼯作，参与联合作战指挥，领导机关均设有司令部、政治
部、后勤部、装备部。海军组织指挥本部队独⽴的或以海军为主的海上作战⾏动，
下辖北海、东海、南海3个舰队。舰队下辖舰艇⽀队和航空兵师等。空军组织指挥
本部队独⽴的空中作战、⾸都防空作战和以空军为主的空中作战⾏动，下辖沈阳、
北京、兰州、济南、南京、⼲州、成都7个军区空军。军区空军下辖航空兵师、地
空导弹师（旅、团）、⾼炮旅（团）、雷达旅（团）以及其他保障部队，在重要⽅
向和重点⺫标区设有军级或师级指挥所。第⼆炮兵组织指挥本部队实施战略导弹的
核反击和常规导弹的作战⾏动，下辖导弹基地、训练基地和相关保障部队等。

Military area commands (theaters of war) are military organizations set up according to
the administrative divisions of the state, geographical locations, strategic and operational
directions, and operational tasks. They are CMC-appointed organs for commanding joint
theater operations. They direct the military, political, logistical and equipment work of
the troops under them. Under a military area command are the headquarters, the political
department, the joint logistics department and the armaments department. A military area
command is mainly in charge of formulating programs and plans for combat readiness
and operations of troops in the theater and for the reserve force buildup of the theater,
organizing and commanding joint theater operations involving different services and
arms, and providing joint logistical support. At present, the PLA has seven military area
commands, namely, Shenyang, Beijing, Lanzhou, Jinan, Nanjing, Guangzhou and
Chengdu. Under a military area command are combined Army corps, units of various
Army arms, logistical support units and provincial military commands (garrison
commands at the same level).
军区（战区）是根据国家⾏政区划、地理位置和战略战役⽅向、作战任务等设置的
军事组织，是中央军委派出的战区联合作战指挥机构，领导所属部队的军事、政治
、后勤和装备⼯作，设有司令部、政治部、联勤部、装备部。主要负责制定战区部
队战备、作战及后备⼒量建设的规划计划，组织指挥战区内诸军兵种联合作战、实
施联勤保障等。⼈民解放军现设有沈阳、北京、兰州、济南、南京、⼲州、成都7
个军区，下辖陆军集团军、兵种部队、后勤保障部队和省军区（卫戍区、警备区）
。


-----

Provincial military commands (garrison commands at the same level) are organizations
set up by the PLA in province-level administrative areas, and are under military area
commands. They also serve as departments of Party committees for military work and
organs of government for military service at the level of province (municipality directly
under the central government, or autonomous region). So, they are under the dual
leadership of the military area commands and local Party committees and governments at
the same level. The leading body of a provincial military command consists of the
headquarters, the political department and the logistics department. A provincial military
command directs the military, political, logistical and equipment work of the units under
it, and oversees reserve force building, peacetime enlistment and wartime strength
mobilization in its area of responsibility.
省军区（卫戍区、警备区）是⼈民解放军在省级⾏政区域设⽴的⼀级组织，⾪属于
军区，同时是省（直辖市、⾃治区）党委的军事⼯作部⻔和政府的兵役⼯作机构，
受军区和同级地⽅党委、政府的双重领导，设有司令部、政治部、后勤部等领导机
关。领导所属部队的军事、政治、后勤和装备⼯作，负责全区后备⼒量建设、平时
兵员征集和战时兵员动员等。

Prefectural military commands (garrison commands at the same level) are organizations
set up by the PLA in prefectures (prefecture-level cities, autonomous prefectures or
leagues). They are under provincial military commands, but also serve as departments of
Party committees for military work and organs of government for military service at the
level of the prefecture (prefecture-level city, autonomous prefecture or league). So, they
are under the dual leadership of the provincial military commands and local Party
committees and governments at the same level. The leading body of a prefectural military
command consists of the headquarters, the political department and the logistics
department. The main tasks of a prefectural military command are to oversee the military
training, political work and equipment management of the militia and reserve force,
organize and conduct wartime mobilization, and undertake military service registration
and enlistment. Prefectural military commands in border areas are also in charge of the
military, political, logistical and equipment work of border defense troops as well as
border defense duties, talks and meetings, and border management, protection and
control.
军分区（警备区）是⼈民解放军在地区（地区级市、⾃治州、盟）设⽴的⼀级组织
，⾪属于省军区，同时是地区（地区级市、⾃治州、盟）党委的军事⼯作部⻔和政
府的兵役⼯作机构，受省军区和同级地⽅党委、政府的双重领导，设有司令部、政
治部、后勤部等领导机关。主要负责民兵、预备役部队的军事训练、政治⼯作和装
备管理，组织实施战时动员，进⾏兵役登记和兵员征集等。边防军分区还负责边防
部队的军事、政治、后勤和装备⼯作，以及边防勤务、会谈会晤和边境的管理、维
护、控制等。

People's armed forces departments are organizations set up by the PLA in counties
(banners, county-level cities or municipal districts). They are under prefectural military
commands, but also serve as departments of Party committees for military work and
organs of government for military service work at the level of the county (banner,
county-level city or municipal district). So, they are under the dual leadership of the


-----

prefectural military commands and local Party committees and governments at the same
level. A people's armed forces department consists typically of a military affairs section,
a political work section and a logistics section. Its main tasks are to oversee reserve force
buildup, combat readiness, military service and mobilization, and command militia
operations. The grass-roots people's armed forces departments established by the state at
the level of township (town) or sub-district are non-active-duty organizations. They are
manned by full-time staff that are under the dual leadership of the local Party committees
and governments at the same level and military organs at higher levels.
⼈民武装部是⼈民解放军在县（旗、县级市、市辖区）设⽴的⼀级组织，⾪属于军
分区，同时是县（旗、县级市、市辖区）党委的军事⼯作部⻔和政府的兵役⼯作机
构，受军分区和同级地⽅党委、政府的双重领导，⼀般设军事科、政⼯科、后勤科
等部⻔。主要负责后备⼒量建设和战备⼯作、兵役和动员⼯作，指挥民兵作战等。
国家在乡（镇）、街道设⽴的基层⼈民武装部，属⾮现役机构，配备专职⼈民武装
干部，接受同级地⽅党委、政府和上级军事机关的双重领导。

In addition, local people's congresses at all levels and the standing committees of local
people's congresses at and above the county level ensure the compliance with and
implementation of laws and regulations relating to national defense in their respective
administrative areas. Local people's governments at all levels, within the authority they
enjoy as prescribed by law, are responsible for enlistment, militia forces, reserve service,
national defense education, mobilization of the economy, civil air defense, national
defense traffic, protection of defense installations, resettlement of servicemen discharged
from active service, supporting the PLA and giving preferential treatment to families of
servicemen and martyrs and other related matters in their respective administrative areas.
Local people's governments at various levels and the military organs stationed there hold
joint civil-military meetings as called for to handle matters concerning national defense in
their respective administrative areas.
此外，地⽅各级⼈⼤和县级以上地⽅各级⼈⼤常委会在本⾏政区域内，保证有关国
防⽅⾯的法律法规的遵守和执⾏。地⽅各级⼈民政府依照法律规定的权限，管理本
⾏政区域内的征兵、民兵、预备役、国防教育、国民经济动员、⼈民防空、国防交
通、国防设施保护、退出现役的军⼈的安置和拥军优属等⼯作。地⽅各级⼈民政府
和驻地军事机关根据需要召开军地联席会议，协调解决本⾏政区域内有关国防事务
的问题.

IV. The People's Liberation Army
四、⼈民解放军

To effectively fulfill its historic mission in the new stage of the new century, the PLA is
speeding up the revolution in military affairs with Chinese features and enhancing in an
all-round way its capabilities of defensive operations under conditions of
informationization.
⼈民解放军着眼有效履⾏新世纪新阶段历史使命，加快推进中国特⾊军事变⾰，全
⾯提⾼信息化条件下的防卫作战能⼒。

Completing the Reduction of 200,000 Troops


-----

完成裁军20万

In 1985, 1997 and 2003, China announced that it would cut the size of the PLA by one
million, 500,000 and 200,000 persons, respectively. By the end of 2005, China had
completed reducing the PLA by 200,000 troops, and the PLA currently has 2.3 million
troops. The PLA has made new progress towards the goal of being proper in size, optimal
in structure, streamlined in organization, swift and flexible in command, and powerful in
fighting capacity.
中国于1985年、1997年和2003年，分别宣布裁减军队员额100万、50万和20万。200
5年底，中国完成裁军20万任务，军队规模现保持230万⼈。⼈民解放军朝着规模适
度、结构合理、机构精干、指挥灵便、战⽃⼒强的⺫标迈出了新的步伐。

Downsizing the PLA. The Army was the focus of force reduction, and its authorized
number of personnel has been reduced by more than 130,000. Over 60,000 military
personnel have been removed from the headquarters and directly affiliated units of
military area commands and provincial military commands. Through restructuring, the
proportion of the Navy, Air Force and Second Artillery Force in the PLA has been raised
by 3.8 percent while that of the Army has been lowered by 1.5 percent.
压缩军队规模。陆军部队是精简重点，共减少编制员额13万余⼈。军区机关和直属
单位、省军区系统，裁减6万余⼈。通过调整，海军、空军和第⼆炮兵占全军总员
额的⽐例提⾼了3.8%，陆军部队的⽐例下降了1.5%。

Streamlining the headquarters and directly affiliated units as well as educational
institutions. More than 3,000 departments of and over 400 units directly affiliated to the
headquarters at and above the regimental level have been cut. A considerable number of
agricultural and sideline production units, cultural and sports units, military
representative offices at railway stations and material supply organs have been closed.
The PLA has also closed 15 educational institutions and 31 training organizations.
精简机关、直属单位和院校。团以上机关部⻔共减少3000余个，团以上机关直属单
位减少400余个。农副业⽣产机构、⽂体单位、驻铁路⻋站军代表处、物资机构等
有较⼤压缩。全军共减少院校15所、训练机构31个。

Improving the structure of services and arms. The Army has cut a number of combined
corps, divisions and regiments, increased the number of combined corps whose order of
battle is corps, brigade and battalion, and set up units with new and high-tech weaponry
and equipment. The Navy and Air Force have cut some ship groups and aviation
divisions, regiments and stations, and set up some high-tech surface ship, aviation and
ground-to-air missile units. A number of reserve infantry divisions have been dismantled,
but the number of divisions (brigades) of other arms has increased.
优化军兵种内部编成。陆军撤销部分集团军及师、团，增加实⾏军－旅－营体制集
团军的数量，组建了⼀批⾼新技术装备部队。海军、空军撤销部分舰艇⼤队和航空
兵师、团、场站，组建了⼀些技术含量较⾼的⽔⾯舰艇、航空兵、地空导弹部队。
预备役部队减少部分步兵师，增加了兵种师（旅）的数量。


-----

Reforming the leadership and command system. The leadership and command system of
the general headquarters/departments has been enhanced through adjusting the functions
of relevant departments and improving joint operational command. The Navy has cut the
naval aviation department and converted naval bases into support ones. The Air Force has
closed corps (base) headquarters and set up regional command posts. Following these
adjustments, the combat troops of the Navy and Air Force are now directly under the
fleets and the air commands of the military areas, respectively.
改⾰领导指挥体制。通过调整总部有关部⻔的职能和联合作战指挥功能，完善了总
部领导指挥体制。海军撤销航空兵部机关，基地改为保障基地。空军撤销军（基地
）机关，组建区域性指挥所。调整后，海军、空军作战部队分别由舰队、军区空军
直接领导。

Deepening the reform of the joint logistical support system. The joint logistical support
system, based on military area commands, has been expanded, and overlapping support
organizations reduced. Apart from special-purpose depots and general hospitals under the
general headquarters/departments, the Navy, Air Force and Second Artillery Force, all
the other rear depots, hospitals and recuperation centers have been integrated and
reorganized into the joint logistical support system. A total of eight joint logistical subdepartments (offices), 94 rear depots, and 47 hospitals and recuperation centers have been
closed.
深化联勤保障体制改⾰。扩⼤以军区为基础的联勤保障范围，减少重复设置的保障
机构。除总部和海军、空军、第⼆炮兵保留专⽤仓库和总医院外，其他后⽅仓库和
医院、疗养院均划归联勤系统统⼀整合。全军共减少8个联勤分部（办事处）、94
座后⽅仓库、47所医院和疗养院。

Improving the ratio between officers and men. The PLA has reduced the number of its
officers by 170,000. More than 150 officer posts at or above the corps level have been
eliminated, nearly 70,000 posts formerly taken by officers are now filled with noncommissioned officers (NCOs), and over 20,000 posts formerly taken by NCOs [should
be wenzhi ganbu] are now filled with contract civilians.
改善官兵⽐例。全军共精简干部17万⼈。减少军职以上领导干部岗位150余个，近7
万干部岗位改由⼠官担任，2万余个⽂职干部岗位改为⾮现役的⽂职⼈员岗位。

Development of the Services and Arms
军兵种建设

The Army is speeding up the upgrading and informationization of its active main battle
equipment to build a new type of ground combat force which is lean, combined, agile and
multi-functional. Priority is given to building Army aviation, light mechanized and
information countermeasures units. The share of the armored component in the Army
combined combat forces has been further raised. The artillery and air defense component
has fielded new types of cannons, field antiaircraft missiles, reconnaissance early
warning radars, fire-control systems, and intelligence and command systems, and
increased the proportion of ground-to-air missiles to antiaircraft guns. The engineering
component has grown in step with the main combat arms, and improved its capabilities of


-----

accompanying support and precision support. The anti-chemical component has
established a preliminary nuclear, biological and chemical (NBC) protection system
tailored to joint operations, and greatly increased its capabilities of rapid NBC protection,
NBC emergency rescue and operations against NBC terrorism. The communications
component has enhanced the building of platforms for general-purpose information
transmission and processing, C2 systems and spectrum management systems, and raised
communications and information support capabilities.
陆军加速现役主战装备更新换代和信息化改造，建设精干合成、灵敏多能的新型陆
战⼒量。优先发展陆军航空兵、轻型机械化部队和信息对抗部队。装甲兵在陆军合
成作战部队中的⽐例进⼀步提⾼。炮兵、防空兵陆续列装新型⽕炮、野战防空导弹
、侦察预警雷达、⽕控系统、情报指挥系统等装备，地空导弹与⾼射炮⽐例得到优
化。⼯程兵与主战兵种配套发展，伴随保障和精确保障能⼒不断提⾼。防化兵初步
建⽴与联合作战相适应的核化⽣防护体系，快速遂⾏核化⽣防护、核化⽣应急救援
和反核化⽣恐怖能⼒明显增强。通信兵加强通⽤信息传输平台、处理平台和指挥控
制系统、频谱管理系统建设，提⾼通信和信息保障能⼒。

Founded in 1986, the Army aviation arm has a three-level (general
headquarters/departments, theaters of war and first-line task groups) administration
system. Equipped mainly with armed helicopters, transport helicopters and service
helicopters, it carries out air strike, air landing, airlifting and battlefield service support
operations. The Army aviation arm works to strengthen its capabilities of rapid power
projection, precision strike, long-range assault and support.
陆军航空兵始建于1986年，实⾏总部、战区、⼀线作战集群三级管理体制，主要装
备有武装直升机、运输直升机和勤务直升机，担负空中⽕⼒突击、机降作战、地⾯
兵⼒和物资的空中输送及战场勤务保障等任务。陆军航空兵重点加强快速投送、精
确打击、远程突击和保障能⼒建设。

The Navy is working to build itself into a modern maritime force of operation consisting
of combined arms with both nuclear and conventional means of operations. Taking
informationization as the goal and strategic focus in its modernization drive, the Navy
gives high priority to the development of maritime information systems, and newgeneration weaponry and equipment. Efforts are being made to improve maritime
battlefield capabilities, with emphasis on the construction of relevant facilities for new
equipment and the development of combat support capabilities. The Navy is endeavoring
to build mobile maritime troops capable of conducting operations under conditions of
informationization, and strengthen its overall capabilities of operations in coastal waters,
joint operations and integrated maritime support. Efforts are being made to improve and
reform training programs and methods to intensify training in joint integrated maritime
operations. The Navy is enhancing research into the theory of naval operations and
exploring the strategy and tactics of maritime people's war under modern conditions.
海军着眼于建设⼀⽀多兵种合成的、具有核常双重作战⼿段的现代化海上作战⼒量
，把信息化作为海军现代化建设的发展⽅向和战略重点，突出发展海上信息系统，
加强新⼀代武器装备建设。完善海战场建设，重点搞好新型装备的各项配套设施建
设和作战⽀援保障建设。加强适应信息化条件下作战需要的海上机动兵⼒建设，增


-----

强近海海域的整体作战能⼒、联合作战能⼒和海上综合保障能⼒。改⾰创新训练内
容和组训⽅式，深化海上⼀体化联合作战训练。加强海军作战理论研究，探索现代
条件下海上⼈民战争的战略战术。

The Air Force is working to build an informationized air fighting force with both
offensive and defensive capabilities. It is reducing the number of combat aircraft, giving
priority to the development of new fighters as well as air and missile defense weapons. It
is working to enhance command and control systems. It stresses mission-oriented and
confrontational training, increasing combined tactical training of different arms and
aircraft types, and conducts training in flying refitted new aircraft and using new
weaponry and equipment in an active and stable way. Air Force pilot training is
conducted at flying colleges, training bases and combat units in five phases, namely,
basic education, primary flying, advanced flying, refitted combat aircraft flying and
tactical flying. Aviation units mainly conduct training in counter-air operations, air-toground attacks and joint operations. Pilots fly training hours are commensurate with the
tasks assigned to pilots.
空军着眼于建设⼀⽀攻防兼备的信息化空中作战⼒量，减少作战⻜机总量，重点发
展新型战⽃机、防空反导武器，加强指挥控制系统建设。突出训练的针对性和对抗
性，加⼤不同兵种、机种合同战术训练，积极稳妥地组织新机改装和新武器装备使
⽤训练。空军⻜⾏员训练实⾏⻜⾏院校、训练基地、作战部队三级体制，分为基础
教育、初级⻜⾏、⾼级⻜⾏、作战⻜机改装⻜⾏、战术⻜⾏五个阶段。航空兵部队
主要进⾏空战、对地攻击和联合作战等训练，⻜⾏员保持与担负任务要求相适应的
训练⻜⾏时间。

The Second Artillery Force is striving to build a streamlined and effective strategic force
with both nuclear and conventional capabilities. It is quickening its steps to raise the
informationization level of its weaponry and equipment systems, build an agile and
efficient operational command and control system, and increase its capabilities of landbased strategic nuclear counterstrikes and precision strikes with conventional missiles. It
is improving the construction of its battlefield system, and associated logistics and
equipment, and raising the cost-effectiveness of integrated support. It is deepening the
reform of training, enhancing integrated training, using scientific and technological
achievements to raise training quality. It is strengthening the safety management and
control mechanism of nuclear missiles, and improving the relevant rules and regulations
and technical preventive measures as well as emergency steps for handling nuclear
accidents. The Second Artillery Force is equipped with surface-to-surface strategic
missiles and tactical operational missiles of various types.
第⼆炮兵着眼于建设⼀⽀精干有效、核常兼备的战略⼒量，加快提升武器装备系统
信息化⽔平，建设灵敏⾼效的作战指挥控制系统，提⾼陆基战略核反击能⼒和常规
导弹精确打击能⼒。完善战场体系和后勤、装备配套建设，增强综合保障效益。深
化训练改⾰，加强集成训练，运⽤科技成果提⾼训练质量。强化导弹核武器安全管
控机制，健全相关法规制度和技术防范措施，完善核事故处置应急⼿段。第⼆炮兵
装备有多种型号的地地战略导弹和战役战术导弹。


-----

Military Training
军事训练

The PLA regards military training as a basic means to raise its combat effectiveness in
peacetime, as well as an important method to foster and administer troops. It takes
vigorous steps to accelerate the transition from military training under conditions of
mechanization to military training under conditions of informationization. At the PLAwide military training conference held in June 2006, the General Staff Headquarters put
forward a comprehensive plan for carrying out military training in a creative way for the
new stage in the new century. It called on all PLA troops to set high and strict standards,
base their training on actual combat, use scientific and technological means in training,
advance the reform of training, and elevate military training to a higher level.
⼈民解放军坚持把军事训练作为和平时期提⾼战⽃⼒的基本途径和重要的治军⽅式
、管理⽅式，积极推进机械化条件下军事训练向信息化条件下军事训练转变。2006
年6⽉，总参谋部召开全军军事训练会议，对新世纪新阶段军事训练创新发展进⾏
全⾯部署，要求全军从实战需要出发从难从严训练，不断深化科技练兵，持续推进
军事训练改⾰，把军事训练提⾼到⼀个新⽔平。

The PLA conducts training in strict accordance with the requirements for winning local
wars under conditions of informationization. It conducts basic technical and tactical
training, combined tactical training, and strategic and operational training. The PLA
conducts training and integration to boost its combat capabilities level by level. It
conducts training with live ammunition and holds exercises with opposing players in a
realistic manner to temper troops in near-real-war environment. The PLA conducts
training by scientific and technological means, employs modern training methods and
means, and develops on-base, simulated and networked training. It is increasing the use
of scientific and technological means with focus on improving the quality and effect of
training.
按照打赢信息化条件下局部战争的要求，全⾯严格训练部队。抓好技术战术基础训
练、合同战术训练和战略战役训练，坚持逐级训练、逐级合成、逐级形成战⽃⼒。
扎实开展实兵实装实弹训练和对抗性训练，在近似实战环境下训练部队。坚持科技
兴训，运⽤现代化训练⽅法和⼿段，发展基地化、模拟化、⺴络化训练，不断增⼤
军事训练科技含量，着⼒提⾼军事训练的质量和效果。

The PLA focuses on enhancing joint training to improve the integrated joint operational
capabilities of various services and arms. It gives priority to the training of joint
campaign commanders and command organs, joint field exercises and the training of
different support forces in integrated support. It works to enhance the commanding and
organizing capabilities of strategic and operational commanders and command organs,
and the joint operational capabilities of the services and arms. Keeping in mind the future
informationized battlefield, the PLA closely follows the emerging trend of integrated
joint operations, conducts integrated training in an innovative way, and actively explores
training approaches for the internal integration of fighting units, systems integration of
fighting elements and comprehensive integration of fighting systems.
着眼提⾼诸军兵种⼀体化联合作战能⼒，⼤⼒加强联合训练。突出联合战役指挥员


-----

和指挥机关训练，强化诸军兵种部队联合实兵演练，注重各种⽀援⼒量综合保障训
练，切实增强战略战役指挥员及领率机关组织指挥能⼒和诸军兵种联合作战能⼒。
瞄准未来信息化战场，把握未来⼀体化联合作战发展趋势，开展⼀体化训练创新实
践，积极探索作战单元内部集成、作战要素系统集成、作战体系综合集成训练的路
⼦。

The PLA conducts training in strict accordance with pre-set plans, and is strengthening
the scientific management of the overall processes and all the aspects of training. It is
exploring new modes for organizing and managing training under conditions of
informationization, and intensifying precise and mission-oriented management according
to law to keep training processes standardized. It is improving training procedures,
making strict training assessments, and setting and improving training standards to meet
the requirements of informationized operations. Priority is given to the training of
command organs and collective training. The PLA uses live-ammunition exercises and
means such as exercise assessment systems for a comprehensive evaluation of the
training and combat capabilities of the troops.
坚持按纲施训，强化军事训练全过程全要素的科学管理。探索和建⽴信息化条件下
的训练组织管理模式，强化依法管理，推⾏⺫标管理，加强精确管理，保持正规的
训练秩序。优化训练程序，严格质量评估，建⽴健全适应信息化作战要求的训练标
准体系，以⾸⻓机关和单位整体训练为重点，采取实兵检验性演习的形式，运⽤部
队演习评估系统等⼿段，全⾯检验和评估部队的训练⽔平和实战能⼒。

Political Work
政治⼯作

The basic tasks of the PLA's political work are as follows: ensuring the success of the
reform and opening-up of the country and the building of a moderately prosperous
society in an all-round way, as well as promoting the socialist modernization; advancing
the revolution in military affairs with Chinese features, as well as the revolutionization,
modernization and regularization of the PLA; guaranteeing --politically, ideologically
and organizationally -- the nature of the people's army under the absolute leadership of
the Party; upholding the PLA's socialist ethical standards, the goal of which is to cultivate
military personnel with lofty ideals, high moral standards, a wide range of knowledge and
a keen sense of discipline; ensuring the PLA's internal unity, unity between the PLA and
the government, and unity between the PLA and the people; and ensuring the PLA's
combat effectiveness and the accomplishment of the PLA's tasks.
⼈民解放军政治⼯作的基本任务是：服务于国家的改⾰开放和全⾯建设⼩康社会、
推进社会主义现代化的⼤局，服务于中国特⾊军事变⾰和军队的⾰命化现代化正规
化建设，从政治上、思想上、组织上保证党绝对领导下的⼈民军队的性质，保证以
培养有理想、有道德、有⽂化、有纪律军⼈为⺫标的军队社会主义精神⽂明建设，
保证军队内部的团结和军政军民团结，保证军队战⽃⼒的提⾼和各项任务的完成。

In the long years of fighting revolutionary wars and seeking modernization, a fine
tradition of democracy has taken root and a complete democratic system has developed


-----

within the PLA. The conference of servicemen's representatives at the levels of the
brigade and regiment is part of this democratic system, which ensures the practice of
democracy and the right of servicemen to exercise their democratic rights and participate
in troop management. The conference of servicemen's representatives is mainly tasked
with reviewing the work reports of their commanders, supervising their units' compliance
with and implementation of regulations, orders and directives from the above, voicing
servicemen's opinions, raising demands on their behalf and monitoring the use of funds in
their units. Guided by Party committees and political organs at the same level, units at the
levels of brigade and regiment hold annual conferences of servicemen's representatives.
The representatives are selected through bottom-up democratic elections from among
active servicemen and employees on the PLA payroll. Led by Party branches or grassroots Party committees and directed by military and political chiefs, the servicemen's
committee is an organization through which companies and company-level units practice
democracy in political, economic and military affairs, ensure servicemen's democratic
rights and conduct servicemen's activities.
在⻓期⾰命战争和现代化建设实践中，⼈民解放军形成了优良的民主传统，建⽴起
⼀整套军队内部民主制度。旅、团级单位军⼈代表会议，是健全和发展军队民主⽣
活、保障军⼈正确⾏使民主权利和参与部队管理的⼀项民主制度。军⼈代表会议的
主要任务是审议本单位⾸⻓的⼯作报告，监督本单位对条令条例和上级命令指⽰的
贯彻执⾏，反映军⼈的意⻅和要求，监督部队的经济⽣活。旅、团级单位在同级部
队党的委员会领导和政治机关指导下每年召开⼀次军⼈代表会议，会议代表从现役
军⼈、军队在编职⼯中通过⾃下⽽上的民主选举产⽣。军⼈委员会是连队及与其相
当的基层单位实⾏政治民主、经济民主、军事民主，保障军⼈⾏使民主权利，开展
群众性活动的组织，在党⽀部或基层党的委员会领导下和军政⾸⻓的指导下进⾏⼯
作。

The PLA conducts political work in a creative way to raise the overall performance of its
officers and men. The PLA educates its officers and men in its historic mission, ideals,
beliefs, fighting spirit, and the socialist concept of honor and disgrace, to raise mission
awareness, foster revolutionary ideals, strengthen the will to fight, draw a clear line
between right and wrong, and arouse enthusiasm for training. The PLA conducts
psychological training and studies on psychological operations, and has in place a
mechanism involving both political and medical institutions to provide psychological
education, catharsis and health service. The CMC and the general
headquarters/departments have formulated a series of policies and regulations to
strengthen the building of grass-roots units. Most of the commanding organs at and above
the regiment level have mechanisms to coordinate grass-roots work. In the course of
implementing the Outline for Armed Forces Building at the Grass-Roots Level, a large
number of advanced grass-roots units and excellent soldiers have come to the fore.
⼈民解放军通过推进政治⼯作的创新发展，促进官兵素质的全⾯提⾼。全军开展军
队历史使命教育、理想信念教育、战⽃精神教育和社会主义荣辱观教育，强化使命
意识，坚定⾰命理想，培养战⽃作⻛，分清荣辱界限，激发练兵热情。组织⼼理训
练和⼼理战研究，建⽴以政⼯系统和医疗系统相结合的⼼理教育、疏导和卫⽣服务
⼯作机制。军委、总部制定⼀系列加强基层建设的政策制度，团以上领导机关普遍


-----

建⽴抓基层⼯作协调机制，各部队认真落实《军队基层建设纲要》，涌现出⼀⼤批
先进基层单位和优秀⼠兵。

Logistical Support
后勤保障

To ensure the cost-effectiveness of logistical support, the PLA is enhancing the
management and reform of logistical support in an effort to build a modern logistics
system.
⼈民解放军着眼提⾼后勤保障效益，加强管理，推进改⾰，全⾯建设现代后勤。

Upgrading logistics management. The PLA is speeding up the formulation of logistical
rules, regulations and standards to establish a standardized system covering supply,
consumption and management. During the period of the Tenth Five-Year Plan for
National Economic and Social Development (2001-2005) (hereinafter referred to as the
Tenth Five-Year Plan), the PLA conducted a comprehensive review of its logistical
regulations and standards. Over 200 standards were adopted or revised, and more than
240 regulations were enacted. During the period of the Eleventh Five-Year Plan for
National Economic and Social Development (2006-2010) (hereinafter referred to as the
Eleventh Five-Year Plan), the PLA is giving priority to standardizing logistical supply
and establishing a mechanism for the dynamic adjustment of supply and support
standards. It is strengthening the management of logistics and ensuring the overall sound
implementation of the military budget. In addition, it is enforcing financial and economic
discipline through strict auditing supervision.
提⾼后勤管理⽔平。加强后勤法规和标准制度建设，探索建⽴集供应、消耗、管理
于⼀体的标准化体系。国民经济和社会发展第⼗个五年计划时期（2001—
2005年，以下简称“⼗五”），对全军后勤标准制度进⾏了全⾯清理，新增和修订标
准制度200多件，制定后勤法规240多件。国民经济和社会发展第⼗⼀个五年规划时
期（20062010年，以下简称“⼗⼀五”），重点抓好后勤供应标准化建设，建⽴供应保障标准
动态调整机制。加强后勤业务管理，全⾯规范军事经济秩序。严格审计监督，维护
财经纪律。

Improving the material life conditions of the officers and men. The PLA has adopted the
practice of serving separate portions of food to improve hygienic conditions. Some
organic battalions have begun to provide battalion-based food service. Board expenses of
enlisted men have been increased substantially since January 1, 2005, and now the food
supply for officers and men aims at providing sufficient nutrition rather than just serving
enough food. From July 1, 2006, the salaries for service people have been increased by a
wide margin. The PLA has issued new types of uniforms to the enlisted and Air Force
officers and men, new types of special-purpose fatigue clothing to troops other than those
of the Army, and new types of plateau cold-proof uniforms to some troops stationed in
Xinjiang and Tibet.
改善官兵物质⽣活条件。全军基本实⾏分餐制，部分建制营集中办伙。从2005年1
⽉1⽇起，⼤幅提⾼⼠兵伙⾷费标准，官兵饮⾷保障正由温饱型向营养型转变。从2


-----

006年7⽉1⽇起，较⼤幅度提⾼了军⼈⼯资。全军⼠兵和空军官兵换发新式常服，
军兵种部队换发部分新型特种⼯作服，部分驻⻄藏、新疆部队配发新型⾼原防寒服
。

Steadily advancing logistics reform. Adhering to the principles of the incorporation of triservice components into joint logistical organs, joint management and employment of
support entities, and unified organization of supply and support, the PLA is conducting
experimental reforms in joint logistics in the Jinan Theatre. This marks an important step
towards the goal of building an integrated tri-service logistical support system. It involves
comprehensive efforts to expand the reform of the centralized payment system to
establish a support mode of fund settlement with single financial accounts as the basis
and centralized payment as the main form. The reform of the military medical support
system is being smoothly carried out, with priority given to ensuring the medical care of
military personnel. Over 70 percent of the PLA's employees are covered by the social
medical insurance system. The housing system reform has made progress, and a housing
system for military personnel has taken shape which combines military support with
social support, government houses with self-owned houses, and supply in kind with
supply in money.
稳步推进后勤改⾰。坚持联勤机关三军合编、保障实体统管共⽤、供应保障统⼀组
织的原则，在济南战区进⾏⼤联勤改⾰试点，向三军⼀体化后勤保障体制的⺫标迈
出重要⼀步。全⾯推开资⾦集中⽀付制度改⾰，建⽴以财务单⼀账户为基础、以集
中⽀付为主要形式的资⾦结算保障模式。军队医疗保障制度改⾰顺利进⾏，军⼈医
疗得到重点保障，70%以上的军队职⼯纳⼊社会医疗保险体系。住房制度改⾰取得
进展，初步形成军队保障与社会保障、公寓住房与⾃有住房、实物供应与货币分配
相结合的军队⼈员住房保障体系。

In October 2004, the General Staff Headquarters, General Political Department and
General Logistics Department jointly issued the Circular on Further Promoting the
Reform of Military Materials Procurement under the Corps Level. The PLA has basically
established a three-level (logistical organs of the general headquarters/departments, major
units, and units) materials procurement and management system and a system of
centralized procurement. During the Tenth Five-Year Plan period, the PLA's centralized
procurement reached RMB 45 billion, enabling it to save RMB 3.15 billion and spend 7
percent less on average.
2004年10⽉，总参谋部、总政治部、总后勤部联合下发《关于进⼀步推进军以下部
队物资采购改⾰的通知》。军队现已基本建⽴总部、⼤单位、部队后勤三级物资采
购管理体制和集中采购模式。“⼗五”时期，全军集中采购物资总⾦额达450亿元⼈
民币，节约资⾦31.5亿元⼈民币，平均节⽀率为7%。

Weaponry and Equipment
武器装备

With the backing of China's economic development and scientific and technological
achievements, the PLA is accelerating its weaponry and equipment modernization drive
mainly by relying on its own efforts.


-----

⼈民解放军坚持以国家经济发展和科技进步为依托，坚持⾃⼒更⽣为主，加快推进
武器装备现代化建设。

Planning long-term weaponry and equipment development in a scientific way. Based on
the military strategic guidelines of the new era and the outline for the building and
development of the military, the PLA is making efforts to correctly handle the
relationship between the needs of equipment development and the availability of funds.
As required by comprehensive integration of the Army, Navy and Air Force, joint
operation and systems building, the PLA has conducted studies and feasibility
assessments of its weaponry and equipment development strategy, adopted the outline
and the Eleventh Five-Year Plan for weaponry and equipment development, and set the
direction, goals and priorities of its future weaponry and equipment development.
科学筹划武器装备⻓远发展。依据新时期军事战略⽅针和军队建设发展规划纲要，
正确处理装备建设需要和经费可能的关系，按照三军⼀体、联合作战和体系建设、
综合集成的要求，研究论证武器装备发展战略，编制武器装备建设规划纲要和武器
装备建设“⼗⼀五”规划，科学确定武器装备未来发展⽅向、⺫标和重点。

Enhancing the capability of independent weaponry and equipment innovation. The PLA
is strengthening applied and basic research as well as research on key defense
technologies, ensuring the application of technological achievements and raising its
capabilities of original innovation, integrated innovation, and innovation through
digesting and absorbing introduced technologies. It is improving the innovation
mechanism for defense-related science and technology, and weaponry and equipment to
support the independent, leapfrogging and sustainable development of new and high-tech
weaponry and equipment.
增强武器装备⾃主创新能⼒。加强应⽤基础研究和国防关键技术研究，做好技术成
果转化应⽤⼯作，提⾼原始创新、集成创新和引进消化吸收再创新能⼒。健全国防
科技和武器装备创新机制，为⾼新技术武器装备⾃主式、跨越式、可持续发展提供
保障。

Optimizing the system of weaponry and equipment. The PLA gives priority to
developing new types of equipment which are advanced and reliable in technical
performance, and effective in operations. It is speeding up the development of integrated
electronic information systems, enhancing the comprehensive integration of various types
of weapon systems and support systems, and facilitating information sharing and fusion.
The PLA is accelerating the retirement of redundant equipment, carrying out the
prioritized, selective and phased retrofitting of equipment and informationization of
equipment on active service, and tapping the potential of existing equipment. It is
strengthening the systematic development of equipment to form a complete system of
equipment, weaponry and equipment support.
完善和优化武器装备体系。优先安排技术性能先进可靠、作战效能显著的新型装备
建设。加强综合电⼦信息系统建设，抓好各类武器系统和⽀援保障系统的综合集成
，促进信息共享和融合。加⼤冗余装备退役报废⼒度，有重点、有选择、分步骤地
实施装备改型和现役装备信息化改造，挖掘现有装备潜⼒。加强装备配套建设，实
现部队装备体系配套、武器系统配套和装备保障配套。


-----

Increasing the capability of integrated equipment support. The PLA is strict with
equipment management and carries out scientific, institutionalized and regular evaluation
on such management in order to maintain and improve the operability of existing
equipment. The PLA has established and improved mechanisms for integrated civilianmilitary equipment support. It is developing new and high maintenance technologies,
widening their application and enhancing the capabilities of equipment maintenance,
emergency rescue and repair, and remote technical support. It is strengthening equipment
support force building, equipment support training, pre-field training and training of
qualified equipment personnel, to promote the organic and systematic development of
operational and support capabilities of equipment.
提⾼装备综合保障能⼒。严格装备管理，开展装备管理科学化、制度化、经常化考
评活动，保持和提⾼现有装备的完好率、在航率。建⽴完善军民⼀体化装备保障机
制，开发和推⼲应⽤⾼新维修技术成果，增强装备维护保养、应急抢救抢修和远程
技术⽀援能⼒。加强装备保障⼒量建设，强化装备保障训练，搞好接装培训，培养
⾼素质装备⼈才，推进部队装备成建制成系统形成作战能⼒和保障能⼒。

Actively advancing the reform of the equipment procurement system. In December 2005,
the CMC approved and issued the Opinions on Some Issues Concerning the Deepening
of the Equipment Procurement System Reform. In the past two years, the General
Armaments Department has improved the review and approval of equipment
procurement modes, and gradually enlarged the scope of competitive procurement,
raising the percentage of funds for such procurement from 10 percent to 20 percent. The
General Armaments Department has strengthened the management of the centralized
procurement of equipment of the same kind for the whole PLA, formulated related rules,
regulations and standards, and substantially increased the quantities and varieties of
equipment procured in a centralized way, saving eight percent of the planned funds and
greatly improving the efficiency of fund use.
积极推进装备采购制度改⾰。2005年12⽉，中央军委批准下发了《关于深化装备采
购制度改⾰若干问题的意⻅》。近两年来，总装备部加强了装备采购⽅式的审定，
逐步扩⼤了竞争性采购范围，竞争性采购经费⽐例由10%提升到20%。强化同类型
装备全军集中采购管理，制定法规、标准，⼤幅度增加集中采购的数量和品种，节
约的经费占计划经费的8%，取得了很好的经济效益。

Military Legal System
军事法制

During the Tenth Five-Year Plan period, the Standing Committee of the NPC, the State
Council and the CMC, exercising their prescribed functions and powers, formulated and
revised 99 military laws and regulations. The general headquarters/departments, military
area commands, Navy, Air Force and Second Artillery Force formulated and revised
nearly 900 military rules and regulations. In 2006, the CMC began to implement its lawmaking program for the Eleventh Five-Year Plan period. In a period of five years, a
military legal system will take shape which covers multiple aspects, and is coherent,
scientific, closely knit and well-designed.


-----

⼗五”时期，全国⼈⼤常委会、国务院和中央军委按照规定的职权制定和修订军事
法律法规99件，各总部、军区、海军、空军、第⼆炮兵制定和修订军事规章近900
件。2006年，中央军委开始实施“⼗⼀五”⽴法规划，将⽤五年时间基本形成覆盖全
⾯、结构合理、内部协调、科学严谨的军事法规体系。

As military courts exercise the function of civil trial within the military, military
procuratorates have begun to conduct civil prosecution on a trial basis and supervise civil
trials in the military in accordance with the law. In line with the regulations on the
people's supervisory system practiced by civil procuratorates, military procuratorates
have started to introduce, on a trial basis, a system of servicemen's supervisors to
strengthen supervision over investigation of misconduct on duty. In conformity with the
requirements of the state's procedural law, a new servicemen's jury system has been
established, which specifies the selection of jury members and the procedure for the
performance of their duties. In keeping with the state's judicial system, the PLA has
instituted a specialized rank system for military judges and procurators which consists of
11 grades at three levels. This has enhanced the professional performance of the military
judicial personnel.
结合军事审判机关履⾏军队内部民事审判职能，军事检察机关开始试⾏军内民事检
察制度，依法对军内民事审判活动进⾏监督。根据国家检察机关实⾏⼈民监督员制
度的有关规定，军事检察机关开始试⾏军⼈监督员制度，加强对查办职务犯罪⼯作
的外部监督。按照国家诉讼法律制度要求，建⽴新的军⼈陪审员制度，规范了军⼈
陪审员遴选条件和履⾏职责⽅式。为保持和国家司法制度统⼀，实⾏军事法官、军
事检察官三等⼗⼀级的专业等级制度，使军事司法队伍更加专业化。

In recent years, based on the experience gained from appointing military lawyers at the
three levels of combined corps, division and brigade in the Army, units at and above the
brigade level in the Second Artillery Force have also started to be staffed with military
lawyers. The General Armaments Department and the Navy have set up professional
legal advisory offices concerning national defense patents and maritime issues. Military
lawyers have played an active role in providing support to commanding officers and
organs in decision-making, defending defendants in criminal trials, and undertaking civil
cases to protect the legitimate rights and interests of military units and personnel.
近年来，在陆军集团军、师、旅三级部队编设军队律师基础上，第⼆炮兵旅级以上
部队也开始编设军队律师。在总装备部和海军设置国防专利、海事等专业性法律顾
问处。军队律师在⽀持军队⾸⻓和机关依法决策、担任刑事诉讼被告⼈的辩护⼈、
代理民事案件维护军队单位和军⼈合法权益⽅⾯，发挥了积极作⽤。

Military Institutional Education
院校教育

Under the unified leadership of the CMC, the PLA institutional education is managed at
two levels: by the general headquarters/departments and by the military area commands
(Navy, Air Force or Second Artillery Force). The four general headquarters/departments
provide overall guidance for all PLA educational institutions, and the General Staff
Headquarters administers military education. The development goal of military


-----

educational institutions is to establish and improve a new school system with distinct
military features to shift priority from education of officer candidates for academic
credentials to pre-assignment education. The new system takes pre-assignment
educational institutions as the main form, and makes a distinction between these two
types of education. The PLA has 67 military educational institutions, which are divided
into two types: those for academic credentials and those for pre-assignment education.
The former offers undergraduate education for pre-commission officers and graduate
education for officers. The latter consists of elementary, intermediate and advanced level
institutions and NCO schools, and offers pre-assignment training and rotational training
for active-duty officers and NCOs. Some pre-assignment educational institutions also
offer graduate courses in military science. At the same time, 112 regular institutions of
higher learning in China undertake the task of training defense students, thus gradually
increasing the number of military officers trained in civilian educational institutions.
⼈民解放军院校教育实⾏中央军委统⼀领导下的总部和军区（军兵种）两级管理体
制。四总部负责全军院校的宏观指导，总参谋部组织全军院校教育⼯作。军队院校
建设的发展⺫标是：建⽴和完善以岗位任职教育院校为主体、岗位任职教育和⽣⻓
军官学历教育相对分离、军事特⾊鲜明的新型院校体系，加快军队院校教育由⽣⻓
军官学历教育为主向岗位任职教育为主转型。军队院校现有67所，分为两⼤类型：
军官学历教育院校，承担预提军官本科学历教育和军官研究⽣教育任务；岗位任职
教育院校，分为初级、中级、⾼级任职教育院校和⼠官学校，主要承担现职军官和
⼠官任职培训及轮训任务，部分院校还承担军事学研究⽣教育任务。同时，逐步提
⾼依托普通⾼等教育培养军队干部⽐例，全国已有112所⾼等院校承担了国防⽣培
养任务。

The PLA endeavors to improve the overall performance of military educational
institutions through focused and coordinated development. It has launched a project for
establishing key military colleges and schools in the Eleventh Five-Year Plan period. It
continues to focus efforts on building a number of institutions and research centers for
disciplines and specialties that are important in building an informationized military and
winning informationized wars. A new round of reform in teaching is underway to
improve the training target models for officers in different fields and at different levels,
and to develop new programs and curricula for the training of military personnel. The
PLA is also improving the information network for military training, and has built more
virtual laboratories, digital libraries and digital campuses to provide distance learning and
online teaching and training. In graduate education, the focus is shifted from academicoriented to practice-oriented, from emphasis on quantity to emphasis on quality, and from
a relatively closed-door approach to a more open and diversified approach. The PLA now
has 41 educational institutions authorized to award doctor's degrees and 60 to award
master's degrees.
坚持突出重点、协调发展，提⾼军队院校整体办学⽔平。全⾯启动“⼗⼀五”军队院
校重点建设⼯程，继续重点建设⼀批对建设信息化军队、打赢信息化战争意义重⼤
的院校和学科专业领域点。展开新⼀轮教学改⾰，完善各级各类⼈才培养⺫标模型
，制定新的军事⼈才培养⽅案和课程标准。加强军事训练信息⺴建设，推进虚拟实
验室、数字图书馆和数字校园建设。开展远程教学、⺴络教学和⺴络训练。继续推


-----

进军队研究⽣教育由培养学术型⼈才为主向培养应⽤型⼈才为主转变，由注重数量
规模增⻓向注重提⾼教育质量效益转变，由相对封闭培养模式向开放多元培养模式
转变。⺫前，全军共有博⼠学位授权单位41个、硕⼠学位授权单位60个。

Management System of Military Cadres
干部政策制度

In 2005, the PLA began to reform the evaluation, selection and appointment system for
military cadres, and to institute a system to evaluate commanding officers. It conducts
both evaluation and examination in selecting leading officers at the level of deputy
regimental commanders for combat troops. It has improved the regulations on reserve
cadres, and works to establish a long-term mechanism to select and train outstanding
young cadres. In March 2006, with the approval of the CMC, the four general
headquarters/departments jointly promulgated the Provisions of the PLA on Rewarding
Technical Experts, which gives awards and allowances to military technical experts.
2005年，⼈民解放军开始对干部考评选拔任⽤制度进⾏改⾰。研究建⽴指挥军官考
核评价体系，实⾏考核与考试相结合选拔作战部队副团职领导干部，完善后备干部
制度，建⽴选拔培养优秀年轻干部的⻓效机制。2006年3⽉，经中央军委批准，四
总部联合颁布《中国⼈民解放军专业技术⼈才奖励规定》，设⽴军队专业技术⼈才
奖和奖励性津贴。

In June 2005, the State Council and the CMC promulgated the Regulations of the PLA on
Contract Civilians, deciding to introduce a system of employing contract civilians to fill
some support posts in the military, so that active-duty officers, who are limited in
number, mainly take up command and combat posts. The regulations contain specific
provisions on the nature and status of contract civilians, the procedures of their
employment, and the coordination of the civil and military authorities' relevant policies.
In 2006, the PLA started the employment of contract civilians.
2005年6⽉，国务院、中央军委颁布《中国⼈民解放军⽂职⼈员条例》，决定在军
队实⾏⽂职⼈员制度，将部队部分保障岗位改由⾮现役⼈员担任，把有限的现役干
部员额⽤于指挥作战岗位。条例对⽂职⼈员的性质地位、聘⽤⼯作的主要环节以及
军地相关政策的衔接等作了具体规定。2006年，组织实施了⾸批⽂职⼈员聘⽤⼯作
。

Officers and non-commissioned officers transferred to civilian work are resettled in one
of the following two ways: state-planned job assignment, and finding jobs by themselves.
The State Council has an office for overseeing the nationwide resettlement of such
officers. The provinces (autonomous regions or municipalities directly under the central
government) have corresponding offices for resettling such officers in their respective
administrative areas. The General Political Department is in charge of PLA-wide transfer
of officers and non-commissioned officers to civilian work, and Party committees and
political organs at and above the regiment level are responsible for transferring officers to
civilian work in their own units. The provincial military commands (garrison commands
at the same level) are responsible for turning over PLA officers and non-commissioned
officers transferred to civilian work in their respective provinces, autonomous regions or


-----

municipalities directly under the central government. In 2005, the state and the PLA
began to deepen the reform and adjustment of the policies on resettling officers and noncommissioned officers transferred to civilian work.
国家对军队转业干部实⾏计划分配和⾃主择业相结合的⽅式安置。国务院设⽴军队
转业干部安置⼯作机构，负责全国军队转业干部安置⼯作。省（⾃治区、直辖市）
设⽴相应的军队转业干部安置⼯作机构，负责本⾏政区域的军队转业干部安置⼯作
。总政治部统⼀管理全军干部转业⼯作，军队团级以上党委和政治机关负责本单位
干部转业⼯作。省军区（卫戍区、警备区）负责全军转业到所在省、⾃治区、直辖
市干部的移交。2005年，国家和军队开始深化军队转业干部安置政策调整改⾰。

Supporting the Government and Loving the People
拥政爱民

The PLA attaches great importance to mass work, taking supporting the government and
loving the people as its major thrust. The political organs of the four general
headquarters/departments and the military area commands, the Navy, Air Force and
Second Artillery Force all have offices for mass work. The political organs of corps,
divisions (brigades) and regiments also have special officers in charge of such work.
These offices and officers are responsible for maintaining contacts and coordination with
governments at all levels. Education in supporting the government and loving the people
is conducted PLA-wide. The PLA participates in national economic development,
emergency rescue and disaster relief, and public welfare activities.
⼈民解放军⾼度重视以拥护政府、热爱⼈民为主要内容的群众⼯作。四总部和各军
区、军兵种政治机关设有群众⼯作部⻔，军、师（旅）、团级政治机关编有群众⼯
作军官，负责军队与政府的联系和协调。各部队⼲泛开展拥政爱民教育，参加国家
经济建设、抢险救灾和社会公益事业。

In the past two years, the engineering troops of the Army, Navy and Air Force have taken
part in more than 430 key construction projects for transportation, hydropower,
communication and energy infrastructure. The PLA has assisted in building new socialist
villages in the countryside, and provided regular assistance to poor farmers in more than
19,000 villages. It has helped build over 48,000 small public projects such as watersaving irrigation projects, drinking water projects for both people and livestock, roads,
and hydropower projects, bringing immediate benefits to nearly 800,000 people. In
addition, it has helped build or enlarge 211 primary and secondary schools, enabling
142,000 school dropouts to return to class. PLA troops stationed in China's western
region have taken part in such ecological engineering projects as the construction of
shelterbelts and the improvement of small drainage areas. They have planted 210 million
trees and sown grass on more than 13 million sq m of land. PLA hospitals have
established regular assistance relations with more than 400 county or township hospitals
in the western region. They have helped train key members of the medical staff, made
rounds of visits offering free medical consultation and treatment, and donated medical
equipment and medicine. The PLA and PAPF have dispatched over 340,000 troops to
take part in more than 2,800 emergency rescue and disaster-relief operations, involving
more than 40,000 vehicles, flown more than 2,000 sorties (including the use of


-----

helicopters), evacuated over 3.4 million people and prevented economic losses of several
billion yuan. At the end of 2006, the PLA donated 230 million yuan and over 930,000
cotton-padded clothes and quilts to disaster- and poverty-stricken areas.
两年来，陆军、海军、空军⼯程部队参加交通、⽔电、通信、能源基础设施重点⼯
程430多项。全军各部队⽀援社会主义新农村建设，建⽴农村扶贫联系点19000多个
，援建节⽔灌溉、⼈畜饮⽔、道路、⽔电等⼩型公共⼯程48000多个，近80万⼈直
接受益；帮助新建扩建中⼩学211所，使14.2万失学⼉童重返校园。驻⻄部地区部
队参加防护林带和⼩流域治理等⽣态⼯程建设，植树2.1亿株，种草1300多万平⽅
⽶。军队医疗卫⽣系统与⻄部地区400多所县、乡医院建⽴帮扶协作关系，培训业
务⾻干，义务巡诊治病，赠送医疗设备和药品。全军和武警部队参加各种抢险救灾
⾏动2800余次，出动官兵34万余⼈次，动⽤⻋辆机械4万余台次，出动⻜机（含直
升机）2000余架次，转移疏散群众340余万⼈，挽回经济损失数⼗亿元⼈民币。200
6年底，各部队向灾区、贫困地区⼀次性捐款2.3亿元⼈民币，捐棉⾐被93万多件（
套）。

In June 2005, the State Council and the CMC promulgated the Regulations on
Participation of the PLA in Emergency Rescue and Disaster Relief, prescribing the PLA's
main tasks, coordination with local people's governments, limits of authority and
procedures for employing troops, joint command with local authorities, preparations and
readiness, financial and material support, etc., for such operations.
2005年6⽉，国务院、中央军委颁布《军队参加抢险救灾条例》，对军队参加抢险
救灾的主要任务、与地⽅⼈民政府的⼯作协调关系、动⽤军队的权限和程序、军地
联合指挥、平时救灾准备和经费物资保障等作了明确规定。

V. People's Armed Police Force
⼈民武装警察部队

The People's Armed Police Force (PAPF) is charged with the fundamental task of
safeguarding national security, maintaining social stability and ensuring that the people
live and work in peace and contentment. It strives to make itself a powerful, disciplined
and politically reliable force.
武警部队以保卫国家安全、维护社会稳定、保障⼈民群众安居乐业为根本职能，努
⼒建设成为⼀⽀政治可靠的威武之师、⽂明之师。

Structure and Organization
体制编制

As a component of China's armed forces and subordinate to the State Council, the PAPF
is under the dual leadership of the State Council and the CMC. The State Council
exercises leadership over the PAPF through relevant functional departments, assigns
routine tasks to it, decides its size and number of organizations, and is responsible for its
command, operations, and financial and material support. The PAPF has an independent
budgetary status in the financial expenditure of the state. The CMC is responsible for the
PAPF's organizational structure, management of officers, command, training and political


-----

work. It exercises leadership over the PAPF through the four general
headquarters/departments. In terms of conducting public security operations and relevant
capability building, the PAPF General Headquarters is under the leadership and
command of the Ministry of Public Security, and the PAPF units at and below the
contingent level are under the leadership and command of the public security organs at
the same level. The PAPF has a total force of 660,000.
武警部队是中国武装⼒量的组成部分，属于国务院编制序列，由国务院、中央军委
双重领导。国务院主要负责武警部队⽇常任务赋予、规模和编制定额、指挥、业务
建设、经费物资保障，通过有关职能部⻔组织实施对武警部队的领导。武警部队的
经费在国家财政⽀出中单列。中央军委主要负责武警部队的组织编制、干部管理、
指挥、训练、政治⼯作，通过四总部组织实施对武警部队的领导。在执⾏公安任务
和相关业务建设⽅⾯，武警总部接受公安部的领导和指挥，总队及其以下武警部队
，接受同级公安部⻔的领导。武警部队总员额现为66万⼈。

The PAPF consists mainly of the internal security force and forces guarding gold mines,
forests, water and electricity supply, and communications. The border security,
firefighting and security guard forces are also components of the PAPF. The PAPF
General Headquarters is the leading and commanding organ that directs and administers
the internal security force and forces guarding gold mine, forest, water and electricity,
and communications, etc., and provides guidance to other forces subordinate to the
PAPF. Under it are the headquarters, political department and logistics department. The
PAPF has one commander-in-chief, one first political commissar (assumed concurrently
by the Minister of Public Security), one political commissar, and several deputy
commanders-in-chief and deputy political commissars. The PAPF internal security force
is composed of contingents at the level of the province (autonomous region or
municipality directly under the central government) and armed police divisions.
Contingents, detachments and squadrons are instituted at the province, prefecture, and
county levels, respectively. The armed police divisions have regiments, battalions and
companies in battle order, which are stationed in a number of provinces, autonomous
regions and municipalities directly under the central government. The forces guarding
gold mines, forests, water and electricity supply, and communications have their own
headquarters, which function as their leading and commanding organs. The PAPF
General Headquarters has an educational institution directly under it. The contingent
headquarters and the headquarters of the forces guarding gold mines, forests, water and
electricity supply, and communications have elementary command colleges under them.
武警部队主要由内卫部队和警种部队组成；公安边防、消防、警卫部队列⼊武警序
列。武警总部是武警部队的领导指挥机关，下设司令部、政治部、后勤部，负责领
导管理武警内卫和警种部队，指导列⼊武警部队序列的其他部队。武警部队设司令
员、第⼀政治委员（公安部⻓兼）、政治委员各⼀名，设副司令员、副政治委员若
干名。武警内卫部队由省（⾃治区、直辖市）总队和武装警察师组成。在中国各级
⾏政区划内，省级设武警总队，地区级设武警⽀队，县级设武警中队。武装警察师
下辖团、营、连，分布在若干省、⾃治区和直辖市内。武警警种部队由⻩⾦、森林
、⽔电、交通部队组成，分别设有指挥部，为该部队的领导指挥机关。武警总部下
辖直属学院，总队和警种部队指挥部下辖初级指挥院校。


-----

Basic Tasks
基本任务

In peacetime, the PAPF is tasked to perform guard duties, handle emergencies, combat
terrorism, and participate in and support national economic development. In wartime, it
assists the PLA in defensive operations.
武警部队平时主要担负执勤、处置突发事件、反恐怖、参加和⽀援国家经济建设等
任务，战时配合⼈民解放军进⾏防卫作战。

Every day, more than 260,000 PAPF servicemen are on guard duty. Through the
combined use of manpower, facilities and technologies, the PAPF has effectively
enhanced the efficiency of guard duties and security in recent years. The PAPF annually
handles an average of over 100 cases of attempted attacks against guarded targets and
escape attempts by detained suspects and imprisoned criminals, organizes thousands of
important temporary duties, and ensures the security of important international and
national conferences and large-scale events, in cooperation with the government
departments concerned. Adhering to the guidelines and principles for handling
emergencies, and using proper methods and tactics, the PAPF effectively safeguards the
fundamental interests of the people, social stability and the dignity of the law. The PAPF
anti-terrorism units closely follow the state's anti-terrorism guidelines and principles, and
enhance their combat-readiness training. They have been involved in the successful
handling of cases of bombing attempts and kidnapping incidents. The various units of the
PAPF take an active part in efforts to keep local order, and assist the public security
departments in catching and arresting criminal suspects and cracking down on organized
criminal gangs.
武警部队每天有26万余⼈轮流执勤。近年来，武警部队将⼈员防范、设施防范、技
术防范紧密结合起来，有效提⾼执勤质量和安全系数。平均每年制⽌侵害警卫⺫标
、制⽌在押犯罪嫌疑⼈和犯罪分⼦逃跑事件上百起，组织重⼤临时勤务数千起，配
合有关部⻔保证了国际、国内重要会议和⼤型活动的安全。武警部队正确把握和贯
彻处置突发事件的⽅针和原则，讲究处置策略和⽅法，有⼒维护了⼈民群众的根本
利益，维护了社会稳定和国家法律的尊严。反恐怖部（分）队贯彻国家反恐怖⽅针
和原则，加强战备训练，参与并成功处置各类爆炸和劫持⼈质事件。各部队还积极
参加社会治安综合治理，协助公安机关抓捕犯罪嫌疑⼈，打击带有⿊社会性质的犯
罪团伙。

The PAPF gold mine force has completed 38 geological prospecting projects in a dozen
provinces and autonomous regions, and found some rich gold deposits. In the last two
years, the PAPF forest force has put out 552 forest or prairie fires, protecting valuable
natural resources. The PAPF water and electricity force has taken part in the construction
of 21 key national projects, including the Qinghai-Tibet Railway, the West-East Natural
Gas Transmission Project, the South-North Water Diversion Project, and major
hydropower projects. The PAPF communications force is responsible for the
maintenance of the Xinjiang-Tibet Highway and the Sichuan-Tibet Highway, and has
undertaken the construction of national high-grade highways, extra-long tunnels and


-----

bridges. Those projects built by the PAPF communications force are all up to standards.
In the past two years, 224,000 PAPF troops have participated in 2,320 emergency rescue
and disaster relief operations, and rescued and evacuated 250,000 people in disasterstricken areas.
⻩⾦部队在⼗多个省区完成38个地质勘查项⺫，为国家探明⼀批具有重要价值的⻩
⾦矿产资源。森林部队两年来扑灭森林、草原⽕灾552起，为保护国家⾃然资源作
出了贡献。⽔电部队参与承建⻘藏铁路、⻄⽓东输、南⽔北调、⼤型⽔电站等21个
国家重点⼯程项⺫的建设。交通部队负责新藏、川藏公路管护，承建的国家⾼等级
公路、特⻓隧道和桥梁建设等项⺫，合格率达100%。两年来，武警部队共出动官
兵22.4万余⼈次，参加各类抢险救灾2320余次，抢救和转移受灾群众25万余⼈。

Force Building
部队建设

The PAPF is working to strengthen itself through science and technology. It is enhancing
staff competence, and conducting strict management so that its personnel can fully
perform their duties. Using the national information infrastructure, the PAPF has
established a preliminary system of three-level integrated information networks, linking
general headquarters with the grass-roots squadrons. It has made progress in real-time
command and control, management of duties through visual means, networked education
and training, and office automation. The PAPF possesses a basically complete range of
equipment through R&D and procurement of urgently needed weaponry and equipment.
It has set up and improved a distinctive mechanism for the selection, training and
employment of officers and NCOs. In particular, priority is given to the training of interdisciplinary personnel. The PAPF conducts mission-oriented training on a priority basis
to better perform guard duties, manage emergencies and combat terrorism. It participated
in China's "Great Wall-2003" and "Great Wall II" anti-terrorism exercises, and the SCO's
"Joint-2003" exercise, and sponsored the "Guard-04" and "Guard-06" exercises to deal
with large-scale emergencies. The PAPF runs its forces strictly and pursuant to the law. It
stresses that leaders make decisions, administrative organs conduct management, and
officers and men perform their duties strictly in accordance with the law. As a result, its
overall performance has been greatly boosted.
武警部队坚持科技强警、⼈才兴警、从严治警，不断增强遂⾏各项任务的能⼒。依
托国家信息基础设施，初步建⽴起武警总部⾄基层中队的三级综合信息⺴络系统，
推进了指挥控制实时化、勤务管理可视化、教育训练⺴络化和机关办公⾃动化建设
。研发和购置部队遂⾏任务急需的武器装备，初步实现装备系统配套。建⽴和完善
符合武警特点的干部和⼠官选拔、培养和使⽤机制，着⼒培养复合型⼈才。突出开
展针对性训练，提⾼执勤、处置突发事件、反恐怖能⼒。参加国家“⻓城－2003”和
“⻓城2号”反恐演习、上海合作组织“联合－2003”演习，组织“卫⼠04”和“卫⼠06”
处置⼤规模突发事件演习。坚持依法从严治警，强调领导依法决策、机关依法管理
、官兵依法办事，正规化建设⽔平明显提⾼。

The PAPF is steadily improving its logistical support system based on self-support and
supplemented by social and PLA support to raise the efficiency of integrated support. It


-----

runs a crisis response support system covering the three echelons of the general
headquarters, contingents (divisions) and detachments (regiments), to better respond to
emergencies, and unexpected and complex situations. It promotes standardized and
institutional logistical management by exploitation of IT and uniformly standardizes its
facility configurations, work procedures, operating mechanisms and management
requirements. The PAPF is pursuing reforms in housing, procurement of bulk materials
and project procurement, medical care, and outsources food, barracks and bedding and
clothing services.
建⽴健全以⾃我保障为主、依托社会保障和军队⽀援保障为辅的后勤保障体系，提
⾼综合保障效能。着眼应对紧急、突然、复杂情况，初步建⽴起总部－总队（师）
－⽀队（团）三级应急保障体系。推⾏后勤管理标准化、制度化和信息化，统⼀规
范各类设施设置、⼯作程序、运⾏机制和管理要求。推进住房、⼤宗物资和⼯程采
购、医疗保障改⾰，基本实现饮⾷服务、营房管理、被装筹措等后勤保障社会化。

In recent years, the PAPF has conducted friendly exchanges with the armed police forces,
military police, internal security forces, public security forces and other similar forces of
more than 30 countries to draw on each other's practices and cooperate in conducting
anti-terrorism training. Its medical personnel, as part of Chinese rescue teams, have
participated in disaster-relief missions in the aftermath of the earthquakes in Iran,
Pakistan and Indonesia, and the tsunami in the Indian Ocean.
近年来，武警部队与30多个国家的武装警察、宪兵、内卫部队、治安部队等同类部
队开展友好交往，互通业务建设情况，进⾏反恐训练合作。先后抽调医务⼈员参加
中国国际救援队，执⾏伊朗地震救援、印度洋海啸救援、巴基斯坦地震救援和印度
尼⻄亚地震救援等任务。

VI. National Defense Mobilization and Reserve Force
六、国防动员和后备⼒量

China, responding to new developments in modern warfare and the needs of national
security, is reinforcing national defense mobilization and reserve force building to
enhance its capabilities of rapid mobilization, sustained support, comprehensive
protection and swift shift from a peacetime to wartime footing.
中国着眼现代战争特点和国家安全需要，加强国防动员和后备⼒量建设，提⾼平战
转换、快速动员、持续保障和综合防护能⼒。

Mobilization of the Armed Forces
武装⼒量动员

China's mobilization of the armed forces includes the mobilization of manpower,
weaponry and equipment, as well as logistical materials. The main tasks of the PLA's
mobilization are as follows: to formulate plans for wartime troop mobilization and
support according to operational plans, carry out pre-regimentation of reservists into
active units and organization of reserve units, and expand and form units according to
wartime structure and organization upon the state's issuance of a mobilization order. The
main tasks of the PAPF's mobilization are to formulate mobilization and support plans


-----

based on the PAPF's possible wartime tasks, carry out pre-regimentation of reservists and
adjustment, expansion and reorganization of units, and adjust the organizational system
or form or expand units according to designated tasks after the state issues a mobilization
order. The main tasks of the militia's mobilization are to call up militiamen, adjust and
reinforce organizations, issue weapons and equipment, carry out pre-war training, and
provide support in accordance with the needs of wartime manpower mobilization and
plans for participating in warfare and supporting the front.
中国的武装⼒量动员包括兵员动员、武器装备动员和后勤物资动员等。⼈民解放军
动员的主要任务，是根据作战预案拟制战时部队动员计划及保障计划，做好现役部
队预编满员和预备役部队建设的落实⼯作，国家发布动员令后按战时体制编制扩编
和组建部队等。武警部队动员的主要任务，是根据战时可能担负的任务拟制动员计
划及保障计划，做好平时预编满员和调整、扩编或重组部队的落实⼯作，国家发布
动员令后根据赋予的任务调整建制或组、扩建部队等。民兵动员的主要任务，是根
据战时兵员动员的需要和参战⽀前预案，收拢集结⼈员、调整充实组织、发放武器
装备、开展临战训练和落实相关保障。

Acting on the directives of the State Council and the CMC, the General Staff
Headquarters organizes and conducts mobilization of the armed forces with the assistance
of the General Political Department, General Logistics Department and General
Armaments Department as well as the relevant government departments. The Navy, Air
Force, and Second Artillery Force are responsible for the mobilization of their respective
forces. The military area commands, provincial military commands and local Party
committees and governments at different levels are responsible for the mobilization of
reserve forces within their respective jurisdictions.
总参谋部根据国务院、中央军委的指⽰，在总政治部、总后勤部、总装备部以及国
家机关有关部⻔的协助下，组织开展武装⼒量动员⼯作。各军兵种负责本军兵种武
装⼒量动员。军区、省军区系统和地⽅各级党委、政府负责后备⼒量动员。

By maintaining a lean standing army, improving the reserve service system, setting up
reserve units, designating manpower replenishment areas, pre-positioning equipment and
supplies, and organizing civil-military mobilization rehearsals, China has ensured the
smooth mobilization of the armed forces, enabling the latter to deter or defuse security
crises with even a downsized standing force. In recent years, China has accelerated the
adjustment and reform of the organization and structure of the militia and the reserve
forces and increased the number of reservists with high-tech backgrounds, and
strengthened the reserve forces of the Navy, Air Force and Second Artillery Force. As a
result, the level of the general quality of the backup forces of national defense has been
raised notably.
中国通过保持精干的常备军、完善预备役制度、组建预备役部队、划分兵员补充区
、储存武器装备和军需物资以及组织军民联合动员演练等措施，有效保证了武装⼒
量动员的顺利实施，使武装⼒量在常备⼒量精简的情况下仍具有遏制和消除各类安
全危机的能⼒。近年来，中国加快民兵、预备役部队体制编制调整改⾰，加⼤地⽅
相关⾼技术⼈员和诸军（兵）种后备兵员的储备，国防后备⼒量建设整体质量⽔平
有新的提⾼。


-----

Mobilization of the National Economy
国民经济动员

The basic policies for the mobilization of the national economy are:
国民经济动员的基本政策是：

- To boost economic mobilization based on China's development strategy and its

economic strength, and incorporate the development of the defense economy into that
of the national economy;
根据国家发展战略，依托国民经济实⼒发展国民经济动员，把国防经济建设寓
于国家的经济发展之中；

- To make economic mobilization a bridge between China's economic development

and available national defense capacities, and strike a balance between military and
civilian needs and between peacetime and wartime needs in economic restructuring,
to keep the national defense economy at a proper level in peacetime;
发挥国民经济动员在国家经济建设与国防常备能⼒之间的桥梁纽带作⽤，在国
家经济结构调整中统筹考虑军需民⽤、平战衔接，使平时的国防经济保持在合
理的⽔平上；

- To speed up the development and application of new and high technologies and dual
purpose technologies, and give priority to the mobilization of high-tech products and
the reserves of high technology, to raise the overall scientific and technological level
of economic mobilization;
加强⾼新科学技术和军民两⽤技术的开发利⽤，注重⾼科技产品的动员和⾼技
术储备，从整体上提⾼国民经济动员基础的科技⽔平；

- To build an organizational structure, mechanism and legal system of economic

mobilization in keeping with the socialist market economy for dealing with both wars
and emergencies in accordance with the assigned functions of economic mobilization,
to serve economic development in peacetime and respond rapidly in cases of
emergency or war; and
按照平时服务、急时应急、战时应战的功能定位，构建与社会主义市场经济相
适应的应战、应急结合的国民经济动员体制、机制、法制；

- To pursue the principle of self-defense by the whole nation and improve the capacity

of economic mobilization to meet the needs of defensive operations under conditions
of informationization.
坚持全民⾃卫原则，提⾼适应信息化条件下防卫作战需要的国民经济动员能⼒
。

The primary objective is to establish a complete economic mobilization system with the
dual functions of responding to both wars and emergencies, and to set up an economic


-----

mobilization base that is an integral part of China's economy to meet the economic needs
of local wars and unexpected incidents.
国民经济动员的主要⺫标是，建成⽐较完善的应付战争兼顾应对突发事件双重功能
的国民经济动员体系，形成与国民经济有机融合的国民经济动员基础，能够从经济
上保障和应付局部战争及突发事件的需要。

With the rapid growth of China's economy, the capacity of its economic mobilization has
been steadily raised. In building information and communications systems, highways,
railways, bridges, tunnels, airports, ports, docks and major urban infrastructures, China
pays close attention to the requirements of national defense, and ensures that peacetime
needs and wartime needs are properly balanced. In working to set up a mechanism of
economic mobilization for responding to both wars and emergencies, China has set up a
system of plans for economic mobilization that takes both peacetime and wartime needs
into consideration. It has established economic mobilization centers in the machinebuilding, weaponry, aviation, space, shipbuilding and chemical industries, and has
optimized the mobilization structure and layout. It has basically completed a survey on
the potential of economic mobilization and set up an information system for economic
mobilization management by the state and a number of provinces and municipalities
directly under the central government. As a component of the national emergency
response force, economic mobilization offices at different levels have established a
mechanism for contacts between economic mobilization offices and emergency reaction
management offices to provide support for handling public emergencies and ensure
public security.
随着国民经济的快速发展，国民经济动员能⼒不断提⾼。在信息通讯、公路、铁路
、桥梁、隧道、机场、港⼝、码头和城市重⼤基础设施的建设中更加注重兼顾国防
要求，加⼤平战结合⼒度。加强应战应急相结合的国民经济动员机制建设，建⽴了
平战兼顾的国民经济动员预案体系。在机械、兵器、航空、航天、船舶、化⼯等领
域建⽴国民经济动员中⼼，优化了国民经济动员能⼒建设的结构和布局。基本完成
国民经济动员潜⼒调查，初步建成国家和部分省市国民经济动员管理信息系统。各
级国民经济动员机构作为国家应急⼒量的组成部分，建⽴了国民经济动员机构与突
发事件应急管理机构之间的联系机制，参与处置突发公共事件应急保障，积极为公
共安全建设服务。

Civil Air Defense
⼈民防空

Civil air defense (CAD), air defense of critical areas and field air defense constitute
China's homeland defense structure. The tasks of the CAD in the new era are to protect
the people and their property and China's economic development in wartime, and carry
out disaster prevention and relief and handle public unexpected incidents in peacetime.
The CAD expenses are born by the state and the public. The state has promulgated the
Civil Air Defense Law, and the people's governments at various levels have formulated
and improved corresponding CAD rules and regulations. CAD work is incorporated into
plans for economic and social development by the people's governments at and above the
county level.


-----

⼈民防空与要地防空、野战防空共同构成中国三位⼀体的国⼟防空体系。新时期的
⼈民防空，战时担负保护⼈民⽣命财产安全和国家经济建设成果任务，平时担负防
灾救灾和处置突发公共事件任务。⼈民防空经费由国家和社会共同负担。国家颁布
了⼈民防空法，各级⼈民政府制定完善了相配套的⼈民防空法规及规章。县级以上
⼈民政府将⼈民防空建设纳⼊国民经济和社会发展规划。

China's CAD capabilities in preparations against war, integrated urban protection and
public unexpected incident response have been greatly enhanced in recent years.
Interconnected and interoperable communications networks for command and warning at
the provincial, city and county levels have been basically established, and urban air
defense early-warning networks have been improved. Over 85 percent of areas in major
cities are covered by air-defense sirens. Most of the key CAD cities have CAD command
posts. All large and medium-sized cities have protection and rescue contingents for
emergency rescue, rush repair, medical aid, fire fighting, maintenance of order, chemical
defense, epidemic prevention, communications and transportation. Short-term and fulltime training courses are conducted, and emergency rescue drills for handling disasters
are organized to help the public acquire CAD knowledge and skills. CAD courses are
included in school teaching programs and curricula. Volunteer CAD teams have been
formed in some factories, mines, enterprises and communities.
近年来，⼈民防空战备⽔平、城市整体防护能⼒和应付突发公共事件能⼒明显提升
。初步建⽴起省、市、县三级互联互通的指挥通信和警报通信专⽤⺴，健全了城市
防空预警报知⺴络，重点城市的警报⾳响覆盖率达到85%以上，多数⼈民防空重点
城市建成⼈民防空指挥所。各⼤中城市组建了抢险抢修、医疗救护、消防、治安、
防化防疫、通信、运输等防护救援队伍，组织短期脱产集训及重⼤灾害事故应急救
援演练，对⼈民群众进⾏⼈民防空知识教育和技能培训，将⼈民防空教育列⼊学校
教学计划和教学⼤纲，⼀些⼚矿、企业和社区还组建了民防志愿者队伍。

Militia Force Building
民兵建设

China's militia is under the unified direction of the State Council and the CMC, and the
dual leadership of local Party committees and governments as well as the military
commands. The concept of people's war, and the principle of combining regular work
with military training and combining peacetime needs with wartime needs are observed
in the building of the militia.
民兵⼯作在国务院、中央军委统⼀领导下，实⾏地⽅党委、政府和军事系统的双重
领导。民兵建设以⼈民战争思想为指导，坚持劳武结合、平战结合。

The focus of the militia work is being shifted from rural areas to cities and areas along
communication lines. The setting up of militia forces has expanded from state-owned
enterprises to private enterprises and from traditional industries to high-tech industries.
Specialized technical units rather than infantry are becoming the backbone of the militia.
The proportion of antiaircraft artillery, ground artillery, missile, communications,
engineering, anti-chemical, reconnaissance, information and other specialized technical
units in the overall militia force is being raised. The building of militia units of the Navy,


-----

Air Force and Second Artillery Force is being strengthened. A new organizational
structure of the militia has taken shape, with specialized technical units and units with
corresponding specialties serving as the main body, and air defense units, units of the
Navy, Air Force and Second Artillery Force, and emergency response units playing a
leading role.
⺫前，民兵⼯作重⼼正在从农村向城市和交通沿线转移，编组单位从国有企业向民
营企业、传统⾏业向⾼科技⾏业拓展，组织结构从以步兵为主向以专业技术队伍为
主调整。⾼炮、地炮、导弹、通信、⼯兵、防化、侦察、信息等专业技术分队⽐例
进⼀步提⾼，海军、空军、第⼆炮兵民兵分队建设得到加强，初步形成以专业技术
分队、对⼝专业分队为主体，以防空部（分）队、军兵种分队、应急分队为重点的
民兵组织建设新格局。

The state has increased investment in militia weaponry and equipment, with priority
given to equipment for air defense, emergency response and maintenance of stability. The
state has phased out a number of out-dated weapons. Militia training reform has been
deepened; a four-level system for organizing training is practiced, the four levels being
provincial military commands, prefectural military commands, people's armed forces
departments of counties (county-level cities or municipal districts) and basic-level
people's armed forces departments. Through interlinked training as well as joint training
and exercises with active PLA units, the militia has boosted its capabilities of conducting
rapid mobilization and carrying out its specialized tasks.
国家加⼤民兵武器装备建设投⼊，重点加强防空和应急维稳装备建设，淘汰、报废
⼀批⽼旧武器。各地深化民兵训练改⾰，实⾏省军区、军分区、县（市、区）⼈武
部和基层⼈武部四级组训体制，与现役部队进⾏挂钩训练和联训联演，民兵的快速
动员和遂⾏任务能⼒明显提⾼。

Reserve Force Building
预备役部队建设

As a component of the PLA, the reserve force receives priority in the building of the
defense reserve. The reserve force conducts peacetime training as provided for in relevant
regulations, assists in maintaining order when necessary pursuant to the law, and
activates its units in wartime in observance of the state's mobilization order.
预备役部队是⼈民解放军的组成部分，是国防后备⼒量建设的重点。平时按照规定
进⾏训练，必要时可以依法协助维护社会秩序，战时根据国家动员令成建制转服现
役。

In recent years, while keeping its overall size unchanged, the reserve force has reduced
the number of Army reserve units, while increasing the numbers of reserve units of the
Navy, Air Force and Second Artillery Force, the proportion of specialized technical
reserve units and the number of logistical and equipment support reserve units, thus
accomplishing the task of forming new reserve units of the Navy, Air Force and Second
Artillery Force in the Tenth Five-Year Plan period. Most of the PLA's reserve divisions,
brigades and regiments have training bases, armament depots, necessary office space and
living quarters, and optical-fiber cable communication. With military training as the


-----

primary task, the PLA reserve units carry out training strictly pursuant to regulations,
ensuring the accomplishment of all training tasks. The focus of training is being shifted
from individuals and units to command posts, key technicians and higher levels of
training such as joint and live-fire exercises.
近年来，预备役部队在保持现有规模的基础上，适度减少陆军预备役部队数量，扩
⼤海军、空军、第⼆炮兵预备役部队建设规模，扩⼤专业技术预备役部队的建设⽐
例，扩⼤后勤和装备保障预备役部队的建设数量，圆满完成“⼗五”时期军兵种预备
役部队组建任务。全军预备役部队绝⼤多数的师、旅、团建有训练基地、装备仓库
和必要的办公、⽣活⽤房，接通了通信光缆。预备役部队坚持把军事训练作为中⼼
任务，严格按纲施训，确保训练任务落实，促进预备役部队军事训练由单兵、分队
训练向⾸⻓机关、技术⾻干、部队合成、实兵演习更⾼层次的训练发展。

VII. Border and Coastal Defense
七、边防海防

Adhering to the principles of conducting overall planning, placing equal emphasis on
land and sea, giving priority to defense, and integrating defense and administration,
China is endeavoring to make its border and coastal defense unified, effective, solid and
informationized.
中国坚持统筹规划、陆海并重、以防为主、防管⼀体的原则，致⼒于建设统⼀、⾼
效、稳固和信息化的边海防。

Border and Coastal Defense System
边海防体制

China's border and coastal defense is under the unified leadership of the State Council
and the CMC, and practices an administration system of sharing responsibilities between
the military and the local authorities. The State Commission of Border and Coastal
Defense, composed of the relevant departments of the State Council and the PLA, and
under the dual leadership of the State Council and the CMC, guides and coordinates
China's border and coastal defense. All military area commands, as well as border and
coastal provinces, prefectures and counties have commissions to guide and coordinate
border and coastal defense within their respective jurisdictions.
边海防⼯作由国务院、中央军委统⼀领导，实⾏军地分⼯负责的边海防管理体制。
国家边海防委员会由国务院和军队的有关部⻔组成，在国务院和中央军委领导下，
负责指导协调全国的边海防⼯作。各军区和沿边沿海省、地、县三级都成⽴了边海
防委员会，负责指导协调辖区内的边海防⼯作。

The PLA border defense force has a three-level structure, namely, regiment, battalion and
company. The PLA coastal defense force has a five-level structure, namely, division,
brigade, regiment, battalion and company. In 2003, the PLA border defense force took
over the defense of the China-DPRK border and the Yunnan section of the ChinaMyanmar border from the border public security force, thus enabling the state to integrate
land border defense and administration. The border public security force is tasked with
safeguarding security and maintaining social order in border and coastal areas. Within the


-----

border public security force there are contingents in provinces (autonomous regions or
municipalities directly under the central government), detachments, groups, border police
substations and frontier inspection stations in border and coastal areas, border inspection
stations in open ports, and marine police force in coastal waters. Since China launched its
reform and opening-up program, the state has consolidated border and coastal lawenforcement functions in organizations responsible for public security, customs,
inspection and quarantine, maritime surveillance, fisheries administration, marine affairs
and environmental protection. The state has also established and reinforced the border
public security force, as well as border and coastal law-enforcement contingents for
marine affairs, anti-smuggling, fisheries administration and maritime surveillance.
⼈民解放军是边海防防卫的主要⼒量。⼈民解放军边防部队设边防团、营、连，海
防部队设海防师、旅、团、营、连。2003年，随着中朝边境和中缅边境云南段的防
卫⼯作由公安边防部队移交⼈民解放军边防部队，国家统⼀了陆地边境的防卫管理
模式。公安边防部队担负国家赋予的边海防安全保卫和维护社会治安秩序等任务，
在省（⾃治区、直辖市）设边防总队，在边境沿海地区设边防⽀队、⼤队、边防派
出所、边境检查站，在国家对外开放⼝岸设边防检查站，在海上部署海警部队。改
⾰开放以来，国家健全了公安、海关、检验检疫、海监、渔政、海事、环保等边海
防执法机构，组建和充实了公安边防部队和海事、缉私、渔政、海监总队等边海防
执法⼒量。

Building Border and Coastal Defense
边海防建设

China has promulgated the Law on National Defense, the Law on the Territorial Sea and
the Contiguous Zone, the Law on the Exclusive Economic Zone and the Continental
Shelf and other relevant laws and regulations, and updated its border and coastal defense
policies and regulations pursuant to international laws and practices, to manage its border
and sea areas in conformity with the law. China endeavors to strengthen its border and
coastal defense, administration and control, and build a modern border and coastal
defense force featuring joint military-police-civilian efforts in defense and administration.
Over the past decade and more, the state has invested more than RMB 2 billion in
construction of border defense infrastructure, building over 20,000 km of patrol roads,
over 6,000 km of barbed-wire fences and installing some 600 sets of monitoring
equipment. Construction of coastal defense infrastructure, including duty piers,
monitoring stations and centers and auxiliary facilities has been underway since 2004.
中国陆续颁布了国防法以及领海及毗连区法、专属经济区和⼤陆架法等法律法规，
按照国际法和国际惯例完善边海防政策规定，做到依法管边、依法管海。中国不断
加强边海防建设，提⾼边海防防卫和管理控制能⼒，建设⼀⽀现代化的军警民联防
联管的边海防队伍。近⼗多年来，国家投资20多亿元⼈民币进⾏边防基础设施建设
，修建了2万余公⾥的边防巡逻路、6000余公⾥的边境铁丝⺴和近600套边境监控设
施。从2004年起，启动海防基础设施建设，安排在沿海地区修建执勤码头、监控站
、监控中⼼和部分辅助设施。


-----

China pursues a good-neighborliness policy, and works to enhance friendship and
partnership with its neighbors. It calls for settling boundary and maritime demarcation
issues with countries concerned in a fair and equitable manner, and through consultations
on the basis of equality. China has signed land border treaties or agreements with
Myanmar and 11 other neighboring countries, thus resolving boundary issues left from
history with these countries; it is currently negotiating with India and Bhutan to settle
boundary issues with those two countries respectively. Since 1996, China has set up
bilateral consultation mechanisms on the law of the sea with the Republic of Korea and
Japan, to exchange views on maritime demarcation and cooperation. In 2004, the
Agreement Between China and Vietnam on the Demarcation of the Beibu Gulf officially
entered into force.
中国始终坚持睦邻友好政策，与邻为善、以邻为伴，主张与有关国家通过平等协商
，公平合理地解决边界和海域划界问题。中国已与缅甸等12个邻国签订陆地边界条
约或协定，解决了历史遗留的边界问题，并正在同印度、不丹谈判解决边界问题。
⾃1996年起，与韩国和⽇本相继启动双边海洋法磋商机制，主要就海域划界和海上
合作问题交换意⻅。2004年，与越南签订的《中越北部湾划界协定》正式⽣效。

China actively promotes border and coastal defense cooperation with its neighbors,
strengthens border and coastal defense contacts in different fields and at various levels,
and handles in an appropriate manner border- and coastal-defense-related issues with
countries concerned. In 2005, the Agreement on Joint Patrols by the Navies of China and
Vietnam in the Beibu Gulf was signed, and China respectively signed with the
Philippines and Indonesia the Memorandum of Understanding on Maritime Affairs
Cooperation and the Memorandum of Understanding on Maritime Cooperation. In July
2006, China and India reopened the border trade route at Nathu La Pass, which links
China's Tibet with Sikkim, India. China's border and coastal defense forces, acting
strictly in accordance with international law and the agreements and understandings
signed by China with its neighbors, have established and improved mechanisms for talks
and meetings with their counterparts in the neighboring countries, and conduct law
enforcement and anti-terrorism cooperation to jointly maintain peace and stability in
border areas and related sea areas.
中国积极发展与邻国的边海防合作，与有关国家加强不同领域和级别的边海防交往
，妥善处理边海防涉外事务。2005年，与越南签署《中越海军北部湾联合巡逻协议
》，与菲律宾、印度尼⻄亚分别签署《海事合作谅解备忘录》、《海上合作谅解备
忘录》。2006年7⽉，中国和印度重新开放连接中国⻄藏和印度锡⾦地区的乃堆拉
⼭⼝边贸通道。中国边海防部队严格执⾏国际法和与周边邻国签署的协议、协定，
建⽴健全与邻国的会谈会晤机制，开展执法和反恐合作，共同维护边境地区和相关
海域的稳定与安宁。

Ensuring the Stability of Border Areas
边疆地区稳定

Stability and development of border areas are the foundation for border and coastal
defense. The Chinese government attaches great importance to work related to ethnic
minorities and economic development in border areas; it has formulated a series of


-----

policies and adopted many strategic measures in this regard. In the early days of New
China, close to one million PLA officers and men were collectively transferred to civilian
work in the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, Tibet and Inner Mongolia autonomous
regions, and Heilongjiang and Yunnan provinces. They were organized into production
and construction corps and state farms, and made great contributions to the economic
development of the border areas and the maintenance of border stability in those areas. In
the 1950s and 1960s, the state moved a large number of industrial enterprises and skilled
workers from inland and coastal areas to border areas, and set up a fairly complete
industrial system and communications and transportation network there. Since the reform
and opening-up policy was initiated in the late 1970s, the state has set up 253 open ports
and implemented the strategy for developing the western region and revitalizing old
industrial bases including Northeast China. It pursues the policy of developing border
areas and making border inhabitants prosperous, and consolidating defense through
building close ties with the local people. It has taken steps, including encouraging inland
provinces to provide assistance to their border counterparts, to accelerate the economic
development there. This has laid a solid foundation for strengthening border and coastal
defense.
边疆的稳定和发展，是边海防巩固的基础。中国政府重视边疆的民族⼯作和经济建
设，制定了⼀系列正确的民族政策，采取了许多促进边疆经济发展的战略举措。新
中国成⽴初期，⼈民解放军近百万官兵集体转业到新疆、内蒙古、⿊⻰江、云南、
⻄藏等地，组建⽣产建设兵团和农场，为发展边疆经济、保持边防稳定建⽴了不可
磨灭的功绩。20世纪50、60年代，国家将⼤批内地⼯业企业和技术⼯⼈迁往边疆地
区，逐步建成⽐较完整的边疆⼯业体系及交通运输⺴络。改⾰开放以来，国家建设
并开放了253个⼝岸，实施⻄部⼤开发和振兴东北地区等⽼⼯业基地战略，落实“兴
边富民”、“爱民固边”政策，采取内地省份对⼝⽀援等举措，加快发展边疆经济，
为边海防的巩固奠定了坚实物质基础。

The PLA border defense force and the border public security force are resolute in
maintaining social stability in border areas and unity among ethnic groups, and take an
active part in the economic development of border areas. They take measures to crack
down hard on cross-border crimes, such as weapon smuggling, drug trafficking, illegal
border crossing and human trafficking, and on separatist, violent and terrorist activities.
They strictly implement the ethnic and religious policies of the state, respect the customs
and lifestyle of ethnic minorities, and strengthen PLA unity with the government and the
people, together with unity among ethnic groups, thus contributing to maintaining
political stability and promoting social development and progress in border areas.
⼈民解放军边防部队和公安边防部队，坚决维护边疆的社会稳定和民族团结，发展
边疆经济。采取措施打击贩枪、贩毒、偷渡、贩卖⼈⼝等跨境犯罪和民族分裂、暴
⼒恐怖活动。严格执⾏国家的民族政策和宗教政策，尊重少数民族的⻛俗习惯，加
强军政军民团结和民族团结，为维护边疆政治稳定和社会发展进步作出了积极贡献
。

VIII. Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense
⼋、国防科技⼯业


-----

China's defense-related science, technology and industry focuses on consolidating its
foundation, making independent innovation, and speeding up the implementation of the
strategy of transition and upgrading, so as to ensure the production and supply of military
equipment and promote the development of national economy.
国防科技⼯业注重强化基础、⾃主创新，加快实施转型升级战略，保障军事装备⽣
产供应，促进国民经济发展。

Improving the industrial structure, enhancing its capabilities of developing and producing
new and high-tech weaponry and equipment. Defense-related science, technology and
industry endeavors to accelerate structural adjustment in research and production, adopt
advanced production modes, promote specialized production and upgrade processing
technologies. Priority is given to R&D of new and high-tech weaponry and equipment,
and endeavors to achieve breakthroughs in a number of key technologies and
leapfrogging technological progress, thus speeding up weaponry and equipment
modernization. Defense-related science, technology and industry is enhancing its core
capabilities in R&D and production of the overall systems and key subsystems of major
projects, and introducing more competition into the manufacturing and processing of
general and supporting equipment, gradually establishing an all-round outsourcing
system of cooperation for developing and producing weaponry and equipment. Priority is
given to upgrading technologies and products in the nuclear, space, aviation,
shipbuilding, weaponry, electronics and other defense-related industries, so as to form a
cluster of high-tech industries to drive the growth of China's economy. In 2005, the
output value, added value and gross revenue of the entire spectrum of defense-related
science, technology and industry increased by 24.3 percent, 20.7 percent and 21.6
percent, respectively, over the previous year.
优化产业结构，提⾼⾼新技术武器装备科研⽣产能⼒。加快科研⽣产能⼒结构调整
，采⽤先进⽣产模式，推进专业化⽣产，提⾼制造⼯艺技术⽔平。优先发展⾼新技
术武器装备，集中⼒量突破⼀批关键技术，实现技术发展的跨越，提⾼了武器装备
现代化⽔平。通过提升重⼤项⺫总体及关键分系统等核⼼科研开发和⽣产能⼒，扩
⼤⼀般配套和加⼯能⼒的竞争范围，逐步建⽴武器装备科研⽣产的社会化⼤协作体
系。重点加强具有核、航天、航空、船舶、兵器、电⼦等军⼯特⾊的技术、产品和
关联产业，形成对国民经济具有带动作⽤的⾼技术产业集群。2005年，国防科技⼯
业全⾏业军品和民品的⼯业产值、⼯业增加值、总收⼊，⽐上年分别增⻓24.3％、
20.7％、21.6％。

The defense manufacturing industries have been further informationized. The Tenth FiveYear Plan period saw the rapid development of digitalized manufacturing technology and
wide application of computer-aided design, manufacturing and system-integrated
manufacturing technologies in China's defense industries. The capabilities of master
design and development, as well as of final assembly and integration, and the
technological level of precision and super-precision processing were significantly raised.
The means and methods of systems integration, experimentation and simulation, as well
as of inspection and testing were upgraded.
军⼯制造业信息化⽔平整体提⾼。“⼗五”时期，军⼯数字化制造技术快速发展，计
算机辅助设计制造和计算机系统集成制造技术得到普遍应⽤；总体设计开发能⼒、


-----

总装集成能⼒、精密与超精密加⼯技术⽔平显著增强；系统集成、试验仿真、检验
测试⼿段明显改善。

The defense industry enterprises have stepped up restructuring and reform, and are
exploring approaches for diversifying their ownership structure and steadily transforming
themselves into share-holding enterprises. The reform of defense-related research
institutes is being speeded up and greater support was given to research institutions
engaged in strategic research, basic research and research in the public interest.
军⼯企业加快改制步伐，积极探索产权结构多元化改⾰，稳步推进军⼯企业股份制
改造。推动军⼯科研机构体制机制改⾰，加⼤对战略性、基础性、公益性科研机构
的⽀持⼒度。

Strengthening capabilities of independent innovation. Efforts are being made to improve
the innovative system of development and production of weaponry and equipment, and
the innovative system of technology for high-tech industries combining military and
civilian needs. The former takes master design, final assembly and manufacturing, and
experimentation and verification as leading factors, and is supported by research and
manufacturing of core systems and specialized equipment, and completed by an
outsourcing system. The latter combines production, education and research, takes
enterprises as the main body and research institutions as the mainstay, and is marketorientated. Priority is given to enhancing basic research, key technology research and
frontier technology research. As a result, a number of state-of-the-art scientific and
technological achievements that enjoy independent intellectual property rights have been
made. Patent applications have increased rapidly -- at an average annual rate of over 40
percent. Major scientific and technological projects, such as manned space flights and the
Lunar Probe Project, are being carried out to spur the leapfrogging development of hightech enterprises combining military and civilian needs and to bring about overall
improvements in defense-related science and technology. Platforms for developing
weaponry systems, lab systems for defense-related science and technology, and research
and application centers for advanced industrial technologies are being built. As a result, a
fairly mature scientific and technological infrastructure is taking shape, which is wellconfigured, multi-functional, efficient and based on close cooperation between the
military and civilian sectors. In addition, higher education and vocational education are
being boosted for defense-related science, technology and industry. Three professionally
specialized contingents are being constructed, namely, a contingent of business
managers, a contingent of professionals and specialists and a contingent of skilled
workers. Efforts are being made to establish an innovative mechanism to absorb and train
high-caliber people for defense-related science, technology and industry.
增强⾃主创新能⼒。完善以总体设计、总装制造和试验验证为⻰头，以核⼼系统和
设备专业化研制为⽀撑，以社会化协作配套为依托的武器装备研制创新体系；健全
以企业为主体、科研院所为⾻干、市场为导向、产学研相结合的军民结合⾼技术产
业技术创新体系。重点加强基础研究、关键技术研究和前沿技术研究，产⽣了⼀批
具有⾃主知识产权和世界先进⽔平的科技成果，专利申请量以年均超过40%的幅度
快速增⻓。组织实施载⼈航天与探⽉⼯程等重⼤科技⼯程，带动⾼技术产业的跨越
发展，实现国防科技的整体跃升。推进武器装备系统研发平台、国防科技实验室体


-----

系、先进⼯业技术研究应⽤中⼼和军⼯技术基础条件建设，逐步形成布局合理、功
能完备、效率突出、军民互动的科技基础条件。提⾼国防科技⼯业⾼等教育质量，
推动职业教育发展，加强企业经营管理⼈才、专业技术⼈才和技能⼈才三⽀队伍建
设，创新⼈才⼯作机制，培养和吸引国防科技⼯业⾼素质优秀⼈才。

On the premise of strictly honoring its international commitments, China encourages and
supports participation in international cooperation and competition in civilian-military
industries.
中国在严格遵守国际承诺的前提下，⿎励和⽀持在军民两⽤产业领域参与国际合作
和竞争。

IX. Defense Expenditure
九、国防经费

Pursuant to the National Defense Law and the Budget Law, and guided by the principle
of coordinated development of national defense and the economy, the Chinese
government decides on the size and use of defense expenditure in an appropriate way to
meet the demands of national defense in keeping with China's economic development.
中国政府依据国防法和预算法，遵循国防建设与经济建设协调发展的⽅针，适应国
防需求和国民经济发展⽔平，合理确定国防费的投量和投向。

China's defense expenditure mainly comprises expenses for personnel, training and
maintenance, and equipment. Personnel expenses mainly cover salaries, insurance, food,
clothing, and welfare benefits for officers, non-commissioned officers and enlisted men
as well as for civilian employees. Training and maintenance expenses cover troop
training, institutional education, construction and maintenance of installations and
facilities, and other expenses on routine consumables. The equipment expenses mainly
cover research on, experimentation with, and procurement, maintenance, transportation
and storage of weaponry and equipment. The defense expenditure covers not only the
active forces, but also the militia and reserve forces. Also covered by the defense
expenditure are costs to support part of the retired officers, education of servicemen's
children and the national economic development, as well as other social expenses.
中国国防费的主要⽀出项⺫有⼈员⽣活费、训练维持费和装备费。⼈员⽣活费⽤于
军官、⽂职干部、⼠兵和聘⽤⼈员的⼯资、保险、伙⾷、服装、福利等费⽤。训练
维持费⽤于部队训练、院校教育、⼯程设施建设及维护和⽇常消耗性⽀出。装备费
⽤于武器装备的研究、试验、采购、维修、运输和储存等。国防费的保障范围，既
包括现役部队，⼜包括民兵、预备役部队，并负担了部分退役军官供养、军⼈⼦⼥
教育、⽀援国家经济建设等⽅⾯的社会性⽀出。

Since the early 1990s, to safeguard its sovereignty, security and unity, and to keep pace
with the global revolution in military affairs, China has gradually increased its defense
expenditure on the basis of its economic development. This increase, however, is
compensatory in nature, and is designed to enhance the originally weak defense
foundation. It is a moderate increase in step with China's national economic development.
In the 1980s, China began to shift the focus of its work to economic development. At that


-----

time, it was decided that national defense should be both subordinated to and serve the
country's overall economic development. As a result, national defense received a low
input, and was in a state of self-preservation. From 1979 to 1989, the average annual
increase of defense expenditure was 1.23 percent. However, the defense expenditure
actually registered an average annual decrease of 5.83 percent, given the 7.49 percent
average annual increase of the consumer price index in the same period. From 1990 to
2005, the average annual increase in defense expenditure was 15.36 percent. As the
average annual increase of the consumer price index during the same period was 5.22
percent, the actual average increase in defense expenditure was 9.64 percent.
20世纪90年代以来，中国在经济发展的基础上，为维护国家主权和安全统⼀，适应
世界新军事变⾰的发展，保持了国防费的逐步增⻓。但是，这种增⻓仍属于弥补国
防基础薄弱的补偿性增⻓，是与国家经济发展相协调的适度增⻓。20世纪80年代，
国家的⼯作重点开始转移到经济建设上来，强调国防建设服从和服务于经济建设⼤
局，国防建设处于低投⼊和维持性的状态。从1979年到1989年，国防费年平均增⻓
为1.23%，与同期全国居民消费价格总指数年平均上涨7.49%相⽐，实际年平均负
增⻓5.83%。从1990年到2005年，国防费年平均增⻓为15.36%，扣除同期全国消费
价格总指数年平均上涨5.22%，实际平均增⻓9.64%。

Chart 1: Comparison Between the Growth Rate of China's Defense Expenditure and the
National Residential Consumer Price Index (1989-2005)
图表1：中国国防费年增⻓率与全国居民消费价格上涨指数⽐较 新华社发

China's GDP in 2004 and 2005 was RMB15,987.8 billion and RMB18,308.5 billion,
respectively, with a growth rate of 10.1 percent in 2004 and of 10.2 percent in 2005. The
state financial expenditure was RMB2,848.689 billion in 2004 and RMB3,393.028 billion
in 2005, up 15.57 percent and 19.11 percent respectively over the previous year. China's
defense expenditure in 2004 and 2005 was RMB220.001 billion and RMB247.496
billion, respectively, with growth rates of 15.31 percent and 12.50 percent. In the past
two years, the share of China's annual defense expenditure in its GDP and in the state
financial expenditure in the same period has decreased, being 1.40 percent and 7.74


-----

percent respectively in 2003, 1.38 percent and 7.72 percent in 2004, and 1.35 percent and
7.29 percent in 2005. Its defense budget for 2006 is RMB283.829 billion.
2004年、2005年中国国内⽣产总值（GDP）分别为159878亿元⼈民币和183085亿
元⼈民币，分别⽐上年增⻓10.1%和10.2%。国家财政⽀出分别为28486.89亿元⼈民
币和33930.28亿元⼈民币，分别⽐上年增⻓15.57%和19.11%。2004年、2005年，中
国年度国防费分别为2200.01亿元⼈民币和2474.96亿元⼈民币，分别⽐上年增⻓15.
31%和12.50%。两年来，中国年度国防费占同期国内⽣产总值和国家财政⽀出的⽐
例有所下降，2003年分别为1.40%和7.74%，2004年分别为1.38%和7.72%，2005年
分别为1.35%和7.29%。2006年，中国国防费年度预算为2838.29亿元⼈民币。

Chart 2: Share of China's Annual Defense Expenditure in the State Financial Expenditure
(1994-2005) (%)
图表2：1994-2005年中国年度国防费占国家财政⽀出的⽐例（%） 新华社发

Chart 3: Composition of China's Defense Expenditure in 2005 (unit: RMB billion)
图表3：2005年度中国国防费构成 新华社发

The increased part of China's defense expenditure is primarily used for the following
purposes: (1) Increasing salaries and allowances of military personnel and improving
their living conditions. Along with the growth of China's economy and the steady
improvement of the people's life, the salaries and allowances of military personnel and
the pensions of retired officers are increased accordingly. The insurance, medical,
housing and other benefits are also increased. Subsidies are being increased, too, to
compensate for regional and post differences, and the living conditions of the troops
stationed in hardship areas are being improved. (2) Increasing investment in weaponry
and equipment and infrastructure. The PLA is accelerating its informationization drive,


-----

increasing the expenses on procurement and maintenance of weaponry and equipment,
upgrading the military infrastructure, and increasing input for improving the facilities for
border and coastal defense troops. (3) Supporting the training of military personnel. The
PLA is increasing input into education and training through both military educational
institutions and regular institutions of higher learning. It is also increasing subsidies for
professionals with outstanding performance and incentives for experts, and increasing the
budget for the employment of contract civilians. (4) Compensating for price rise. As the
prices of oil, building materials and staple and non-staple foodstuffs rise, the PLA
accordingly increases the expenses on military petroleum, oils and lubricants and defense
engineering, and raises the boarding subsidies. (5) Increasing expenses for international
cooperation in non-traditional security fields.
中国增加的国防费，主要⽤于：（⼀）改善军⼈⼯资待遇和部队⽣活条件。随着国
民经济发展和⼈民⽣活持续改善，相应提⾼现役军⼈的⼯资和津贴标准，增加离退
休⼈员的离退休费，提⾼保险、医疗、住房等保障⽔平。提⾼地区和专业岗位津贴
，改善驻艰苦地区部队⽣活条件。（⼆）加⼤武器装备和基础设施建设投⼊。推进
军队信息化建设，增加武器装备购置和维修保养费⽤，完善军事基础设施，加⼤边
海防部队设施建设投⼊。（三）⽀持军事⼈才建设。加⼤军队院校教育和依托地⽅
院校培训军队⼈员的投⼊，提⾼军队优秀专业⼈才津贴⽔平和⼈才奖励标准，增加
聘⽤⾮现役⼈员经费。（四）平抑物价上涨因素。适应⽯油、建材及主副⾷品价格
上涨，增加军⽤油料购置和国防⼯程建设⽀出，提⾼部队伙⾷费标准。（五）增加
⾮传统安全领域国际合作的费⽤。

Both the total amount and per-serviceman share of China's defense expenditure is low
compared with those of some other countries, particularly major powers. In 2005, China's
defense expenditure equaled 6.19 percent of that of the United States, 52.95 percent of
that of the United Kingdom, 71.45 percent of that of France and 67.52 percent of that of
Japan. China's defense expenses per serviceman averaged RMB107,607, amounting to
3.74 percent of that of the United States and 7.07 percent of that of Japan.
中国国防费总额、军⼈⼈均数额，与其他⼀些国家特别是⼤国相⽐仍处于较低⽔平
。2005年，中国年度国防费相当于美国的6.19%、英国的52.95%、法国的71.45%、
⽇本的67.52%。中国国防费军⼈⼈均数额为107607元⼈民币，是美国的3.74%、⽇
本的7.07%。

China practices a strict system of financial appropriation of defense funds . The PLA's
budgeting is based on the defense development strategy, military building objectives and
annual military tasks set by the state. Budgeting units at each level carry out studies to
decide on their budget items, make calculations of their requests for funds and then report
to the next-higher authorities. The General Logistics Department, working with the
relevant departments of other general headquarters/departments, analyzes, calculates and
verifies the annual budget requests submitted by all the military area commands, the
Navy, Air Force and Second Artillery Force, and draws up the defense budget. After
being reviewed and approved by the CMC, the defense budget is submitted to the
Ministry of Finance. The latter, on the basis of medium- and long-term fiscal plans and
the estimated revenue of the year, puts forward a plan for military expenditure
appropriations after consultation with the General Logistics Department, and then


-----

incorporates it into the annual financial budget draft of the central government. Upon
approval by the State Council, the annual financial budget is submitted to the Budget
Work Committee of the NPC Standing Committee and the Finance and Economic
Committee of the NPC for review before it is submitted to the NPC for review. After the
budget of the central government is approved by the NPC, the Ministry of Finance
informs in writing the General Logistics Department of the approved defense budget. The
defense budget is then implemented down to troops at different levels through prescribed
procedures.
中国对国防费实⾏严格的财政拨款制度。军队根据国家确定的国防发展战略、军队
建设⺫标和年度军事任务，开展预算编制⼯作。各级预算单位进⾏预算项⺫论证与
经费需求测算并逐级上报。总后勤部会同各总部部⻔，对各军区、军兵种提出的年
度预算需求进⾏分析测算和研究论证，汇总编制国防费预算，经中央军委审查批准
后，提交国家财政部。国家财政部根据中⻓期财政计划和预计年度财政收⼊，与总
后勤部协商提出军费拨款⽅案，纳⼊年度中央财政预算草案。经国务院批准后，报
全国⼈⼤常委会预算⼯作委员会和全国⼈⼤财政经济委员会审查，最后提交全国⼈
⼤审议。财政部根据全国⼈⼤批准的中央预算将国防预算批复给总后勤部。总后勤
部根据国家批复的国防预算，按规定程序下达各级各部队执⾏。

Financial departments are instituted at the General Logistics Department, military area
commands, Navy, Air Force and Second Artillery Force, and units at the levels of corps,
division (brigade) and regiment. These departments are responsible for the appropriation,
management and supervision of the defense funds. The auditing offices of the state and
the PLA conduct strict supervision of the defense budget.
总后勤部和各军区（军兵种）、军、师（旅）、团级单位设置财务机构，负责国防
费的供应保障和管理监督。国家和军队的审计机构，对国防费预算及其执⾏情况实
施严格的审计监督。

Chart 4: Comparison of Defense Expenditures of Major Countries in 2005 (unit: US$
billion)
图表4：2005年度部分国家国防费⽐较 新华社发


-----

Chart 5: Comparison of Percentages of Defense Expenditures in GDP of Major Countries
in 2005
图表5：2005年度部分国家国防费占国内⽣产总值（GDP）⽐例（%） 新华社发

Chart 6: Comparison of Per Serviceman Share of Defense Expenditure of Major
Countries in 2005 (unit: US$1,000)
图表6：2005年度部分国家军⼈⼈均国防费（⾦额单位：千美元） 新华社发


-----

Source of the figures: Defense reports, budget reports or other government reports
released by these countries.
Note: One pound is equivalent to 1.7439 US dollars.
One Euro is equivalent to 1.3029 US dollars.
One US dollar is equivalent to 28.5470 Russian rubles.
One US dollar is equivalent to 106.9998 Japanese yen.
One US dollar is equivalent to RMB8.0759 yuan.

X. International Security Cooperation
⼗、国际安全合作

China pursues a new security concept featuring mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality and
coordination, and adheres to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. It works to
promote good-neighborliness, mutual benefit and win-win, and endeavors to advance
international security cooperation and strengthen military relations with other countries.
中国倡导和实践互信、互利、平等、协作的新安全观，坚持和平共处五项原则，坚
持睦邻友好、互利共赢，推进国际安全合作，加强对外军事关系。

Regional Security Cooperation
地区安全合作

Since its founding five years ago, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) has
steadily deepened and expanded cooperation in security, economic and cultural areas in
practical terms. A decision-making mechanism has taken shape, with the Council of
Heads of State and the Council of Heads of Government being its core. Two permanent
bodies, namely, the Secretariat and the Regional Anti-terrorism Structure, have also been
established. A number of documents on cooperation in fighting terrorism, separatism,
extremism and drug trafficking have been adopted. In April 2005, the SCO, ASEAN and
the Commonwealth of Independent States signed a memorandum of understanding on
conducting cooperation in counter-terrorism. In July, the Concept of Cooperation
between SCO Members on Combating Terrorism, Separatism and Extremism was
adopted at the SCO Astana Summit. In April 2006, a meeting of SCO defense ministers
was held in Beijing, and the Sixth SCO Summit was held in Shanghai in June. Ten


-----

documents, including the Declaration on the Fifth Anniversary of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, were signed during the Summit.
上海合作组织成⽴五年来，不断深化和拓展在安全、经济、⼈⽂等领域的务实合作
。建⽴以元⾸、总理会议为核⼼的决策机制和秘书处、地区反恐怖机构两个常设机
构，出台多个打击“三股势⼒”和禁毒合作⽂件。2005年4⽉，上海合作组织与东盟
和独联体签署谅解备忘录，确定在反恐领域开展合作。7⽉，阿斯塔纳峰会通过《
上海合作组织成员国合作打击恐怖主义、分裂主义和极端主义构想》。2006年4⽉
，在北京举⾏成员国国防部⻓会议。6⽉，在上海召开第六次元⾸会议，签署了《
上海合作组织五周年宣⾔》等10份⽂件。

China attaches great importance to the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF). At the 13th ARF
Ministerial Meeting in July 2006, China called for enhancing mutual trust, respecting
diversity and properly handling the ARF's relations with other mechanisms. In the past
two years, China has, within the ARF framework, hosted the Seminar on Enhancing
Cooperation in the Field of Non-traditional Security Issues, sponsored the ARF Seminar
on Non-proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction with the United States and
Singapore, held the Fifth and Sixth ARF Inter-sessional Meetings on Disaster Relief with
Indonesia, and held the Fourth ARF Inter-sessional Meeting on Counter-terrorism and
Transnational Crime with Brunei.
中国⾼度重视东盟地区论坛的作⽤。在2006年7⽉举⾏的第⼗三届论坛外⻓会议上
，中⽅提出深化相互信任、尊重多样性特点、处理好论坛与其他机制的关系等主张
。两年来，在东盟地区论坛框架内，中国承办了加强⾮传统安全领域合作研讨会，
与美国、新加坡联合举办防⽌⼤规模杀伤性武器扩散研讨会，与印度尼⻄亚联合举
办第五、六次救灾会间会，与⽂莱联合举办第四次反恐与打击跨国犯罪会间会。

China's cooperation in the non-traditional security area with ASEAN and within the
framework of ASEAN and China, Japan and the Republic of Korea has achieved
significant progress. In January 2005, China proposed a series of initiatives on disaster
prevention and reduction at the Special ASEAN Leaders' Meeting on the Aftermath of
Earthquake and Tsunamis. In August, China hosted the Workshop on Policing Exchanges
and Cooperation among the Capital Police Agencies of ASEAN, China, Japan and the
Republic of Korea, during which the Beijing Declaration on Policing Exchanges and
Cooperation among the Capital Police Agencies of ASEAN, China, Japan and the
Republic of Korea was signed. In October, China hosted the Second International
Congress of ASEAN and China on Cooperative Operations in Response to Dangerous
Drugs. The Beijing Declaration and other documents were adopted. In November, China
attended the Second ASEAN and China, Japan and the Republic of Korea Ministerial
Meeting on Transnational Crime and the First China-ASEAN Informal Ministerial
Meeting on Transnational Crime.
中国与东盟、东盟与中⽇韩框架下的⾮传统安全领域合作取得⻓⾜进展。2005年1
⽉，中国在东盟地震和海啸灾后问题领导⼈特别会议上，提出⼀系列防灾减灾倡议
。8⽉，主办东盟与中⽇韩⾸都警察局警务交流与合作研讨会，签署《关于加强东
盟与中⽇韩⾸都警察局合作的北京宣⾔》。10⽉，主办第⼆届中国与东盟禁毒合作


-----

国际会议，通过《北京宣⾔》等⽂件。11⽉，参加第⼆届东盟与中⽇韩打击跨国犯
罪部⻓级会议及⾸届中国与东盟打击跨国犯罪部⻓级⾮正式会议。

Honoring Commitment to International Arms Control and Non-Proliferation
履⾏国际军控和防扩散条约

China has made sound preparations for implementing the Comprehensive Test Ban
Treaty (CTBT). To this end, a preparatory office has been established at the PLA General
Armaments Department. With the support of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the
Ministry of Health, the State Environmental Protection Administration, the China
Earthquake Administration and other government departments, this office is responsible
for setting up 11 monitoring stations in China as part of the international monitoring
system, and formulating their administrative regulations and detailed rules for the
implementation of the CTBT. Two primary seismological monitoring stations have been
set up in Hailar and Lanzhou, respectively, and three radionuclide stations have been set
up in Beijing, Guangzhou and Lanzhou, respectively. The surveying of the two sites for
two infrasound stations in Beijing and Kunming has been completed, and construction is
scheduled to start soon. The China National Data Center and the Beijing Radionuclide
Laboratory have been built, and are now in trial operation.
中国认真做好《全⾯禁⽌核试验条约》的履约筹备⼯作。⼈民解放军总装备部成⽴
了禁核试履约筹备组办公室，在外交部、卫⽣部、国家环保总局、中国地震局等单
位配合下，承担中国境内11个国际监测系统台站的建设任务，制定履约监测台站管
理规定及实施细则。⺫前，海拉尔、兰州两个基本地震台站和北京、⼲州、兰州三
个放射性核素台站相继建成。北京、昆明两个次声台站完成实地勘址，拟于近期启
动相关建设项⺫。中国国家数据中⼼和北京放射性核素实验室已建成，并进⼊调试
阶段。

China supports multilateral efforts aimed at enhancing the effectiveness of the Biological
Weapons Convention. It has attended the review conferences, annual meetings of State
Parties and meetings of the Ad Hoc Group of Governmental Experts in an active and
responsible manner. China has also submitted in a timely fashion to the United Nations
declarations regarding confidence-building measures under the Convention.
中国⼀贯⽀持旨在加强《禁⽌⽣物武器公约》有效性的多边努⼒，以积极务实的态
度参加了公约审议⼤会、缔约国年会和专家组会议，及时向联合国提交《禁⽌⽣物
武器公约》建⽴信任措施宣布材料。

China honors in good faith its obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention. It
has promptly and completely submitted all the annual declarations, subsequent
declarations regarding newly discovered chemical weapons abandoned by Japan in China
and the annual national programs related to protective purposes. It has also received more
than 100 on-site inspections by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons. The PLA is working, in strict compliance with the Convention, to ensure the
smooth management and operation of the "single small-scale facility" and the "10kg
Schedule I Chemical Synthesis Laboratory." China and Japan have held 42 rounds of
bilateral consultations to accelerate the destruction of the chemical weapons abandoned


-----

by Japan in China. Since 2005, China has assisted Japan in 24 on-site verifications, and
recovered over 3,100 chemical weapons abandoned by Japan. At the request of Japan,
China has taken into temporary custody the recovered Japanese-abandoned chemical
weapons confirmed by Japan. These chemical weapons will be destroyed by Japan in the
future.
中国严格履⾏《禁⽌化学武器公约》规定的义务，按时、完整地提交了各类年度宣
布、新发现⽇本遗弃在华化学武器的后续宣布以及年度国家防护⽅案，并接待禁化
武组织对中国进⾏的100多次现场视察。⼈民解放军严格按照公约要求，认真管理
和运⾏“单⼀⼩规模设施”和“10千克附表⼀设施”。为推动销毁⽇本遗弃化武进程，
中⽇进⾏了42次双边磋商。2005年以来，中国协助⽇⽅进⾏了24次现场调查，回收
⽇本遗弃化武3100余枚。受⽇⽅委托，中⽅对已回收和已经⽇⽅确认的⽇遗化武进
⾏临时看管，留待⽇后由⽇本⽅⾯统⼀销毁。

China fully honors its obligations under the amended Landmine Protocol to the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. The PLA keeps its troops fully informed
of China's obligations, and has implemented the technical standards and limitations
specified in the Protocol. It has carried out a general check of all the anti-personnel
landmines that do not meet the standards of the Protocol, and has destroyed several
hundred thousand old landmines in a planned way. China has made technical
modifications to usable anti-infantry landmines in inventory to make them conform to the
technical standards of the Protocol. China continues to take an active part in international
demining operations. In the period September-December 2005, Chinese military
demining experts worked in Thailand to train demining personnel and give on-site
instructions. China also provided Thailand with demining equipment. In the period
September-December 2006, China ran demining training courses for Lebanon and Jordan
in Nanjing, and provided the two countries with demining equipment. China has taken
part in a constructive way in the discussions on anti-vehicle landmines by the Group of
Governmental Experts of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, and is
making preparations for ratifying the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War.
中国认真履⾏《特定常规武器公约》所附经修订的《地雷议定书》的相关义务。⼈
民解放军积极开展履约宣传教育，落实议定书相关技术要求，已对不符合规定的杀
伤⼈员地雷进⾏全⾯普查，并按计划销毁了数⼗万枚⽼、旧地雷，并对尚能正常使
⽤的库存防步兵地雷进⾏必要的技术改造，使之符合《地雷议定书》有关技术要求
。中国继续积极开展国际扫雷援助活动。2005年9⽉⾄12⽉，中国派遣军队扫雷专
家赴泰国，为其培训扫雷⼈员，现场指导扫雷，捐赠了⼀批扫雷器材。2006年9⽉
⾄12⽉，在南京为黎巴嫩、约旦两国⼈员开办扫雷技术培训班，并向两国援助扫雷
器材。中国⼀直以建设性姿态参与《特定常规武器公约》政府专家组关于反⻋辆地
雷问题的讨论，正在为批准《战争遗留爆炸物议定书》积极做相关准备。

China is firmly opposed to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery. It supports the United Nations in playing its due role in nonproliferation. China is a party to all international treaties on non-proliferation and related
international organizations. It has established a complete legal regime for controlling the
export of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons, missiles and other related sensitive


-----

items and technologies, and all defense items. China follows strict procedures in
approving exports, to ensure effective export control.
中国坚决反对⼤规模杀伤性武器及其运载⼯具的扩散，⽀持联合国在防扩散领域发
挥应有的作⽤，参加了防扩散领域的所有国际条约和相关国际组织，建⽴了涵盖核
、⽣物、化学、导弹等相关敏感物项和技术及所有军品的完备的出⼝管制法规体系
，实⾏严格的出⼝审批程序，确保有效管控。

Military Exchanges and Cooperation
军事交流与合作

China has established military ties with over 150 countries and military attaché offices in
107 countries. A total of 85 countries have military attach¨¦ offices in China. In the past
two years, senior PLA delegations have visited more than 60 countries, and defense
ministers, commanders-in-chief of the services, chiefs of the general staff and other highranking officers and military-related officials from more than 90 countries have visited
China. China and Russia hold regular high-level military exchanges, and the general staff
headquarters of the two countries have held the ninth and tenth rounds of strategic
consultations. The military activities connected with "Russia Year" were successful. In
October 2005 and July 2006, Chinese and US military leaders exchanged visits. China
and the US maintain in-depth exchanges through institutionalized defense consultations
and maritime military security consultations. China has enhanced high-level military
contacts and defense consultations with the European countries, and China-Europe
military exchanges have progressed steadily. China maintains military contacts with its
neighbors, and has enhanced military exchanges with other developing countries. Since
2005, China has held workshops for senior officers from Latin American and Middle
Eastern countries, and China-Germany, China-France workshops for senior officers. It
has also hosted the SCO defense and security forum and the China-ASEAN workshop on
Asia-Pacific security issues. Since 2002, China has held 16 joint military exercises with
11 countries. In August 2005, China and Russia conducted the "Peace Mission-2005"
joint military exercise in Russia's Vladivostok and China's Shandong Peninsula, and their
respective offshore waters. In November and December 2005, the PLA Navy held joint
maritime search and rescue exercises with its Pakistani, Indian and Thai counterparts,
respectively. In September 2006, China and Tajikistan conducted the "Cooperation-2006"
joint counter-terrorism military exercise. In September and November 2006, the Chinese
Navy and the US Navy conducted joint maritime search and rescue exercises in the
offshore waters of San Diego and in the South China Sea. In December 2006, China and
Pakistan held the "Friendship-2006" joint counter-terrorism military exercise. In the past
two years, the PLA has sent observers to military exercises held by Turkey, Thailand,
Pakistan, India, the US and Australia. In September 2005, the PLA invited 41 military
observers and military attach¨¦s from 24 countries to attend the "North Sword-2005"
maneuvers organized by the Beijing Military Area Command. Naval ships from
Thailand, the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, the
Republic of Korea, France, Singapore and Peru have paid port visits to China. PLA naval
ships have visited Pakistan, India, Thailand, the United States, Canada and the
Philippines. In the past two years, the PLA has continued to expand exchanges of
professional expertise and military students with its foreign counterparts. It has sent


-----

division- and brigade-level officers of combat troops and relevant functional organs of
the Navy, Air Force, Second Artillery Force, military area commands, and general
headquarters/departments on overseas study tours. Over 500 military personnel have been
dispatched to study in more than 20 countries, and over 2,000 military personnel from
more than 140 countries have come to China to study in military schools.
中国已与150多个国家建⽴军事关系，在107个国家设⽴武官处，有85个国家在中国
设⽴武官处。两年来，⼈民解放军⾼级军事代表团出访60多个国家，有90多个国家
的国防部⻓、三军总司令、总参谋⻓等⾼级代表团来访。中俄两军⾼层互访频繁，
举⾏了总参谋部第九轮、第⼗轮战略磋商，“俄罗斯年”军事活动取得圆满成功。20
05年10⽉和2006年7⽉，美中两军领导⼈实现了互访。中美在国防部防务磋商、海
上军事安全磋商等机制化项⺫上进⾏了深⼊交流。中国加强同欧洲国家军队的⾼层
接触和防务磋商，中欧军事交流稳步发展。中国保持同周边国家军队的交往，加强
与发展中国家的军事交流。2005年以来，举办拉美国家、阿拉伯国家、中德、中法
⾼级军官研讨班，上海合作组织防务安全论坛，中国—
东盟亚太地区安全问题研讨班等。2002年以来，中国共与11个国家举⾏16次联合军
事演习。2005年8⽉，中俄两军在俄罗斯符拉迪沃斯托克和中国⼭东半岛及附近海
域，举⾏“和平使命—
2005”联合军事演习。2005年11⽉⾄12⽉，中国海军与巴基斯坦、印度和泰国海军
分别举⾏海上联合搜救演习。2006年9⽉，中国和塔吉克斯坦举⾏了“协作—
2006”联合反恐军事演习。2006年9⽉和11⽉，中美两国海军先后在美国圣迭⼽附近
海域和中国南海海域举⾏了海上联合搜救演习。2006年12⽉，中国和巴基斯坦举⾏
了“友谊—
2006”联合反恐军事演习。近两年，⼈民解放军派员观摩了⼟⽿其、泰国、巴基斯
坦、印度、美国、澳⼤利亚等国举⾏的军事演习。2005年9⽉，邀请24国41名军事
观察员和驻华武官观摩北京军区组织的“北剑－2005”实兵对抗演习。泰国、美国、
加拿⼤、澳⼤利亚、新⻄兰、英国、韩国、法国、新加坡、秘鲁等国海军舰艇编队
相继访华。中国海军舰艇编队访问了巴基斯坦、印度、泰国、美国、加拿⼤和菲律
宾。两年来，⼈民解放军继续扩⼤专业交流和军事留学⽣的规模，组织海军、空军
、第⼆炮兵、军区、总部有关业务部⻔和作战部队师、旅主官出国考察，向20多个
国家派出军事留学⽣500余名，140多个国家的2000余名军事⼈员到中国军队院校学
习。

Participation in UN Peacekeeping Operations and International Disaster Relief
Operations
参加联合国维和⾏动和国际救灾⾏动

Since 1990, China has sent 5,915 military personnel to participate in 16 UN
peacekeeping operations. Eight lost their lives and several dozens were wounded on duty.
Since 2000, China has sent 893 peacekeeping police officers to seven mission areas. At
present, China has 1,487 military peacekeeping personnel serving in nine UN mission
areas and the UN Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Among them, 92 military
observers and staff officers, 175 engineering troops and 43 medical personnel are in
Congo (Kinshasa); 275 engineering troops, 240 transportation troops and 43 medical


-----

personnel are in Liberia; 275 engineering troops, 100 transportation troops and 60
medical personnel are in Sudan; and 182 engineering troops are in Lebanon. China also
has a total of 180 peacekeeping police officers in Liberia, Kosovo, Haiti and Sudan.
1990年以来，中国已参加16项联合国维和⾏动，共派出维和军事⼈员5915⼈次，有
8名维和军事⼈员在执⾏任务中牺牲，数⼗⼈负伤。2000年以来，中国向7个任务区
派遣维和警察893⼈次。⺫前，中国有1487名维和军事⼈员在联合国9个任务区和联
合国维和部执⾏任务。其中，军事观察员和参谋军官92⼈，赴刚果（⾦）⼯兵分队
175⼈，医疗分队43⼈；赴利⽐⾥亚⼯兵分队275⼈，运输分队240⼈，医疗分队43
⼈；赴苏丹⼯兵分队275⼈，运输分队100⼈，医疗分队60⼈；赴黎巴嫩⼯兵分队18
2⼈。中国现有180名维和警察在利⽐⾥亚、科索沃地区、海地和苏丹执⾏维和任务
。

The PLA has actively participated in the international disaster relief operations conducted
by the Chinese government. It has set up an emergency command mechanism, sent
personnel to join specialized rescue teams, provided equipment, and assisted in missionoriented training. In the past two years, PLA personnel have joined China's international
rescue teams in international rescue operations after the Indian Ocean tsunami and the
earthquakes in Pakistan and Indonesia. They have conducted search and rescue
operations for people in distress, treatment of the sick and injured and prevention of
epidemics, and assisted the Chinese government in providing relief materials to disasterstricken countries.
⼈民解放军积极参加中国政府组织的国际灾难救援⾏动，建⽴应急指挥机制，派员
参加专业救援队伍，提供器材和协助开展针对性训练。两年来，派员参加中国国际
救援队，在印度洋海啸、巴基斯坦地震、印度尼⻄亚⽇惹地震等国际救援⾏动中，
担负搜救遇险⼈员、救治伤病员和卫⽣防疫等任务，并协助中国政府向有关受灾国
提供救援物资。

i Excerpt from the book "An Explanation of Core Viewpoints from Theories of Socialism
with Chinese Characteristics" by Chen Junhong. Posted by Renmin Wang on 26 October
2012

Comrade Jiang Zemin proposed in December 1997 that development of national defense
and military modernization construction crossing the century, would be basically in line
with the developmental progress of national modernization construction, and could
generally be divided into "three steps."
Step one, from now to 2010, using a period of over ten years, work hard to realize the
various requirements of the military strategic guidelines for the new period, to lay a solid
foundation for national defense and military modernization.
Step two, the second ten years of the 21st century, following growth in national economic
power and the corresponding increase in military expenditures, accelerate the pace of
building the quality of the military, making appropriate increases to the scope of
developing high-tech weaponry, so there is a relatively large development in national
defense and military modernization.


-----

Step three, after 30 years of hard work, by the middle of the 21st century, realize national
defense and military modernization.
In this "three step" strategic objective, the first step is critical. In the overall arrangements
of national modernization construction, fully utilize the precious opportunity for peaceful
development, use revolution as the motivating power, use scientific and technological
innovation as the lever, use informatization as the objective, earnestly borrow from the
beneficial experiences of military modernization of developed countries, fully utilize
domestic and international strategic resources, maintain a relatively fast pace of
development, shrink the disparity of our military's modernization construction in
comparison to the militaries of developed nations, accumulate strength, so as to lay a
solid foundation for realizing national defense and military informatization.

与国家现代化建设“三步⾛”相⼀致，国防和军队现代化建设也可以分“三步⾛”
2012年10⽉26⽇15:17  来源：⼈⺠⺴-理论频道
http://theory.people.com.cn/n/2012/1026/c350795-19402718.html

江泽⺠同志1997年12⽉提出，与国家现代化建设的发展进程基本上相⼀致，

国防和军队现代化建设跨世纪的发展，⼤体上也可以分“三步⾛”。

第⼀步，从现在起到2010年，⽤10多年时间，努⼒实现新时期军事战略⽅针

提出的各项要求，为国防和军队现代化打下坚实基础。

第⼆步，21世纪的第⼆个10年，随着国家经济实⼒的增⻓和军费的相应增加

，加快军队质量建设的步伐，适当加⼤发展⾼技术武器装备的⼒度，使国防和军队
现代化建设有⼀个较⼤的发展。

第三步，再经过30年的努⼒，到21世纪中叶，实现国防和军队现代化。
“三步⾛”战略⺫标，第⼀步是关键。在国家现代化建设的总体布局下，充分

利⽤当前和平与发展的宝贵时机，以改⾰为动⼒，以科技创新为杠杆，以信息化为
⺫标，认真借鉴发达国家军队现代化建设的有益经验，充分利⽤国内和国际的战略
资源，保持较快的发展速度，使我军的现代化建设⽔平与发达国家军队的差距有所
缩⼩，积累⼒量，为实现国防和军队的信息化打下坚实的基础。

（摘⾃陈俊宏著《中国特⾊社会主义理论核⼼观点解读》

仅供在线阅读及学习使⽤ 不能下载转贴）


-----

