Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

China's National Defense in 2010

Information Office of the State Council

of the People's Republic of China

Mar. 31, 2011


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

Contents

Preface

I. The Security Situation

II. National Defense Policy

III. Modernization of the People's Liberation Army

IV. Deployment of the Armed Forces

V. National Defense Mobilization and Reserve Force Building

VI. Military Legal System

VII. Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense

VIII. Defense Expenditure

IX. Military Confidence-Building

X. Arms Control and Disarmament


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

Preface

In the first decade of the 21st century, the international community forged ahead in a new phase of
opening up and cooperation, and at the same time faced crises and changes. Sharing opportunities
for development and dealing with challenges with joint efforts have become the consensus of all
countries in the world. Pulling together in the time of trouble, seeking mutual benefit and engaging
in win-win cooperation are the only ways for humankind to achieve common development and
prosperity.

China has now stood at a new historical point, and its future and destiny has never been more
closely connected with those of the international community. In the face of shared opportunities and
common challenges, China maintains its commitment to the new security concepts of mutual trust,
mutual benefit, equality and coordination. By connecting the fundamental interests of the Chinese
people with the common interests of other peoples around the globe, connecting China's
development with that of the world, and connecting China's security with world peace, China strives
to build, through its peaceful development, a harmonious world of lasting peace and common
prosperity.

Looking into the second decade of the 21st century, China will continue to take advantage of this
important period of strategic opportunities for national development, apply the Scientific Outlook on
Development in depth, persevere on the path of peaceful development, pursue an independent
foreign policy of peace and a national defense policy that is defensive in nature, map out both
economic development and national defense in a unified manner and, in the process of building a
society that is moderately affluent on a general basis, realize the unified goal of building a
prosperous country and a strong military.

## 1. The Security Situation

The international situation is currently undergoing profound and complex changes. The progress
toward economic globalization and a multi-polar world is irreversible, as is the advance toward
informationization of society. The current trend toward peace, development and cooperation is
irresistible. But, international strategic competition and contradictions are intensifying, global
challenges are becoming more prominent, and security threats are becoming increasingly
integrated, complex and volatile.

On the whole, the world remains peaceful and stable. The international community has reaped the
first fruits in joint efforts to respond to the global financial crisis. All countries have stepped up to
adjust their strategies and models for economic development, and no effort has been spared in
attempting to foster new economic growth points. Scientific and technological innovations are
breeding new breakthroughs. And economic globalization has achieved further progress. The
international balance of power is changing, most notably through the economic strength and
growing international status and influence of emerging powers and developing countries. Prospects
for world multi-polarization are becoming clearer. The prevailing trend is towards reform in
international systems. Steady progress is being made in the establishment of mechanisms for
management of the global economy and finance. G20 is playing a more outstanding role. The
international spotlight has turned to the reform of the UN and other international political and
security systems. Profound realignments have taken place in international relations; economic
interdependence among various countries has been enhanced; shared challenges have been
increasing; and communication, coordination and cooperation have become mainstream in
relationships among the world's major powers. As factors conducive to maintaining peace and


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

containing conflict continue to grow, mankind can look forward to a future that on the whole is
bright.

The international security situation has become more complex. International strategic competition
centering on international order, comprehensive national strength and geopolitics has intensified.
Contradictions continue to surface between developed and developing countries and between
traditional and emerging powers, while local conflicts and regional flashpoints are a recurrent
theme. In a number of countries, outbreaks of unrest are frequently triggered off by political,
economic, ethnic, or religious disputes. In general, world peace remains elusive. Deep-seated
contradictions and structural problems behind the international financial crisis have not been
resolved. World economic recovery remains fragile and imbalanced. Security threats posed by such
global challenges as terrorism, economic insecurity, climate change, nuclear proliferation, insecurity
of information, natural disasters, public health concerns, and transnational crime are on the rise.
Traditional security concerns blend with non-traditional ones and domestic concerns interact with
international security ones, making it hard for traditional security approaches and mechanisms to
respond effectively to the various security issues and challenges in the world.

International military competition remains fierce. Major powers are stepping up the realignment of
their security and military strategies, accelerating military reform, and vigorously developing new
and more sophisticated military technologies. Some powers have worked out strategies for outer
space, cyber space and the polar regions, developed means for prompt global strikes, accelerated
development of missile defense systems, enhanced cyber operations capabilities to occupy new
strategic commanding heights. Some developing countries maintain the push towards
strengthening their armed forces, and press on with military modernization. Progress has been
made in international arms control, but prevention of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction remains complex, there is still much to do to maintain and strengthen the international
non-proliferation mechanism.

The Asia-Pacific security situation is generally stable. Asia has taken the lead in economic
recovery, and its growth as a whole has been sustained. With an enhanced sense of shared
interests and destiny, Asian countries have seized the opportunities presented by economic
globalization and regional economic integration, and maintained a commitment to promoting
economic development and regional stability. They have persisted in multilateralism and open
regionalism, actively developed bilateral and multilateral cooperation with countries inside and
outside the region, and endeavored to build economic and security cooperation mechanisms with
regional features. The Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) is playing a growing role in
promoting regional stability and development. The integration of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) is moving ahead. There is growing cooperation in such mechanisms as ChinaASEAN, ASEAN Plus Three (China, Japan and the Republic of Korea) and China-Japan-ROK. The
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) continues to make progress.

Nevertheless, Asia-Pacific security is becoming more intricate and volatile. Regional pressure
points drag on and without solution in sight. There is intermittent tension on the Korean Peninsula.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains serious. Political turbulence persists in some
countries. Ethnic and religious discords are evident. Disputes over territorial and maritime rights and
interests flare up occasionally. And terrorist, separatist and extremist activities run amok. Profound
changes are taking shape in the Asia-Pacific strategic landscape. Relevant major powers are
increasing their strategic investment. The United States is reinforcing its regional military alliances,
and increasing its involvement in regional security affairs.


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

China is still in the period of important strategic opportunities for its development, and the overall
security environment for it remains favorable. It has coped effectively with the impact of the
international financial crisis, and sustained a steady and relatively rapid economic growth. China
has vigorously maintained national security and social stability, and its comprehensive national
strength has stepped up to a new stage. It has strengthened coordination and cooperation with
major traditional powers and emerging countries, reinforced good-neighborly friendship and
practical cooperation with neighboring countries, and extended mutually benefiting cooperation with
other developing countries. China has played a unique role in collective action with other countries
to meet global challenges. The Chinese government has formulated and implemented principles
and policies for advancing peaceful development of cross-Strait relations in the new situation,
promoted and maintained peace and stability in the area. Significant and positive progress has
been achieved in cross-Strait relations. On the basis of opposing "Taiwan independence" and
adhering to the "1992 Consensus," the two sides have enhanced political mutual trust, conducted
consultations and dialogues, and reached a series of agreements for realizing direct and bilateral
exchanges of mail, transport and trade, as well as promoting economic and financial cooperation
across the Straits. The peaceful development of cross-Strait relations accords with the interests and
aspirations of compatriots on both sides of the Straits, and is widely applauded by the international
community.

China is meanwhile confronted by more diverse and complex security challenges. China has vast
territories and territorial seas. It is in a critical phase of the building of a moderately prosperous
society in an all-round way. Therefore, it faces heavy demands in safeguarding national security.
The "Taiwan independence" separatist force and its activities are still the biggest obstacle and
threat to the peaceful development of cross-Strait relations. Further progress in cross-Strait
relations is still confronted by some complicating factors. Separatist forces working for "East
Turkistan independence" and "Tibet independence" have inflicted serious damage on national
security and social stability. Pressure builds up in preserving China's territorial integrity and
maritime rights and interests. Non-traditional security concerns, such as existing terrorism threats,
energy, resources, finance, information and natural disasters, are on the rise. Suspicion about
China, interference and countering moves against China from the outside are on the increase. The
United States, in the defiance of the three Sino-US joint communiques, continues to sell weapons to
Taiwan, severely impeding Sino-US relations and impairing the peaceful development of crossStrait relations.

In the face of the complex security environment, China will hold high the banner of peace,
development and cooperation, adhere to the concepts of overall security, cooperative security and
common security, advocate its new security concept based on mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality
and cooperation, safeguard political, economic, military, social and information security in an allround way, and endeavor to foster, together with other countries, an international security
environment of peace, stability, equality, mutual trust, cooperation and win-win.

## 2. National Defense Policy

China pursues a national defense policy which is defensive in nature. In accordance with the
Constitution of the People's Republic of China and other relevant laws, the armed forces of China
undertake the sacred duty of resisting foreign aggression, defending the motherland, and
safeguarding overall social stability and the peaceful labor of its people. To build a fortified national
defense and strong armed forces compatible with national security and development interests is a
strategic task of China's modernization, and a common cause of the people of all ethnic groups.


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

The pursuit of a national defense policy which is defensive in nature is determined by China's
development path, its fundamental aims, its foreign policy, and its historical and cultural traditions.
China unswervingly takes the road of peaceful development, strives to build a harmonious socialist
society internally, and promotes the building of a harmonious world enjoying lasting peace and
common prosperity externally. China unswervingly advances its reform and opening up as well as
socialist modernization, making use of the peaceful international environment for its own
development which in return will contribute to world peace. China unswervingly pursues an
independent foreign policy of peace and promotes friendly cooperation with all countries on the
basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. China unswervingly maintains its fine cultural
traditions and its belief in valuing peace above all else, advocating the settlement of disputes
through peaceful means, prudence on the issue of war, and the strategy of "attacking only after
being attacked." China will never seek hegemony, nor will it adopt the approach of military
expansion now or in the future, no matter how its economy develops.

The two sides of the Taiwan Strait are destined to ultimate reunification in the course of the great
rejuvenation of the Chinese nation. It is the responsibility of the Chinese people on both sides of the
Straits to work hand in hand to end the history of hostility, and to avoid repeating the history of
armed conflict between fellow countrymen. The two sides should take a positive attitude toward the
future, and strive to create favorable conditions to gradually resolve, through consultation on an
equal footing, both issues inherited from the past and new ones that emerge in the development of
cross-Strait relations. The two sides may discuss political relations in the special situation that
China is not yet reunified in a pragmatic manner. The two sides can hold contacts and exchanges
on military issues at an appropriate time and talk about a military security mechanism of mutual
trust, in a bid to act together to adopt measures to further stabilize cross-Strait relations and ease
concerns regarding military security. The two sides should hold consultations on the basis of
upholding the one-China principle to formally end hostilities and reach a peace agreement.

The goals and tasks of China's national defense in the new era are defined as follows:

-- Safeguarding national sovereignty, security and interests of national development. China's
national defense is tasked to guard against and resist aggression, defend the security of China's
lands, inland waters, territorial waters and airspace, safeguard its maritime rights and interests, and
maintain its security interests in space, electromagnetic space and cyber space. It is also tasked to
oppose and contain the separatist forces for "Taiwan independence," crack down on separatist
forces for "East Turkistan independence" and "Tibet independence," and defend national
sovereignty and territorial integrity. National defense is both subordinate to and in service of the
country's development and security strategies. It safeguards this important period of strategic
opportunities for national development. China implements the military strategy of active defense of
the new era, adheres to the principles of independence and self-defense by the whole nation,
strengthens the construction of its armed forces and that of its border, territorial sea and territorial
air defenses, and enhances national strategic capabilities. China consistently upholds the policy of
no first use of nuclear weapons, adheres to a self-defensive nuclear strategy, and will never enter
into a nuclear arms race with any other country.

-- Maintaining social harmony and stability. The Chinese armed forces loyally follow the tenet of
serving the people wholeheartedly, actively participate in and support national economic and social
development, and safeguard national security and social stability in accordance with the law.
Exercising to the full their advantageous conditions in human resources, equipment, technology and
infrastructure, the armed forces contribute to the building of civilian infrastructure and other
engineering construction projects, to poverty-alleviation initiatives, to improvements in people's
livelihood, and to ecological and environmental conservation. They organize preparations for


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

military operations other than war (MOOTW) in a scientific way, work out pre-designed strategic
programs against non-traditional security threats, reinforce the building of specialized forces for
emergency response, and enhance capabilities in counter-terrorism and stability maintenance,
emergency rescue, and the protection of security. They resolutely undertake urgent, difficult,
dangerous, and arduous tasks of emergency rescue and disaster relief, thereby securing lives and
property of the people. Taking the maintenance of overall social stability as a critical task, the
armed forces resolutely subdue all subversive and sabotage activities by hostile forces, as well as
violent and terrorist activities. The Chinese armed forces carry on the glorious tradition of
supporting the government and cherishing the people, strictly abide by state policies, laws and
regulations and consolidate the unity between the military and the government and between the
military and the people.

-- Accelerating the modernization of national defense and the armed forces. Bearing in mind the
primary goal of accomplishing mechanization and attaining major progress in informationization by
2020, the People's Liberation Army (PLA) perseveres with mechanization as the foundation and
informationization as the driving force, making extensive use of its achievements in information
technology, and stepping up the composite and integrated development of mechanization and
informationization. The PLA has expanded and made profound preparations for military struggle,
which serve as both pull and impetus to the overall development of modernization. It intensifies
theoretical studies on joint operations under conditions of informationization, advances the
development of high-tech weaponry and equipment, develops new types of combat forces, strives
to establish joint operation systems in conditions of informationization, accelerates the transition
from military training under conditions of mechanization to military training in conditions of
informationization, presses ahead with implementation of the strategic project for talented people,
invests greater efforts in building a modern logistics capability, and enhances its capabilities in
accomplishing diversified military tasks in order to win local wars under the conditions of
informationization, so as to accomplish its historical missions at the new stage in the new century.
The state takes economic development and national defense building into simultaneous
consideration, adopts a mode of integrated civilian-military development. It endeavors to establish
and improve systems of weaponry and equipment research and manufacturing, military personnel
training, and logistical support, that integrate military with civilian purposes and combine military
efforts with civilian support. China vigorously and steadily advances reform of national defense and
the armed forces, strengthens strategic planning and management, and endeavors to promote the
scientific development of the national defense and armed forces.

-- Maintaining world peace and stability. China consistently upholds the new security concepts of
mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality and coordination, advocates the settlement of international
disputes and regional flashpoint issues through peaceful means, opposes resort to the use or threat
to use of force at will, opposes acts of aggression and expansion, and opposes hegemony and
power politics in any form. China conducts military exchanges with other countries following the
Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, develops cooperative military relations that are nonaligned, non-confrontational and not directed against any third party, and promotes the
establishment of just and effective collective security mechanisms and military confidence-building
mechanisms. China adheres to the concepts of openness, pragmatism and cooperation, expands
its participation in international security cooperation, strengthens strategic coordination and
consultation with major powers and neighboring countries, enhances military exchanges and
cooperation with developing countries, and takes part in UN peace-keeping operations, maritime
escort, international counter-terrorism cooperation, and disaster relief operations. In line with the
principles of being just, reasonable, comprehensive and balanced, China stands for effective
disarmament and arms control, and endeavors to maintain global strategic stability.


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

## 3. Modernization of the Peopleâ€™s Liberation Army

Over the 60 years and more since its founding, the PLA has made great achievements in its
modernization. It has grown from a single service into a strong military force featuring a range of
services and arms, and is now beginning to make progress towards informationization. In recent
years, the PLA has enhanced its comprehensive development in accordance with the principle of
integrating revolutionization, modernization and regularization, and continuously accelerated
revolution in military affairs with Chinese characteristics.

**History of the PLA's Modernization**

Following the founding of the New China in 1949, the PLA set a general guideline and objective of
building outstanding, modernized and revolutionary armed forces. It built the Navy, the Air Force
and other technical arms, and developed mechanized weaponry and equipment, as well as nuclear
weapons for the purpose of self-defense. It established regularized military rules, formed a system
of institutional education, and strengthened ideological and political work. It carried out a series of
reforms in military command, organization and structure, training, and regulations. The PLA began
to develop from a primary to an advanced level in mastering modern military science and
technologies.

Under the new historical conditions of reform and opening-up, the PLA embarked on a road of
building a streamlined military with Chinese characteristics. As its guiding principle for military buildup underwent a strategic shift from preparations for imminent wars to peacetime construction, the
PLA advanced its modernization step by step in a well-planned way under the precondition that
such efforts should be both subordinate to and in the service of the country's overall development.
The PLA underwent significant adjustment and reform in accordance with the principles of making
itself streamlined, combined and efficient, downsized in scale, upgraded in quality, and boosted its
capability of self-defense in modern conditions of warfare.

Adapting itself to new trends in world military development, the PLA, by following the general
requirements of being qualified politically and competent militarily, and having a superior modus
operandi, strict discipline, and reliable logistics support, strengthened its overall development,
regarded revolution in military affairs with Chinese characteristics as the only way to modernize the
military. By adopting a strategy of strengthening the military by means of science and technology,
the PLA gradually shifted its focus from quantity and scale to quality and efficiency, from a
manpower-intensive to a technology-intensive model. It laid down a three-step development
strategy and adopted a step-change approach which takes mechanization as the foundation and
informationization as the focus. It took preparations for military struggle as the driving force for its
modernization, and enhanced its capability in defensive operations in conditions of
informationization.

To meet the new and changing needs of national security, the PLA tries to accentuate
modernization from a higher platform. It strengthens the building of a new type of combat capability
to win local wars in conditions of informationization, strengthens the composite development of
mechanization and informationization with the latter as the leading factor, focuses informationization
on raising its fighting capabilities based on information systems, and enhances the capabilities in
fire power, mobility, protection, support and informationization.

**Building of the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Second Artillery Force**


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

In line with the strategic requirements of mobile operations and tri-dimensional offense and
defense, the PLA Army (PLAA) has invested additional efforts in reform, innovation and
development, and advanced the overall transformation of the service. The PLAA has emphasized
the development of new types of combat forces, optimized its organization and structure,
strengthened military training in conditions of informationization, accelerated the digitized upgrading
and retrofitting of main battle weaponry, organically deployed new types of weapon platforms, and
significantly boosted its capabilities in long-distance maneuvers and integrated assaults. The PLAA
mobile operational units include 18 combined corps, plus additional independent combined
operational divisions (brigades). The combined corps, consisting of divisions and brigades, are
respectively under the seven military area commands of Shenyang, Beijing, Lanzhou, Jinan,
Nanjing, Guangzhou and Chengdu.

The PLAA has made great progress in strengthening its arms. The armored component has
strengthened the development of digitized units, accelerated the mechanization of motorized units,
and improved its combat system, which combines heavy, light, amphibious and air-borne assault
forces. The artillery component has been working on new types of weapons, equipment, and
ammunition with higher levels of informationization, forming an operational and tactical in-depth
strike system, and developing the capacity to carry out precision operations with integrated
reconnaissance, control, strike and assessment capabilities. The air defense component has
stepped up the development of new types of radar, command information systems, and mediumand high-altitude ground-to-air missiles. It has formed a new interception system consisting of antiaircraft artillery and missiles, and possesses enhanced capabilities of medium- and low-altitude air
and missile defense operations. The PLAA aviation wing has worked to move from being a support
force to being a main-battle assault force, further optimized its combat force structure, and
conducted modularized grouping according to different tasks. It has upgraded armed helicopters,
transport and service helicopters, and significantly improved its capabilities in air strike, force
projection, and support. The engineering component has accelerated its transformation into a new
model of integrated and multi-functional support force which is rapid in response and can be used
both in peacetime and in war. It has also strengthened its special capabilities in emergency rescue
and disaster relief. In this way, capabilities in integral combat support and military operations other
than MOOTW missions have been further enhanced. The chemical defense component has worked
to develop an integrated force for nuclear, biological and chemical defense which operates both in
peacetime and in war, combines civilian and military efforts, and integrates systems from various
arms and services. It has developed enhanced permanent, multi-dimensional and multi-terrain
defense capabilities against nuclear, biological and chemical threats.

In line with the requirements of offshore defense strategy, the PLA Navy (PLAN) endeavors to
accelerate the modernization of its integrated combat forces, enhances its capabilities in strategic
deterrence and counterattack, and develops its capabilities in conducting operations in distant
waters and in countering non-traditional security threats. It seeks to further improve its combat
capabilities through regularized and systematic basic training and actual combat training in complex
electromagnetic environments. By organizing naval vessels for drills in distant waters, it develops
training models for MOOTW missions. New types of submarines, frigates, aircraft and large support
vessels have been deployed as planned. The PLAN enhances the construction of composite
support bases so as to build a shore-based support system which matches the deployment of
forces and the development of weaponry and equipment. The Navy has accelerated the building of
surface logistical platforms by deploying ambulance boats and helicopters, and a standard 10,000
DWT hospital ship, and is working to further improve its surface support capabilities. The Navy
explores new methods of logistics support for sustaining long-time maritime missions. There are
three fleets under the Navy, namely, the Beihai Fleet, the Donghai Fleet and the Nanhai Fleet, each


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

of which has under its command fleet aviation, support bases, flotillas, maritime garrison
commands, aviation divisions and marine brigades.

To satisfy the strategic requirements of conducting both offensive and defensive operations, the
modernization and transformation of the PLA Air Force (PLAAF) follows a carefully-structured plan.
It strengthens and improves the PLAAF development and personnel development strategies, and
enhances its research into the operation and transformation of air forces in conditions of
informationization. The PLAAF is working to ensure the development of a combat force structure
that focuses on air strikes, air and missile defense, and strategic projection, to improve its
leadership and command system and build up an informationized, networked base support system.
It conducts training on confrontation between systems in complex electromagnetic environments,
and carries out maneuvers, drills and operational assembly training in different tactical contexts.
The PLAAF strengthens routine combat readiness of air defenses, taking the defense of the capital
as the center and the defense of coastal and border areas as the key. It has carried out MOOTWs,
such as air security for major national events, emergency rescue and disaster relief, international
rescue, and emergency airlift. It has gradually deployed airborne early warning and control aircraft,
third-generation combat aircraft, and other advanced weaponry and equipment. The PLAAF has
under it an air command in each of the seven military area commands of Shenyang, Beijing,
Lanzhou, Jinan, Nanjing, Guangzhou and Chengdu. It also has under its command an airborne
corps. Under each air command at military area level are aviation divisions, ground-to-air missile
divisions (brigades and regiments), anti-aircraft artillery brigades (regiments), radar brigades
(regiments), electronic countermeasures (ECM) regiments (battalions), and other units. An aviation
division has under its command aviation regiments and related stations.

Following the principle of building a lean and effective force, the PLA Second Artillery Force
(PLASAF) strives to push forward its modernization and improves its capabilities in rapid reaction,
penetration, precision strike, damage infliction, protection, and survivability, while steadily
enhancing its capabilities in strategic deterrence and defensive operations. It continues to develop a
military training system unique with the strategic missile force, improve the conditions of on-base,
simulated and networked training, conduct trans-regional maneuvers and training with opposing
forces in complex electromagnetic environments. It has set up laboratories for key disciplines,
specialties and basic education, and successfully developed systems for automatic missile testing,
operational and tactical command and control, strategic missile simulation training, and the support
system for the survival of combatants in operational positions. It has worked to strengthen its safety
systems, strictly implement safety regulations, and ensure the safety of missile weaponry and
equipment, operational positions and other key elements. It has continued to maintain good safety
records in nuclear weapon management. Through the years, the PLASAF has grown into a
strategic force equipped with both nuclear and conventional missiles.

**Accelerating Informationization**

In line with its strategic objective of building informationized armed forces and winning
informationized wars, and with overall planning and phased implementation, the PLA is trying to
break through major bottlenecks which hinder the building and improvement of combat
effectiveness of systems. The fighting capabilities of the armed forces in conditions of
informationization have been significantly raised.

A step-change development has been achieved in information infrastructure. The total length of the
national defense optical fiber communication network has increased by a large margin, forming a
new generation information transmission network with optical fiber communication as the mainstay
and satellite and short-wave communications as assistance.


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

Significant progress has been made in building information systems for reconnaissance and
intelligence, command and control, and battlefield environment awareness. Information systems
have been widely applied in logistics and equipment support. A preliminary level has been achieved
in interoperability among command and control systems, combat forces, and support systems,
making order transmission, intelligence distribution, command and guidance more efficient and
rapid.

Strategic planning, leadership and management of informationization have been strengthened, and
relevant laws, regulations, standards, policies and systems further improved. A range of measures,
such as assembly training and long-distance education, have been taken to disseminate knowledge
on information and skills in applying it. Notable achievements have been made in the training of
commanding officers for joint operations, management personnel for informationization, personnel
specialized in information technology, and personnel for the operation and maintenance of new
equipment. The complement of new-mode and high-caliber military personnel who can meet the
needs of informationization has been steadily enlarged.

**Building Joint Operation Systems**

The PLA takes the building of joint operation systems as the focal point of its modernization and
preparations for military struggle, and strives to enhance its fighting capabilities based on
information systems.

Intensifying research into operational theories. A new generation of doctrines on command in joint
campaigns and operations, and other relevant supporting doctrines have been issued and
implemented, and a series of theoretical works and training textbooks on joint campaigns have
been compiled, which have formed the basic theoretical framework for joint operations and a
methodological system for joint campaign training.

Strengthening the building of combat forces. Catering to the needs of the military's
informationization, the PLA reforms and improves its leadership and command systems, adjusts
and optimizes the organization and structure of combat forces, deploys new types of combat and
support forces, gives priority to the building of land, maritime and air task formations, speeds up the
transformation of various arms and services, and raises the level of modularized grouping and
combined employment, so as to form a system of streamlined, joint, multi-functional and efficient
system of combat forces.

Improving operational command systems. To ensure an authoritative, lean, agile and efficient
operational capability, the PLA speeds up the building of a joint operational command system,
which features sound structure and organization, applicability in both peacetime and war, tri-service
integration, optimized mechanisms, smoothness in operation and high efficiency.

Enhancing integrated support capabilities. Following the principle of providing systematic, precise
and intensive support, the PLA strengthens the construction of composite combat and support
bases, optimizes battlefield support layout, and improves position facilities for the following
services: command and control, reconnaissance and intelligence, communication, surveying and
mapping, navigation, meteorological and hydrological support as well as rear storage facilities,
military communication and equipment maintenance facilities, thus forming an initial battlefield
support capability that matches the development of weaponry and equipment and satisfies the
needs of combat units in offensive and defensive operations. The PLA has improved joint support
mechanisms, enhanced IT-based integrated support, and established a basic integrated support
system linking strategic, operational and tactical levels.


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

**Promoting Transition in Military Training**

The PLA upholds that military training is the basic means to generate and raise combat
effectiveness, and is working to reform training in all respects, and accelerate the transition from
training in conditions of mechanization to training in conditions of informationization.

Reforming training tasks. In accordance with the new edition of the Outline for Military Training and
Evaluation, the PLA intensifies training of command organs, training in operating command
information systems and informationized weaponry and equipment, and information skills. It
enhances training to fulfill its missions, strengthens research and training in maintaining maritime,
space and electromagnetic space security, and carries out MOOTW training. It studies the technical
and tactical performance of electronic countermeasures (ECM) equipment, intensifies anti-jamming
(AJ) and ECM training, and organizes operational training exercises in complex electromagnetic
environments.

Innovating training methodologies. With a top-down approach to training, the PLA organizes
campaign-level training within the framework of strategic-level training, service campaign-level
training in accordance with the joint campaign-level training, and unit training within the framework
of campaign-level command post training, in an effort to merge training at different levels into an
organic whole. Based on and supported by command information systems, the PLA organizes
combined training of different combat components, assembly training of various combat elements,
and joint training of all systems and all components. It intensifies joint training of task formations
and confrontational training, and places emphasis on training in complex electromagnetic
environments, unfamiliar terrain, and complex weather conditions. The PLA holds trans-regional
exercises for organic divisions (brigades) led by campaign-level command organs, raises training
evaluation standards, and organizes training based on the needs, formations and procedures of
actual combat.

Improving military training means. The PLA speeds up the construction of large-scale integrated
training bases which meet the requirements raised by joint training, as well as IT-based upgrading
of combined tactical training bases, with the priority being given to the construction of complex
electromagnetic environments. The PLA strives to develop simulation training devices and systems,
and improve training information network.

Reforming training management. The PLA is working to optimize its leadership and management
system, update regulations, and implement a system of accountability for training. It reforms its
training evaluation system, formulates detailed criteria for individual and unit performance,
enhances quantitative analysis and evaluation, and enforces meticulous management of the whole
process and all aspects of military training.

**Innovating Political Work**

In a spirit of innovation, the PLA strives to push forward its political work so as to make it adapt to
new situations and achieve new development. The newly revised Regulations on the Political Work
of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, promulgated in August 2010, expressly stipulates that the
political work of the PLA must guarantee - politically, ideologically and organizationally - the nature
of the people's army under the absolute leadership of the Party, the scientific development of the
national defense and armed forces, and the performance of the PLA's historical missions at this
new stage in the new century.


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

Closely in line with the times, the tasks and missions, and the characteristics of its officers and men,
the PLA is working to improve and innovate its political work to achieve a more scientific approach.
Through education in ideology, guidance of opinion, and cultural edification, the core values of the
contemporary revolutionary serviceman of "loyalty to the Party, love of the people, service to the
country, dedication to the mission, and belief in honor" have been fostered. In order to keep its
political work effective and focused, the PLA also strives to study new conditions regarding the
building of armed forces and changes to the state of mind of officers and men brought about by the
new situations. The PLA has built a PLA-wide political network connecting all units and educational
institutions, issued digitalized movie players to all border and coastal defense units, so as to realize
networked education and real-time information transmission.

Opinions on Strengthening Political Work in MOOTW, promulgated in March 2009, stipulates that
the PLA should have a good understanding and mastery of the characteristics and laws of political
work in MOOTWs, keep in line with tasks and realities, and explore new areas and functions of the
supporting role of political work. Opinions on Improving Psychological Services in the Armed Forces
under the New Situation, promulgated in October 2009, requires the provision of psychological
health services, such as psychological evaluation, psychological training and psychological crisis
intervention. It also rules that within five years there must be at least one professional
psychotherapist for each brigade- (regiment-) level unit, and three or more specially trained
psychological assistants for each company-level unit.

**Implementing the Strategic Project for Talented Individuals**

The PLA is further implementing the strategic project for talents in an effort to increase its
complement of new-type and high-caliber military personnel. It further promotes the cultivation of a
contingent of commanding officers, staff officers, scientists, technical experts and noncommissioned officers (NCOs) by taking the improvement of ideological and political qualities as
the foundation, the transformation of capabilities as the main theme, the cultivation of joint operation
commanders, informationization professionals, IT specialists, and experts in operating and
maintaining new types of equipment as focus.

The PLA is continuing to adjust and reform its management system for military officers. Issued in
January 2009, the Regulations on Work Procedures for the Selection and Appointment of Military
Cadres (Trial) requires that democracy be promoted, procedures regulated, supervision tightened,
and rationality, accuracy, fairness and credibility raised in the selection and appointment of military
cadres. The PLA has issued implementation measures and general standards for the evaluation of
staff officers and specialized technical officers, and formulated an overall plan for the adjustment
and reform of management systems for specialized technical personnel.

The PLA is laying stress on the training of commanding officers for joint operations and high-level
experts in technological innovation. It has published basic readers and held lectures on joint
operations through all its arms and services. While giving attention to selecting, commending and
rewarding outstanding commanding and staff officers, it has placed particular emphasis on training
and promoting excellent staff officers, and company- and battalion-level officers of great potential.
To cultivate commanding officers for joint operations, the PLA has also reformed the model for
training graduates for its Masters Degree in Military Science. Following the promulgation of
Implementation Measures for Military High-Level Personnel Project in Scientific and Technological
Innovation, every two years the PLA selects 200 leading scientists and high-performing talents from
different disciplines for special training in order to improve their innovation aptitude in science and
technology.


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

The PLA is working to reform its NCO selection and training system. It has increased the number of
positions for high-tech specialized NCOs, implemented a pre-assignment accreditation system for
evaluating the skills of specialized technical NCOs, developed an expert assessment system for
selecting senior NCOs, and further improved its NCO training and management system.

**Multilateral Approach to Building a Modern Logistics System**

In order to enhance its logistical support capabilities for diversified military tasks, the PLA is working
on a multilateral approach to building a modern logistics system by speeding up the process of
integrating systems, outsourcing services, informationizing processes, and managing its logistical
support systems in a more scientific way.

The PLA is strengthening logistics reforms. It improves the mechanism of the joint logistics system
first adopted by the Jinan Military Area Command mainly by readjusting functions, rationalizing
internal relations, optimizing structures, and raising cost-effectiveness. It continues the process of
outsourcing daily maintenance services, and takes steps to outsource other services, such as
general-purpose materials storage and integrated civilian-military equipment maintenance.
Moreover, the PLA endeavors to upgrade and retrofit existing logistics equipment, assess the
development of new-generation equipment, and undertake pilot research on key technologies. It
promotes the serviceman support card system, and develops the military logistics information
system which focuses on the dynamic supervision of strategic logistical warehouses and packing of
strategic materials in storage and military transportation. It reviews and simplifies logistics rules and
regulations, and improves the system of logistical support standards and regulations covering
supply, consumption, and management. The PLA enhances auditing and supervision of major
construction and reform projects, and pushes forward reforms of such policies and systems as
financial management, material procurement, medical care, housing, and insurance.

The PLA meticulously organizes and provides logistical support for key events. Examples are the
National Day Parade in celebration of the 60th anniversary of the founding of the People' s Republic
of China, escort operations in the Gulf of Aden and waters off Somalia, joint exercises with foreign
military forces, security work for the Shanghai World Expo, and emergency rescue operations both
at home and abroad. It also provides strong and reliable logistical support for those troops who take
part in rescue and relief operations following disasters, such as the Yushu earthquake and the
Zhouqu mud-rock slide.

The PLA is working to improve supply to and support for its units. It has adjusted the standards of
overhead expenses, regional subsidies, grass-roots post allowances and professional post
allowances; adopted new standards of military rations and housing; expanded the catalogue of
medicines used in military medical care; implemented rest and recuperation (R&R) plans for officers
and men; and provided better mental health services. It has fulfilled its three-year plan for integrated
improvement of grass-roots logistics systems, so as to provide an effective solution to acute and
complex problems in the supply of water, heating, and staple and non-staple food for brigade- and
regiment-level units, for border and coastal defense units, for small, scattered, and distant units,
and for units directly under the headquarters. By the end of 2009, replacement of old uniforms with
the 07 series had been completed for all PLA troops.

**Accelerating the Development of New and High-Tech Weaponry and Equipment**

The PLA is gaining momentum in developing new and high-tech weaponry and equipment,
strengthening the retrofitting and management of existing equipment, and promoting the composite
development of mechanized and informationized weaponry and equipment.


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

The PLA is working to improve the quality and optimize the composition of its weaponry and
equipment. It has formed a system with second-generation equipment as the main body and third
generation as the backbone. The PLAA has developed for its land operations a weaponry system
with helicopters, armored assault vehicles, and anti-air and suppression weapons as the spine. The
PLAN has built for its maritime operations a weaponry system with new types of submarines,
surface vessels and surface attack aircraft as the spine. The PLAAF has formed for its air control
operations a weaponry system with new types of combat aircraft and ground-to-air missile systems
as the spine. The PLASAF has set up a ground-to-ground weaponry system with its medium- and
long-range missiles as the spine.

The PLA is working to improve its capabilities in managing, maintaining and supporting equipment.
It widely applies modern management techniques and enhances standardized and meticulous
management of equipment. Educational institutions, research institutes and manufacturers are
encouraged to recruit and train more experts in new equipment. The PLA works in coordination with
R&D institutes and defense industry manufacturers to enhance its maintenance and support for
high-tech equipment, and develops an integrated civilian-military maintenance and support system.
The PLA has developed comprehensive capabilities in equipment maintenance which cover multifunctional testing, mobile rescue and rush repair, and long-distance technical support. Recent
emergency rescue and disaster relief operations, counter-terrorism exercises, and fully equipped
training and maneuvers have testified the achievements of the development and management of
weaponry and equipment, demonstrating a notable improvement in the PLA' s capabilities of
equipment support in long-distance and trans-regional maneuvers, escort operations in distant
waters, and complex battlefield environments.

The PLA is planning its future development of weaponry and equipment. By understanding and
scientifically mastering the features and rules of information technology as being compatible,
systematic, integrated, and holistic, the PLA seeks to promote the organic compatibility and
composite development of weapon platforms and integrated electro-info systems. With the use of
advanced and mature technologies and devices, the PLA is working, selectively and with priorities,
to retrofit its existing weaponry and equipment to upgrade its comprehensive performance in a
systematic, organic and integrated way, so as to increase the cost-effectiveness of developing
weaponry and equipment.

## 4.  Deployment of the Armed Forces

Adapting to changes both in times and security environment, the Chinese armed forces take an
active role in dealing with various security threats, safeguard national security and development
interests, and play an important role in maintaining world peace and promoting common
development.

**Safeguarding Border, Coastal and Territorial Air Security**

China practices an administration system of sharing responsibilities between the military and the
local authorities in border and coastal defense. The armed forces are mainly tasked to safeguard
the border, coastal and maritime security, and guard against, stop and subdue such activities as
foreign intrusions, encroachments, provocations and cross-border sabotage. The main
responsibilities of the border public security force are as follows: border, coastal and maritime public
security administration, entry-exit frontier inspection at ports; prevention and crackdown on illegal
and criminal acts in border and coastal areas, such as illegal border crossing, drug trafficking and
smuggling; and organization of and participation in counter-terrorist and emergency-management
operations in border and coastal areas. Organs of maritime surveillance, fisheries administration,


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

marine affairs, inspection and quarantine, and customs are responsible for ensuring legitimate
rights, law enforcement, and administration. The State Commission of Border and Coastal Defense,
under the dual leadership of the State Council and the Central Military Commission (CMC),
coordinates China's border and coastal defenses. All military area commands, as well as border
and coastal provinces, cities and counties, have commissions to coordinate border and coastal
defenses within their respective jurisdictions.

In recent years, in line with the policy of consolidating border defense, cultivating good
neighborliness and friendship, maintaining stability and promoting development, the PLA frontier
and coastal guards abide by relevant laws and regulations of China as well as any treaties and
agreements with neighboring countries, well perform border defense duties, maintain a rigorous
guard against any invasion, encroachment or cross-border sabotage, timely prevent any violation of
border and coastal policies, laws and regulations and changes to the current borderlines, and
effectively safeguard the security and stability of the borders, coastal areas and maritime waters
within their jurisdictions. The border public security force makes solid progress in border defense
and control, counter-terrorism, and maintenance of stability. It has strengthened efforts in port
inspection, maritime management and control, and clampdown on crimes, including illegal border
crossing, drug-trafficking and smuggling. Since 2009, it has solved 37,000 cases and confiscated
3,845 illegal guns.

China has always treated combined military, police and civilian efforts as a strong guarantee for
consolidating border and coastal defenses and developing border and coastal areas. In recent
years, China has steadily improved a border and coastal defense force system featuring the PLA as
the mainstay, the coordination and cooperation of other relevant forces, and the extensive
participation of the militia, the reserve forces and the people in the border and coastal areas. It has
advanced the informationization of border and coastal defenses, taking the command system as the
focus and information infrastructure as the support, and strengthened efforts in building border and
coastal defense infrastructure. This has enhanced border and maritime control capabilities and
promoted the economic construction and social stability in the border and coastal areas.

Territorial air security is an important constituent of overall national security. The PLAAF is the
mainstay of national territorial air defense, and in accordance with the instructions of the CMC, the
Army, Navy, and People's Armed Police Force (PAPF) all undertake some territorial air defense
responsibilities. The PLAAF exercises unified command over all air defense components in
accordance with the CMC's intent. China's territorial air defense system stands on permanent alert.
It keeps track of any developments in the air, preserves air traffic order, organizes combat air
patrols, handles air emergencies, and resolutely defends China's sovereignty over its territorial air
and its air security.

**Maintaining Social Stability**

In accordance with relevant laws and regulations, and mainly under the unified leadership of local
Party committees and governments, the armed forces of China assist the public security forces in
maintaining social order and ensure that the people live and work in peace and stability.

The PAPF is the state's backbone and shock force in handling public emergencies. Since 2009, it
has handled 24 acts of serious violence and crime, including hostage taking, participated in 201
operations of hunting down criminal suspects, and fulfilled the task of security provision during the
celebrations of the 60th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the
Shanghai World Expo, and the Guangzhou Asian Games.


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

In November 2010, the CMC approved and promulgated Regulations on Emergency Command in
Handling Emergencies by the Armed Forces, which specifies for the armed forces regulations
concerning their organization, command, force deployment, integrated support, and civil-military
coordination while carrying out missions to maintain social stability and handle emergencies.

**Participating in National Construction, Emergency Rescue and Disaster Relief**

As stipulated by the Constitution and laws, an important task for the armed forces is to take part in
national construction, emergency rescue, and disaster relief.

The PLA and PAPF have actively participated in and supported national construction work, of which
a key component is the large-scale development of the western region. In the past two years, they
have contributed more than 16 million workdays and utilized 1.3 million motor vehicles and
machines, and participated in construction of more than 600 major infrastructure projects relating to
transportation, hydropower, communications and energy. They have set up more than 3,500
contact points for rural poverty alleviation, and provided assistance to over 8,000 small public
initiatives, such as water-saving irrigation projects, drinking water projects for both people and
livestock, road construction projects, and hydropower projects. The armed forces stationed in the
western region have planted 11 million trees and afforested 3.2 million mu of barren hills and desert
land by large-scale forestation and aerial planting. PLA medical and health units have provided
assistance to 130 county-level hospitals in poverty-stricken western areas, sent there 351 medical
teams and donated 110 sets (items) of instruments and equipment. With donations, the armed
forces have financed and built eight schools and one rehabilitation center in earthquake-stricken
areas in Sichuan, Shaanxi and Gansu provinces.

The armed forces of China act as the shock force in emergency rescue and disaster relief. In
January 2009, with the armed forces as the mainstay, China formed eight state-level emergencyresponse professional units, boasting a total of 50,000 personnel, specializing in flood control and
emergency rescue, earthquake rescue, nuclear, biological and chemical emergency rescue, urgent
air transportation, rapid road repair, maritime emergency search and rescue, emergency mobile
communication support, and medical aid and epidemic prevention. In July 2009, China integrated
the 31,000-strong PAPF protecting water and electricity supplies and communications into the
national emergency rescue system. Provincial level units specializing in emergency rescue have
been formed with the joint participation of military area commands and relevant provinces,
autonomous regions, or municipalities directly under the central government.

In the past two years, the PLA and PAPF have engaged a total of 1.845 million troop deployments
and 790,000 deployments of vehicles or machines of various types, flown over 181 sorties
(including the use of helicopters), organized 6.43 million militiamen and reservists, participated in
disaster relief operations in cases of floods, earthquakes, droughts, typhoons and forest fires,
rescued or evacuated a total of 1.742 million people, rush-transported 303,000 tons of goods,
dredged 3,742 km of waterways, dug 4,443 wells, fortified 728 km of dikes and dams, and delivered
504,000 tons of domestic water.

**Participating in UN Peacekeeping Operations**

As a responsible major power, China has consistently supported and actively participated in the UN
peacekeeping operations, making a positive contribution to world peace.

In 1990, the PLA sent five military observers to the UN Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) the first time China had taken part in UN peacekeeping operations. In 1992, it dispatched an


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

engineering corps of 400 officers and men to the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) the first time China had sent an organic unit on peacekeeping missions. It established the
Peacekeeping Affairs Office of the Ministry of National Defense of the People's Republic of China in
2001. In 2002, it joined the UN Stand-by Arrangement System. In 2009, it established the
Peacekeeping Center of the Ministry of National Defense of the People's Republic of China. As of
December 2010, China has dispatched 17,390 military personnel to 19 UN peace-keeping
missions. Nine officers and men have lost their lives on duty.

Tough, brave and devoted, the Chinese peacekeeping troops have fulfilled various tasks entrusted
to them by the UN in a responsible and professional way. They have built and repaired over 8,700
km of roads and 270 bridges, cleared over 8,900 mines and various explosive devices, transported
over 600,000 tons of cargo across a total distance of 9.3 million km, and treated 79,000 patients.

As of December 2010, the PLA had 1,955 officers and men serving in nine UN mission areas.
China has dispatched more peacekeeping personnel than any other permanent member of the UN
Security Council. Among these are 94 military observers and staff officers; 175 engineering troops
and 43 medical personnel for the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (UNMONUC); 275 engineering troops, 240 transportation troops and 43 medical
personnel for the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL); 275 engineering troops and 60
medical personnel for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL); 275 engineering
troops, 100 transportation troops and 60 medical personnel for the United Nations Mission in Sudan
(UNMIS); and 315 engineering troops for the African Union/United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).

**Conducting Escort Operations in the Gulf of Aden and Waters off Somalia**

In line with relevant UN resolutions, China dispatched naval ships to conduct escort operations in
the Gulf of Aden and waters off Somalia on December 26, 2008. They are mainly charged with
safeguarding the security of Chinese ships and personnel passing through the Gulf of Aden and
Somali waters, and the security of ships delivering humanitarian supplies for the World Food
Program and other international organizations, and shelter pass-by foreign vessels as much as
possible. As of December 2010, the Chinese Navy has dispatched, in seven sorties, 18 ship
deployments, 16 helicopters, and 490 Special Operation Force (SOF) soldiers on escort missions.
Through accompanying escort, area patrol, and onboard escort, the Chinese Navy has provided
protection for 3,139 ships sailing under Chinese and foreign flags, rescued 29 ships from pirate
attacks, and recovered nine ships released from captivity.

China takes a proactive and open attitude toward international escort cooperation. Chinese escort
fleets have established mechanisms for regular intelligence exchange and sharing with relevant
countries and organizations. It has exchanged 24 boarding visits of commanders with fleets from
the EU, the multinational naval force, NATO, Russia, the ROK, the Netherlands and Japan. It has
conducted joint escort operations with Russian fleets and joint maritime exercises with ROK escort
ships, and exchanged officers for onboard observations with Dutch fleets. China has joined
international regimes such as the UN liaison groups' meeting on Somali pirates, and the
international conference on "intelligence sharing and conflict prevention" escort cooperation.

**Holding Joint Military Exercises and Training with Other Countries**

In adherence to the principles of being non-aligned, non- confrontational, and not directed against
any third party, the PLA has held joint exercises and training with other countries pursuant to the
guidelines of mutual benefit, equality and reciprocity. As of December 2010, the PLA has held 44


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

joint military and training exercises with foreign troops. This is conducive to promoting mutual trust
and cooperation, drawing on useful lessons, and accelerating the PLA's modernization.

Joint counter-terrorism military exercises within the SCO framework are being institutionalized. In
2002, China ran a joint counter-terrorism military exercise with Kyrgyzstan, the first ever with a
foreign country. In 2003, China ran a multilateral joint counter-terrorism military exercise with other
SCO members, again the first ever with foreign countries. In 2006, China and Tajikistan ran a joint
counter-terrorism military exercise. China and Russia as well as other SCO members ran a series
of "Peace Mission" joint counter-terrorism military exercises in 2005, 2007, 2009 and 2010.

Maritime joint exercises have been held on a regular basis. In 2003, China ran a joint maritime
search-and-rescue exercise with Pakistan, the first ever between China and a foreign country.
During mutual port calls and other activities, the PLAN has run bilateral or multilateral joint maritime
exercises with the navies of India, France, the UK, Australia, Thailand, the US, Russia, Japan, New
Zealand and Vietnam, focusing on tasks such as search-and-rescue, communication, formation
sailing, diving, and escorting. In 2007 and 2009, the PLAN participated in multilateral joint maritime
exercises organized by the Pakistani navy. In 2007, the PLAN took part in the joint maritime
exercise held in Singaporean waters within the framework of the Western Pacific Naval
Symposium. In 2010, China held a joint marine training with Thailand, the first ever between China
and a foreign country.

Extensive joint military training on land has been carried out. China held a joint army training with
Thailand in 2007, the first ever with a foreign country. In recent years, China has conducted joint
military training with many countries, including Pakistan, India, Singapore, Mongolia, Romania and
Thailand, focusing on tasks such as counter-terrorism, security and safeguarding, peacekeeping,
and mountain and amphibious operations, all directed towards exploring new models of mixed
grouping and joint training. In 2009, for the first time, China sent a medical detachment to Africa to
hold a joint operation with Gabon, to conduct medical training and rescue exercises, and to provide
medical assistance for local residents. In 2010, China sent a medical team to Peru for joint training
on humanitarian medical aid and emergency medical rescue, in an effort to improve its capabilities
in responding to humanitarian emergencies.

**Participating in International Disaster Relief Operations**

China's armed forces consider it an obligation to take part in international disaster relief operations
organized by the government, and to fulfill international humanitarian obligations. In recent years,
they have actively assisted relevant departments of the Chinese government to provide relief
materials to disaster-stricken countries and to contribute specialized teams to international disaster
relief operations.

Since the PLA provided relief supplies to Afghanistan in 2002, it has carried out 28 urgent
international humanitarian aid missions, and provided 22 disaster-stricken countries with relief
materials including tents, blankets, medicine, medical appliances, food and generators. The total
value exceeds RMB950 million. In 2001, the Chinese International Search and Rescue (CISAR)
team, consisting of officers and men from an engineer regiment of the Beijing Military Area
Command, medical care personnel from the PAPF General Hospital, and experts from the China
Earthquake Administration, began to participate in international disaster relief operations. CISAR
has since carried out eight rescue operations in disaster-stricken countries. In January 2010, the
CISAR team and the PLA medical care and epidemic prevention team were sent to Haiti to conduct
earthquake rescue, post-earthquake search and relief, medical work and epidemic prevention
operations. They rescued and treated 6,500 sick and injured. In September 2010, the CISAR team,


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

a PLA medical team and a helicopter rescue formation were sent to Pakistan to conduct
humanitarian rescue operations, with the saving and treatment reaching 34,000 person-times in
total and 60 tons of airdropped goods and materials.

The Chinese armed forces have played an active role in international exchanges and cooperation in
disaster relief, engaging in close communication and coordination with relevant countries and
international organizations, and promoting the perfection of procedures and the training of
personnel for regional disaster relief. They have held seminars and joint operations on humanitarian
rescue and disaster limitation with armed forces of the US, Australia and New Zealand, run the
ASEAN Regional Forum workshop on formulating legal rules for armed forces' participation in
international disaster relief operations, and attended the ASEAN Plus Three workshop on armed
forces' participation in international disaster relief.

## 5. National Defense Mobilization and Reserve Force Building

China pursues the principles of combining peacetime needs with wartime needs, integrating military
with civilian purposes and combining military efforts with civilian support. It strengthens national
defense mobilization and reserve force building, enhances national defense mobilization
capabilities, and reinforces its defense strength.

**Organizational Structure and Leadership System of National Defense Mobilization**

According to the Constitution and related laws, the Standing Committee of the National People's
Congress (NPC) decides on general or partial mobilization. The president of the People's Republic
of China, pursuant to the decisions of the Standing Committee of the NPC, issues mobilization
orders. The State Council and the CMC work in combination to direct nationwide mobilization,
formulate principles, policies and regulations, and organize the implementation of mobilization in
accordance with the decisions of the Standing Committee of the NPC and mobilization orders
issued by the president. When China's state sovereignty, national unification, territorial integrity or
security are under imminent threat which requires an immediate action, the State Council and the
CMC may take the necessary measures of national defense mobilization in response to the urgency
and seriousness of the event, and at the same time report to the Standing Committee of the NPC.

Local people's governments organize and execute national defense mobilization within its
administrative area in accordance with relevant principles, policies, laws and regulations. Related
departments of local people's governments at and above the county level and those of the armed
forces, within their respective scopes of duties, take charge of national defense mobilization work,
and execute the programs and pre-arranged implementation plans.

At each level of the people's government from the county up to the state and in each military area
command, there is a national defense mobilization commission. The State Commission for National
Defense Mobilization, under the leadership of the State Council and the CMC, is in charge of
organizing, directing and coordinating the nationwide national defense mobilization. The leaders of
the State Council and the CMC take the positions of chairman and vice chairmen of the State
Commission for National Defense Mobilization. Other members of the Commission include leaders
of relevant ministries and commissions under the State Council, and leaders of the general
headquarters/departments of the PLA. The core responsibilities of the Commission are to carry out
the military strategy of active defense, organize and implement the state's defense mobilization,
and coordinate relations between economic and military affairs, the armed forces and the
government, and manpower and materials support in defense mobilization. Commissions for
national defense mobilization of military area commands and local people's governments at and


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

above county level are in charge of organizing, directing and coordinating national defense
mobilization work within their respective jurisdictions. There are administrative offices in each
commission for national defense mobilization to organize its routine work. At present, the State
Commission for National Defense Mobilization has under its charge administrative offices
responsible for the mobilization of the people's armed forces, national economy, civil air defense,
transportation, and national defense education. The commissions in military area commands and
local governments have under them corresponding offices.

In February 2010, the NPC Standing Committee passed the National Defense Mobilization Law of
the People's Republic of China which specifies the peacetime preparations for and wartime
implementation of national defense mobilization, stipulating the obligations and rights of each
citizen and organization during mobilization and improving China's basic mobilization system.

**National Defense Mobilization Capabilities Building**

China's fundamental goal of strengthening defense mobilization is to establish and improve a
mobilization system which is in line with national security demands, coordinated with the economic
and social development and coupled with the emergency response mechanisms to increase
mobilization capabilities. In recent years, following the principles of unified leadership, public
participation, long-term preparations, priority to key projects, overall planning, all-round
consideration, orderliness and high-efficiency, China has integrated its defense mobilization
building with general social and economic development, gradually improving its capabilities in rapid
mobilization, moving swiftly from a peacetime to wartime footing, and sustained support and
comprehensive protection.

New progress has been made in people's armed forces mobilization. China has improved its plans
for wartime troop mobilization and support, implemented pre-regimentation of reservists into active
units, and strengthened the development of the reserve force. Based on possible wartime tasks and
MOOTW demands, the militia force is improving its rapid mobilization process. The Law of the
People's Republic of China on Reserve Officers, revised in August 2010, lays down new regulations
on the authorities, procedures and methods of calling up reserve officers following a state decision
to call for national defense mobilization.

Steady progress has been achieved in national economic mobilization. China has given priority to
the requirements of national defense in building major infrastructure projects, and has continuously
improved the compatibility of military and civilian key technologies and products. It has laid out a
basic framework for generating capabilities in national economic mobilization, with key industries
and major enterprises as the mainstay and important products and technologies as the links. China
has made significant progress in the investigation of the potential of key areas, industries,
technologies and products, further optimized the strategic reserve and storage system that meets
defense requirements and economic growth, and caters to the needs of both emergencies and
wars.

Progress has been accelerated in developing civil air defense (CAD). Adhering to the guidelines of
long-term preparation, construction of key projects, and combination of needs in peacetime and
war, China strives to do a better job in preparing against air raids in informationized conditions.
There is an ongoing effort to improve the system of joint civil-military meetings and offices,
optimizing the CAD organizations in local governments at and above county level and promoting
the quasi-militarization of the CAD organs. Emphasis has been laid on the building of CAD
command posts at all levels in accordance with the requirements of joint and regional air defense.
Efforts have been made to improve CAD' s disaster prevention functions and mechanisms featuring


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

the combination of air defense with disaster prevention. More effort has been invested in providing
protection for key economic targets, selected through evaluation and research. Emergency rescue
and rapid repair plans have also been formulated in this regard. These CAD projects are
incorporated into urban development plans and civil defense basements are incorporated in new
buildings as required by law, meeting the requirements of the CAD in urban development, and
balancing urban development and the CAD projects. Provinces, autonomous regions and
municipalities have carried out extensive publicity campaigns, education programs and training
initiatives to disseminate understanding of air defense and disaster prevention, skills of rescue and
self-rescue, and methods of emergency evacuation.

Transportation mobilization for national defense is making steady and orderly progress. China is
working to integrate combat-readiness as an element in the national transportation grid, and
improve capabilities in strategic lines of communication support, strategic projection support, and
rush transportation and rapid repair. Priority has been given to a number of projects that combine
military and civilian purposes, giving impetus to an overall improvement in transportation combatreadiness for national defense. Relevant industries have helped in forming specialized support
teams in an organic and systematic way, reinforcing transportation protection and communication
maintenance along strategic lines of communication. Support plans for key communication targets
and combat-readiness transportation have been formulated and revised, aimed at synchronized
planning and construction of both military transportation facilities and urban development.

**Reserve Force Building**

With active servicemen as its backbone and reserve officers and men as its foundation, the reserve
force is an armed force formed in line with the unified structure and organization of the PLA. It is
under the dual leadership of the PLA and local Party committees and governments. The positions of
chief military and political leaders at all levels and principal department leaders, as well as a
proportion of the staff members and professionals and specialists, are assumed by active
servicemen. Reserve officers are chosen mainly from qualified retired servicemen, civil officials,
cadres of the people's armed forces departments, cadres of the militia and civilian technicians with
the appropriate military specialties. Reserve soldiers are chosen mainly from qualified discharged
soldiers, trained primary militia members, and civilians with the appropriate military specialties.

In recent years, the reserve force has undergone consistent improvement in various aspects of its
building and reform. It works to improve its organizational models on a regional basis, to explore a
systematic and organic organizational model based on new and high-tech industries, and to
develop such organizational models as personnel-and-equipment organization, trans-regional
organization and community-based organization. Based on possible wartime assignments, the
reserve force has revised and updated the guidelines for its military training and evaluation,
strengthened integrated training with active PLA units, and conducted on-base, simulated and
networked training. Reserve officers and men are required to devote 240 hours to political
education and military training each year. To be able to respond to emergencies in peacetime and
to fight in war, the focus of the reserve force is shifting from quantity and scale to quality and
efficiency, from a combat role to a support role, and from the provision of general-purpose soldiers
to soldiers with special skills. It is working to become an efficient auxiliary to the active force and a
strong component of the national defense reserve.

**Militia Force Building**


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

The militia force is an important component of China's armed forces as well as the backup force of
the PLA. In recent years, through transformation and reform, it has made progress in restructuring,
in training reform, and in equipment building. China now has 8 million primary militia members.

The militia force gives priority to reinforcing those units which are tasked with defending border and
coastal areas, providing service support for different arms and services, and responding in
emergencies. It has been realigned to extend from rural to urban areas as well as to areas along
important communication lines, from ordinary locations to key sites and areas, and from traditional
industries to new and high-tech ones. As a result, its structure and layout have been further
improved. In line with the newly revised Outline for Military Training and Evaluation of the Militia, it
promotes reforms in military training, holds joint training and exercises with active PLA units,
improves the construction of associated training base facilities at all levels, and attaches importance
to key detachment training. Its capabilities in dealing with both emergencies and wars have been
greatly enhanced. The militia strengthens its building of equipment for the purposes of air defense,
emergency response, and maintaining stability, supply of new types of air defense weaponry and
equipment, and retrofitting and upgrading of existing weapons. There have been significant
increases in the level of equipment-readiness and in the full kit rate (FKR).

The militia has taken an active part in such operations as counter-terrorism, stability maintenance,
emergency rescue, disaster relief, border protection and control, and joint defense of public
security, and has played a unique role in accomplishing diversified military tasks. Each year, it
mobilizes more than 90,000 militiamen to serve as guards on bridges, tunnels and railways, more
than 200,000 to take part in joint military-police-civilian defense patrols, more than 900,000 to
participate in emergency response, rescue and relief operations following major natural disasters,
and nearly 2 million to engage in the comprehensive control and management of social order in
rural and urban areas.

## 6. Military Legal System

The armed forces of the People's Republic of China abide by the Constitution and laws, implement
the guidelines of governing the armed forces according to law, strengthen military legal system
building, and guarantee and push forward the building of national defense and armed forces in
accordance with the requirements of the legal system.

**Military Legal System Building**

A number of important military laws and regulations have been formulated and revised. In the past
two years, the Standing Committee of the NPC has adopted the Law of the People's Republic of
China on the People's Armed Police Force, the National Defense Mobilization Law of the People's
Republic of China, and the newly revised Law of the People's Republic of China on Reserve
Officers. The Central Committee of the CPC and the CMC have approved and promulgated the
newly revised Regulations on the Political Work of the People's Liberation Army. The CMC has
promulgated the newly revised Regulations on Routine Service of the People's Liberation Army, the
Regulations on Discipline of the People's Liberation Army, the Regulations on Formation of the
People's Liberation Army, and a new generation of regulations on the work of headquarters.
Approved by the CMC, the PLA's General Staff Headquarters, General Political Department,
General Logistics Department and General Armaments Department have promulgated the newly
revised Outline for Armed Forces Building at the Grass-roots Level, and the General Political
Department has promulgated the Guideline for the Ideological and Political Education of the
Chinese People's Liberation Army. The State Council and the CMC have jointly promulgated the
Regulations on Military Uniform Management, the Regulations on Quality Control of Weaponry and


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

Equipment, and the newly revised Regulations of the Chinese People' s Liberation Army on the
Military Service of the Enlisted in Active Service. The general headquarters/departments, Navy, Air
Force, Second Artillery Force, military area commands and the PAPF have promulgated a number
of military rules and regulations. As of December 2010, the NPC and its Standing Committee has
passed laws and issued law-related decisions on 17 matters concerning national defense and
military affairs, the State Council and the CMC have jointly formulated 97 military administrative
regulations, the CMC has formulated 224 military regulations, and the general
headquarters/departments, Navy, Air Force, Second Artillery Force, military area commands and
PAPF have enacted more than 3,000 military rules and regulations.

Military laws, regulations and rules have been reviewed and consolidated. In accordance with the
2008 requirements of the NPC Standing Committee, the legal organs of the CMC organized the
legal departments of the general headquarters/departments, Navy, Air Force, Second Artillery
Force, military area commands and PAPF in reviewing laws and regulations relating to national
defense and military affairs. In 2009, the fifth round of review and consolidation of military
regulations and rules was conducted, sorting out 921 existing military regulations (including
regulatory documents) and 7,984 military rules and regulations (including regulatory documents)
promulgated before the end of 2008, and repealing 65 military regulations (including regulatory
documents) and 1,214 military rules and regulations (including regulatory documents). A Collection
of Military Laws and Regulations of the People's Republic of China (2004-2008), A Collection of
Military Rules and Regulations of the People's Liberation Army of the People's Republic of China
(2004-2008), and A Collection of Military Rules and Regulations of the People's Armed Police Force
of the People's Republic of China (2004-2008) were published.

**Implementation of Laws and Regulations**

The PLA and the PAPF maintain their commitment to employing troops and taking action in
accordance with the law. Units participating in emergency rescue and disaster relief operations
strictly abide by such laws and regulations as the Emergency Response Law of the People's
Republic of China, the Law of the People's Republic of China on Protecting Against and Mitigating
Earthquake Disasters, and the Regulations on the PLA's Participation in Disaster Rescue. PAPF
troops performing stability maintenance and emergency response tasks act in strict conformity with
laws and regulations like the Law of the People's Republic of China on the People's Armed Police
Force. Naval ships performing escort missions in the Gulf of Aden and in waters off Somalia, as
well as those carrying out maritime training, strictly observe international treaties like the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and act in accordance with the relevant laws
and regulations of China. Troops participating in joint military exercises with foreign countries act
within relevant bilateral or multi-lateral legal frameworks and settle any legal issues arising in the
course of such exercises in accordance with the law.

The newly revised common regulations on routine service, discipline and formation have been
implemented and incorporated into education, training, inspection and evaluation. Military rules and
regulations provide guidance and standards for combat readiness, training, working conditions and
daily life. The enforcement of regulations has been strengthened, discipline inspection and
supervision mechanisms improved, and breaches of discipline investigated and rectified. Safety
rules and regulations have been enforced, safety and preventive mechanisms improved, and
education and training on safety conducted.

For the past two years, the armed forces, working with relevant local departments, have conducted
inspections of the implementation of such laws and regulations as the Civil Air Defense Law of the
People's Republic of China, the Law of the People's Republic of China on Protecting Military


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

Facilities, and the Regulations on Military Uniform Management. In accordance with laws and
regulations like the Military Service Law of the People's Republic of China and the Regulations on
the Recruitment of Soldiers, military service organs and recruitment staff of the people's
governments at all levels have undertaken efforts to supervise and inspect recruitment work. Within
the proper bounds of their authority, military departments have conducted special reviews on lawenforcement in their respective fields of military training, equipment procurement, discipline
inspection and supervision, and auditing.

**Military Judicial System**

The PLA continues to uphold the CPC's leadership in its political and legal work, and to improve
military judicial work systems. In 2007, the CMC issued the Opinions on Further Strengthening the
Political and Legal Work of the Armed Forces, requiring the establishment of political and legal
commissions in units at and above regiment level. In 2008, the General Political Department
enacted the Regulations on the Work of Political and Legal Commissions at All Levels of the Armed
Forces.

The PLA strengthens crime prevention in a proactive, comprehensive and constructive manner. In
2009, the General Staff Headquarters, General Political Department, General Logistics Department
and General Armaments Department jointly issued the Opinions on Further Strengthening the
Prevention of Duty-related Crime of the Armed Forces under the New Situation and the Provisional
Regulations on the Participation of Discipline Inspection Departments and Military Procuratorial
Organs in Accident Investigation and Handling. The internal security organs, military courts and
military procuratorates of the armed forces have performed their functions to the full, resolutely
maintaining justice in punishing various offenses and crimes in accordance with the law.

In line with overall arrangements by the state for judicial reform, the PLA presses forward with the
reform of the military judicial system. The Military Court of the PLA has enacted the Detailed Rules
of the Military Court of the People's Liberation Army for the Implementation of the Guiding Opinions
on Sentencing by People's Courts (Trial), and implemented the policy of combining leniency with
rigor in respect of criminal offences. They have made further progress in civil adjudication, and
improved the dispute resolution mechanism that connects litigation and non-litigation. The
formulation of the Measures of Military Courts to Close Cases of Litigation Relating to Complaint
Letters and Visits has enhanced transparency and public credibility in the review of appeals. The
General Political Department has issued the Notice of the Requirement that Cases Filed and
Investigated by the Military Procuratorate at a Lower Level Be Submitted to the Military
Procuratorate at the Next Higher Level for Examination and Detention Decision-Making, and the
PLA Military Procuratorate has issued relevant implementation measures for the Notice, which
advances the reform of decision-making procedures regarding examination and detention in dutyrelated cases.

**Legal Service and Legal Publicity and Education**

To meet the needs of their troops in accomplishing diversified military tasks, judicial and
administrative departments at all levels and other relevant departments of the armed forces have
provided professional and efficient legal services. Specifically, legal advisors have been provided
for troops participating in emergency rescue and disaster relief operations, escort operations in the
Gulf of Aden and the waters off Somalia, and major joint military exercises with other countries.
Several legal-service teams have been dispatched to help troops who perform counter-terrorism
and stability-maintenance tasks to deal with legal problems. Legal handbooks have been compiled
and printed for the troops.


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

A series of actions have been carried out to provide legal services, including legal consultations, to
grass-roots officers and men. These have now covered more than two-thirds of units at brigade or
regiment level. Interactions with local judicial and administrative departments and legal service
organizations have been strengthened, coordination mechanisms have been improved to solve
legal problems of officers and men, and channels for handling such problems have been widened.
In 2009, military lawyers represented defendants in more than 700 criminal trials, and undertook
more than 2,300 civil and economic cases.

Efforts have been strengthened in legal service personnel training and organization building. At
present, China's armed forces have established 268 military legal advisory offices, more than 1,600
legal consultation stations in units at brigade/regiment level, and legal consultation teams in almost
all battalions and companies. There are altogether 1,342 military lawyers and 25,000 legal advisors
in the armed forces.

Mechanisms have been improved for safeguarding the rights and interests of military units, military
personnel, and national defense, and the legitimate rights and interests of servicemen and their
families have been protected. Led by local Party committees, mainly composed of judicial organs,
supported by relevant departments of local governments, and featuring civil-military coordination,
permanent mechanisms have been established in 31 provinces, autonomous regions and
municipalities directly under the central government to safeguard the legal rights and interests of
military units and personnel. As a result, a relatively comprehensive system of organizations for
safeguarding the legal rights and interests of military units and personnel has been established.
Since 2000, such organizations, operating at different levels, have provided 760,000 legal
consultations to servicemen and their families, handled 120,000 complaint letters or visits, and dealt
with 98,000 disputes involving military units and personnel, and the people's courts have tried
34,000 cases involving military units and personnel.

In the context of the fifth five-year program on law education, legal publicity and education have
been enhanced, and the legal awareness of officers and men has been raised. The PLA and PAPF
have incorporated legal publicity and education into the outline of education and training and into
training and evaluation systems for military cadres, and organized officers and men to study the
Constitution and relevant laws and regulations. They have continued to innovate means and
measures designed to render legal publicity and education more up-to-date, more interesting and
more appealing.

## 7. Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense

China has established and is striving to optimize those research and production systems for
weaponry and equipment which cater to both military and civilian needs and sustain military
potential in civilian capabilities. It furthers reform and development and raises the capacity of
research and production in promoting advanced defense-related science, technology and industry.

**Reform and Development of Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense**

Defense-related industries have actively transformed their development model. Through
restructuring, optimizing and upgrading, and by taking energy conservation and emission reduction
measures, they have coped effectively with the international financial crisis. A legal and regulatory
system has been established to improve the capabilities of defense-related industries as well as the
supervision over and management of their key installations and facilities. Defense-related industries
have achieved steady and relatively rapid growth.


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

Defense-related enterprises and institutions are regulated and guided to make use of civilian
industrial capabilities and social capital to conduct research into and production of weaponry and
equipment. In 2010, based on the Regulations on the Licensing Administration of Weaponry and
Equipment Research and Production, the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology and the
PLA's General Armaments Department jointly issued the Implementation Measures for the
Licensing of Weaponry and Equipment Research and Production to further regulate the
participation of different types of economic bodies in scientific research into and production of
weaponry and equipment and in tendering for relevant projects. Civilian industrial enterprises
licensed for the scientific research into and production of weaponry and equipment now make up
two-thirds of the total licensed enterprises and institutions. The Guiding Catalogue of Fields for
Social Investment in Defense-related Science, Technology and Industry has been issued to
promote diversity in investors in defense-related enterprises.

**Improvement of Scientific Research and Production Capabilities for Weaponry and**
**Equipment**

Advanced core competence of defense-related industries has been built. Science, technology and
industry for national defense have achieved the goals set in the Eleventh Five-Year Plan (20062010). A number of high-level research platforms and new equipment production lines have been
built. Resources involved in R&D, design and simulation, processing and manufacturing, and
experimentation and testing have been further modernized to ensure the fulfillment of research and
production tasks, and the realization of mutual promotion and coordinated development between
the R&D and production of model weaponry and equipment and the consolidation of fundamental
capabilities.

Capabilities in independent innovation have been strengthened. Defense-related enterprises and
institutions, institutes for basic research and institutions of higher learning are encouraged to make
innovations in defense-related science and technology and to strengthen both basic and applied
research. Exploration, innovation and the application of new theories, technologies and processing
techniques have been accelerated. The development of advanced industrial technologies has been
encouraged. Digital and information technologies have been widely used. The technological level
and innovative capability of scientific research into and production of weaponry and equipment have
been raised. To create a favorable environment for innovation, incentive policies and appraisal
systems for original innovation have been introduced to build a better contingent of creative and
talented people and to provide them with the motivation and initiative to produce scientific and
technological innovations. Great importance has been given to the filing, application and protection
of intellectual property rights related to science, technology and industry for national defense. In
2009, dozens of innovations won National Technology Invention Awards or National Science and
Technology Progress Awards.

The basic capabilities of weaponry and equipment research and production have been enhanced.
The construction, operation and management of defense-related technological infrastructure have
all been reinforced. National defense science and technology labs as well as research and
application centers for advanced technologies have been playing a vital role in both basic and
applied research. A long-term mechanism for quality control has been established to reinforce
quality supervision, resulting in a steady improvement in the overall quality of products.
Technological infrastructure for the defense industry, such as standards and measurements, has
been established to provide better support capabilities to weaponry and equipment research and
production.

**Peaceful Use of Defense Industrial Technology**


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

The application of defense-related technologies has been accelerated in line with key fields and
projects decided by the state. With breakthroughs in vital technologies and industrialization,
burgeoning industries with strategic significance, and other defense-related high-tech industries in
the fields of aeronautics and space, electronic information, special technologies and equipment,
new energy and high efficiency power, and energy conservation and environmental protection have
been developed to foster new economic engines in revitalizing national industries and restructuring
new and high-tech industries.

Great importance has been attached to the peaceful use and development of nuclear energy and
space technology. The industrial policy of actively exploiting nuclear energy has been formulated
and issued, which has effectively secured the growth of the industries of nuclear power, nuclear fuel
recycling, and nuclear technology application. Positive progress has been achieved in the export of
aerospace products. China has successfully developed and launched a communications satellite for
Venezuela and signed agreements or contracts on cooperation in the field of communications
satellites with some countries.

**Participation in International Exchanges and Cooperation**

Cooperation with foreign countries in defense-related science, technology and industry has been
conducted on an equal, mutually beneficial, and win-win basis. Cooperation in defense technology
with friendly countries has been promoted, and mechanisms for inter-governmental commissions
with some friendly countries involving defense industries and technologies have been established.
Defense-related enterprises and institutions are encouraged and supported to engage in
international exchanges and cooperation. Such defense industrial and technological cooperation as
joint R&D, and production and personnel training are conducted with foreign countries.

The Chinese government strictly fulfils its international obligations, commitments and relevant
resolutions of the Security Council of the UN on sanctions. In conformity with international
conventions and standards, it has established a sound non-proliferation regime at the three levels
of government, corporation and export enterprise, taking a prudent attitude towards the export of
military products and related technologies. Following the principles of serving the purpose of
helping the recipient state enhance its capability for legitimate self-defense, not impairing the
peace, security and stability of the relevant region or the world as a whole, and not interfering in the
recipient state's internal affairs, China sets up a franchising system for the enterprises permitted to
export military products, practices a licensing system for military product export, and strictly abides
by its policies and laws on non-proliferation.

Attaching great importance to international cooperation in the field of nuclear energy, the Chinese
government has reached inter-governmental agreements with 23 countries on peaceful use of
nuclear energy, introduced advanced nuclear energy technologies into China, and provided every
possible assistance to developing countries. In April 2009, organized by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and hosted by the Chinese government, the International Ministerial
Conference on Nuclear Energy in the 21st Century was held in Beijing.

In accordance with the principle of peaceful use of outer space, China has conducted bilateral
cooperation and exchanges with Russia, France, Brazil, Ukraine, the United States and the
European Space Agency (ESA) in the fields of space technology, space exploration and space
science. It supports the work of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space (COPUOS) and Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization (APSCO), and plays an active
role in making use of outer space technologies to conduct multilateral cooperation in Earth science


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

research, disaster prevention and reduction, deep space exploration, and space debris mitigation
and protection.

## 8. Defense Expenditure

China adheres to the principle of coordinated development of national defense and economy. In line
with the demands of national defense and economic development, China decides on the size of
defense expenditure in an appropriate way, and manages and uses its defense funds in
accordance with the law.

With the development of national economy and society, the increase of China's defense
expenditure has been kept at a reasonable and appropriate level. China's GDP was RMB31,404.5
billion in 2008 and RMB34,090.3 billion in 2009. State financial expenditure was RMB6,259.266
billion in 2008 and RMB7,629.993 billion in 2009, up 25.7 percent and 21.9 percent respectively
over the previous year. China's defense expenditure was RMB417.876 billion in 2008 and
RMB495.11 billion in 2009, up 17.5 percent and 18.5 percent respectively over the previous year. In
recent years, the share of China's annual defense expenditure in its GDP has remained relatively
steady, while that in overall state financial expenditure has been moderately decreased.

China's defense expenditure mainly comprises expenses for personnel, training and maintenance,
and equipment, with each accounting for roughly one third of the total. Personnel expenses mainly
cover salaries, allowances, housing, insurance, food, bedding and clothing for officers, non-ranking
officers, enlisted men and contracted civilians. Training and maintenance expenses mainly cover
troop training, institutional education, construction and maintenance of installations and facilities,
and other expenses on routine consumables. Equipment expenses mainly cover R&D,
experimentation, procurement, maintenance, transportation and storage of weaponry and
equipment. Defense expenditure covers costs to support the active forces, reserve forces, and
militia. It also covers part of the costs to support retired servicemen, servicemen's spouses, and
education of servicemen's children, as well as national and local economic development and other
social expenses.

(Table 1: China's Defense Expenditure in 2009)

In the past two years, the increase in China's defense expenditure has primarily been used for the
following purposes: (1) Improving support conditions for the troops: Along with the economic and
social development and the improvement of people's living standards, the PLA has adjusted
servicemen's salaries and allowances, increased funding for education and training, water and
electricity supplies and heating, upgraded logistics support for grass-roots units in a comprehensive
and coordinated way, and improved the on-duty, training and living conditions of border and coastal
defense forces and units in remote areas and harsh environments. (2) Accomplishing diversified
military tasks: China has increased investment in improving MOOTW capabilities, in supporting
earthquake rescue and disaster relief operations, in escort operations in the Gulf of Aden and
waters off Somalia, in flood control and emergency rescue operations, and in international rescue
operations. (3) Pushing forward the Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA) with Chinese
characteristics. In view of the upward trend in purchasing prices and maintenance costs, China has
moderately increased the funds for high-tech weaponry and equipment and their supporting
facilities.

In 2010, confronted by the residual impact of the global financial crisis and other uncertainties, the
tension between revenue and expenditure in China's finances persists. Giving priority to socially
beneficial spending in agriculture, rural areas and farmers, as well as in education, science and


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

technology, health, medical care and social security, China has increased its defense expenditure
moderately as needed. China's defense budget for 2010 is RMB532.115 billion, up 7.5 percent over
2009. The growth rate of defense expenditure has decreased.

(Chart 1: Share of China's Annual Defense Expenditure in the State Financial Expenditure)

China practices a strict system of financial supervision of defense funds. The annual defense
budget is incorporated into the annual financial budget draft of the central government, and then
submitted to the NPC for review and approval. The auditing offices of the state and the PLA
conduct audit and supervision of the defense budget and its enforcement. In recent years, the
Chinese government has strengthened systematic and meticulous management of defense
expenditure, reformed and innovated financial management systems, pressed forward with reforms
in asset management, reinforced budget implementation, supervision and management, and
organized auditing of economic responsibilities of military leaders and special auditing of the use of
funds and materials. In this way, transparency and standardization of defense expenditure are
enhanced, and the proper and effective use of defense funds is ensured.

## 9. Military Confidenceâ€Building

Military confidence-building is an effective way to maintain national security and development, and
safeguard regional peace and stability. With political mutual trust as the groundwork and common
security as the goal, China is promoting the establishment of equal, mutually beneficial and
effective mechanisms for military confidence-building, which should be based on the principles of
holding consultations on an equal footing, mutual respect for core interests and recognition of major
security concerns, not targeting at any third country, and not threatening or harming other countries'
security and stability.

**Strategic Consultations and Dialogues**

In recent years, China has held extensive strategic consultations and dialogues with relevant
countries in the field of security and defense to enhance mutual understanding and trust, and to
strengthen communication and coordination. To date, China has established mechanisms for
defense and security consultation and dialogue with 22 countries.

The strategic and cooperative partnership between Russia and China continues to be
comprehensively and vigorously reinforced. The two militaries established a strategic consultation
mechanism in 1997. The 13th round of strategic consultations between the two general staff
headquarters in 2010 resulted in consensus on the international strategic situation, issues in
Northeast Asia, Central Asia and South Asia, and cooperation between the two militaries.

China and the United States maintain consultations on such issues as non-proliferation, counterterrorism, and bilateral military and security cooperation. The two countries established a
mechanism of defense consultation between the two defense ministries in 1997, and held the tenth
and 11th Defense Consultative Talks (DCT) on issues of common concern in June 2009 and
December 2010, and the fifth and the sixth Defense Policy Coordination Talks (DPCT) in February
and December 2009.

China attaches great importance to defense and security consultations with neighboring countries.
It has established mechanisms for defense and security consultation and policy dialogue with
neighboring countries, including Mongolia, Japan, Vietnam, the Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand,
Singapore, India and Pakistan, and has held regular consultations and dialogues at different levels


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

with its neighbors, which focus on Asia-Pacific security, bilateral military relations and regional
flashpoint issues. Such consultations and dialogues play a positive role in promoting mutual
understanding, consolidating good neighborliness and friendship, deepening mutual trust and
cooperation, and maintaining regional peace and stability.

China has conducted extensive strategic consultations and dialogues with other countries. In
September 2009, the two militaries of China and Germany held the fourth round of defense
strategic consultations. In October 2009, the two militaries of China and Australia held the 12th
defense strategic consultations. In March 2009 and June 2010, China and New Zealand held the
second and third strategic dialogues. In February 2010, military deputies of China and the United
Kingdom held defense strategic consultations. In November 2010, China and South Africa held the
fourth defense commission meeting. China has also established mechanisms for defense
(cooperation) commission meetings with Egypt, for high-level military cooperation dialogue with
Turkey, and for defense consultations with the United Arab Emirates, all of which have broadened
defense exchanges between China and Middle Eastern countries.

**Border Area Confidence-Building Measures**

China consistently pursues a foreign policy of building an amicable relationship and partnership with
its neighbors, attaches great importance to border area confidence-building measures, strengthens
friendly military exchanges in border areas, and actively prevents dangerous military activities, all of
which have helped preserve peace and stability on the borders.

In September 1993, China and India signed the Agreement on the Maintenance of Peace and
Tranquility Along the Line of Actual Control in the China-India Border Areas, and in November
1996, the two countries signed the Agreement on Confidence-Building Measures in the Military
Field Along the Line of Actual Control in the China-India Border Areas. In April 2005, the two
countries signed the Protocol on Implementation Measures for Confidence-Building Measures in the
Military Field Along the Line of Actual Control in the China-India Border Areas, agreeing on specific
implementation measures for certain articles in the 1996 Agreement.

In April 1996, China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia and Tajikistan signed the Agreement on
Confidence-Building in the Military Field Along the Border Areas. In April 1997, China signed the
Agreement on the Mutual Reduction of Military Forces in the Border Areas with the aforementioned
countries, which includes clauses on mutual reduction of combat troops and weaponry within
delineated limits along China' s 7,600-km borderlines with Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia and
Tajikistan, on the organization of annual mutual inspections, and on supervision and verification of
the implementation of mutual trust measures in border areas. In December 1998, China and Bhutan
signed the Sino-Bhutanese Agreement on the Maintenance of Peace and Tranquility in the Border
Areas.

The PLA border defense force faithfully implements all relevant border confidence-building
agreements in the military field. Since the 1990s, China's Ministry of National Defense has signed
Frontier Defense Cooperation Agreement respectively with relevant departments of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea (DPRK), Russia, Mongolia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Myanmar and
Vietnam, and established a three-level meeting mechanism between China's general
headquarters/departments, military area commands (provincial military commands) and border
defense units and their counterparts, to communicate border information in a timely manner and
handle major border affairs through consultation. The PLA border defense force has set up along
the borders more than 60 stations for border talks and meetings, and every year engages in
thousands of talks and meetings with neighboring countries. In recent years, in the border areas,


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

China has conducted military training in bilateral or multilateral border blockade and control, joint
counter-terrorism, and carried out joint patrols and inspections respectively with Russia, Tajikistan,
Mongolia and Pakistan.

China has signed border management system agreements with a dozen of its land neighbors to
specify cooperation measures for keeping order in border areas, protecting and utilizing crossborder rivers, establishing a border area liaison system, and handling border affairs through
consultation. A border representative system has been established to handle border affairs that can
be settled through consultation without the need for escalation to diplomatic levels. Appointed by
the government and selected from leaders of border defense units, Chinese border representatives
perform their duties under the guidance of local military organs and foreign affairs departments.
Border representatives exchange information regularly, guard against and handle border incidents,
and provide assistance in port administration, cross-border transportation, fishery cooperation,
environmental protection and disaster prevention.

**Dialogues and Cooperation on Maritime Security**

China takes an active part in dialogue and cooperation on international maritime security. It strictly
complies with the UN Charter, the United Nations Convention on Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), and
other universally recognized norms of international relations. It consistently pursues common
security and development, and respects the sovereignty, rights and interests of coastal states.
China perseveres in dealing with traditional and non-traditional maritime threats through
cooperation, and strives to maintain maritime security through multiple peaceful ways and means.

In 1998, China and the United States concluded the Military Maritime Consultative Agreement
(MMCA) and began to conduct consultations on military maritime security issues. To date, eight
annual meetings, 13 working group meetings and two special meetings have been held,
contributing to the safety of maritime activities, the avoidance of maritime accidents and the
adoption of other confidence-building measures. An MMCA special session was held in August
2009 and an annual meeting was held in October 2010.

In October 2005, China and Vietnam signed the Agreement on Joint Patrols by the Navies of China
and Vietnam in the Beibu Gulf. The two navies established the Office of Joint Patrols in the Beibu
Gulf, organized ten joint patrols, and held five annual meetings. In February 2009, direct telephone
links were officially established between the Chinese and ROK naval and air force troops stationed
in adjacent areas. Since 2008, China and Japan have held several consultations over the
establishment of a maritime liaison mechanism. The Chinese Navy has taken an active part in the
activities of the Western Pacific Naval Symposium (WPNS), and in seminars on maritime security
sponsored by the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) and the Council for Security Cooperation in the
Asia Pacific (CSCAP).

In the past two years, the Chinese Navy has sent more than 20 naval ships in over ten convoys to
visit more than 30 countries, and received port visits from more than 30 naval ships representing
over 20 countries. '

**Regional Security Cooperation**

A multi-tiered and composite framework of Asia-Pacific regional security cooperation is taking
shape, and numerous security cooperation mechanisms have been further developed. China takes
an active part in establishing security dialogue and building security mechanisms in the Asia-Pacific


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

region, strengthens mutual political trust and security cooperation with Asia-Pacific countries,
promotes military confidence-building, and endeavors to maintain regional peace and stability.

Since 2009, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) has sustained its strong development
momentum in security cooperation. Its member states have signed a succession of papers, such as
the SCO Counter-Terrorism Convention, the Agreement among the Governments of the SCO
Member States on Cooperation in the Field of Ensuring International Information Security, and the
Agreement among the Governments of the SCO Member States on Cooperation in the Field of
Combating Crime, which have laid a solid legal foundation for security cooperation. Further
improvements have been made in cooperation mechanisms for security work at major international
events, such as those held in 2010, including the 65th Anniversary of the Victory of World Antifascist War held in Moscow, the Shanghai Expo and the Guangzhou Asian Games. Joint counterterrorism exercises continue to be formalized. Joint counter-terrorism exercises, such as the "Peace
Mission" series between the militaries, and the "Norak-Anti-Terror 2009" and "Saratov-Anti-Terror
2010" initiatives between law-enforcement and security departments, have provided an effective
deterrence to the three regional threats of terrorism, separatism and extremism. Regular meetings
have been held between security committee secretaries, procurators-general, heads of supreme
courts, defense ministers, ministers of interior affairs and public security, and other leaders of law
enforcement and security agencies from the SCO member states, enhancing cooperation in justice,
defense, law enforcement, security and other fields.

China actively participates in multilateral security meetings within the framework of the ARF,
ASEAN Plus One (China), and ASEAN Plus Three (China, Japan and the ROK). Initiated by China,
the ARF Conference on Security Policies was officially staged in 2004, and has developed into a
dialogue mechanism for the highest ranking senior defense officials within the ARF framework. In
May 2010, at the seventh ARF Conference on Security Policies, China proposed initiatives on
strengthening research on non-traditional security cooperation and on promoting practical
cooperation. In October 2010, China attended the first ASEAN Defense Ministers' Meeting Plus
(ADMM+) and proposed to advance regional security dialogue and cooperation. In recent years, the
PLA has hosted the China-ASEAN Defense and Security Dialogue (CADSD), the ASEAN Plus
Three Forum on Non-traditional Security Cooperation between Armed Forces, and the ARF
workshop on formulating legal rules for armed forces' participation in international disaster relief
operations.

Since 2007, China has sent senior defense officials on an annual basis to attend the Shangri-La
Dialogue held in Singapore to elaborate its national defense policy and opinions on regional
security cooperation.

**Military Exchanges with Other Countries**

China develops its military relations with foreign countries in a comprehensive manner, continues to
strengthen its practical exchanges and cooperation with the armed forces of other countries, and
strives to foster a military security environment featuring mutual trust and benefit. In the last two
years, senior PLA delegations have visited more than 40 countries, and defense ministers and
chiefs of general staff from more than 60 countries have visited China.

The strategic mutual trust and practical cooperation between the militaries of China and Russia has
been steadily enhanced. The militaries of the two sides have regularly exchanged high-level visits,
signed the Missile- and Space-Launch Notification Deal, conducted cooperation in training and
border defense, and held exchanges between educational institutions and air defense forces. With
respect to relations between the militaries of China and the United States, two sides are still


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

maintaining effective dialogues and communications after various ups and downs, carrying out
planned exchanges in respect of structural projects, such as defense consultation, maritime military
security consultation, and military filing work. Military ties between China and the European
countries continue to be strengthened. China continues to consolidate traditional friendly relations
with Central and Eastern European countries, increase practical exchanges with Western European
countries, and explore ways to develop military ties with the NATO and the EU.

China has strengthened military relations with its neighboring countries. It conducts friendly
exchanges with the DPRK and the ROK militaries, attaches importance to Sino-Japanese defense
exchanges, strengthens multi-dimensional Sino-Pakistani military exchanges and cooperation,
works to advance the Sino-Indian military relationship, strengthens friendly exchanges with the
militaries of ASEAN countries, and promotes military exchanges with countries like Australia and
New Zealand.

China conducts military exchanges with developing countries in Africa, West Asia, Latin America
and the South Pacific. It increases high-level visits and exchanges between junior and intermediate
officers, and seeks to broaden cooperation fields with these countries. For the first time, China sent
a hospital ship, the Peace Ark, to visit the Republic of Djibouti, the Republic of Kenya, the United
Republic of Tanzania, the Republic of Seychelles and other African countries and provided
humanitarian medical service. Also for the first time, China hosted workshops for heads of military
academies from English-speaking African countries, for directors of military hospitals from Frenchspeaking African countries, and for intermediate and senior officers from Portuguese-speaking
African countries. Additionally, China continues to host workshops for senior officers from countries
in Latin America, the Caribbean and the South Pacific.

Since the establishment of the Ministry of National Defense (MND) spokesperson system in 2008,
seven press conferences have been held on such themes as earthquake rescue and disaster relief,
maritime escort and international humanitarian rescue, and important information has been
released in a timely manner. The PLA invests greater efforts in public diplomacy, and has arranged
for domestic and foreign media to visit combat units and conduct interviews. The PLA provides
timely information on the building of national defense and armed forces via such platforms as the
MND website.

In 2009, in celebration of the 60th anniversaries of their respective foundings, the PLAN hosted a
multinational naval event on the theme of "Harmonious Ocean," and the PLAAF hosted the
"International Forum on Peace and Development."

## 10. Arms Control and Disarmament

China attaches importance to and takes an active part in international efforts in the field of arms
control, disarmament and non-proliferation. It adheres to the complete fulfillment of the UN's role in
this area, and that of other related international organizations and multilateral mechanisms, and
considers that existing multilateral arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation systems should
be consolidated and strengthened, that the legitimate and reasonable security concerns of all
countries should be respected and accommodated, and that global strategic balance and stability
should be maintained.

**Nuclear Disarmament**

China has always stood for the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons.
China maintains that countries possessing the largest nuclear arsenals bear special and primary


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

responsibility for nuclear disarmament. They should further drastically reduce their nuclear arsenals
in a verifiable, irreversible and legally-binding manner, so as to create the necessary conditions for
the complete elimination of nuclear weapons. When conditions are appropriate, other nuclearweapon states should also join in multilateral negotiations on nuclear disarmament. To attain the
ultimate goal of complete and thorough nuclear disarmament, the international community should
develop, at an appropriate time, a viable, long-term plan with different phases, including the
conclusion of a convention on the complete prohibition of nuclear weapons.

China holds that, before the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, all
nuclear-weapon states should abandon any nuclear deterrence policy based on first use of nuclear
weapons, make an unequivocal commitment that under no circumstances will they use or threaten
to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states or nuclear-weapon-free zones, and
negotiate an international legal instrument in this regard. In the meantime, nuclear-weapon states
should negotiate and conclude a treaty on no-first-use of nuclear weapons against each other.

China has played a constructive role in the review process of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Together with other signatories to the NPT, China is willing to sincerely
implement the positive achievements of the Eighth NPT Review Conference in 2010. China
supports the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) and the
early commencement of negotiations on the Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) at the
Conference on Disarmament (CD) in Geneva.

As a permanent member of the UN Security Council and a nuclear-weapon state signatory of the
NPT, China has never evaded its obligations in nuclear disarmament and pursues an open,
transparent and responsible nuclear policy. It has adhered to the policy of no-first-use of nuclear
weapons at any time and in any circumstances, and made the unequivocal commitment that under
no circumstances will it use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states
or nuclear-weapon-free zones. China has never deployed nuclear weapons in foreign territory and
has always exercised the utmost restraint in the development of nuclear weapons, and has never
participated in any form of nuclear arms race, nor will it ever do so. It will limit its nuclear capabilities
to the minimum level required for national security.

China has strictly abided by its commitment to a moratorium on nuclear testing and has actively
participated in the work of the Preparatory Commission of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban
Treaty Organization, and is steadily preparing for the national implementation of the Treaty. China
is responsible for setting up 12 international monitoring stations and laboratories. At present, six
primary seismological monitoring stations, three radionuclide stations, the Beijing Radionuclide
Laboratory and the China National Data Center have been set up, and one infrasound station is
under construction.

China consistently supports the efforts of non-nuclear-weapon states in establishing nuclearweapon-free zones, has already signed and ratified all the relevant protocols which have been
opened for signature of any nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties, and has reached agreement with
the ASEAN countries on relevant issues under the Protocol of the Treaty on the Southeast Asia
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone. China supports the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central
Asia and its protocols signed by Central Asian countries, and supports the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East.

China maintains that the global missile defense program will be detrimental to international strategic
balance and stability, will undermine international and regional security, and will have a negative
impact on the process of nuclear disarmament. China holds that no state should deploy overseas


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

missile defense systems that have strategic missile defense capabilities or potential, or engage in
any such international collaboration.

**Non-Proliferation**

China firmly opposes the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and their means of
delivery, and consistently deals with non-proliferation issues in a highly responsible manner. China
maintains that, in order to prevent proliferation at source, efforts should be made to foster a global
and regional security environment featuring mutual trust and cooperation, and the root causes of
WMD proliferation should be eliminated. It holds that non-proliferation issues should be resolved
through political and diplomatic means. It holds that the authority, effectiveness and universality of
the international non-proliferation regime should be upheld and enhanced. The international
community should ensure fairness and prevent discrimination in international non-proliferation
efforts, strike a balance between non-proliferation and the peaceful use of science and technology,
and abandon double standards. China has joined all international treaties and international
organizations in the field of non-proliferation, and supports the role played by the United Nations in
this regard, and has conscientiously implemented any relevant resolutions of the UN Security
Council.

China advocates resolving the nuclear issue in the Korean Peninsula peacefully through dialogues
and consultations, endeavoring to balance common concerns through holding six-party talks in
order to realize the denuclearization on the Korean Peninsula and maintain peace and stability of
the Korean Peninsula and the Northeast Asia. China, always considering the whole situation in the
long run, painstakingly urges related countries to have more contacts and dialogues in order to
create conditions for resuming six-party talks as early as possible. China is for the peaceful
resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue through dialogue and negotiation, and for maintaining the
peace and stability of the Middle East. China has been dedicated to promoting dialogue and
negotiation, and has actively engaged with relevant parties to promote non-proliferation. China has
attended the meetings of foreign ministers and political directors of the P5+1, and has participated
in the deliberations on the Iranian nuclear issue at the UN Security Council and at the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in a constructive manner.

Since 2009, China has held arms control and non-proliferation consultations with a dozen countries,
including the US, Russia, the UK, Germany, Brazil, Canada, Pakistan, the Republic of Korea, the
EU, Australia and Israel, and continues to strengthen dialogue and exchanges with multinational
export control mechanisms. It has conducted discussions with the Missile Technology Control
Regime (MTCR) and participated in its technical outreach meeting. China has cosponsored intersessional meetings on non-proliferation and disarmament with relevant countries within the
framework of the ARF, and taken part in discussions on biological security and counter-biological
terrorism.

China attaches great importance to non-proliferation export control, and has established a
comprehensive legal system for export control of nuclear, biological, chemical, missile and related
sensitive items and technologies, as well as all military products. It has adopted the relevant
international universal export control measures, including the licensing system, end-user and enduse certificate, list control, and "catch-all" principle. In 2009, the Ministry of Commerce promulgated
the Measures for Administration of Dual-use Items and Technologies Subject to Export General
License to further strengthen the licensing system for export control.

China attaches great importance to the issue of nuclear security, opposes nuclear terrorism, adopts
effective nuclear security measures and maintains a good record in this field. China observes in


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

good faith its international obligations and takes an active part in international nuclear security
cooperation. It agrees in principle to set up a nuclear security "Center of Excellence" in China in
cooperation with relevant countries.

**Prohibition of Biological and Chemical Weapons**

China sincerely fulfills its obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) by setting up
implementation offices at both central and local levels, by submitting timely complete annual
declarations, through declarations subsequent to newly discovered chemical weapons abandoned
by Japan in China, and through submission of the annual national protection program. China has
hosted more than 240 on-site inspections by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). China cooperates closely with the OPCW. Jointly with the OPCW, China has
hosted several training courses for OPCW inspectors, as well as international courses on protection
and assistance. China has also provided assistance to those African states party to the
Organization. With a view to facilitating Japan's role in fulfilling its obligation to destroy its chemical
weapons abandoned in China, China has assisted Japan in carrying out 150 on-site investigation,
excavation, recovery and identification missions, and has excavated almost 50,000 items of
abandoned chemical weaponry. In October 2010, China began to destroy chemical weaponry
abandoned by Japan in Nanjing. China calls on Japan to increase its input to this process and to
accelerate the destruction of its chemical weapons abandoned on Chinese territory.

China supports multilateral efforts to strengthen the effectiveness of the Biological Weapons
Convention (BWC) and is committed to the comprehensive and strict implementation of the
Convention. China has already established a comprehensive legislation system for the
implementation of the Convention and set up a national point of contact. China submits annual
declarations of its confidence-building measures to the Implementation Support Unit of the
Convention in a timely manner, attends Meetings of State Parties and Meetings of Experts and
related seminars, strengthens bio-security and disease surveillance, and carries out international
exchanges and cooperation.

**Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space**

The Chinese government has advocated from the outset the peaceful use of outer space, and
opposes any weaponization of outer space and any arms race in outer space. China believes that
the best way for the international community to prevent any weaponization of or arms race in outer
space is to negotiate and conclude a relevant international legally-binding instrument.

In February 2008, China and Russia jointly submitted to the Conference on Disarmament (CD) a
draft Treaty on the Prevention of the Placement of Weapons in Outer Space and the Threat or Use
of Force against Outer Space Objects (PPWT). In August 2009, China and Russia jointly submitted
their working paper responding to the questions and comments raised by the CD members on the
draft treaty. China is looking forward to starting negotiations on the draft treaty at the earliest
possible date, in order to conclude a new outer space treaty.

**Conventional Arms Control**

China has sincerely fulfilled its obligations under the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons
(CCW) and its Protocols, submitted its annual reports on the implementation of the Amended
Protocol on Landmines, and actively participated in the work of the Group of Governmental Experts
(GGE) on Cluster Munitions. In April 2010, China ratified the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of
War.


-----

Downloaded from the official Chinese Government English translation at URL:
http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7114675.htm on 31 March 2011 (Laurel, MD)

Since 2009, China has continued to participate actively in international humanitarian de-mining
assistance. It has held de-mining training courses for Afghanistan, Iraq and Sudan. China has also
donated de-mining equipment to Egypt, Afghanistan, Iraq, Sudan and Sri Lanka, and provided Peru
and Ethiopia with mine victim assistance.

China has actively participated in the international effort to combat the illicit trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons (SALW). It has conscientiously implemented the UN Program of Action (PoA) on
SALW and the International Instrument on Identifying and Tracing Illicit SALW. It has participated in
the Open-Ended Working Group (OEWG) and the first session of the Preparatory Commission of
an Arms Trade Treaty. In 2010, China attended the Fourth Biannual Meeting on SALW and
submitted its national report.

**Transparency in Military Expenditure and Registration of Transfer of Conventional Arms**

China attaches great importance to military transparency, and makes efforts to promote mutual trust
with other countries in the military sphere. Since 2007, China has begun to report to the UN
Standardized Instrument for Reporting Military Expenditures. China gives weight to the UN Register
of Conventional Arms and continues to submit data to the Register on conventional arms transfer in
the seven categories covered by the Register.


-----

