###### POLICY FOR THE CONSOLIDATION OF DEMOCRATIC SECURITY

 (PCSD)

### PCSD

Ministry of National Defense
Republic of Colombia


-----

Overall Coordination
Ministry of National Defense

Design and Diagramming
Adriana Marcela Ruiz

Printing
Imprenta Nacional de Colombia

2007


-----

Ministry of National Defense

Juan Manual Santos Calderon – Minister of Defense
Juan Carlos Pinzon – Vice Minister for Strategy and Planning
Sergio Jaramillo Caro – Vice Minister for International Policy and Affairs
Luis Manual Neira Nunez – Secretary General of the Ministry of Defense

Armed Forces

General Fredy Padilla de Leon – General Commander of the Armed Forces
General Mario Montoya Uribe – Army Commander
Admiral Guillermo Barrera Hurtado – Navy Commander
General Jorge Ballesteros Rodriguez – Air Force Commander

National Police

General Oscar Naranjo – Director General of the National Police


-----

-----

### PCSD

his document on the Policy for the Consolidation of
Democratic Security (PCDS) has been prepared by
the Ministry of Defense as part of the National De
#### T

velopment Plan 2006-2010 “Community State: Development for Everyone.” The document describes the strategic objectives that will receive the focus of each one of the
institutions in the defense sector.


5


-----

-----

##### TABLE OF CONTENTS

# C

Presentation............................................................. 9

1. Introduction...........................................................15

2. New strategic scenario..........................................19

3. Policy for the Consolidation of Democratic

Security (PCDS)......................................................25

3.1 Principles for implementation.................................................27
3.2 Strategic objectives................................................................29
3.2.1 To consolidate territorial control and strengthen the rule
of law across the entire national territory.................................29

3.2.1.1 Strategy for the consolidation of territorial control ......30

3.2.1.2 Development of the Integrated Action Doctrine (DAI)...33

3.2.2 To protect the public and hold on to strategic initiative
against all threats to citizen security. .......................................34
3.2.3 To drastically raise the cost of trafficking drugs in Colombia. ...36
3.2.4 To keep our public security forces modern and effective,
with a high level of legitimacy based on public confidence

and support..........................................................................38

3.2.4.1 Strengthened capabilities in the public security forces ..38

3.2.4.2 Structural reforms.....................................................40

3.2.5 To maintain the downward trend in all crime rates in the
country’s urban centers..........................................................41

3.2.5.1 Citizen security strategy..............................................42

3.3 International initiative ............................................................43
3.4 Plans, programs, and initiatives..............................................45


-----

-----

##### Presentation

BY MINISTER OF DEFENSE, JUAN MANUEL SANTOS

# P

n modern day societies it is clear that security is not
an end in itself, but serves rather as a foundation for
building a future with progress and social justice.

#### I

From the very first day, the main goal of President Alvaro Uribe’s government has been to make Colombia
safer, free from threats to its citizens’ security, where
legitimate government authority can promote the economic and social development of all Colombians.

These goals for the 2002-2006 period were outlined in
the Democratic Defense and Security Policy and developed by the Ministry of Defense and the public security
forces.

The policy’s main objective was to recover state control
over the majority of the national territory, particularly
areas affected by the activity of illegal armed groups
and drug traffickers.

The results by the end of the first term were decisive.
Colombians enjoyed huge improvements in security, and
improved security brought with it significant increases
in investor confidence and quality of life.

From 2002 to 2006, to cite just a few indicators, we
were able to reduce the number of homicides by 40%,
the number of kidnappings for extortion by 83%, the


9


-----

10


number of victims from collective homicides by 72%,
terrorist attacks by 61%, and kidnappings at illegal
roadblocks by 99%.

By the start of Uribe’s second term on August 7, 2006,
as is normal in every dynamic process, many things
had changed. The different actors threatening society
began to adapt to the new circumstances, making it
necessary for the government to respond by changing
the emphasis and parameters under which it had been
operating.

For example, with the demobilization of the illegal selfdefense groups and the beginning of the application of
the Justice and Peace Law, the Colombian paramilitary
phenomenon came to an end. Nevertheless, once the
demobilization of close to 32,000 members of paramilitary groups and their leaders had taken place, criminal
bands closely tied to drug trafficking emerged in some
of their former zones of influence, requiring a new strategy.

Meanwhile, the FARC recognized it could not engage
in a war of movements, and was forced to return to
guerrilla warfare with its sporadic ambushes, quick escapes, and terrorism.

Drug traffickers also transformed their business in order
to adapt to the government’s ambitious anti-narcotic
strategy. They switched from large plantations of illicit
crops to small parcels in difficult to access sites with the
coca hidden under legitimate crops.

In brief, after four years, the Democratic Defense and
Security Policy needed adaptation to the new strategic
scenario. Its initial objective of territorial control by the
public security forces gave way to the goal of social recovery of that territory through integrated state action.
The Ministry of Defense undertook a rigorous analysis
of these developments, with the active participation of
the Armed Forces General Commander, the Commanders of the different Armed Forces, the Director General of the National Police, and high-level officers at the
Armed Forces and Police. The resulting adjustments
are contained in the Policy for the Consolidation of De

-----

mocratic Security (PCDS). This policy has been implemented since the beginning of President Uribe’s second
administration and is described in this document.

We have already gained control of the vast majority of
our national territory. Now we must consolidate that
control, meaning that, in addition to the presence of
the public security forces, we must bring in the diverse
institutions and agencies that provide every type of government service. A return of institutionality will bring
a definitive end to the isolation to which many zones of
the country had been condemned by the violence they
experienced.

The Policy for the Consolidation of Democratic Security will bring that institutionality back to the country
through its five strategic objectives, broken down into
28 plans, programs, and initiatives led by executive
managers who will follow-up, supervise, and measure
results.

This policy is a mandate from the President of the Republic and the Ministry of Defense establishing priorities,
criteria, and instructions on how efforts by the Armed
Forces and the National Police are to be organized as
they fulfill their constitutional mission during the second
administration of President Uribe. It is, in synthesis,
Colombia’s national defense policy for the 2006-2010
period.

The PCDS includes new elements such as a three-phase
strategy to consolidate territory in different areas in the
country according to the individual security characteristics. This means that military operations and police
presence will be more or less intense according to the
presence and threat of illegal armed groups, drug traffickers, and criminal bands, until normal activity by all
government institutions can be guaranteed.

Another new element is the Integrated Action Doctrine, which is a methodology for consolidating territorial
control that prescribes combining the legitimate use of
force with state and community social action. Members
of the security forces apply principles and protocols for
proper coordination with representatives of other government institutions.


11


-----

12


The public security forces will work together closely
with the Center for the Coordination of Integrated Action (CCAI for its Spanish initials), in places where that
agency is present. When not present, the public security forces will work directly with local authorities and
state agencies in the area, coordinating social work that
will satisfy the most urgent needs of the people.

To adapt to the new dynamics for illicit crops, we will
put greater emphasis on manual eradication as an important aspect in the fight against drug trafficking. The
advantage of manual eradication is its precision combined with durable effects. We will not give up on aerial spraying, however, but will continue to use it when
warranted by the circumstances and the size of the
plantations.

If criminals change, then the strategies to fight them
must also change, and that is why the notion of flexibility will be one of this policy’s guiding principles.

Special attention will also be given to improving urban
security. Urban security is a focus of concern for citizens, whose peace of mind is affected by the actions
of common criminals in organized bands dedicated to
theft, kidnapping, and extortion.

The citizen security strategy will provide additional
tools to the Police for dismantling groups responsible
for committing high impact crimes in cities and urban
centers.

Lastly, without pretending to have covered all aspects
of the PCDS in this presentation, the policy will include
structural reforms in diverse areas such as military penal justice, the definition of roles and missions, and the
police and military educational systems.

We will develop and implement a comprehensive human
rights policy to generate a systematic and long-term
transformation process toward a strengthened culture
of respect for human rights in the security forces

Likewise, special investments will be made during President Uribe’s second term to improve the mobility of the


-----

Armed Forces, increase our intelligence capacity against
criminals, build up the standing force, and maintain minimum strategic capabilities.

Intelligence will play a dominant role in this consolidation phase, and we will work to strengthen it, promoting a law to regulate intelligence functions. Only with
excellent, modern intelligence will the security forces be
successful in their mission to dismantle criminal organizations and fight terrorism.

We therefore proudly present to the country the Policy
for the Consolidation of Democratic Security. It represents a step forward in the national goal of rescuing
Colombia from the harmful influence of violence and
corruption and leading us into progress and social justice.

This Policy is also a bridge between the DSP applied
during the first period of the Uribe administration and
current efforts to turn these lines of action into a state
policy.

This democratic security strategy has demonstrated
that it has every element it needs to become the core
of a permanent and long-term security policy that will
prevent Colombia from experiencing swings in security
strategy in response to short-term circumstances.

After just over a year since we began to design and
apply the PCDS, results can already be seen in an increase in demobilized persons, a continued downward
trend in crime, and the capture or neutralization of dangerous criminals.

We are reaping these fruits thanks to the professionalism and the sacrifices of the Armed Forces and the Police, who work untiringly on behalf of the security and
peace of mind of the Colombian people.


13


-----

-----

###### INTRODUCTION

## 1

n the year 2002 the government of President Álvaro
Uribe Vélez launched the Democratic Security Policy
(DSP) describing the guiding principles for all activi
#### I

ties related to national defense and security.

The DSP concentrated on recovering state control of the
majority of national territory. To do that, it continued
and intensified the process begun by the prior presidential administration to strengthen the Armed Forces and
the National Police.

The number of military and police units was increased
to better cover national territory. In total, the standing
forces increased by 32% from 2002 to 2006. New
units and the ones already in existence were equipped
with better means for mobility and tactical support,
such as helicopters, aircraft, river patrol boats, and intelligence platforms.

By virtue of this strengthening, it was possible for the
public security forces to establish a level of control
over the nation’s geography without precedent in the
country’s history.

In 2002, after years of aggressive offensive action by
illegal armed groups, 158 of the 1,099 municipalities in
the country were left without a police station to protect
the local population. By 2004, all the municipalities of
Colombia had police stations in their municipal seats.

During the four-year term the Armed Forces developed
the capacity to launch operations into increasingly remote regions of the national geography where the state


15


-----

16


had never before been present in a sustained manner.
This ended a situation that had been taken advantage of
by the illegal armed groups to strengthen their armed
structures and expand their influence over the communities settled in those regions.

Thanks to these advances, all the illegal armed groups
and other criminal organizations assailing the security
of Colombians have received hard blows, significantly
reducing their capability to destabilize the constitutional
order.

Stronger public security forces have significantly hobbled the plans of the illegal armed group the FARC.
Aggressive military operations from 1998 to 2002 led
the FARC to renounce armed operations with large concentrations of men. In the same way, increased Military
and Police capabilities over the last four years have allowed them to establish sufficient territorial control to be
able to launch offensive operations against FARC rearguard positions, dismantling several FARC fronts and
support structures.

Not only did these efforts from 1998 to 2006 keep the
FARC from being able to move into a war of positions, but after sustained confrontation across the entire
nation, they almost completely dissolved the capacity
the FARC once had to launch large-scale attacks, thus
meting out a decisive defeat in the war of movements.
This situation forced the FARC to once again adopt guerrilla warfare, deploying in small groups and staying
constantly on the move in order to survive the constant
pressure of the Armed Forces and the National Police.

The other two large illegal armed groups, the ELN and
the AUC, were also fought with determination. Constant
action by security forces significantly reduced ELN capabilities and structure. It decided to begin exploratory
conversations with the national government in December 2005, in order to work out a negotiated solution
to the armed conflict. After several rounds of conversation, this process is ongoing as of this document’s
publication.

Similarly, at the beginning of this administration the
illegal armed group the AUC decided to engage in a


-----

peace process with the national government. By 2006
the process had produced the demobilization of around
32,000 men from its armed structures and support
networks. The main leaders of the organization are
now confessing their crimes to the justice system in the
framework of the Justice and Peace Law.

There is no doubt that the weakening and disintegration of these illegal armed groups has had a significant
impact on the fight against drug trafficking. Combined
with efforts in the areas of eradication, interdiction, and
extradition, this weakness has severely impacted the organizations dedicated to drug trafficking in Colombia.

By the end of President Uribe’s first presidential term in
2006, after four years of implementing the DSP, the results were highly satisfactory. All crime rates had been
reduced across the nation. Homicide, for example,
went from 28,837 cases in 2002 to 17,479 in 2006.
Kidnapping for extortion went from 1,709 cases to 282
in the same period. Attacks on towns by the illegal
armed groups went from 32 in 2002 to 4 in 2006,
while terrorist attacks in general decreased from 1,645
in 2002 to 646 in 2006. In the same way, while in
2002 there were 131 mayors in the country who were
unable to exercise office from their municipal seats due
to pressure and threats from the illegal armed groups,
in 2006 this figure went down to four mayors.

These improvements, together with the government’s
steadfast resolve to

###### Virtuous circle

continue to fight cri
###### graph: me have brought


17

|Col1|There is no doubt that the weakening and disintegration of illegal armed groups has had a significant impact on the fight against drug trafficking.|
|---|---|
|There is no doubt that the weakening and disintegration of illegal armed groups has had a significant impact on the fight against drug trafficking.|There is no doubt that the weakening and disintegration of illegal armed groups has had a significant impact on the fight against drug trafficking.|


-----

18


back a feeling of peace and security to the vast majority
of Colombians.

These results have not only benefited security in Colombia, but they have also had a very positive effect on
economic and social arenas.

A “virtuous circle of security” has been generated in the
last four years. Greater security brings greater confidence and stability, which then acts as a powerful attraction for private investment. Private investment then
generates greater economic growth.

Private investment grew in Colombia around 15 points
as a percentage of the GDP for the four years from
2002 to 2006. This had very favorable repercussions
on economic growth, which went from 1.93% of the
GDP in 2002 to 6.8% in 2006, the country’s highest
growth rate in the last twenty years.

Economic growth, in turn, generated greater tax revenues, which has permitted increased investments in social development programs. This explains the reduction
of around ten percentage points in the poverty index
and approximately five percentage points in the unemployment rate from 2002 to 2006.

We can thus declare that the DSP has decisively improved the climate of peace and security, increased private
investment and economic growth, and, most importantly, stimulated social development and produced well
being for the great majority of Colombians.


-----

###### NEW STRATEGIC SCENARIO
# 2

###### PCSD


-----

-----

###### NEW STRATEGIC SCENARIO
## 2

he very success of the DSP has generated a new
security context where criminal groups have been
forced to change their tactics and strategies in or
#### T

der to survive. They have been weakened, but have not
disappeared. Following their criminal logic, they have
gone through a transformation. This situation presents
a series of challenges to the institutions of Colombia and
its public security forces.

The first and most important threat comes from the illegal armed groups (IAGs), in particular the FARC and
the ELN. Though undeniably weakened, they persist in
their intention to confront the state, challenge its authority, and attack its citizens.

In the case of the FARC, this group continues to
insist on terrorism and drug trafficking. It currently dedicates a large portion of its armed efforts
to defending what it considers to be its strategic
assets - its illicit crops, its kidnap victims, and its
leaders.

It has now become impossible for the FARC to stage
attacks with great numbers of armed men given the public security forces’ military superiority and quick response capability. Therefore, the FARC keeps its forces
dispersed in classic guerrilla warfare, seeking to wear
down government forces through attrition. Even so,
under special circumstances this group can engage in
armed actions with a significant concentration of individuals.

In addition, although the FARC continues to be active
in numerous regions of the country, it has deployed its


21


-----

22


strategic rearguard in border regions. Its illegal activities are increasingly concentrated in those regions, making it a threat not only to the security of Colombia but
also to the security of neighboring countries.

The FARC is also expending great energy in an attempt
to influence national and international political arenas in
search of recognition and legitimacy, in order to compensate for lost ground in the military arena.

From the beginning of President Uribe’s administration
the ELN gave signs of wanting to explore a negotiated
solution. Despite several attempts, however, only in December 2005 did it decide to begin dialogue with the
national government. Today, while periodic rounds of
conversations between government representatives and
the ELN take place in the city of Havana, Cuba, ELN
armed structures continue to carry out terrorist actions
in different regions of the country, continue to participate in drug trafficking, and continue to indiscriminately
plant anti-personnel mines in the territories where they
are still present.

The demobilization of the illegal self-defense groups put
an end to the paramilitary phenomenon as a nationwide armed structure, but set the stage for the appearance of new threats.

Without a doubt, the most representative threat in this
context is the emergence of criminal groups in several of the zones where armed self-defense structures
demobilized. These criminals seek to control the different illegal activities once dominated by self-defense
groups and take advantage of the enormous financial
resources they generate. Another threat comes from
the desire of other illegal armed groups to enter into
demobilized zones in order to exercise armed influence. At this point it is important to emphasize the national government’s firm decision to cancel legal benefits,
apply regular criminal justice, and, when appropriate,
extradite any person who relapses into drug trafficking,
terrorism, or any other crime once he has demobilized
from the self-defense groups.

A commonality between illegal armed groups and criminal groups is the systematic use of kidnapping and


-----

extortion. These crimes have a high impact on society.
They affect not only freedom, peace of mind, and the
finances of the victims and their families, but also affect
the state, since they are used as political betting chips
by the illegal armed groups to try to pressure the state
into political and military concessions in exchange for
the freedom of captive citizens. For that reason, any
reduction in these crimes requires first dismantling those groups.

Numerous drug trafficking cartels present another threat to the security of Colombians. Drug
traffickers have figured out how to adapt to the
government’s anti-narcotics strategy. Instead of
planting large, industrial coca fields, they now plant
multiple small, scattered plots at remote sites. The
coca is planted among legal crops, making it hard
to detect and eradicate. They are also making increased use of natural parks and border zones to
avoid aerial spraying. They also use these areas
to mount and operate clandestine laboratories for
drug production.

In terms of drug exports, the drug traffickers have begun to use a greater number of land and sea routes,
since those transportation methods are less expensive
and permit greater mobility and a greater number of
routes that can be used more frequently. Colombia’s
borders are extensive and complex and the public security forces are limited in their capacity to effectively
cover every section of the border and the ocean. By the
same measure, the use of air space for drug transportation has increasingly gone down, due to increased and
more effective coverage by the Colombian Air Force’s
air interdiction system.

Another concern in the area of drug trafficking is the
growing participation of foreign drug trafficking networks, which, in connection with Colombian cartels
and organizations, make continual attempts to transport drugs from Colombia to different countries. In this
sense, international cooperation is essential for fighting
these networks.

There is another threat to the peace and security of the
inhabitants of the country’s urban centers. It is the exis

23


-----

tence of bands of common criminals who commit every
type of crime from muggings, house robberies, and
bank robberies, to extortion, kidnapping, and homicide.
Although over the last four years it has been possible to
reduce crime rates across the country thanks to police
action against these criminals, they continue to commit
a significant number of crimes. For that reason, the National Police will strengthen its citizen security strategy,
with the objective of dismantling these bands.


24


-----

###### POLICY FOR THE CONSOLIDATION OF DEMOCRATIC SECURITY

# 3

###### PCSD


-----

-----

###### POLICY FOR THE CONSOLIDATION OF DEMOCRATIC SECURITY
## 3

n 2002, in the framework of the Democratic Defense
and Security Policy, the national government determined that the overall goal of Democratic Security

#### I

was to “Reinforce and guarantee the rule of law across
the nation.” In response to changes in the security context, the Ministry of Defense has now designed new
strategies to reach that same objective. The Policy for
the Consolidation of Democratic Security (PCDS) is the
result of that process. It establishes the specific priorities and political objectives that will orient the actions
of the Ministry of Defense, the Armed Forces, and the
National Police during this current presidential term.

In addition, the Ministry of Defense is heading up a process of review and analysis that will determine strategies for further development of this policy’s directives
and objectives.

As the PCDS is implemented, the public security
forces will operate under the constitutional mandate to reinforce and guarantee the rule of law across
the nation, as a necessary condition for protecting
all the inhabitants of Colombia.

3.1 PRINCIPLES FOR IMPLEMENTATION

Decisions and actions implemented by virtue of the
PCDS will always be framed within the following principles:

  - Our goals are security and peace. The great desire of all Colombians is to live in a climate of security
and tranquility. Therefore, no action will be taken
by the security forces that does not have the purpose of moving Colombians increasingly closer to
stable and lasting peace.


27


-----

28



- We will act within the law. The security forces
will always act out of the strictest respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law. They will
act within the framework of the rule of law, giving
priority to protecting the public. Public confidence
and support are the basis of the security forces’ legitimacy and their center of gravity.

- Continuous presence. The public security forces
will not abandon any of the zones where they are
currently present, or any zones where they gain territorial control through military operations over the
next few years.

- Security guarantees the functioning of the justice system. The security forces must continue to
contribute to the proper administration of justice by
guaranteeing the security conditions the justice system needs in order to function. This is a fundamental means of protecting the rights of citizens.

- Security is a catalyst for economic growth and

social benefits. Security force operations must
continue to contribute to a climate of confidence
and stability that will attract private investment
and produce economic growth and social
development, reducing unemployment and
poverty. Greater security will establish proper
conditions for state social action in benefit of
the most needy.

- Flexibility and adaptability. Without detriment to
its structure, organization, or line of command, the
security forces must establish and apply procedures
for flexibly and effectively adapting to changes in
tactics and strategies on the part of illegal armed
groups and other agents threatening national security. With that same flexibility, the security forces
must make every effort to develop new tactics and
procedures to continue to hold the strategic initiative in the confrontation.

- Coordination with other Forces. Each one of the
Armed Forces will intensify its process to adapt to
the joint operations doctrine, so that soldiers on the
land, on the ocean, and in the air might engage in


-----

coordinated and complementary actions. The Armed Forces and the Police, especially, will give priority to intensifying the application of coordination
procedures in every zone where they share jurisdiction.

- Coordination with other state institutions. More
than ever, the consolidation of Democratic Security will depend on the effective coordination of the
public security forces with other state institutions,
especially those in charge of social action and the
administration of justice. Therefore, the security
forces will develop protocols and principles within
their doctrine to ensure proper coordination.

3.2 STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES

In accordance with these principles, the Policy for the
Consolidation of Democratic Security has five (5) strategic objectives:

3.2.1 TO CONSOLIDATE TERRITORIAL CONTROL
AND STRENGTHEN THE RULE OF
LAW ACROSS THE ENTIRE NATIONAL
TERRITORY

Through the Democratic Security Policy, the state recovered extensive territorial control, represented mainly
by military and police control of geography. During
this current presidential administration, the government
must move from a stage of territorial control to one of
consolidation of territorial control. Strengthening the
rule of law and protection of the public will be at the
core of this effort.

Consolidation of territorial control is when the security provided by the public security forces enables the state to establish the justice system and
the rule of law. Democratic institutions are guaranteed free and continuous function, so that citizens
may fully exercise their rights.

The policy’s triumph is linked to the concept of irreversibility. That means that the achievements of the consolidation process will be so deep-seated in a given region that in practice it will be very hard to return to the


29


-----

30


scenario where illegal armed groups or other threats to
citizen security exercised influence through violence.

3.2.1.1 Strategy for the consolidation of territorial
control

The consolidation of territorial control and the rule of
law has been a strategic objective since the Democratic
Defense and Security Policy was formulated. Having a
strong constitutional order based on territorial control
is at the foundation of security, peaceful coexistence,
and democracy. Therefore by meeting the objective of
territorial control we end up effectively protecting citizens and supporting the exercise of their rights and
freedoms.

Three phases will be identified in the consolidation of territorial control. The phase for each zone of the country
will be established in line with the distinct security characteristics of that zone. Although the intense efforts
made in each zone will be different, interagency coordination and the work to strengthen democratic institutions and the justice system will be a constant.

The strategy for the consolidation of territorial control
concentrates on aligning military and police efforts with
anti-narcotic measures, social programs, the justice system, economic development, and the strengthening of
state institutions. When those six components function
simultaneously and in coordination they will produce
protection, justice, and prosperity. They will provide legitimate economic alternatives that complement the increased security with progress and social development.
They will attack drug trafficking organizations along
with the armed structures that protect them and profit
from that activity. Coordinating resources will establish
conditions of security, legality, and availability of public
and social services, making economic, social, and institutional development possible.

In order to attain that type of coordination, the Ministry
of Defense and the Presidential Agency for Social Action
will develop pilot programs to promote: (i) the recovery
of regional security and state institutional control, (ii)
the presence of state democratic institutions, the reinforcement of local governability, and the effective parti

-----

cipation of civil society, (iii) the eradication of illicit crops
and the development of a legitimate economy, (iv) the
recovery of the environment, and (v) the effective administration and application of justice.


###### Consolidation Strategy


Phase 1 – Territorial control This phase will be implemented in zones where illegal armed groups, drug
trafficking structures, and criminal bands are still active, and in zones where illegal self-defense groups have
demobilized.

Intense military operations will dismantle and neutralize criminal organizations at the same time they break
up drug trafficking networks and infrastructure in the
zone.

Phase 2 – Stabilization This phase will be implemented in regions where the public security forces are already exercising control, in other words in those zones
where phase 1 has been successfully completed.

In this phase the objective is to establish minimum security conditions in order to begin the process of institutional recovery. This means that the state democratic
institutions and agencies will be able to continue or, in
some cases, begin to carry out their work. The priority
of this phase is to satisfy the local population’s most
basic and immediate needs.


31


-----

32


During this stage intense policing will maintain order,
security, and peaceful co-existence in the community, so
that other state agencies can enter and function, especially agencies in charge of social action.
Significant military efforts will continue in order to prevent any attempt by illegal armed groups to attack, gain
a foothold, or be active in the zone.

Phase 3 – Consolidation This phase applies to regions
that have already been established, and the objective is
to expand state authority and increase public well being
through the normal and proper functioning of all government institutions and agencies.

This is a transition phase working toward the satisfaction of people’s basic needs and the effective provision
of all essential state services such as education, health,
justice, infrastructure works, and recreation.

During this phase, the most intense efforts will be focused on political, economic, and social arenas. Of
course, the police and the Armed Forces will continue
to selectively exercise their authority to maintain the underlying security conditions.

As part of this consolidation strategy, we will give priority to the implementation of the following plans and
programs:

Program for Humanitarian Attention to Demobilized
Persons (PAHD for its Spanish initials). The mission
of this program is to provide comprehensive humanitarian attention to the demobilized person and
his family, and to facilitate his social re-integration.
The objectives at this stage are: (i) To guarantee
comprehensive, efficient, and timely humanitarian
attention, (ii) To create incentives for demobilization, (iii) To raise the awareness of national and international communities, (iv) To prevent recruiting,
and (v) To strengthen the gathering, analysis, and
dissemination of information.

National Highway Security Program. The Ministry
of Defense is redesigning the Integrated Strategy for
National Highway Security. The process will optimize


-----

the use of existing resources, promoting substantial improvements in mobility, communication, and inter-institutional coordination. The result will be the creation
of an integrated system to respond more efficiently and
effectively to current security threats.

Network Program. Using a network model, the Ministry of Defense will fill regional security vacuums in order
to consolidate state presence across the nation. The
program objectives are: (i) To optimize and organize
human, logistical, and technological resources, (ii) To
improve mobility, communication, and coordination in
the security forces, (iii) To integrate the community, industry associations, authorities, and security forces, and
(iv) To promote active, voluntary citizen cooperation.

Kidnapping and Extortion. This program has four
main elements: (i) to keep GAULA personnel properly
trained, (ii) to strengthen the work to dismantle kidnapping and extortion networks, (iii) to prosecute the
financial assets of these criminal networks, and (iv) to
launch a communication campaign to decrease the rates of non-reported extortions in the country.

3.2.1.2 Development of the Integrated Action Doctrine
(DAI for its Spanish initials)

There is no doubt that these key elements will determine the success or failure of this strategy: the consolidation of territorial control and inter-agency coordination,
especially civilian-military coordination.

For that reason, the development of the Integrated Action Doctrine (DAI) will be a fundamental aspect of the
PCDS and the main tool for coordination between the
state’s use of legitimate force and its social action.

The DAI will give security force members the principles
and protocols they need to properly coordinate with the
representatives of other state institutions, local authorities, international cooperation agencies, non-governmental organizations, civic organizations, and the private sector.

Raising the principle of integrated action to the level of
operational doctrine will make it mandatory to include


33

|A fundamental aspect of the PCSD will be the develop- ment of an Integra- ted Action Doctrine (DAI) which will be the main tool for coordination bet- ween the state’s use of legitimate force and its social action.|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||A fundamental aspect of the PCSD will be the develop- ment of an Integra- ted Action Doctrine (DAI) which will be the main tool for coordination bet- ween the state’s use of legitimate force and its social action.||
||||


-----

34


integration in the design and execution of every operation undertaken by the Armed Forces and the Police in
their respective theaters and areas of operation.

There will be two different scenarios for the execution
of this doctrine, depending on the proximity of an office
of the Center for the Coordination of Integrated Action
(CCAI), under the Office of the President of the Republic. In the first scenario, the CCAI is present in a region. In that case, all the security units in that region
must establish close and continuous coordination with
the local CCAI representative. There will also be coordination at a central level, between the Ministry of
Defense, the General Command of the Armed Forces,
the Commands of each of the Armed Forces and the
National Police, and CCAI headquarters at the Office of
the President of the Republic.

The second scenario operates in regions where the CCAI
is not present. The CCAI currently has offices in just 58
of the 1,099 Colombian municipalities, so during this
presidential term, this second scenario will be the most
common one for the public security forces

The DAI must therefore establish clear principles and
multiple procedures for direct coordination between
security forces and the different authorities and civil organizations present in regions that do not have a CCAI
office.


3.2.2 TO PROTECT THE PUBLIC AND HOLD ON
TO STRATEGIC INITIATIVE AGAINST ALL
THREATS TO CITIZEN SECURITY.


Protecting people is at the core of the mission of the
public security forces. As long as there is still impunity,
law breaking, and rebellion against the authority of democratic institutions, people will continue to experience
a threat to their security. That is why state actions in all
arenas have the final goal of protecting people, under
the constitutional system they follow and defend.

So as part of the overall goals, one of the main responsibilities of the security forces is to dismantle illegal
armed groups (IAGs), criminal bands, drug trafficking
cartels, and organized criminal groups that constitute a
threat to the security of Colombians.

|Protecting people is the core of the mission of the public security for- ces. Democratic Security can be consolidated only as rule of law is strengthened,|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||Protecting people is the core of the mission of the public security for- ces. Democratic Security can be consolidated only as rule of law is strengthened,||
||||


-----

The public security forces will dismantle the structures
of those groups and deny them access to urban centers and rural towns. In the case of the IAGs, as territorial control is consolidated, they will progressively
lose their violence-based influence over people, which
will be a severe blow to their logistics and intelligence.
In the same way, progressive isolation of the IAGs will
continue to demonstrate that they do not represent the
people nor do they have any popular legitimacy.

It will be the job of the security forces to engage in
offensive operations across the nation, including the
most remote areas. They must go to the strategic rearguards of the illegal armed groups and to the hideouts
of drug traffickers and members of criminal bands in
order to dismantle them.


The role of military and police intelligence will be
basic to this effort. It will provide opportune analysis and reporting for effective offensive operations,
which, in turn, will help us maintain strategic initiative against all threats to the public. In response
to the ever-present threat of terrorist acts by illegal armed groups in compensation for their military weakness, intelligence will attempt to anticipate
terrorism and contribute to its prevention.


35


In the same measure, we will strengthen counterintelligence to prevent criminal organizations from having
access to information, plans, and operations of the public security forces in their attempt to prevent or escape
actions.

Certain that it is now impossible to reach their objectives
using armed methods, and with military defeat imminent, illegal armed groups may seek a rapprochement
with the national government. It is possible they will be
interested in a serious and committed process of political negotiation, under the terms established by the
President and by the High Commissioner of Peace. At
the same time, the Ministry of Defense and the security
forces will continue to hold out the option of individual
demobilization in the midst of the confrontation. Members of IAGs will be able to demobilize and enter the
re-integration and re-socialization programs sponsored
by the Office of the President.


-----

Demobilization will not be a possibility for any of the
drug cartels, gangs, or organized crime organizations,
or for former AUC members who have demobilized previously and relapsed into criminal activity. For them the
only road open is to voluntarily and immediately submit
to the regular justice system, or face the consequences
of offensive actions by the public security forces.

These same conditions will apply to any member of an
illegal armed group who, having demobilized through a
political negotiation process with the state, relapses into
criminal activity.

An inter-agency process for strategic review and analysis
will determine the best course of action for implementing military and police strategy against these threats.


3.2.3 TO DRASTICALLY RAISE THE COST OF
TRAFFICKING DRUGS IN COLOMBIA.


36


The fight against drug trafficking will use a holistic
approach because the drug business is comprised of a
series of interdependent links. Only by simultaneously
targeting action on all links will it be possible for the
fight against drug trafficking to be effective.

In a context of limited resources, but with multiple tools
available, we will choose actions that will make the greatest contribution to destabilizing the drug trafficking
system and implement them with the greatest priority
and intensity. The Armed Forces and the National Police
will carry out operations in the following areas:

Eradication. The public security forces will make use of
all means available for eradicating illicit crops. It must
be emphasized that the national government has begun a process to review its eradication strategy, in order
to optimize the use of resources. More resources and
efforts will go toward manual eradication, balanced
with aerial spraying. The use of one or the other in each
zone where there are illicit crops will be determined by
topography, natural features, and security status.

Interdiction. Interdiction operations take place on the
ground, on the ocean, on rivers, and in the air. The
objective is to make it more difficult to transport drugs

|Col1|In a context of limi- ted resources, but with multiple tools available, the actio- ns that make the greatest contribu- tion to destabilizing the drug trafficking system will be implemented with priority and with the greatest inten- sity.|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|In a context of limi- ted resources, but with multiple tools available, the actio- ns that make the greatest contribu- tion to destabilizing the drug trafficking system will be implemented with priority and with the greatest inten- sity.|In a context of limi- ted resources, but with multiple tools available, the actio- ns that make the greatest contribu- tion to destabilizing the drug trafficking system will be implemented with priority and with the greatest inten- sity.||
||||


-----

from inland areas to the borders and also to make sure
chemical precursors for drug production do not have
an easy trip to the processing laboratories. Interdiction
will also neutralize illegal traffic in arms, munitions, and
explosives for illegal armed groups and for the armed
structures of drug trafficking organizations. Important
efforts will also be made toward the identification and
destruction of infrastructure for drug storage and processing.

Neutralization. We will neutralize illegal armed groups
that participate in any stage of the business, as well as
the armed structures of drug trafficking organizations.
Because of the enormous resources received by illegal
armed groups from their active participation in the drug
trafficking business, they allocate an increasingly greater proportion of their military apparatus to protecting
that whole system from actions by the public security
forces. When the Armed Forces take offensive action
against illegal armed groups, the drug trafficking system is weakened, making it more vulnerable to other
state actions to combat it.

Consolidation of territorial control. Consolidating territorial control significantly increases the chances of
success in the fight against drug trafficking, because
it permits the arrival and functioning of the state’s social agencies. Government social agencies can develop
alternative development programs for people who live
in regions where illicit crops are grown. It also permits
the expulsion of illegal armed groups, criminal bands,
and drug trafficking cartels, thus guaranteeing that
fields will not be replanted and the structures will not be
there to promote the purchase, collection, processing,
and transportation of drugs.

It has been demonstrated that when an attack is made
on all fronts, the drug trafficking system can be broken
and destabilized, limiting and complicating its different activities, forcing the drug traffickers to constantly
change their tactics and stay on the defensive in hiding,
thus increasing its costs and risks and reducing its profits. With this in mind, public security operations will
concentrate on hitting drug trafficking increasingly harder at every link of the productive chain, complicating


37

|Col1|Consolidating terri- orial control signifi- antly increases the hances of success in the fight against drug trafficking|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Consolidating terri- torial control signifi- cantly increases the chances of success in the fight against drug trafficking|Consolidating terri- orial control signifi- antly increases the hances of success in the fight against drug trafficking||
||||


-----

the business to the point of creating disincentives for
individuals and organizations that would like to stay in
or enter this business in Colombia.
The international cooperation agreements signed by
Colombia in this area will be implemented with determination as a fundamental part of the fight against drug
trafficking.


3.2.4 TO KEEP OUR PUBLIC SECURITY FORCES
MODERN AND EFFECTIVE, WITH A HIGH
LEVEL OF LEGITIMACY BASED ON PUBLIC
CONFIDENCE AND SUPPORT.


38


To fulfill this objective, the efforts of the Ministry of
Defense will concentrate on two priority areas. Firstly, it will make special investments to strengthen the
operational capabilities of the public security forces. At
the same time, it will implement a series of structural
reforms at the Ministry of Defense, the Armed Forces,
and the National Police, with a clear orientation toward
legitimacy as their center of gravity. These reforms will
be guided by a long-term vision, which we have developed through work with scenarios to determine the
future actions most likely to be required from the security forces.

3.3.4.1 Strengthened capabilities in the public security
forces

Over the next four years, the Ministry of Defense will
make special investments that will have a decisive impact on the force structure and on operating methods
in the medium and long run. These investments will be
allocated to public security capabilities in the following
areas:


###### Consolidation of territorial control


-----

Mobility. Investments in this area will increase the efficiency of territorial control operations, in the measure
that with greater mobility greater extensions of territory
can be covered in less time. Likewise, greater mobility
will permit quicker reaction with greater impact in response to an attack or threat of attack at any point of the
national geography.

Intelligence. Strong intelligence becomes fundamental
when facing enemies that recur with increasing insistence to terrorism and ambush, and who take refuge and
camouflage themselves among the civilian population
to avoid actions by security forces. Intelligence helps
to identify and locate threats, and opportunely provides
the proper information for engaging in successful operations against those threats.

Standing force. Consolidating territorial control presents a series of challenges making it necessary to increase the number of personnel in the Armed Forces
and Police. Extending territorial control to zones where
the state currently does not have control, occupying the
areas where illegal self-defense groups have demobilized, increasing combat capacity through new units,
and doing integrated action work all obviously require
a larger standing force.

Aware of this need, the Ministry of Defense will allocate
resources for a sustainable increase in the standing force, under the premise of prudent growth. The growth
will occur at a set ratio between commanders and troops, to maintain a proper command and control level.

Maintenance of strategic capabilities. At the present
conjuncture, the Colombian government makes use of
all of its strategic material to support the operations
against drug trafficking and terrorism. For example,
ships and submarines are used for surveillance and maritime interdiction of drugs and arms, just as combat
aircraft are used for air fire support against targets related to illegal armed groups.

Further investments in strategic material will focus on
extending the useful life of existing materials through
upgrading and retrofitting. In addition, minor acqui

39


-----

|Col1|The Ministry of Natio- nal Defense will allo- cate resources for a sustainable increase in the standing force, under the premise of prudent growth. The growth will maintain a proper ratio bet- ween commanders and troops, so that a proper command and control level can be maintained.|
|---|---|
|The Ministry of Natio- nal Defense will allo- cate resources for a sustainable increase in the standing force, under the premise of prudent growth. The growth will maintain a proper ratio bet- ween commanders and troops, so that a proper command and control level can be maintained.|The Ministry of Natio- nal Defense will allo- cate resources for a sustainable increase in the standing force, under the premise of prudent growth. The growth will maintain a proper ratio bet- ween commanders and troops, so that a proper command and control level can be maintained.|


40


sitions will be made to complement the existing material.

The Armed Forces can thus maintain the minimum capabilities necessary to fulfill their constitutional mandate
to defend the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity, and constitutional order of Colombia. From a
strategic defense posture, they will remain attentive to
the emergence and formation of potential new threats
requiring action.

3.3.4.2 Structural reforms

In the years to come, the Ministry of Defense will provide leadership for reforms that will allow security forces
to successfully confront security threats in the medium
run, and at the same time establish a forward-looking
structure for the next decade. To that end, the reforms
will concentrate on the following aspects:

HR and IHL policy. The comprehensive HR and IHL
policy for the public security forces will emphasize designing better instruction processes and practical training in HR and IHL. It will introduce more and better
controls for strict compliance. It will generate better
systems for legal consulting, and design differentiated
mechanisms for protecting especially vulnerable population groups. It will strengthen mechanisms for national and international cooperation.

Legality. Based on the principle that legality and public
support are the center of gravity for all public security
actions, important reforms will be made to strengthen
respect for HR and IHL. The structure and functioning
of the military penal justice system will be improved.
Education and training will have the goal of maintaining
and strengthening the tradition of respect for and allegiance to the Constitution and the Law.

Modernization. In order to optimize the technical and
human resources of the public security forces in accordance with current international standards the entire
system for education and training for security force
members will be revamped. The career path for military personnel and police will be modernized, and we
will reevaluate and redefine the roles and missions of


-----

the different forces, Special Forces, and task groups to
meet current and future needs. The very organizational
structure of the Ministry of Defense will be redesigned.


Operational strengthening. In terms of operative
capabilities and force structure, reforms will be
made in aspects such as intelligence and counterintelligence, and special operations capabilities. In
this sense, the reform will focus on achieving increasingly effective operations, technology intensive and with economy of force. In some areas the
development of new operational doctrines will be
necessary.


In order to increase the efficiency of operations, these
reforms will be complemented by reforms to the structure and functioning of military and police intelligence.
Only with proper intelligence will it be possible to plan
and conduct high impact operations against threats to
the security of Colombians.

Well being. In the area of well being the reforms will
concentrate on improving the health system, increasing
salaries, and improving living conditions in operative
units. A holding entity will be created for all the companies in the defense sector, to provide the proper well
being and logistics to help the public security forces fulfill their mission.

Vision of the strategic future of the Forces. Initiatives will be undertaken in this area such as the Law of
Security and Defense, and an evaluation of the vision
and strategic future needs of the public security forces.
The purpose is to develop the human skills and technology that will allow the forces to adapt and respond to
internal and external security challenges in the medium
and long term.


41


3.2.5 TO MAINTAIN THE DOWNWARD TREND

IN ALL CRIME RATES IN THE COUNTRY’S
URBAN CENTERS.


Colombia today is largely an urban country, with the
majority of its people living in cities and urban centers
in the different regions of the country.


-----

|Col1|The National Police will have the mis- sion of reinforcing its citizen security strategy|
|---|---|
|The National Police will have the mis- sion of reinforcing its citizen security strategy|The National Police will have the mis- sion of reinforcing its citizen security strategy|


42


Although the existence of illegal armed groups, drug
trafficking cartels, and criminal bands has a negative
impact on the security of all Colombians, their actions
affect rural populations more directly and with a greater impact.

In the urban centers, in contrast, the perception of
overall security is determined less by actions by those
groups and much more by the existence of organized
groups of common criminals. The occurrence of muggings, thefts of vehicles and residences, extortions, and
homicides, is, in the end, what determines how the inhabitants of cities feel about their security.

For that reason, and under the principle that Democratic Security implies security for everyone, the Policy for
the Consolidation of Democratic Security will pay special attention to strategies and actions to improve security conditions in the country’s cities.

The National Police will have the mission of reinforcing
its citizen security strategy in order to neutralize and
dismantle organized gangs and groups of common criminals that affect the security and harmony of urban
population groups. Dismantling these groups will continue and accentuate the current downward trend in
crime rates in the country’s cities and urban centers.

3.2.5.1 Citizen security strategy

In the 2006-2010 period, the Ministry of Defense will
make important investments in Police capabilities for
dismantling groups and gangs that commit high impact
crimes in an urban context.

The citizen security strategy will be based on 5 main
aspects:

Increase in the standing force. This increase will permit the creation of new units and the strengthening of
existing ones, considerably increasing the coverage of
police services in the main cities of the nation.


-----

Improved mobility. Ground mobility will be significantly reinforced through the acquisition of cars, motorcycles, and anti-riot vehicles. This will allow the police
to respond more quickly to citizen security requirements
over a greater range.

Creation of new judicial units. The creation of these units and equipping the ones already existing will
strengthen the capabilities of the judicial police.

Adaptation to the accusatory criminal system. The
National Police Force will make the necessary organizational and procedural reforms to harmonize its function
and capabilities with the dynamics of the accusatory
criminal system.

Intelligence and communications. The National Police will strengthen technical and human intelligence
capabilities, and will equip units with new communications equipment to facilitate and promote coordination
between units.

Education and police careers. Reforms will be made
in education and training schools, and in the career
path for police officers. These reforms will deliver police agents to society who are increasingly prepared and
sensitive to security and peaceful coexistence needs in
the cities and urban centers of the nation. Close relations with the public, based on absolute respect for
human rights, will be the foundation of these reforms.

3.3 INTERNATIONAL INITIATIVE

In today’s world it would be unthinkable to even attempt
make the above objectives a reality without help from
the international community. For that reason, the Ministry of Defense will develop, in coordination with the
Ministry of Foreign Relations, and in strict agreement
with Colombian foreign policy, an international initiative
to explain abroad the objectives and advances of the
Policy for the Consolidation of Democratic Security and
the benefits it will generate for the Colombian people.

This initiative will dispel mistaken perceptions and questions about the legitimacy of the institutions, and in this
particular case, of the Colombian public security forces.


43


-----

The Ministry of National Defense will
develop, in coordination with the Ministry
of Foreign Relations,
and in strict agreement with Colombian foreign policy,
an international
initiative to explain
abroad the objectives and advances
of the Policy for the
Consolidation of Democratic Security


It will counteract mistaken ideas, using arguments and
information about the real situation of these institutions
and their functioning. In the same way, it will show the
reality of illegal armed groups, their terrorist and drug
trafficking vocation and activity, and their absolute lack
of popular representativity and political legitimacy.

This initiative must also share with the international
community about how a democratic nation can confront and counteract security threats, according to the
Colombian experience. We will put at the service of
friendly countries our complete willingness to cooperate
in areas in which the Colombian public security forces
have exceptional skills and experience.

The initiative will also generate international consensus
on the need to support Colombian state efforts against
security threats that, although manifested in Colombia,
are tied to criminal networks that are present and influential in many countries around the world. Under
the principle of shared responsibility, international political support must lead to practical international cooperation for a more effective and integrated fight against
these threats.

Through this initiative, the Ministry of Defense hopes to
be able to count on international accompaniment for
the entire process of structural reforms and investments
to be made over the coming years to modernize our Armed Forces and the National Police in accordance with
current international standards.

|Col1|The Ministry of Na- tional Defense will develop, in coordina tion with the Ministry of Foreign Relations, and in strict agree- ment with Colom- bian foreign policy, an international initiative to explain abroad the objecti- ves and advances of the Policy for the Consolidation of De- mocratic Security|
|---|---|


44


-----

3.4 PLANS, PROGRAMS, AND INITIATIVES

The PCDS will be implemented through 28 strategies,
programs, and initiatives, each one of which will have a
manager or coordinator responsible for constant orientation and evaluation. These strategies, programs, and
initiatives have been grouped into five lines of action:


45


-----

46


-----

47


-----

-----

-----

-----

