# COOK ISLANDS


# NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY 2023–2026


-----

-----

# COOK ISLANDS


-----

##### Page 11

## PART 1
 NATIONAL SECURITY IN A COMPLEX WORLD

##### CHAPTER 1. COOK ISLANDS’ NATIONAL SECURITY


##### 12


##### Purpose of the National Security Policy 13

 What is national security? 13

 Alignment of the National Security Policy 13


##### 14

 16


##### Page 4

## MESSAGE FROM THE PRIME MINISTER


##### Our vision, objectives, and principles for national security

 CHAPTER 2. THE EVOLUTION OF THE COOK ISLANDS’ SECURITY ENVIRONMENT AND OUTLOOK


##### National security in today’s world 17


##### Page 6

## EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


-----

##### Page 50

## CONCLUSION


##### Page 23

## PART 2
 BUILDING A FUTURE OF HAPPINESS, SAFETY AND WELLBEING

##### CHAPTER 3. OUR NATIONAL SECURITY PILLARS 


##### 24


##### Pillar 1 Machinery of government 26

 Pillar 2 National systems 31

 Pillar 3 Economy 33

 Pillar 4 Human security 35


##### Pillar 5 Environmental
 and resource security

 Pillar 6 Political stability
 and good governance


##### 41

 44


##### Pillar 7 Transnational organised crime 46


##### Pillar 8 Cyber crime and
 cyber enabled crimes


##### 48


-----

# MESSAGE FROM THE PRIME MINISTER


-----

### It is of the utmost importance that we, as your elected Government, commit to the protection of our national interests by maintaining our national sovereignty and border integrity; ensuring a peaceful and just society; and nurturing strong human security for all Cook Islanders.

I am proud to present our first National Security
Policy (2023-2026). The policy outlines our security
environment by identifying the threats that we
face and our initiatives to mitigate those threats.
It provides a clear pathway forward for additional
actions we can take to strengthen our resilience
to any threat that may bring harm to our people,
communities, environment, and the systems and
infrastructure that help sustain our valuable way
of life.

The policy supports our national aspiration for a
stable, sustainable and prosperous Cook Islands,
as set out in the National Sustainable Development
_Agenda 2020+ and the Economic Development_
_Strategy 2030. It reflects our fundamental national_
values including our respect for the rule of law,
human rights, cultural and religious practices,
economic stability, resource efficiency and social
cohesion.


Using our national legislation, governance
principles, risk management and efficient use of
resources we will build resilience, prevent conflict,
and deter threats to our sovereignty and society.

We value the strong support of our security
partners as well as regional and international
organisations. We continue to strengthen these
relationships and work closely with our partners
to build our security and prosperity.

We give high-priority to countering growing threats
from cybercrime and transnational organised crime
and those that have the potential to impact upon
our health, food, community and personal security.
We will guard against foreign interference and
espionage and protect our national border and
Exclusive Economic Zone. We will work with our
communities to address domestic crimes.

We continue to improve our National Security
Architecture and are building a robust intelligence
capability to meet our future security needs.

Stakeholder consultation with our Government
agencies, Chiefs, Churches, Pa Enua, and the
general public and the private sector informed
the policy’s development.

The security of the Cook Islands is a truly national
endeavour and we must all play our part. We are
committed to working closely with all sectors of
society to implement the policy and together we
can build a secure, prosperous and happy future
for all Cook Islanders.

**Hon. Mark Brown**
**Prime Minister**


-----

-----

### There can be no higher responsibility of a government than to protect the nation. This document is our first National Security Policy (NSP). It provides an integrated, overarching framework for our national security effort.

The NSP reflects our fundamental national values,
including respect for the rule of law and basic
human rights and norms, and promotes good
governance principles. It supports the goals,
objectives and actions set out in other national
policies, especially Te Ara Akapapa’anga Nui: the
_National Sustainable Development Agenda 2020+_
(NSDA 2020+) and the Economic Development
_Strategy 2030 (EDS 2030)._

The NSP supports other regional and international
commitments and policy priorities that we
subscribe to. These include Pacific Islands Forum
(PIF) policies, most notably the Framework of
_Pacific Regionalism, adopted by PIF leaders in_
2014, and the Boe Declaration on Regional Security,
agreed by Pacific Islands’ leaders at the Nauru
PIF in 2018, the PIFS 2050 Strategy for the Blue
_Pacific Continent, the Pacific Security outlook report_
_2022–2023 and the Regional Security Roadmap._

The NSP takes into account international, regional
and national security-related developments. We
held initial consultations with security experts in
New Zealand, the public sector and community
stakeholders on Rarotonga. It was not possible to
conduct in-person consultations in the Pa Enua;
however, Pa Enua representatives attended a
consultation workshop on Rarotonga both in
person and via zoom.


Regional, national and international security
agencies identified threats and hazards relevant
to the Cook Islands, which informed the NSP.

Interactions with community representatives were
particularly valuable in identifying issues relating
to human security, and will help us to decide the
actions we need to protect the Cook Islands.

For policy purposes, such as cooperation and
collaboration with external security agencies,
especially those active in the region, the NSP has
been guided by the focal areas identified in the Boe
Declaration, while stressing substantive securityrelated issues of particular importance to the
Cook Islands.

The NSP identifies national priorities in general
terms and a number of specific security-related
actions. The NSP refers to a number of securityrelated policies and activities that have already
been adopted and are being implemented.

While military deterrence still plays a role in
protecting our national security many serious
threats and hazards today (e.g. pandemics,
cyclones) are most effectively addressed through
our adoption of a precautionary approach and
implementing effective resilience measures
(i.e. reduction of risk, readiness, response and
recovery).

The NSP takes into account the severe impact
of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic
on our country as well as the many other security
situations we face. It reflects new opportunities
to build a more secure future for our country and
our people now and for generations to come. These
opportunities are reflected in our vision, objectives,
and the eight National Security Pillars. These
pillars capture how our national security objectives
will be met and the actions necessary to secure
our future.


-----

-----

### Our objectives

 To achieve our vision, our enduring national security objectives are to:

- Protect and promote Cook Islands’ sovereignty,

territorial integrity and good reputation.

- Safeguard the democratic institutions, the rule

of law, principles, and national values upon which
our society is founded.

- Ensure our safety and that of our communities

as well as the safety and integrity of key national
assets, institutions and infrastructure.

- Preserve and promote the economic security of

individuals, families, businesses and communities
throughout the Cook Islands.

- Protect the fundamental cultural values and the

welfare of our people.

- Protect our natural environment while promoting

the sustainable development of the Cook Islands
and its resources.

- Engage effectively at the regional and

international levels to support and promote the
rules-based international order consistent with
our national security needs and interests.


### Our 8 National Security Pillars

**1.** Well-coordinated and effective Government

machinery to manage national security issues
supported by high-quality intelligence and
assessment capability.

**2.** Resilient national systems that support disaster

preparedness, response, recovery and climate
change adaptation.

**3.** A strong, well-managed economy.

**4.** Robust human security for individuals and

families.

**5.** Effective monitoring and protection of the

Cook Islands borders and its Exclusive
Economic Zone.

**6.** Political stability and strong governance of

institutions, including the security sector.

**7.** Strengthened capacity for tackling organised

crime.

**8.** Strong policy framework to protect individuals,

government, and the private sector against
cyber-crime and other malicious activity.


-----

-----

# PART 1


# NATIONAL SECURITY IN A COMPLEX WORLD


-----

-----

### Purpose of the National Security Policy

 We are proud to deliver our Government’s first National Security Policy (NSP) for the Cook Islands. It includes an overarching framework that supports our national security efforts and describes the strategic context for the development of long-term plans, policies, and capabilities to address national security threats. The NSP will ensure we are prepared for and can respond to security challenges effectively and efficiently, both now and in the future.

 While our Government will have the main role in implementing the NSP, national security is an important task for all Cook Islanders. An important purpose of this NSP is to inform Cook Islanders of our key concerns.


### What is national security?

The security of a nation is linked to economic
stability, resource efficiency, good governance
and social cohesion. National security is a broad
and evolving concept. It is concerned with how we
shape our environment, and how we prevent and
prepare for threats to our sovereignty, people,
assets, infrastructure and institutions. National
security is also concerned with how we respond to
such threats and recover from any event that may
occur. National security also includes threats such
as climate change and natural disasters, cyber
security and elements of human security.

### Alignment of the National Security Policy

The NSP reflects our fundamental national values,
including respect for the rule of law and basic
human rights and norms as well as promotion of
good governance principles. It has been prepared
to support the goals, objectives and actions
set out in other national policies, especially Te
_Ara Akapapa’anga Nui: the National Sustainable_
_Development Agenda 2020+ (NSDA 2020+) and the_
_Economic Development Strategy 2030 (EDS 2030)._

This NSP is also compatible with and supports
other regional and international commitments and
policy priorities that we subscribe to. This includes
Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) policies, most notably
the Framework of Pacific Regionalism, adopted
by PIF leaders in 2014, and the Boe Declaration
_on Regional Security, agreed by Pacific Islands’_
leaders at the Nauru PIF in 2018.


-----

### Our vision, objectives, and principles for national security

#### Vision

Our people, resources and environment are
effectively protected through well-designed and
implemented measures that anticipate threats,
protect our national interests, and enhance
resilience for the benefit of all Cook Islanders.

#### Objectives

To achieve our vision, our enduring national
security objectives are to:

- Protect and promote Cook Islands’ sovereignty,

territorial integrity and good reputation.

- Safeguard the democratic institutions, the rule

of law, principles and national values upon which
our society is founded.

- Ensure our safety and that of our communities

as well as the safety and integrity of key national
assets, institutions, and infrastructure, including
from increasing climate risks.

- Preserve and promote the economic security of

individuals, families, businesses and communities
throughout the Cook Islands.

- Protect the fundamental traditional and cultural

values and welfare of our people.

- Protect our natural environment while promoting

the sustainable development of the Cook Islands
and its resources.

- Engage effectively at the regional and

international levels to support and promote the
rules-based international order consistent with
our national security needs and interests.


#### Principles

We will apply the following principles when
implementing this NSP:

- Priority will be given to activities requiring action

by the Government and involve serious risks to
achieving one or more of the above objectives.

- Activities will be undertaken in an accountable,

transparent manner, respecting the rights and
freedoms of Cook Islanders, our national values
and the rule of law.

- We will seek to maintain control of our own

national security, while recognising our capacity
constraints and the benefits of appropriate and
effective bilateral, regional and international
collaboration.

- We will seek to ensure that activities carried out

in the Cook Islands do not present a security risk
to other countries.

- Actions will be undertaken recognising that

sustainable development and security are
mutually reinforcing and inextricably linked.

- Because security threats, risks and challenges

are constantly evolving, implementation of
our NSP will necessarily be a continual work
in progress and its effectiveness regularly
evaluated against relevant standards.

- National security will be strengthened based

on genuine cooperation, collaboration and
information-sharing among all relevant
ministries, and agencies of Government as well
as between Government and our people.

- We will support and contribute to the promotion

and strengthening of an effective, international
rules-based order that reflects and supports
Cook Islands’ security interests and priorities.

In undertaking activities to achieve the objectives
in line with the principles above, strengthening
deterrence and resilience in critical areas will be
the primary consideration, including addressing
climate risks.


-----

-----

-----

### National security in today’s world

 A country has effective national security when it has the necessary safeguards in place to counter serious threats to its vital national interests. The identification of threats is a vital and ongoing process, which prompts the development and implementation of plans to safeguard any country.


Cook Islanders no longer live in relative isolation
from the rest of the world. While we benefit greatly
from our participation in world affairs, global
and regional activities may also have serious,
or potentially serious, implications for our own
national security.

A serious security event for distant countries
(e.g. military confrontation between major powers
on the other side of the world) may generate a
different type of security threat within the Cook
Islands (e.g. a threat to our economic security).
A security threat elsewhere in the world and even
in our own region (e.g. drug trafficking) may have
security implications in the Cook Islands (e.g.
increased presence of illegal drugs). The NSP must
simultaneously consider inter-related international,
regional and national security dimensions.

For this reason, it is useful to place our NSP in its
broader global, regional and domestic security
context before discussing particular areas of
our policy.


-----

#### Global

In the decades following World War II, the concept
of security was mainly understood in terms of ‘hard
security’, that is, large-scale military confrontation
and threats of nuclear war. There remains the
potential for significant state-on-state conflict as
well as the possible proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, including by non-State actors,
that may have potentially severe impacts on even
small, peaceful countries like the Cook Islands.

Advances in information and communication
technologies (ICT) and transportation modalities
and linkages have contributed to new opportunities
arising from the emergence of a new and more
complex international environment. This includes
industrialisation, globalisation and the growing
inter-connectivity and inter-dependency of
countries, economies and people. However, these
opportunities also increase challenges to global,
regional and national security, including terrorism,
transnational crime and, in more recent years,
cybercrime, climate change, environmental, health
and other threats.

As a result, national security is increasingly
understood from a global perspective and more
broadly than in earlier years, and a wide range
of policy, legal and other forms of cooperation
are evolving to respond to modern-day security
concerns.


#### Regional

Our own insular Pacific region has long been
concerned with broad-based security issues. For
example, in 2014, Pacific Islands Forum Leaders
adopted a Framework for Pacific Regionalism
(FPR). An important objective set out in the FPR
is “security that ensures stable and safe human,
environmental and political conditions for all”.

Reflecting the above global developments, in 2018
Forum Leaders adopted the Boe Declaration on
_Regional Security, which identified five regional_
security priorities:

- Climate change, the single greatest security

threat

- Human security, including humanitarian

assistance

- Environmental and resource security

- Transnational crime

- Cybersecurity.

In their Declaration, leaders committed to, inter
_alia, developing national security strategies_
and strengthening national security capacity.
To give effect to the Declaration at the regional
level, Forum Leaders in 2019 endorsed a detailed
_Boe Declaration Action Plan. In doing so, they_
requested that traditional and cultural norms be
acknowledged and considered as an underpinning
imperative of all initiatives under the plan.


-----

In their adoption in 2022 of the 2050 Strategy
_for the Blue Pacific Continent, Forum Leaders_
recognised the central role that peace and security
play in ensuring that forum island countries are
able to realise a safe, secure and prosperous
region. They committed to working together
to promote security in the region.

#### The Cook Islands’ security context

We have adopted a broad approach to the
formulation and implementation of this NSP. We
consider this as the most effective and efficient
means of safeguarding the Cook Islands against
the five regional security priorities. This approach
is based on a realistic assessment of the current
and potentially most serious security issues
we face.

Effective implementation of the NSP will require
the full cooperation and support of all Cook
Islanders, not only in the public sector but also
in the private sector and in the wider community.
Given the multidimensional nature of security
concerns, it is important to collaborate with
bilateral, regional and international partners
to address issues of common concern.


Given the impossibility of removing all national
security threats or hazards or negating all risks
that we face, traditional deterrence measures
may be neither practical nor possible. We seek
to protect and promote our security interests by
strengthening our resilience; that is, our ability to
anticipate, absorb, adapt to and recover from an
event seriously disruptive to our national security.
This approach is consistent with our NSDA 2020+,
especially Goals 2 and 13. In strengthening our
security resilience, high priority will be given
to critical infrastructure protection, building on
progress made to date. At the same time, we will
seek to collaborate with and support private sector
entities providing critical services to our country,
including the airlines, banks, radio, shipping, and
civil society bodies (e.g. the Cook Islands Red
Cross) with a view to strengthening resilience
where possible and necessary.

With this context in mind, we approach national
security from the dual perspective of the Cook
Islands as both a very small Island State and a
large Ocean State (see Figures 1 and 2).


-----

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|aall||

|SSoolloomm|Col2|
|---|---|
|||


Figure 1: Location of the Cook Islands in the Pacific

Tokelau (N.Z.)

Pukapuka

Tema Reef

Nassau

American Samoa (U.S.)

Avarua

**Rarotonga**

##### SOUTHERN COOK ISLANDS

Figure 2: The Cook Islands


-----

The total land area of the 15 islands that comprises
the Cook Islands is approximately 240 km² and
is surrounded by our 1.96 million km² Exclusive
Economic Zone (EEZ). Our living resources within
our EEZ are of great importance to our people
culturally and economically for both subsistence
purposes and for domestic and foreign commercial
fishing. (The non-living marine resources of our EEZ
and continental shelf are potentially significant
sources of great wealth for our nation).

The total resident population of the Cook Islands
in 2021 was 14,987, with 72.5% residing on the
main island, Rarotonga. In 2021, Cook Islands Maori
and part Cook Islands Maori residents comprised
85.7% of the total population. The number of
those residing in the Pa Enua (outer islands) has
decreased over the years while the number of nonindigenous Cook Islanders has increased.

The Cook Islands has a small, open economy with
growth heavily reliant on the export of services.
In recent decades, tourism has become more
important and was our country’s leading economic
sector pre-COVID-19 (estimated 66% of our total
nominal gross domestic product (GDP) in 2019–20[1]).
Smaller contributions to the economy are made by
agriculture, fishing, construction and international
financial services.

1 According to New Zealand. MFAT (5.5.20) Forward: Pacific

Tourism: COVID19 Impact & Recovery Sector Status Report:
Phase 1 B, p.19, the share of contribution of tourism as a
percentage of GDP in 2018 was 87%.


Telecommunications links between Rarotonga
and Aitutaki and the outside world have improved
greatly with the installation in early 2020 of the
Manatua submarine cable. Other islands of the Pa
Enua continue to rely on satellite communications
through telecommunications providers on
Rarotonga. International shipping links are primarily
between Rarotonga and Aitutaki and New Zealand
on approximately three-weekly schedules.

The Cook Islands is a parliamentary democracy
based on the Westminster model. The Head
of State of the Cook Islands is King Charles III,
represented in the Cook Islands by the King’s
Representative. Executive Government is led by
the Prime Minister as head of a Cabinet including
a maximum of six other ministers.

The Cook Islands is a self-governing State in free
association with New Zealand. Cook Islanders are
New Zealand citizens by birth with a non-reciprocal
free right of access to New Zealand. As New
Zealand citizens, they also have visa-free access
to Australia for work and residency purposes.
The Cook Islands and New Zealand cooperate
closely, assist each other and consult regularly
on foreign affairs, defence and national securityrelated issues.

The Cook Islands has also forged cooperative
arrangements with other countries and
organisations in security-related areas. It has
become a full member of a wide range of
multilateral and regional organisations and has
entered into multifarious security-related and
other multilateral, regional and bilateral treaties.


-----

-----

# PART 2


# BUILDING A FUTURE OF HAPPINESS, SAFETY AND WELLBEING


-----

-----

### On the basis of international, regional and national risk assessments there are several challenges to the Cook Islands’ national security, especially climate, economic and health security. Security challenges in one focal area (e.g. climate security) may have serious implications in other areas (e.g. food and health security), which must also be considered.


Addressing these challenges requires a range
of capabilities and an enabling environment. The
eight pillars show the actions needed to meet
our national security objectives. Some security
concerns identified are being addressed under
other policy initiatives.

The actions listed are those that the Government
intends to address in the near future.


-----

## PILLAR 1 MACHINERY OF GOVERNMENT


### Well-coordinated and effective government machinery to manage national security issues supported by high- quality intelligence and assessment capability.


The NSP architecture is adaptable and flexible,
and enables cooperation and collaboration
between relevant agencies when there are
serious risks to the:

- security and safety of our people and those who

visit us.

- sovereignty, reputation, or vital interests of the

Cook Islands

- economy or the environment

- effective functioning of Cook Islands’

communities.

In formulating this NSP we adopted an ‘all hazards,
all-risks’ approach, taking into account domestic,
regional and international developments. We
identified and prioritised a number of actions based
on initial assessments of security threats and
risks as well as other security-related challenges
we face. We also recognised new or expanded
opportunities for security collaboration


-----

### National intelligence collaboration, gathering and assessment

Preserving and promoting our national security
necessitates fostering collaboration within
Government and between Government and
domestic and foreign stakeholders. At the
domestic level, Government at all levels will need
to work closely with a wide range of stakeholders,
both on Rarotonga and in the Pa Enua, to address
the national security areas of concern highlighted
in this NSP.

The Cook Islands has no military force of its own.
We have established close defence and security
collaboration with New Zealand based on unique
constitutional ties and shared interests and
concerns.

Our Government will pursue strengthened
security collaboration with New Zealand based
on principles set out in the 2001 Joint Centenary
_Declaration (JCD) and the Aotearoa New Zealand_
– Kuki Airani The Cook Islands Waka Hourua/Vaka
_Purua 2022–2025 statement of Partnership; and_
with Australia as per the Cook Islands – Australia
Oa Tumanava statement of Partnership 2022.
We will also strive to promote collaboration with
other governments in the region, as well as with
governments beyond our region that share our
security interests and concerns.

We will work to strengthen our collaboration
with regional and international agency partners
and continue our participation in security-related
initiatives at both the regional and international
levels, including under the Boe Declaration
Action Plan.

We continually gather intelligence for analysis,
risk assessment and update our security policies.
This is essential for understanding threats to
our national security and as necessary. This
intelligence work, tailored to our particular
circumstances, may require capacity building and
strengthening of our Government’s protective
security arrangements.


### Protective security arrangements

Up until 1965 our communications were almost
exclusively with New Zealand and concerned
fundamental developmental issues. Today, we
enjoy close relations with many countries. We are
a member of numerous regional and international
organisations and an active participant in
many critical decision-making processes. Our
Government has many important regional and
international interests and priorities. We are party
to sensitive information that may be of great
interest to external actors. Illegal access to this
information would be detrimental to our national
interests or those of our partners.

Promoting and enhancing our national security
requires balancing confidentiality and sharing
information between our Government and
our people, including those living abroad. The
protection of confidential information through
secure arrangements within and between all levels
of Government, including both the political and
agency levels, as well as between our Government
and our external collaborating partners is
paramount. To satisfy the protective security
requirements that are appropriate for the Cook
Islands and meet the highest relevant international
standards we are establishing a policy framework
and procedures. The framework will build on and
strengthen arrangements already in place and
cover personnel security (access to sensitive
information made available only to qualified
persons), information security (procedures for
protection of sensitive information) and physical
security (measures in place to protect people,
information and assets).

The framework and procedures will be set in place
over time, taking into account agreed priorities
given our current human and financial resource
constraints.

With an appropriate, internationally recognised
satisfactory level of protective security,
established through legislation if necessary,
our security partners will be better placed to
share sensitive security-related information of
importance to the Cook Islands.


-----

### Cook Islands Security Council

Exercising responsibilities for our national security
is a complex task requiring close cooperation
and collaboration among many central security
and other agencies of Government, acting under
appropriate policy direction.

The highest responsibility for the security of our
country rests with Government, led by the Prime
Minister and Cabinet. Select Cabinet Members
can sit as the Cook Islands Security Council (CISC)
and act on the basis of independent, professional
advice from relevant national experts, and review
NSP implementation and issue policy directives.
These directives will be carried out by the central
security and other agencies identified below.

As appropriate, the Government will also be
advised by and support local government bodies
in the Pa Enua.


### Central security agencies

Key responsibilities for national security are
exercised by the following agencies:

- Cook Islands Police Service (CIPS)

- Office of the Prime Minister – National Security

Directorate (NSD)

- Customs Service in Ministry of Finance &

Economic Management (MFEM)

- Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Immigration

(MFAI)

- Crown Law Office (CLO)

- Ministry of Agriculture (MoA)

- Ministry of Marine Resources (MMR)

- Te Marae Ora/Ministry of Health (TMO)

- Ministry of Transport (MoT)

- Cook Islands Financial Intelligence Unit (CIFIU).

These agencies will be assisted by other agencies
of Government as well as other governments and
organisations. They will continue to conduct normal
operations; however, broader collaboration may


-----

be required to address threats that could pose
serious risks for one or more of our key national
security objectives, especially where those risks
require urgent, coordinated intervention by our
Government and have the potential to generate
or exacerbate risks in other areas.

A Director of the National Security Division (NSD)
supported by NSD officers, within the Office of the
Prime Minister, has been established to:

- Provide support and advice to the Prime Minister,

the CISC and the National Security Committee
on national security issues and implement policy
directives as appropriate.

- Work in collaboration with other agencies of

Government as appropriate, monitoring domestic,
regional, and international developments of
security relevance to the Cook Islands, preparing
assessments and report thereon to Government.

- Support other agencies of Government in the

implementation of this NSP, including in capacitybuilding and undertaking work in securityrelated areas (e.g. threat and risk assessments;
international and domestic legal matters) and
the formulation and implementation of sectoral
security resilience strategies in collaboration
with external partners as appropriate.

- Facilitate collaboration between Government

and the Cook Islands private sector and other
stakeholders on national security matters as
appropriate.

- Represent Government at the regional and

international levels in security matters or, when
security matters relate to particular aspects of
security (e.g. meetings on customs security),
support the responsible agency of Government.

- Support the formulation of a national

cybersecurity policy and support other agencies
of Government in the implementation of the
policy, taking into account existing securityrelated communications arrangements of
specific Government agencies.

- Coordinate formulation of a Protective Security

Requirements Framework (PSRF) for Government
and support implementation of that framework.

- Report periodically to Government and annually

to Parliament on implementation of the NSP
including by coordinating the preparation of an
annual national security assessment.


### National Security Committee

The National Security Committee (NSC) is
chaired by the Chief of Staff of the Office of the
Prime Minister. The committee is made up of the
Commissioner of Police, the Solicitor-General,
Director National Security, Principal Immigration
Officer, Comptroller of Customs. Other officials
may be invited to participate in NSC meetings.

The objectives of the committee include:

- Monitoring, evaluating and supporting

implementation of this NSP and proposing
amendments of the NSP to the Prime Minister
and CISC, as appropriate.

- Collating and analysing intelligence from

member agencies and others as appropriate
in order to understand and identify national
security threats, and providing high-quality and
timely advice to the Prime Minister and the CISC
as appropriate.

- Coordinating national responses to major crises

or circumstances affecting national security,
respecting the legal and policy mandates of
specific agencies as appropriate.

- Facilitating mutual cooperation and assistance

in national security matters between member
agencies, including:

— sharing information and intelligence in

relation to potential national security threats
in a timely manner

— sharing specialised skills and resources for

training and capacity building, as well as in
response to specific national security threats
or events.

- Engaging in effective partnership between

the NSC and external security partners and
agencies.

- Establishing and monitoring the deliberations of

specialised standing or ad hoc security subcommittees and acting on recommendations of
those committees.

The NSD Director and NSD officers support the
NSC.

Detailed consultation will be undertaken among
all security agencies to determine the extent that
new legislation is required or existing legislation
amended or repealed to clarify the respective roles
and responsibilities of the security agencies, and
to ensure the safeguarding of confidential security
information and related matters.


-----

### Other security committees

The NSC may establish special committees on
either a standing or ad hoc basis to deal with either
security focal areas generally or circumstances of
immediate security concern.

A standing committee may be established to
collaborate in addressing specific intelligence
security threats, comprising key security agencies
involved (e.g. senior officials from Police, the
FIU, Customs and Immigration) while an ad hoc
committee might be established to prepare for
a national conference on food security, also
comprising the relevant agencies and other
stakeholders as appropriate (e.g. agriculture,
customs, health, marine resources, growers
associations etc.).

Collaboration will take place under existing
legislative arrangements or other agreed
operational procedures (e.g. the Disaster Risk
_Management Act 2007, Ministry of Health Act 2013)_
or by Cabinet mandate or directive.

The NSD and officers of the NSC will support
the work of such committees as appropriate.

### Transparency and reporting arrangements

It is essential for the Government’s securityrelated activities to be transparent. Under the
direction of the NSC, the NSD will coordinate the
preparation of an annual national security report
on the implementation of the NSP during the year
for presentation to the NSC. The report will provide
an assessment of current and potential security
issues facing the Cook Islands.

The Prime Minister, as CISC chair, will arrange for
the report to be tabled in parliament.

The NSD will coordinate the preparation of special
reports on particular security-related events for
consideration by the NSC and possible public
dissemination.


### Action plan

→ Strengthen immediately our capacity to
address critical, wide-ranging security
concerns as set out in the NSP.

→ Establish new policy-making machinery, and
strengthen existing machinery to address
concerns, both at the Cabinet and official
levels.

→ Implement a program of activities focused
on capacity-building and strengthening
cooperation and collaboration at all levels
among key security agencies and others as
appropriate over the next three years.

→ NSD to coordinate the preparation of special
reports on particular security related events
for consideration by the NSC and possible
public dissemination.

→ Conduct detailed consultation amongst
security agencies on new legislation or
amendments to current legislations to clarify
and confirm roles and responsibilities to
ensure the safeguarding of confidential
security information or related matters.

→ Protect access to our security-related
information in ways appropriate to our way of
life while still meeting recognised international
standards.

→ Prioritise security response activities based on
professional risk assessments undertaken on a
continuing basis to support the NSP.

→ Strengthen collaboration and cooperation
between Government and external partners,
including through information exchange and
capacity building.

→ Table in parliament annual reports on the
Cook Islands national security situation and
implementation of the NSP.


-----

## PILLAR 2 NATIONAL SYSTEMS


### Resilient national systems that support disaster preparedness, response and recovery, and climate change adaptation

Climate change is one of the greatest security
hazards facing humankind today, with serious
implications for sea level rise (SLR), as well as
increasing conditions for extreme sea level events,
tropical cyclones and rainfall, heatwaves, floods
and droughts, with potentially existential risks for
the Cook Islands and other small island states.
Climate change has already caused substantial
damages and increasingly irreversible losses in
the world’s coastal and ocean ecosystems.


Addressing the risks posed by climate change is
an important goal in the NSDA 2020+. Overseeing
climate change initiatives and activities across
Government is the responsibility of Climate
Change Cook Islands (CCCI), a Division of the
Office of the Prime Minister (OPM). Given the
implications of climate change for the Cook
Islands, disaster preparedness is also an essential
part of addressing extreme events that will be
exacerbated by a changing environment over
longer time frames. The Emergency Management
Cook Islands (EMCI) Division (located in the OPM)
focuses on disaster preparedness, response,
recovery and related matters.

Central to our Government’s efforts in
addressing climate change hazards has been
the implementation of the Cook Islands Climate
_Change Policy 2018–2028. In 2023, the policy_
will be reviewed and revised based on the latest
information and research findings available from
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) and other sources. The review will be
undertaken through a transparent, consultative


-----

process and informed by a detailed risk
assessment of the implications of climate change
for our country. On the basis of the review, a range
of climate security activities will be implemented
within the framework of the government’s Climate
Change Country Programme 2018–2030.

We are party to the mitigation and adaptation
approaches to dealing with climate change
security identified in the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the
2015 Paris Agreement.

As a small island state (SIS), our greenhouse gas
emissions have a minimal effect on global warming.
The steps it is obliged to take under the UNFCCC
and Paris Agreement to fight global warming are
therefore modest. Nevertheless, in solidarity with
other members of the international community and
to promote our own security, we are undertaking
a growing range of mitigation activities aimed at
reducing the sources of greenhouse gases, such
as replacing fuel-powered generators with solar
energy and enhancing the processes, activities or
mechanisms that remove greenhouse gases from
the atmosphere.

We will prepare, maintain and submit to the
UNFCCC Secretariat nationally determined
contributions (NDCs) that it intends to achieve
through domestic mitigation measures to meet the
objectives of the UNFCCC and Paris Agreement.
The NDCs will assist in guiding efforts to combat
climate change going forward.

We must also take measures to adapt to the effects
of both actual and expected climate change.
Adaptation may necessitate changes to how we
work with the natural environment to reduce the
harmful effects of climate change. Where possible,
we could take advantage of beneficial opportunities
resulting from climate change, such as changing
fish stock migration patterns that increase the
living marine resources in our EEZ.

SLR has broad, existential and sovereignty
implications of special importance for our national
security. It is currently projected that sea levels
in the Cook Islands may rise between 27–30 cm
by 2030 and 2 m by 2100. This could threaten the
viability of many of our low-lying communities,
especially in the atolls of our Pa Enua. This is a
priority for the NSP.

The living and non-living resources of our EEZ
and continental shelf constitute an important part
of our national patrimony as a large ocean State.
Given the possible implications of SLR, we must
ensure that our existing rights to those resources
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of
_the Sea (UNCLOS) are protected. We are working_
domestically, with our regional partners and with
other like-minded countries towards that end.


Under UNCLOS, we have claimed sovereign rights
over certain continental shelf areas covering some
350,000 km2 beyond the EEZ. We are intensifying
our efforts to secure a final recognition of our
claim that was submitted to the United Nations
_Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf_
(CLCS) in 2009. Once this is completed all our
national territorial boundaries are legally fixed.

The NSDA 2020+ recognises the clear link between
climate change and disaster risk management.
During the 2023 review of the Cook Islands Climate
_Change Policy 2018–2028 national planning_
of climate-related activities will be based on
vulnerability and adaptation assessments for
each island and those results fed into Island
Development Plans.

To achieve our objectives for climate security we
continue to work closely with our regional and
international partners to draw on expertise and
to strengthen international legal arrangements to
achieve the objectives set out in the UNFCCC and
Paris Agreement.

Mitigation and adaptation necessitates investment
of large-scale financial and other resources. While
domestic financial resources will be used where
possible, it will be important for the Cook Islands
to participate in reviews of and benefit from new
international funding mechanisms (e.g. a ‘loss and
damage’ instrument) and make access available
through existing regional and international
mechanisms, regardless of the Cook Islands’
developed status.

### Action plan

→ Review existing climate change policies and
revise them based on the most up-to-date
information and research findings.

→ Strengthen mitigation and adaptation
activities to enable the Cook Islands to
respond effectively to current and future
security challenges of climate change.

→ Protect our sovereign rights over maritime
areas under international law, especially from
threats arising from sea level rise.

→ Strengthen our resilience to the effects
of natural disasters through professional
assessments and effective protection,
response and recovery measures.


-----

## PILLAR 3 ECONOMY

### A strong, well-managed and resilient economy

Economic security is an important goal of the
NSDA 2020+ and a cornerstone of this NSP. It
depends on our ability to protect or promote our
national economic interests in the face of events or
circumstances that may jeopardise or block those
interests. Long-term sustainable development
is closely related to the maintenance and
strengthening of economic security.

Our vision of how to achieve national economic
security is set out in the EDS 2030, which was
adopted on the basis of widespread public
consultation in 2021. However, implementation of
the strategy was seriously impacted by COVID-19,
which led to a contraction of the Cook Islands’
nominal Gross Domestic Product (GDP) by some
22% between March 2020 and June 2021. To
address the security challenges of COVID-19, our


Government adopted urgent measures, including
the Economic Recovery Roadmap (ERR) in July 2021.
The ERR uses the EDS 2030 as a guiding document
for Government over the next decade, identifying
actions that support our sustainable development
through the NSDA 2020+. Various workstreams
have been identified in the ERR that promote NSP
national security objectives.

The EDS 2030 acknowledges the central
importance of the tourism sector for economic
growth. However, it also recognises the risks to
our economic security from this dependency.
It therefore supports economic diversification,
building on the Cook Islands’ comparative
advantages, while recognising the importance of
other sectors as current contributors to economic
diversification (e.g. financial services). There are
other possibilities to be explored and promoted
through effective policy and other measures. In
support of a NSDA 2020+ goal, for example, our
Government will continue to strengthen existing
initiatives for both increased primary production
and explore the development of commercial


-----

micro-processing in the primary sector. Special
attention will be given to the Pa Enua, both for
economic security and broader sustainable
development purposes, including providing
increased employment opportunities and enhanced
wellbeing. Where possible traditional knowledge
of Cook Islanders will assist in the adaptation of
practices to the effects of climate change.

There is considerable potential for promoting our
services sectors beyond tourism. For example,
our Government will consult with stakeholders
on Rarotonga and in the Pa Enua, to consider
initiatives to support further development and
promotion of our creative or cultural industries;
that is, economic activities concerned with
the generation or use of local knowledge or
information, such as the media, performing
arts, visual arts, music and publishing. We will
collaborate with other like-minded countries to
promote international rules in this area to protect
our interests.

A third, broad area offering possibilities for
economic diversification concerns Artificial
Intelligence (AI); that is, activities relating to the
ability of a computer system to perform actions
that would otherwise require human intelligence.
These include, for example, social media
applications and video games. Our Government
will consult with the growing number of talented,
innovative Cook Islanders, both in the Cook Islands
and elsewhere, about support and encouragement
to undertake promising entrepreneurial activity to
strengthen and expand this part of our domestic
economy.

A number of other activities will support the above
initiatives. In particular, the Development Investment
_Act 1995–96, Investment Regulations and the 2003_
_Cook Islands Investment Code will be reviewed,_
along with the Government’s investment priorities,
practices and activities to ensure that investment
activities are for the genuine, long-term security
and benefit of the Cook Islands.

The Government will arrange an Ease of Doing
Business (EDB) survey to measure best practice
across key Doing Business Topics (e.g. starting a
business) to identify where improvement can be
made to better assist and strengthen our private
sector and enhance our competitiveness.

The success of these diversification initiatives
depends on our capacity to establish and protect
the intellectual property rights (IPRs) of our people,
including those relating to traditional knowledge
(TK). We will review the 2014 National Intellectual
_Property Strategy (NIPS) and implement a program_
to preserve and promote IPR, including for TK, at
national and international levels, collaborating with
like-minded partners and working through regional
and international institutions.


We will review and refresh our 2014 Trade Policy
_Framework and use it as a tool to promote our_
economic security interests and identify trade
opportunities, and areas where assistance might
be required especially in the sectors indicated
above. We will support our private sector to exploit
the opportunities available through the PACER
Plus Agreement and PICTA, including increasing
resources for trade capacity building. We will
strengthen the Cook Islands’ National Trade
_Facilitation Committee (NTFC). We will support_
our private sector through enhanced Quality
_Infrastructure (QI) – the institutional arrangements,_
policies and practices that support and enhance
the quality, safety and environmental soundness
of goods, services and processes.

Given recent disruptions to global supply chains,
the Government will consider strengthening the
security of supply of goods and services to the
Cook Islands.

As determined by the Organisation for Economic
_Cooperation and Development (OECD) in accordance_
with its own criteria, from 1 January 2020, the
Cook Islands has ceased to be eligible for Official
Development Assistance (ODA), and is now deemed
a developed country given our relatively high
per capita GDP. Nonetheless, Cook Islands will
intensify its bilateral, regional, and international
efforts to secure access to assistance.

### Action plan

→ Continue to implement the ERR, using the
EDS 2030 as a guiding document.

→ Strengthen national security through
economic diversification, including
consultation with stakeholders in the primary
resources, cultural industries and AI sectors.

→ Update the Cook Islands investment regime
and trade policies, protecting the Cook Islands
IPRS, and other measures to strengthen the
Cook Islands economy.

→ Continue to work at the international level to
ensure access to resources critical for the
success of our efforts to address climate
change and other national security concerns
identified in this NSP.


-----

## PILLAR 4 HUMAN SECURITY


### Robust human security for individuals and families

National security involves more than threats and
hazards to national borders. The notion of human
security in the context of overall national security
is important. At its most basic, human security
encompasses freedom from fear, freedom from
want and freedom to live in dignity. It also relates
to security of government institutions, individuals,
groups and island communities.

Human security is directly relevant to the NSP goal
and objectives. It is a broad, security focal area
and concerns internal and external threats and
hazards, both natural and human-caused, to our
national security. It also often involves complex
issues in one of the individual focal areas below


that may be relevant to security concerns in other
focal areas, including in the context of sustainable
development.

In addition, various aspects of the Cook Islands’
population have significant implications for public
policy, including policies relating to the country’s
human security. These include changes to the
Cook Islands’ age structure, depopulation of the
Pa Enua, internal/external population movements,
and changing ethnic composition of the resident
population. The Government has adopted a
_National Population Policy (NPP) reflecting the_
above considerations as well as an important
NSDA 2020+ goal to maintain a resident population
that is consistent with our economic, social and
cultural aspirations. The NPP recognises that
various population-related policies are reflected
in individual departmental policies and work plans.
The NPP supports the goals and objectives of this
NSP.


-----

### Food security

The 2009 World Summit on Food Security has
stated that “food security exists when all people, at
all time, have physical, social and economic access
to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet
their dietary needs and food preferences for an
active and healthy life”. Food security is impacted
by many social, economic, technological, political
and environmental factors, including degradation
of natural resources, water scarcity, pests and
diseases, and risks associated with climate change.

An important goal of the NSDA 2020+ is food
security. The Government is committed to
promoting national food security, and recognises
that food security involves several considerations
including those relating to import substitution,


production, retaining arable land, biosecurity,
trade, health, accessibility and other issues.
Considerations may also differ between individual
islands in the Pa Enua and Rarotonga. Food
security issues fall within the responsibility
of various government ministries including
agriculture, customs, health, marine resources
and transportation.

We will hold a national consultation on food
security to determine a detailed policy, including
a work plan. It will review the responsibilities and
collaboration arrangements of our Government and
address the concerns of both Rarotonga and the
Pa Enua.

We will strengthen collaboration with relevant
regional and international organisations and
incorporate our Cook Islands traditional knowledge
practices.


-----

### Health security

Over recent decades, a number of disease-related
issues have assumed significance as global public
health concerns. These include emerging infectious
diseases such as COVID-19 and HIV/AIDS, noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) such as diabetes,
and heart and respiratory diseases, as well as
health problems relating to climate change such
as the increased risk of transmission of infectious
diseases.

The Cook Islands is facing many of the same health
security concerns as other countries. Consequently,
health security is one of the fundamental goals
of the NSDA 2020+ and another cornerstone of
this NSP.

Health security matters are a primary responsibility
of Te Marae Ora/Ministry of Health (TMO). Health
information systems have been introduced and
a review of the Ministry’s health governance
is underway. In addition, one of TMO’s primary
legislative instruments, the Public Health Act 2004,
is currently being revised.


With immense effort on the part of local authorities
and great assistance from New Zealand and other
countries, COVID-19 resulted in only two fatalities
in the Cook Islands. While over 6,900 Cook
Islanders caught the disease they subsequently
recovered. However, as indicated elsewhere, the
pandemic had severe economic consequences for
the country that are still being felt to this day.

Pandemics are security hazards that have become
more prevalent in recent years and there is no
indication that such pandemics will become less
frequent in the future. In order to better prepare for
the next pandemic and following a precautionary
approach, we will undertake a thorough,
independent, and comprehensive review of our
experiences in addressing the COVID-19 pandemic
and lessons learned will strengthen our resilience
to such events in the future. This is relevant to the
review of management practice and the draft Cook
Islands Pandemic Action Plan.


-----

NCDs are the leading causes of premature illness,
death, and disability in the Cook Islands. Over
75% of all deaths in the country are NCD-related.
In 2021, TMO adopted a Strategic Action Plan to
_Prevent and Control Non-Communicable Diseases_
_2021–2025. We will continue to strengthen our_
capacity to deal with NCDs concerns once the
final STEPwise Approach to NCD Risk Factor
Surveillance (STEPS) Survey Report 2022 is
received. We will build on activities undertaken
to date, traditional practices as appropriate, and
agreed regional action programs.

Also of health security concern is the level of
health services in the Pa Enua. Owing to financial
and personnel constraints facing TMO, as well as
the decreasing population in the Pa Enua, it has not
been feasible to station doctors on each of the Pa
Enua. However, experienced nurse practitionersin-charge stationed on each island have gone some
way in improving health services in the Pa Enua,
while serious cases are flown to Rarotonga for
treatment. Telemedical services are available on
some of the Pa Enua. Consideration will be given
to introducing a regular ‘flying doctor’ service for
the Pa Enua and improving inter-island ambulance
services.


The TMO and the Government as a whole benefit
greatly from regional and international cooperation,
including with the World Health Organization
(WHO). Collaboration with those agencies will be
strengthened and we will participate in decisionmaking to advance our interests, including revision
of the WHO’s International Health Regulations
2005 (IHR 2005). Given the critical importance of
the IHR 2005, with the support of our development
partners, we will strengthen our capacity to
implement fully the IHR 2005.

We will continue to work closely through various
mechanisms to support and advance regional
and international health security, including the
formulation and implementation of a cooperation
program.

### Community security

Many people derive security from membership of a
group, be it a family, a community or ethnic group
that provides an identity, a common language
and a reassuring set of common cultural values
and practical support when needed. This aspect


-----

of human security is found throughout the NSDA
2020+. This includes a vision of safe communities
to live in with vibrant living languages and culture
and the collective capacity to respond effectively
to change. This is expressed, for example, through
national events and community collaboration.

While our decision to become part of the broader
world has brought us many benefits and opened
up many opportunities for a better life, it has
also given rise to important challenges to our
community security, especially on Rarotonga. It
is important that these challenges be recognised
and that we continue to safeguard and strengthen
our community security as a modern, open society
while striving to achieve our broader developmental
aspirations. This will be achieved through various
programs including those promoting harmonious
relations among the various communities making up
the modern Cook Islands, and enhanced programs
to protect and promote our culture, develop the Pa
Enua and encourage our people to remain in the
Cook Islands or return from abroad.

Over the years, much effort has been spent on
preserving and promoting our community security,
including our Maori language, culture and core
social values. The response of our people in the
face of the COVID-19 adversities demonstrated that


community institutions are strong. Such activities
will continue, and institutions supported and
strengthened.

There remain other, more fundamental challenges
to our community security: including the
breakdown of the traditional extended family
system and networks; economic pressures that
have forced many Cook Islanders to sell land,
businesses and properties to foreign interests;
and continued emigration threatening the viability
of many of our island communities. The exodus
of Cook Islanders to New Zealand and elsewhere
because of the economic impact of COVID-19 must
not be discounted and will need to be addressed
through priority initiatives in the EDS 2030 and
those indicated above.

Attracting Cook Islanders of all ages to remain in
the Cook Islands, including the Pa Enua, or return
from abroad has long been an objective of the
Government as a contribution to strengthening
both economic and community security.
However, achieving this requires formulation and
implementation of targeted policies and programs
to address critical concerns. When encouraging
Cook Islanders to return home it is important to
recognise that many of our people living abroad,
especially those of working age and with skills


-----

in high demand in our country, face numerous
obstacles to returning. This includes overseas loan
commitments and access to land at reasonable
prices on Rarotonga for housing purposes.

### Personal security

Threats to personal security take many forms,
including domestic violence, domestic criminal
activities, and threats to one’s own personal
security such as drug abuse and suicide.

Freedom from physical violence is a vital element
of human security. Reducing domestic violence is
one of the important goals of the NSDA 2020+ and
is reflected in the goals of this NSP. Despite efforts
over recent years, domestic violence has risen to a
matter of significant public concern.

In recent years, increasing instances of abuse have
been reported to Government authorities, such
as the Police, as well as to social organisations,
especially the Cook Islands Women’s Counselling
Centre/Punanga Tauturu and in the local media.
Given the multi-faceted nature of the problem,
we will strengthen our multi-pronged approach,
including closer cooperation between Government
agencies, non-governmental organisations, family
and community representatives.

The Pacific Leaders Gender Equality Declaration
from the woman leaders inaugural meeting was
received and endorsed at the PIFS Leaders Forum
in July 2022. It addresses the role that gender plays
in shaping approaches and decisions in support of
human security.

The increase in drug usage, especially cannabis,
has given rise to issues of potentially serious
security concern. Again, because of its multifaceted nature, the problem will be addressed
through a strengthened, multi-pronged approach
involving Government agencies, non-governmental
organisations community groups to ensure that
drug use does not rise to the level of a serious
security risk.

To strengthen public safety, our national firearms
legislation will be updated and strengthened,
taking into account developments in firearms
technology and the history, practices and traditions
of firearms usage and practices in the Pa Enua.


As the 2019 events in Christchurch demonstrated,
no country is immune from terrorism-related
activities. Our security-related agencies will
continue to work closely together under the
oversight of the NSC and with bilateral, regional
and international partners to reduce the risk of
a terrorism event occurring in our country.

Similarly, our Government security agencies
and other agencies will work collaboratively
with community groups and other domestic
stakeholders as well as bilateral, regional, and
international partners to ensure gang influences
do not give rise to a serious security concern in
our country.

### Action plan

→ Initiate preparations for a national consultation
on food security at an early date to chart a way
forward to strengthen the food security of the
Cook Islands.

→ Undertake an early, independent assessment
of our experience in dealing with COVID-19
to strengthen our capacity to prepare for and
effectively address any such health threats
that may arise in the future.

→ Strengthen activities to combat NCDs and
continue to address the particular health
security challenges of those living in the
Pa Enua.

→ Strengthen community security through
building harmonious relations between all
groups comprising modern Cook Islands
society while enhancing programs to promote
the Cook Islands languages and culture.

→ Strengthen efforts to encourage Cook
Islanders to remain in the Cook Islands and
those living abroad to return home.

→ Address personal security challenges arising
from domestic violence.

→ Address other personal security challenges
facing the Cook Islands, including increasing
drug use.

→ Update the Cook Islands’ firearms legislation.

→ Work collaboratively under the umbrella/
oversight of the National Security Committee
and with bilateral, regional, and international
partners to reduce the risk of a terrorism event
occurring in our country.


-----

## PILLAR 5 ENVIRONMENTAL AND RESOURCE SECURITY


### Effective monitoring and protection of the Cook Islands borders and its Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ)

Protecting and promoting environmental and
resource security is a fundamental objective of the
NSP. Security considerations must be carefully
balanced against the need to protect and promote
our nation’s economic security. This balance is
clearly reflected in the NSDA 2020+ in the principle
of sustainability.


Given the transnational character of many
environmental and resource security threats
and hazards, the Cook Islands has long sought
to collaborate in both international and regional
environmental security-related activities, including
participation in treaties (such as the Convention
_on Biological Diversity [CBD]) and initiatives to_
combat threats to environmental and resource
security through, for example, the UN Conference
_on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine_
_Biological Diversity of Areas Beyond National_
_Jurisdiction (BBNJ). The Cook Islands will continue_
to engage with these treaties.

Water security, an important element of
environmental security, is reflected as a high
priority in the NSDA 2020+. Building on existing
programs, we will preserve and strengthen
infrastructural facilities and management practices
on Rarotonga and in the Pa Enua to ensure water
security for our people.


-----

Through our Marae Moana, a marine protected area
covering the Cook Islands’ EEZ, we will continue to
protect and conserve the ecological, biodiversity
and heritage values of our marine environment.
We will allow sustainable use of that environment,
including its resources, through the application of
the precautionary approach and sound principles
of ecologically sustainable use.

The living and non-living marine resources of our
EEZ and continental shelf form an invaluable part
of our patrimony over which the Cook Islands
has sovereign rights recognised by UNCLOS. We
are committed to using those resources for the
economic benefit of our country while managing
our fisheries in a sustainable manner based on
the best scientific information and techniques
available. We are working to protect our EEZ from
illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing
and cooperating with overseas partners to tackle
IUU fishing on a regional basis. The 2009 Port State
_Measures Agreement (PSMA) is currently being_
assessed with a view to the Cook Islands acceding
the agreement, and reviewing our relevant
legislation and practices to ensure that they are fit
for purpose.

Our continental shelf has an abundance of
polymetallic nodules that offer potentially
significant seabed mining opportunities for
economic diversification that could greatly
enhance our country’s economic security. The Cook
Islands has also signed an International Seabed
_Authority (ISA) – a 15-year contract for exploration_
for polymetallic nodules in an area in the North
Pacific.

All actions taken to explore and exploit mining
opportunities must be consistent with our own
legislation and our obligations under UNCLOS. In
order to promote and protect our environmental
and resource security they must also be conducted
in such a way as to, in particular, protect and
preserve the marine environment and rare or fragile
ecosystems, conserve biodiversity and apply the
precautionary approach. We are preparing an
Environment Management Framework for seabed
mining activities.

Given our responsibilities with respect to
environmental and resource security, we actively
participate in ISA deliberations on the elaboration
of environmental regulations governing seabed
mining beyond the EEZ. We have received valuable
advice and assistance from external collaborating
partners with respect to our own economic and
resource security concerns.


Maritime, aviation, water, energy,
telecommunications, medical, banking and other
infrastructural facilities are critical to our national
security and the security of our environment and
our resources. These facilities are liable to a wide
range of human and natural threats and hazards.
It is essential that we protect those facilities.
Protection measures will be based on experiences
in the Cook Islands and elsewhere, reflect
regional and international best practice and the
highest applicable international standards. These
measures will build on positive initiatives already
being undertaken by several Government agencies.
We will collaborate with and support private sector
entities providing critical services to our country.

Under the 2019 Boe Action Plan a wide range of
regional activities will be undertaken to address
threats to environmental security. These include
(for example):

- refining environmental risk assessment

techniques in the context of regional security

- information-sharing on environmental criminal

matters

- ensuring that regional countries have effective

legal and other mechanisms in place to
implement the relevant environmental security
agreements

- enhancing monitoring, control, and surveillance

(MCS) efforts to combat IUU fishing

- strengthening efforts to combat corruption

relating to the environment and natural resources

- strengthening national policy, legal and

institutional capacities in the above areas.

We continue to play a constructive, proactive role
in Boe Declaration Action Plan activities addressing
the particular needs and concerns of the Cook
Islands with respect to environmental and resource
security.


-----

### Action plan

→ Protect the environmental and resource
security of the Cook Islands through national
activities as well as through participation in
regional and international legal and other
initiatives.

→ Strengthen effort to protect water security for
all communities in the Cook Islands.

→ Manage and exploit the marine and other
natural resources of the Cook Islands
sustainably and based on the best scientific
information and practices.

→ Assess the 2009 Port State Measures
_Agreement (PSMA) with a view to the Cook_
Islands acceding to the agreement and
reviewing our relevant legislation and
practices to ensure that they are fit for
purpose.

→ Review and strengthen our existing national
plans to protect the integrity of our ports
and airports and meet our international
safety obligations through our own initiatives
and existing regional and international
partnerships.

→ Implement a broad-based program for the
strengthening and protection of the country’s
critical infrastructure, based on national,
regional, and international risk assessments
and build on ongoing efforts.


-----

## PILLAR 6 POLITICAL STABILITY AND GOOD GOVERNANCE


### Political stability and strong governance of institutions, including the security sector

Political security covers a wide range of issues
from threats or challenges to our national
sovereignty, to supporting the democratic process,
to promoting respect for fundamental human rights
and freedoms.


Central to a country’s national security is
protection of its sovereignty and essential
national interests from external interference. In
recent years, the Cook Islands and other Pacific
Island countries have become the subject of
unprecedented attention on the part of external
actors, some with interests different to ours.
While recognising the importance of legitimate
international diplomatic discourse, we will continue
to protect against threats to our national interests
and sovereignty.


-----

Modern geo-political uncertainties have arisen
from powerful forces acting on the global and
regional stages, generated or exacerbated by
COVID-19. It is critical for us to: monitor closely
regional and international political developments
as they may impact on our own national security;
undertake risk assessments; formulate response
strategies; and take action, including in concert
with other like-minded States as necessary, to
protect our security interests and strengthen
the rules-based international order. This may
require participation in regional and international
organisations, initiatives, and treaties such as
we have done in the 1985 South Pacific Nuclear
_Free Zone Treaty. The Cook Islands will continue_
to expand its cooperation in those areas as
appropriate.

Corruption has been recognised by the Cook
Islands and other regional governments, including
through the 2020 Teieniwa Declaration, as
having the potential to pose a serious national
security risk. In support of the NSDA 2020+, the
Government has adopted a National Anti-Corruption
_Strategy (NACS) to significantly reduce corruption_
in our country and hence any risk to our national
security. The NACS will support this NSP and
be implemented and anti-corruption efforts
strengthened in light of evolving circumstances.

Our Government’s longstanding commitment
to preserve and promote political security is
reflected, for example, in the NSDA 2020+, which
recognises the fundamental rights and freedoms
currently enshrined in Part IVA of the Constitution.
We will give serious consideration to becoming
a party to other human rights and disarmament
agreements, including the 1984 Convention Against
_Torture and Other Cruel, Inhumane or Degrading_
_Treatment or Punishment (CAT) and the 2013 Arms_
_Trade Treaty (ATT)._

Our Government will ensure that respect for the
rule of law, democratic principles and fundamental
human rights and freedoms of the people of the
Cook Islands are protected.


### Action plan

→ Monitor closely regional and international
political developments, undertake risk
assessments, formulate response strategies,
and take action, together with other likeminded countries as necessary, to protect our
national security interests and strengthen the
rules-based international order.

→ Promote national security through respect
for the rule of law, democratic principles and
fundamental human rights and freedoms of
the people of the Cook Islands; implement
national anti-corruption strategies; and
participate in other human rights and related
instruments as appropriate.


-----

## PILLAR 7 TRANSNATIONAL ORGANISED CRIME


### Strengthened capacity for tackling organised crime

A growing security threat at the global, regional,
and national levels is transnational organised
crime (TOC). TOC is organised crime coordinated
across national borders involving groups (such
as Organised Motorcycle Crime Gangs (OMCGs),
deportees from these groups and other organised
crime groups) working in more than one country to
plan and carry out illegal business activities. TOC
includes, for example: drugs, arms, and people
trafficking; money laundering; laundering of the
proceeds of crime; importation/manufacture and


sale of illicit drugs and counterfeit goods; tobacco,
wildlife and cultural artifacts smuggling; and
cyber-related crimes. TOC poses an increasingly
diverse range of serious security threats relating
to, for example, border security, public health,
government corruption, and logistical and other
support to terrorist financing.

In March 2004, the Cook Islands became a party to
the United Nations Convention Against Transnational
_Organised Crime (UNTOC) and our Parliament has_
passed several laws enabling us to combat TOCrelated activities. Consideration will be given to the
Cook Islands also becoming party to the UNTOC
Firearms Protocol. At the same time, our security
agencies are continually being strengthened to
deal with TOC and collaborating with external


-----

partners. We will review our legislation and
practices relating to TOC and continue to
strengthen our ability to implement the convention.

Various TOC activities referred to above are of
growing security concern in our own country,
including drug trafficking and money laundering.
Evidence suggests that drugs are increasingly
present in the Cook Islands (including in or around
some of the Pa Enua), both on their way to larger
markets, as well as for domestic consumption,
which may give rise to unforeseen risks to the
personal health and security of our people. As a
consequence, the Government is strengthening
its efforts to address the problem through both
domestic and international action.

The Cook Islands is a party to both the 1961 and
1988 Narcotics Conventions and will give serious
consideration to participating in the 1971 Convention
_on Psychotropic Substances and the 1972 Protocol_
amending the 1961 Convention.

In recent years, our Parliament has adopted a
suite of legislation that strengthens the operations
of our financial services sector and its ability to
combat money laundering and other international
illicit financial transactions. We have concluded
a number of bilateral tax information exchange
agreements (TIEAs) that facilitate our involvement
in tackling international financial crimes. Our
Government will continue to strengthen its money
laundering and proceeds of crime protections,
including entering into other TIEAs as appropriate
and reviewing/amending proceeds of crime and
money laundering legislation to include civil
forfeiture/unexplained wealth provisions.

Wildlife smuggling has also emerged in recent
years as a serious global and regional TOC threat.
A central aim of the 1973 Convention on International
_Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and_
_Flora (CITES) is to ensure that international trade_
in specimens of wild animals and plants does not
threaten their survival. Of some 35,000 species
of fauna and flora regulated by CITES are species
that migrate through or reside in the Pacific
islands region, including all whales and dolphins,
marine turtles, corals, several sharks, manta rays
and orchids. The Cook Islands implements the
CITES trade-related provisions. We will assess
the convention with a view to the Cook Islands’
possible accession.

Of concern are those Cook Islanders who, having
spent most of their lives overseas and with little
genuine connection to our country, have been
expelled by their country of habitual residence
and are returned to the Cook Islands after serving
terms of imprisonment for serious crimes. It will be
necessary for us to ensure that no security issues
arise from their return.


Many governments and international organisations
are heavily involved in combatting TOC. We will
continue to collaborate closely with them and to
play a constructive, proactive role in Boe Action
Plan activities relating to TOC, strengthening
collaboration and seeking capacity-building and
other assistance where necessary. We will also
develop our own transnational organised crime
strategy in collaboration with our partners.

### Action plan

→ Develop a Transnational Organised Crime
Strategy for the Cook Islands.

→ Strengthen the capacity and operations of
the National Security Committee and its subcommittees including legislative measures
to ensure the best advice is provided to the
Prime Minister and the Cook Islands National
Security Council as required.

→ Strengthen money laundering and proceeds
of crime protections, including entering into
other tax information exchange and review
and amend the Proceeds of Crime and
Money Laundering legislation to include Civil
Forfeiture/unexplained wealth provisions.

→ Strengthen cooperation and collaboration
with external partners to combat organised
criminal activities, including those of gangs.

→ Work with partners on developing a system
of pre-warning Cook Islands authorities on
criminal deportees.


-----

## PILLAR 8 CYBER CRIME AND CYBER ENABLED CRIMES


### Strong policy framework for protecting individuals, government and the private sector against cyber-crime and other malicious cyber activity


The Cook Islands’ increasingly diverse and growing
electronic communication links within the country
and with the world have brought us immense
economic and social benefits, for example, the
recently installed Manatua Cable. However,
they make us increasingly susceptible to cyber
security threats. Common cybercrimes include:
using internet computer programs to penetrate
or damage computer systems in order to steal
banking logins, financial data, and intellectual
property (malware); locking computer systems
until a ransom is paid (ransomware); and convincing
people to disclose confidential login, banking
or other information (phishing). Cyber-enabled
crimes are those assisted, facilitated or expanded
using computer systems such as fraud and the
online distribution of materials dealing with child
exploitation.


-----

Besides criminal individuals and gangs, certain
State or quasi-State entities seek to use cyber
technologies and systems for other purposes
(e.g. political, military, or commercial espionage;
distributing disinformation and enhancing social
discord; disrupting the operation of critical cyber
and other infrastructure; and promoting terrorismrelated activities).

Our Government is committed to enhancing
cybersecurity, defined for present purposes as
_“[p]olicies, procedures and processes that secure_
_computers, networks, programmes and data from_
_unauthorised access, usage or exploitation”. [2]_

Given the broad-based impact of information and
communications technology (ICT) on our way
of life, including public sector, private sector,
community and personal affairs, an important
NSDA 2020+ goal is to promote national ICT
connectivity. Cabinet has recently approved a
national ICT policy based on expert advice and
extensive public and stakeholder consultation. The
policy includes actions to combat cyber and cyberenabled crimes and strengthen cybersecurity both
within Government and our broader community.
The policy protects the rights and freedoms
of Cook Islanders as guaranteed under the
Constitution.

Our Government continues to participate in
regional, international and other cybersecurity
initiatives, including implementing the Boe
Declaration Action Plan. Consideration will be
given to the Cook Islands becoming a party to the
_2001 Budapest Convention on Cybercrime and other_
treaties.

The Cook Islands is currently working towards
establishing a CERT (Cyber Emergency Response
Team) that will consist of key Government and
private stakeholders. It will be responsible for
responding to any cyber security related events
targeting the Cook Islands. We will explore
legislative tools to give appropriate strength and
authority to this capability.

2 PIFS(19)OCS.3b(iv) Annex 1, p.12.


### Action plan

→ Strengthen our capacity to assess risks to
the Cook Islands cyber security and potential
harm from illicit cyber activities, including
cybercrime and cyber-enabled crime.

→ Strengthen legal and other measures to
reduce risks to our cyber security, including
systems and infrastructure in consultation with
stakeholders.

→ Implement the National ICT Policy.

→ Establish a Cook Islands Cyber Emergency
Response Team (CERT) and develop Cyber
Crime/Cyber Enabled Crime legislation.

→ Explore opportunities for the Cook Islands
to become a party to the Budapest Convention
on Cybercrime and other treaties.

→ Develop the Cook Islands Cyber Security
Strategy.


-----

-----

### If we are to secure our future and increase our prosperity, happiness and wellbeing it is necessary to manage our national security issues. The NSP outlines the major tasks that must be undertaken to achieve this.

We continue to improve our high-quality
intelligence and assessment capability, and build
resilient national systems that support effective
response to national security threats and or events,
disaster preparedness, response and recovery, and
climate change adaptation. We need to continue to
address human security for individuals and families
and effectively monitor and implement plans to
protect the Cook Islands borders and the EEZ. We


need to ensure that we maintain political stability
and strong governance of institutions as well as a
strong, well-managed economy.

Finally, we need to strengthen our capacity to
tackle organised crime and continue to develop
a strong policy framework to protect individuals,
government, and the private sector against cybercrime and other malicious activity.

Now is the time to move forward quickly in this
task. Our Government has already initiated
numerous initiatives in the security sector and
we will build on this momentum. Our political
stability affords us the opportunity to advance on
any agreed priority actions. Also, fortuitously the
Pacific Islands Forum and security partners are
currently strengthening their role in supporting
Forum member countries in the security sector,
in ways that complement our policy.

The Government gives priority to safeguarding the
nation and building public awareness of security
issues, and looks forward to working with all
members of the community in this endeavour.


-----

-----

-----

### Image Credits

**Cover image**
Aerial View of Manihiki House on Coral
_Credit: Niroa Kamana_

**Page 10**
Rarotonga Mountains
_Credit: Conical Hill_

**Page 12**
Weaving Tivaevae on Atiu Island
_Credit: Dylan Harrison_

**Page 15**
Fishing in Mitiaro
_Credit: Noem Bartley_

**Page 17**
Avatiu Harbour Rarotonga
_Credit: Daniel Fisher_

**Page 18**
One Foot Island Aitutaki
_Credit: Craig Owen_

**Page 19**
Yellowfin tuna
_[Credit: Cookislandspocketguide.com](http://Cookislandspocketguide.com)_

**Page 22**
Cook Island family
_Credit: Cook Islands Tourism_

**Page 25**
Parliament House of the Cook Islands
_Credit: Parliament of the Cook Islands Facebook page_
_post 25 January 2018_

**Page 26**
CIPPB Tekukupa II
_Credit: Cook Islands Police Service Facebook page_
_post 20 July 2022_

**Page 28**
Top Left: Hon Mark Brown with members of cabinet
_Credit: Hon. Mark Brown Facebook page post_
_14 December 2022_

Bottom Left: Hon Mark Brown with Australian
Foreign Affairs Minister Penny Wong
_Credit: Senator Penny Wong Twitter Post_
_13 June 2022_

Right: Hon Mark Brown with Australian Prime
Minister Anthony Albanese
_Credit: Anthony Albanese Twitter Post 13 June 2023_

**Page 31**


**Page 33**
Tourism cultural experience Rarotonga
_Credit: David Kirkland_

**Page 35**
Manihiki Island family
_Credit: Melanie Cooper_

**Page 36**
Traditional fruit
_Credit: Dylan Harris_

**Page 37**
Primary health care in the Cook Islands
_Credit: Te Marae Ora Cook Islands Ministry of Health_
_[website www.health.gov.ck](http://www.health.gov.ck)_

**Page 38**
Children swimming in Rarotonga
_Credit: Cook Islands Tourism_

**Page 41**
Locally caught fish
_Credit: Dylan Harris_

**Page 43**
Fishing over Reef Rarotonga
_Credit: David Kirkland_

**Page 44**
Cook Islands Cultural Dancers at Black Rock
_Credit: David Kirkland_

**Page 46**
Cook Islands Tourism
_Credit: Sandee Cook_

**Page 47**
CIPPB Tekukupa II handover ceremony
_Credit: Hon. Mark Brown Facebook page post_
_11 June 2022_

**Page 48**
_[Credit: istockphoto.com](http://istockphoto.com)_

**Page 50**
Aerial view Mitiaro Wharf and Island
_Credit: Tayla Beddoes_

**Page 52**
Cook Island family
_Credit: Kieran Scott_

**Back Cover image**
Island Vaka 2
_Credit: William Tuiravakai_


-----

### Acronyms

**ACC** Anti-Corruption Committee

**AI** Artificial Intelligence

**ATT** Arms Trade Treaty

**BBNJ** UN Conference on the Conservation
and Sustainable Use of Marine
Biological Diversity of Areas Beyond
National Jurisdiction

**CAT** Convention Against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhumane or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment

**CCCI** Climate Change Cook Islands

**CITES** Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna
and Flora

**CLCS** Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf

**EDB** Ease of Doing Business

**EEZ** Exclusive Economic Zone

**EMCI** Emergency Management Cook
Islands

**EDS 2030** Economic Development Strategy
2030

**ERR** Economic Recovery Roadmap

**FIU** Financial Intelligence Unit

**FPR** Framework for Pacific Regionalism

**GDP** Gross Domestic Product

**ICT** Information and Communications
Technology

**IHR** International Health Regulations

**IPCC** Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change

**IPRs** Intellectual Property Rights

**ISA** International Seabed Authority

**IUU** Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated

**JNAPII** 2nd Joint National Action Plan:
A Sectoral Approach to Climate
Change and Disaster Risk
Management 2016–2020

**JCD** Joint Centenary Declaration


**MFAI** Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
Immigration

**MFEM** Ministry of Finance and Economic
Management

**MMR** Ministry of Marine Resources

**MoA** Ministry of Agriculture

**NACS** National Anti-Corruption Strategy

**NSDA 2020+ Te Ara Akapapa’anga Nui: the**

National Sustainable Development
Agenda 2020+

**NCD** Non-communicable disease

**NDC** Nationally Determined
Contributions

**NIPS** National Intellectual Property
Strategy

**NPP** National Population Policy

**NSC** National Security Council

**NSD** National Security Division

**NSP** National Security Strategy

**NTFC** National Trade Facilitation
Committee

**ODA** Official Development Assistance

**OECD** Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development

**OPM** Office of the Prime Minister

**QI** Quality Infrastructure

**PIF** Pacific Islands Forum

**SLR** Sea Level Rise

**SIDS** Small Island Developing States

**TK** Traditional knowledge

**TMO** _Te Marae Ora/Ministry of Health_

**UNCLOS** United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea

**UNFCCC** United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change

**WHO** World Health Organization


-----

This page has been left blank intentionally.


-----

This page has been left blank intentionally.


-----

-----

