```
  MILITARY STRATEGY OF THE CZECH REPUBLIC
          Prague 2002
Contents
A. INTRODUCTION  2
B. ASSESSMENT OF THE SECURITY SITUATION  3
C. MISSION AND TASKS OF THE ARMED FORCES OF THE CZECH REPUBLIC 5
D. STRATEGY OF MILITARY DEFENCE OF THE CZECH REPUBLIC  8
E. DEFENCE ASSETS AND RESOURCES  12
F. CONCLUSION  15

```

-----

```
A. INTRODUCTION
1. Military Strategy of the Czech Republic ("Military Strategy"
hereafter) is a basic document for the development and employment
of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic1), based on the
principles of defence policy as defined by the Security Strategy
of the Czech Republic. It reflects the basic provisions of NATO
Strategic Concept and related NATO Military Committee Guidance for
the Military Implementation of Alliance Strategy, assessment and
expected development of the security environment, as well as the
principles of the upcoming reform of the Armed Forces of the Czech
Republic. 
2. The Military Strategy, together with the relevant legislation,
belongs to the basic security documents of the Czech Republic
which, along with the membership of the Czech Republic in the
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ("NATO" hereafter) and with the
obligations of the international law, creates political tasking
for execution of military tasks of defence of the country and
their definition vis-a`-vis other bodies that take part in
ensuring security of the country. It also creates, in accordance
with the policy of the Czech Republic, conditions for active
participation of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic in the
implementation of the European Security and Defence Policy ("ESDP"
hereafter).
3. The previous Military Strategy of the independent Czech
Republic was approved by the Government of the Czech Republic in
March 1999, immediately after the Czech Republic's accession to
NATO. Due to a very short time between the accession and the
approval of the Military Strategy, the document could not fully
reflect all aspects of the membership. NATO membership has
principally affected the position of the country in the
international security environment and this fact became one of the
principal reasons for update of the Military Strategy and for the
reform of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic. Other main
reasons for these processes were a deeper knowledge of all aspects
of NATO membership and the assessment of the achieved level of
integration within the development of defence capabilities.
4. Security of the country is provided by a complex system of
measures enabling the Armed Forces to act either independently or
in assistance role for other bodies participating in ensuring
security of the country. In this sense the Military Strategy
expresses the basic attitudes and ambitions of the Czech Republic
in the areas of military defence and the share of the Armed Forces
of the Czech Republic in ensuring the security; it sets out their
mission, main tasks, principles of use and development, including
specification of the necessary assets and resources. 

```

-----

```
5. The chapter titled Assessment of the Security Situation offers
a brief review of security threats and risks; they are the reason
WHY it is necessary to create the capabilities for ensuring
military defence. The chapter titled Missions and Tasks of the
Armed Forces of the Czech Republic expresses WHAT the Armed Forces
of the Czech Republic must be able to fulfil in order to ensure
the security interests of the country. The chapter titled Strategy
of Military Defence of the Czech Republic expresses HOW the
defence will be provided and how the Armed Forces of the Czech
Republic should be prepared for this. The chapter titled Defence
Assets and Resources answers the question BY WHAT MEANS the tasks
of the Czech Republic?s defence will be executed and what main
assets and resources will be needed.
B. ASSESSMENT OF THE SECURITY SITUATION
6. External security environment of the Czech Republic has
fundamentally changed by its accession to NATO. By this step, one
of the main strategic goals of the security policy of the country
has been achieved, ensuring security of the Czech Republic within
the current security environment in the best possible way. Beside
strengthening its position in the community of democratic
countries and its integration into the strongest defence structure
of the present world, the Czech Republic has assumed an
appropriate part of responsibility for the security of its Allies
and for the implementation of NATO security policy.
7. An essential role for the security of the Euro-Atlantic region
is played by the maintenance and development of the transatlantic
link, where NATO plays a central role in the security-political
and defence dimension. The challenges that NATO is facing as a
result of the developments of the security environment and its
engagement in the war on terrorism lead to accentuation and
shifting of some priorities and to widening of the spectrum of the
tasks to be dealt with. That corresponds with NATO enlargement,
internal adaptation and development of NATO capabilities,
deepening the cooperation with the Partners and other non-member
countries.
8. As reflected in the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP),
the importance of the European Union for ensuring the European
security is also being strengthened. Further integration of Europe
is accompanied by an increase in the capabilities of the Common
European Security Defence Policy (CESDP). It will provide the
European Union with the tools for an independent execution of
peacekeeping, rescue and humanitarian operations. The necessary
military capabilities, complemented by police forces and other

```

-----

```
civilian components, are being created through implementation of
the European Headline Goal (EHG).
9. Internal security of the Czech Republic is affected by a number
of threats and risks. Their level is assessed on a regular basis
and subsequently reflected in the tasks of the relevant components
of the security system. The current trends of growing extent and
importance of certain threats and risks are transferred to the
increased demands that the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic be
able to assist the non-military security bodies.
10. With respect to the Security Strategy of the Czech Republic,
the following vital and strategic interests are essentially
related with the field of activity of the Armed Forces of the
Czech Republic:

```
- `Vital interests: ensuring of existence, sovereignty, territorial`
```
  integrity, principles of democracy and the rule of law and
  creation of fundamental conditions for the life of the Czech
  Republic?s citizens;

```
- `Strategic interests: increase in the defensive capabilities of`
```
  the Czech Republic and its share in the defence of the Allies,
  participation in operations led by NATO, other international
  organisations and ad-hoc coalitions, reinforcing of regional
  cooperation, NATO enlargement, continuation of the disarmament
  process, continued U.S. presence in Europe, strengthening of
  security in the Euro-Atlantic region, participation in the ESDP. 
11. Based on the assessment of the security threats and risks
defined in the Security Strategy of the Czech Republic, NATO
Strategic Concept and related intelligence assessments, the
security situation of the Czech Republic is generally
characterised, from the viewpoint of possible impacts on the area
of defence and activities of the Armed Forces, as follows:

```
- `Occurrence of a large-scale conventional aggression against the`
```
  Czech Republic and NATO in the foreseeable timeframe is highly
  unlikely and a potential threat will be disclosed sufficiently
  in advance to enable adequate measures to be taken; however, in
  a long-term perspective, this possibility, as well as an attack
  by weapons of mass destruction, cannot be ruled out. Therefore,
  it must be considered in the concept of development and
  preparation of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic;

```
- `Currently,` `a` `serious` `security` `threat` `is` `represented` `by`
```
  countries, non-governmental groups and organisations that do not
  respect the principles of international law and democracy and
  commit violence, encroach human rights and freedoms on their own
  territory, as well as conduct terrorist attacks and actions on a
  world-wide scale;

```
- `Threat of terrorist attacks, in which various kinds of weapons`
```
  and dangerous means might be used in a treacherous way, has
  substantially increased. It has also acquired a new dimension in

```

-----

```
  the form of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Since
  such attacks are very difficult to predict, they create specific
  requirements in the area of detection and prevention, as well as
  from the viewpoint of effective means for their averting or
  dealing with their consequences;

```
- `Security` `risks` `of` `non-military` `character` `resulting` `from`
```
  religious and ethnic conflicts, economic problems and
  instability of the political order still exist and, in many
  cases, are increasing. These risks may lead to limited armed
  conflicts, with a possibility of spreading;

```
- `Other threats of non-military character are connected with a`
```
  possible abuse of dangerous substances and technologies, natural
  and industrial disasters, organised crime, massive and illegal
  migration, drugs trafficking, disruption of information and
  control systems, violation of order and property. 
C. MISSION AND TASKS OF THE ARMED FORCES OF THE CZECH
REPUBLIC
12. Security and defence of the country is a matter of the whole
society. Apart from the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic, the
security and defence are being ensured by the armed security
corps, rescue corps and emergency services co-operating with
public authorities and bodies of territorial self-government and
municipalities and other legal and physical entities.
13. Fight against terrorism does not principally change the
mission and main tasks of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic;
it results, however, in higher demands on the development of their
capabilities.
Defence of the Country
14. The main mission of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic is
defence of the Czech Republic and its security interests. Their
basic task is preparation for defence of the Czech Republic and
its defence against an external attack.
15. In compliance with the membership of the Czech Republic in
NATO, the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic will maintain and
develop their capability to operate as part of collective defence
in accordance with Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty. At the
same time, they will contribute to the general defence potential
of NATO and prepare themselves, should that became necessary, to
receive Alliance reinforcements on the territory of the Czech
Republic. 

```

-----

```
Assistance Operations
16. In accordance with the laws of the Czech Republic, the Armed
Forces of the Czech Republic will fulfil the tasks necessary for
securing democracy, internal order and security. These tasks
include guarding facilities important for the defence of the
country; assistance to the Czech Republic Police in securing the
state border, movement control and the tasks of protection
service; assistance in rescue operations during disasters or other
serious situations when human lives, health, considerable values
or environment are in danger.
Crisis Response Operations
a) Military crisis situations
17. In compliance with the UN Charter and with the policy of the
Czech Republic, the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic will be
preparing themselves for their participation and active engagement
in crisis response operations outside the territory of the Czech
Republic, especially in operations led by NATO, the European
Union, United Nations and Organisation for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, or within ad-hoc coalition groupings.
18. When fulfilling these tasks, the Armed Forces of the Czech
Republic will usually operate outside the territory of the Czech
Republic, as part of a coalition grouping.
b) Non-military crisis situations
19. Capabilities of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic could
be used for dealing with crisis situations of humanitarian
character and resulting from natural or industrial disasters. They
could also be used for dealing with the consequences of armed
conflicts, including assistance in reconstruction of civilian
infrastructure.
Rescue Operations
20. Selected forces and assets of the Armed Forces of the Czech
Republic will be able to fulfil, either independently or in cooperation with other national or international subjects on the
territory of the Czech Republic or abroad, the following tasks:
search, rescue and creation of conditions for the survival of
individuals or groups facing an immediate danger to their lives.
International Military Cooperation and Confidence Building
21. As part of the integration of the Czech Republic into
international organisations, the Armed Forces of the Czech
Republic will contribute their forces and assets to implementation

```

-----

```
of confidence-building measures. They will also contribute to the
development of bilateral and multilateral cooperative programs
with democratic countries and their armed forces, including
formation of multinational units. Military cooperation will be, as
a matter of priority, fostered with the NATO Allies, as well as EU
countries, neighbours of the Czech Republic and the countries
involved in the PfP Program.
Civil-Military Cooperation
22. The Armed Forces of the Czech Republic will foster development
of the civil-military cooperation as part of educational, social,
cultural and other activities on both national and regional, as
well as international levels.
Politico-Military Ambitions
23. In principle, the Czech Republic declares all forces and
assets of the Army of the Czech Republic "ACR? hereafter) under
the command or control of NATO for the needs of collective
defence. It also declares a part of the forces and assets for use
in international crisis-response missions of both military and
non-military character. In accordance with the accepted principles
of the reform of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic, the ACR
has to achieve the capabilities necessary for fulfilling the
following ambitions:

```
- `to participate with all its forces in collective defence`
```
  operations in accordance with Article 5 of the North Atlantic
  Treaty, which may include mobilisation of reserves, or

```
- `on achieving the initial operational capabilities2), to take`
```
  part in one crisis response operation of higher intensity (non  Article 5 peace-enforcement operation) with a contingent equal
  to a Ground Forces brigade of up to 5000 persons or a resource  equivalent element of the Air Force, or by a combination of the
  Ground and Air Forces for a period of up to six months (without
  rotation). At the same time, it must be able to receive NATO
  reinforcements on Czech territory and to secure an active
  participation of the ACR in NATO Integrated Extended Air Defence
  System (NATINEADS), or

```
- `to participate, on a long-term basis, in one crisis response`
```
  operation of lower intensity (non-Article 5 peace-support or
  peacekeeping operation) with a contingent equal to a Ground
  Forces battalion of up to 1000 persons or resource-equivalent
  element of the Air Force, or by a combination of the Ground and
  Air Forces. At the same time, it must be able to take part in a
  second, simultaneous operation for a short period (humanitarian
  assistance, disaster relief) by a contingent of 250 persons for
  maximum period of six months without rotation3). At the same
  time, it must be able to receive NATO reinforcements on Czech
  territory and to secure an active participation of the ACR in
  NATINEADS and, simultaneously,

```

-----

- `to fulfil tasks, required by the laws of the Czech Republic, on`
```
  the Czech territory.
24. The ACR will keep developing its capabilities to receive
Alliance reinforcements and to actively participate in NATINEADS.
25. Capabilities of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic to
reach the level of politico-military ambitions depend on
implementation of the reform of the Armed Forces of the Czech
Republic, on maintaining an adequate level of defence expenditures
and their effective use. For specified units, this means reaching,
by the date of achieving the initial operational capabilities4):

```
- `Capability of long-term sustainment in the operational area`
```
  (sustainability);

```
- `Capability to operate with NATO forces (interoperability);`

- `Transportability by strategic transport means, in a combined`
```
  way, in the whole area of possible operations;

```
- `Capability of effective engagement and reconnaissance;`

- `Required level of command and control systems;`

- `Logistic self-sufficiency and self-protection in the area of`
```
  operation;

```
- `Sustainment of personnel.`
```
26. After initial operational capabilities are achieved,
transition to the target organisational structure of the Armed
Forces of the Czech Republic will continue. Subject to sufficient
funding, the target operational capabilities will be reached
thereafter.
27. A basis for formulation of the target operational capabilities
of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic is their direct link to
the NATO Force Goals5).
D. STRATEGY OF MILITARY DEFENCE OF THE CZECH REPUBLIC
28. For its military defence, the Czech Republic develops a
complex of forces and assets with adequate capabilities to achieve
set goals and fulfil the tasks corresponding with the principles
of operational use of the ACR. 
General Conditions
29. Strategy of military defence of the Czech Republic is based on
the use of its own forces and assets and on the security
guarantees and obligations following from its NATO membership.
Development of its own defence capabilities is a basis of

```

-----

```
effective participation of the Czech Republic in NATO or other
coalition groupings.
30. The Czech Republic will employ all available means, including
its military power, to secure its vital interests. For support of
its strategic interests, it will use its means as required. 
31. Implementation of the basic mission of the Armed Forces of the
Czech Republic is based on the principle of ensuring the defence
of the country primarily outside its own territory, which
minimises the possibility of an armed conflict on the territory of
the Czech Republic.
32. Strategy of military defence of the Czech Republic is
supported by building up an optimum structure and by developing
the capabilities of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic based
on effective use of resources and simultaneous acceptance of
reasonable level of security risks. Primarily, preventive
instruments will be used. Should they prove insufficient, they
will be supported by adequate reaction measures.
33. Strategy of military defence of the Czech Republic is based on
three pillars. Each of them always includes both preventive and
reactive action, as well as national and Alliance share and
responsibility for their implementation:
1st pillar: Capability to participate in Alliance operations by
fully trained and equipped mobile forces. This capability is being
developed in compliance with the priority of ensuring the defence
outside the territory of the Czech Republic. It includes
employment of forces depending on the character and extent of the
crisis situation, in accordance with defined politico-military
ambitions and principles of graduated readiness for operations,
their use for NATO operations or operations of an ad-hoc coalition
with maximum effectiveness, sustainability and support during the
whole period of the operation.
2nd pillar: Protection and defence of Czech Republic airspace,
especially by active participation in NATINEADS. Effective
fulfilment of individual tasks depends on the employment of
supersonic aircraft with full operational capabilities, along with
development of appropriate ground elements and command, control
and reconnaissance systems, including passive surveillance
systems.
3rd pillar: Preparation and implementation of measures necessary
for receiving Allied reinforcements on the territory of the Czech
Republic together with the required security measures on national
territory, including mobilisation measures according to
appropriate plans and concrete specifications.
34. Ensuring security of the Czech Republic on both Alliance and
national levels will be executed primarily by preventive measures.
The measures taken as a response to a crisis situation are

```

-----

```
considered complementary. Effectiveness of preventive (deterrent)
activities minimises the necessity of the reactive measures.
35. Preventive measures will be based especially on:

```
- `Effective management system with the capability of taking`
```
  adequate measures;

```
- `Effectiveness of military intelligence, continuous assessment of`
```
  security situation eliminating the possibility of surprise and
  involving intensive exchange of intelligence information with
  the Allies;

```
- `Active participation of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic`
```
  in measures taken to prevent crisis situations from occurring or
  to manage them. This active participation will take place
  primarily in the framework of NATO and the European Union;

```
- `Readiness, deterrence value and capabilities of the Armed Forces`
```
  of the Czech Republic, developed on the principles of reasonable
  sufficiency, internal balance, effective specialisation,
  graduated readiness and flexibility of use of individual
  structures;

```
- `Capability of receiving Allied reinforcements, together with the`
```
  guarantee of collective defence according to Article 5 of the
  North Atlantic Treaty; 

```
- `Readiness` `of` `the` `crisis` `management` `system` `and` `its`
```
  interconnection with the NATO Crises Response System6);

```
- `Overall preparation and provision of active duty soldiers,`
```
  reserves, as well as civilian employees;

```
- `Maximum level of interoperability with Allied forces by means of`
```
  standardization, coordination in all areas of defence planning,
  preparation of common doctrines and participation in
  multinational exercises. 
36. In the planning process, the development programs of the Armed
Forces of the Czech Republic will be structured in accordance with
the priorities and availability of resources into specific
categories with the aim to create conditions for their flexible
adaptation to the development of the security environment. 
Principles of Development of the Armed Forces of the Czech
Republic 
37. The structure of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic, their
size and capabilities are derived from their expected tasks and
resource limitations. They must respect the principles of internal
balance and reasonable sufficiency. Stress will be laid on
development of capabilities of units to fulfil the full spectrum
of missions in both the Alliance and national scale. At the same
time, specialisation of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic
will be developed; nevertheless, it must not be pushed to the
detriment of their internal balance.

```

-----

```
38. Assets and capabilities of the Armed Forces of the Czech
Republic are being created as a single complex. Some of its
elements can simultaneously be earmarked for different
employments, either from the viewpoint of their employment in
national conditions, as well as from the viewpoint of their
possible assignment when fulfilling international obligations of
the Czech Republic.
39. Optimisation of the structure of the Armed Forces of the Czech
Republic and effective use of resources are the issues of defence
planning, whose main objective is to achieve the required
capabilities of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic. 
40. Peacetime structure of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic
will enable them to meet the full spectrum of tasks that result
from the politico-military ambitions of the Czech Republic in
peacetime conditions. At the same time, a system of measures will
be created (planning, training, operational, mobilisation,
economic, legal measures, etc.) that will enable a gradual change
of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic to wartime structure,
their full engagement in operations of lower or higher intensity
in accordance with Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty and
fulfilment of the tasks of defence of the Czech Republic in
compliance with preliminary and mobilisation measures.
41. Wartime structure of mobilised Armed Forces of the Czech
Republic will not exceed 1.8-times the peacetime strength.
42. Particular structure elements of the ACR will be classified in
readiness categories, so that their planned operational tasks,
based on their declaration to NATO, the European Union and the
United Nations, are met with the greatest possible effectiveness.
The classification is as follows:

```
- `High Readiness Forces7) that are subdivided as`
```
   o Permanent Readiness Forces,
   o Immediate Reaction Forces/Initial Entry Forces,
   o Rapid Reaction Forces;

```
- `Forces of Lower Readiness that will be used, inter alia, for`
```
  rotation of High Readiness Forces;

```
- `Long-Term Build-Up Forces, being formed by mobilisation.`
```
43. In the context of the implementation of the reform of the
Armed Forces of the Czech Republic, a simplified management system
will be created. The strategic conceptual and management level
will be represented by the Ministry of Defence, including the
General Staff of the ACR. Chief of the General Staff will be
responsible for military-professional control of the ACR. The main
task of operational-tactical levels of control will be training,
general provision of troops and preparation of the troops for
operational engagement. In order to improve the coordination of
command, control and support of the units in operations, a joint

```

-----

```
element of operational command (Joint Operation Centre) will be
established at the General Staff.
44. Full professionalisation of the Armed Forces of the Czech
Republic, which is connected with termination of the conscript
service while retaining legal tools for calling-up, is one of the
principal prerequisites of fulfilment of their mission and tasks
with the necessary quality, and achievement of the required
capabilities. 
45. As a contribution to the collective defence capacities and
international specialisation, the Armed Forces of the Czech
Republic will focus primarily on development of their capabilities
in the fields of passive surveillance systems, detection and
identification of chemical and biological weapons and on
development of systems and elements of medical support. Priority
will be given to further cooperation with domestic defence
industry in close connection with the research and development
base. The Czech Republic will continue its gradual integration
into international defence research, development and armament
programs with priority focus on NATO and European Union programs.
E. DEFENCE ASSETS AND RESOURCES
Defence Assets and Basic Operational Tasks
46. In accordance with the reform of the Armed Forces of the Czech
Republic, the ACR will have the following basic military
capabilities for the implementation of the defined mission and
tasks:
a) Ground Forces in the strength of one Mechanised Division that
will represent the main part of mobile forces fulfilling the tasks
of prevention of and response to crisis situations on both
national and Alliance scale within the full spectrum of NATO
missions. Formations, units and facilities of the Ground Forces
will be organised and declared so that they may create the
necessary task groupings depending on the character of operation.
Modular organisational structure of mechanised brigades and
divisional combat support and combat service support units will
enable their employment in operations on the basis of defined
politico-military ambitions with a gradual increase of possibility
of their rotation in accordance with the implementation of the
reform of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic.
b) Air Forces in the strength of one Combined Air Force Division
that will provide protection and defence of the airspace of the
Czech Republic, especially by active participation in NATINEADS,
combat support of the Ground Forces, aerial reconnaissance and
electronic warfare, strategic and tactical transport of personnel

```

-----

```
and equipment, air search and rescue service, training and other
tasks. The Air Forces will be organised in the framework of Air
Force Bases of tactical supersonic, tactical subsonic, transport
and helicopter aviation; ground units of air defence, command,
control and reconnaissance systems.
c) Supporting Forces will consist of military rescue and training
bases and other support elements primarily ensuring general
support of operations of both the Ground and Air Forces. In
addition, they will provide protection and defence of
strategically important facilities; assist in peacekeeping and
rescue operations and in implementation of humanitarian
assistance. They will centrally provide logistics, medical
support, personnel management for the Armed Forces of the Czech
Republic and management of military administrative offices. They
will also perform duties connected with reception of Alliance
reinforcements. 
d) Military Intelligence will be divided into elements of
intelligence service, tactical intelligence and reconnaissance
that will acquire, gather and evaluate the information necessary
to secure the military defence of the Czech Republic and its
obligations towards the Alliance. It will continually assess the
risks and threats to security of the Czech Republic, helping to
secure the functionality of the preventive measures. The area of
responsibility of military intelligence will be defined by special
legislation.
e) Military Police will provide police protection to the Armed
Forces of the Czech Republic and will be ready to operate in
international police units, peacekeeping and humanitarian
operations outside the territory of the Czech Republic. At the
same time, it will be ready to provide assistance for all
components of the Integrated Rescue System.
Human Resources
47. Recruitment and retention of high-quality and highly motivated
people for the service in the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic
is a key condition for achieving the goals stemming from the
politico-military ambitions of the Military Strategy. From the
viewpoint of provision of human resources for the needs of the
Armed Forces of the Czech Republic, the National Service will be
preserved, but will be implemented only as part of preliminary
measures in state of emergency or state of war. Military service
obligations will consist of an obligation for the reserve soldiers
to perform the mandatory military exercises and special service in
state of emergency or state of war.
48. Until the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic are fully
professional, the basic (conscript) military service will be
preserved in the extent necessary for ensuring reliable
performance of the military specialisations that are not manned by
professional soldiers. Peacetime strength of the ACR will be

```

-----

```
gradually reduced to a target strength of the professional army of
34,000 to 36,000 soldiers and up to 10,000 civilian employees. The
size of reserves will be reduced to the level of 80% of the
peacetime active force. The model of creation and training of the
reserves will be changed and based on the principle of voluntary
takeover of these obligations. In compliance with the development
of professional Armed Forces of the Czech Republic, a complete
reform of military education system and preparation of
professionals will be implemented.
49. The care of human resources is a key condition of successful
profesionalization of the ACR. The ACR will prepare a system of
motivating measures on all levels of the career system with the
aim of increasing attractiveness of the service in the Armed
Forces of the Czech Republic for high-quality and professionally
skilled personnel. Special emphasis will be given to recruitment,
development of living and work conditions, training, possibilities
to improve individual skills in in-service courses, and on
assistance to soldiers returning to civilian life. Clear
definition of conditions for career growth and 
all-round care of the quality of life of the military
professionals will be important aspects of this process.
Material Resources
50. Material resources for defence will be planned and acquired
preferentially from the domestic industrial and economical base in
the framework of national system of defence planning on the basis
of the requirements defined by the Ministry of Defence. In crisis
situations, these resources will be provided in the form of
necessary supply of products, labour and services as part of
measures taken in the economic mobilisation system. They will also
be provided by creating national material reserves and by building
up the necessary infrastructure. The ACR will gradually adapt the
composition of its stocks and reduce the extent of the material
resources in emergency supplies and stored equipment maintained in
the peacetime. This adaptation will be based on the capabilities
of the country in the areas of national material reserves and
preservation of production capabilities.
51. The amount and composition of the stocks of the ACR will
correspond to NATO standards and will be set so that the ACR may
fulfil all its allocated tasks. Requirements of the ACR for the
necessary supply of products, labour and services for the state of
emergency and state of war will be covered by contractual
arrangements.
52. As the supply and logistic system is rationalised, the portion
provided by civilian sector will keep sharply increasing. It will
include contractual provision of direct supplies in crisis
situations. 

```

-----

```
53. The extent of military infrastructure, consisting of complex
facilities for all areas of activity of the Armed Forces of the
Czech Republic and Allied forces involved in defence of the
country, will be changed to meet the requirements. Disposal of
excess facilities will be a basic priority in this area. Forces
will be gradually concentrated into garrisons and military bases
in the vicinity of training areas. Development of these facilities
will take place in the framework of the priority pilot programs of
the reform. The system of defence infrastructure will be
maintained in the necessary extent to cover the needs of military
activities.
Financial Resources
54. During the implementation of the reform of the Armed Forces of
the Czech Republic, the financial resources allocated from the
National Budget for the Ministry of Defence should not drop under
the limit of 2.2% of GDP. Maintenance of this level of
expenditures in the next years is a prerequisite for successful
implementation of the reform of the Armed Forces of the Czech
Republic, provided that the security situation will not
substantially change. Funding of preparation of ACR units assigned
for peacekeeping and rescue operations abroad, as well as for
humanitarian assistance, will be fully covered from the budget of
the Ministry of Defence. Expenditures connected with the actual
deployment and operations will be covered from the National Budget
according to the specifications set by the Government or
Parliament of the Czech Republic. A similar method will be applied
for financing the participation of the Armed Forces of the Czech
Republic in large operations organised on the territory of the
Czech Republic for the benefit of foreign subjects.
F. CONCLUSION
55. Military Strategy of the Czech Republic was prepared as part
of the process of strategic defence review and reflects the
conclusions of a complex assessment of the security environment
and analysis of the current state of the Armed Forces of the Czech
Republic. It builds on the requirements of the Security Strategy
of the Czech Republic and of the strategic documents of the
Alliance. Military Strategy of the Czech Republic, together with
the conceptual documents prepared as part of the reform of the
Armed Forces of the Czech Republic, is a basic document for the
development and employment of the Armed Forces of the Czech
Republic. 

```

-----

```
56. Amendments to the Military Strategy will be prepared if the
external and internal security situation changes in any
substantial manner or the documents, on which the Military
Strategy is based, are updated รฐ especially the Security Strategy
of the Czech Republic and the strategic conceptual documents of
NATO.
The Military Strategy of the Czech Republic was approved by the
Government Resolution of 29 April 2002 No. 438.
-----------------------------------------------------------------Odkazy:
1) In accordance with the Act No. 219/1999, on the Armed Forces of
the Czech Republic, as amended by the Act No. 352/2001, the Armed
Forces of the Czech Republic consist of the Army of the Czech
Republic, Military Office of the President of the Republic and the
Castle Guard.
2) The reform of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic expects
achieving of initial operational capabilities by 
1 January 2007.
3) On achieving the initial operational capabilities with an
assumption of rotation.
4) The abovementioned capabilities refer to both the units
earmarked to achieve the initial operational capabilities by 1
January 2007, as well as other units earmarked in the target
organisational structure of the Armed Forces within the target
operational capabilities.
5) The NATO Force Goals are defined in the planning process of the
Alliance and include military functions and basic operational
capabilities structured according to NATO Task List.
6) NATO Crises Response System (NCRS) will replace the existing
NATO Precautionary System (NPS).
7) Concrete time limits for placing units on combat alert
according to individual degrees of readiness are being set and
updated in mandatory NATO directions and the ACR reflects the
valid data in its internal regulations.

```

-----

