# SECURITY STRATEGY
 OF THE CZECH REPUBLIC
 2023


-----

## Introductory word from the Prime Minister

Dear fellow citizens,

After eight years, the Government presents to you a new Security Strategy. More
than ever before, this government document speaks not only to the different levels of
our public administration system and to the Government itself, but it reaches out to
our civil society and to every individual. It engages the Parliament and recognizes its
indispensable role in our security. The fact is that we will never be able to safeguard
our security interests completely unless every one of us is aware of and willing to
do his or her part.

This Security Strategy is uncommonly open in naming the sources of threats and
showing how they have forced their way into different aspects of our lives. We believe
that to make good decisions, whether in strategic or daily matters, one must be
aware of these threats, their reality and their complex interplay. Understanding our
security environment will help us become a more resilient society.

This Security Strategy does not gloss over the increasingly dire state of the
international security environment. It does not reduce Russia‘s aggression against
Ukraine to a struggle for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. It
clarifies how the war represents a threat to the international order as a whole. If the
West fails in its responsibility to protect the order, it will open the door to potentially
even more destructive conflicts.

This Security Strategy shows how external threats, including the risks brought by
climate change, directly affect our internal security. Precipitating development
of technologies and the cyber and information space, along with our economic
dependencies, makes the impacts even more severe.

Czechia‘s anchoring in international relations; the building, development and
appropriate financing of its armed forces; the arrangements we make for our
economic, cyber and environmental security; and the way we build a resilient
system and society—all these areas require long-term, strategic and interconnected
approaches. I am convinced that the new Security Strategy provides a solid
groundwork for this holistic understanding of security.

Dear fellow citizens, I am presenting to you a document that is realistic and tells you
that happier times are not necessarily just around the corner. Many of you may see
security threats, interests, and priorities in a different light than the Government
does. I will be very glad if this Security Strategy inspires you to reflect on and take
interest in our common security.


Petr Fiala, prime minister of the Czech Republic


-----

## Content

Introductory word from the Prime Minister.......................................................................1

Key messages of the Security Strategy of the Czech Republic .................................4

I. Introduction.....................................................................................................................................5

II. Security policy principles of the Czech Republic........................................................7

III. Security interests of the Czech Republic.......................................................................9

IV. Security environment............................................................................................................12

Characteristics of the security environment........................................................12

Security threats and sources of instability.............................................................13

V. Strategy to promote the security interests of the Czech Republic...................19

Collective dimension of defence and security.....................................................21

Foreign policy and diplomacy ..................................................................................... 23

Strategie prevence a potlačování hrozeb ekonomické bezpečnosti........ 25

VI. Areas of strategic concern .................................................................................................27

Czechia‘s place in international relations ..............................................................27

Czechia‘s defence and the tasks of our armed forces......................................28

Cyber security .......................................................................................................................31

Economic security ..............................................................................................................31

Internal security .................................................................................................................36

Civil protection and crisis management ...............................................................38

Other important areas of strategic concern ........................................................39

Concluding note..............................................................................................................................41


-----

## Key messages of the Security Strategy
 of the Czech Republic

- Czechia is not secure. The main source of the threats is the much deteriorated
international situation.

- Russia’s war against Ukraine has put an end to the period of peace, stability, and
cooperation enjoyed by Europe after the end of the Cold War.

- Russia acts deliberately against Czechia’s political, economic, and social stability.
It poses a fundamental threat to our security.

- China calls into question the international order. This has adverse implications
for Euro-Atlantic security.

- Russia and China share the same interest – to weaken the influence and unity of
democratic countries. The systemic competition is of a long-term nature.

- Czechia must be able to withstand hostile influences in the cyber, information,
economic, and intelligence spheres.

- Czechia must prepare thoroughly for the possibility that it could become part of
an armed conflict.

- Czechia must be prepared to deal with emergencies and crisis situations,
including long-term crises, caused by climate change or extraordinary humanmade events.

- Europe’s security is interlinked with security and stability in Europe’s
neighbourhood.

- NATO and EU membership is of critical importance to Czechia. A threat to an ally
is a threat to Czechia.

- Citizens are contributors to security and not just its consumers. A crucial task for
the Government is to prepare them for this role.

- The only answer to today’s complex threats is a whole-of-government and wholeof-society approach.

- Czechia, together with its allies, will make itself secure. However, we will need to
invest in every aspect of our security.


## I. Introduction

1. The Security Strategy of the Czech Republic (“the Security Strategy”) is the
fundamental document of our security policy and a frame of reference for other
strategies and policies relating to our security. It sets out the core principles
and directions of our security policy that are binding on all bodies of the State
and public administration. The Security Strategy is to serve as guidance for
strategic decisions as well as for daily work on all levels of our security system,
including the very basic ones. Its implementation will be regularly reviewed in
cooperation with the competent authorities.

2. The Security Strategy is the Government’s document drawn up in consultation
with the Office of the President of the Czech Republic and the Parliament of
the Czech Republic. The aim was to seek non-partisan approaches to security
issues. The authors also received input from the Czech security community,
including its non-governmental as well as government sectors. The principal
frameworks of reference were the NATO Strategic Concept and the EU Strategic
Compass; these crucial documents were adopted at the highest level in the two
organizations during 2022. The Security Strategy is aligned with the Strategic
Framework Czech Republic 2030, a document that sets out an overall strategic
vision and goals for Czechia’s development in the long-term horizon.

3. The Security Strategy is based on the values and legal standards enshrined
in our constitutional legislation: the Constitution of the Czech Republic, the
Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms, Constitutional Act No. 110/1998
(concerning the security of the Czech Republic as amended), and other
legislation implementing constitutional standards. Furthermore, the Security
Strategy reflects our commitments to our allies and other international
commitments arising from the Czech Republic’s membership of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), European Union (EU), United Nations
(UN), and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).

4. The Security Strategy mostly respects the established structure of its
predecessors adopted in 2003, 2011, and 2015. The logic is to look at our
comparatively stable security interests in the context of the dramatically
changing security environment. The confrontation tells us which strategy is
best suited to promote our security interests here and now; and the strategy, in
turn, tells us in general terms which tools we should use. In departure from the
previous documents, the authors included a new chapter on areas of strategic
concern where further policy work will be needed.


-----

5. The watchword of this Security Strategy is a whole-of-government and
whole-of-society approach. Each of us must do his or her part for our security.
With this in mind, the authors made an effort to make this Security Strategy
straightforward and easy to read.


## II. Security policy principles of the Czech Republic

6. Our security policy is grounded in enduring democratic values and principles.
The security of individuals and the protection of their human rights and
fundamental freedoms remain at the core.

7. To deliver security for individuals, we need functioning State institutions,
public administration systems, and crisis management and civil protection
mechanisms. The crucial enabler is societal resilience and everyone’s
readiness to take a share of responsibility for his or her own security as well as
for the security of others. The security of a State is closely interlinked with the
security of all its people. No security policy will ever work unless the people get
interested and involved. Moreover, the security of today’s Czechia and its people
is inseparable from the security of the EU Member States and NATO’s collective
defence system.

8. The Government of the Czech Republic (“the Government”), State bodies, the
integrated rescue system (including its core and other elements) and all local
government bodies are obliged to provide security for our people, to defend our
sovereignty and territorial integrity and to safeguard the constituent elements
of the democratic rule of law. Their institutional tool for this purpose is a
comprehensive, functioning, and resilient security system which anticipates
and flexibly responds to the security situation in Czechia and worldwide. The
system hinges on close cooperation among all its actors, working together with
civil society and the academic and private sectors.

9. The present security environment requires a holistic understanding of and
approach to the different areas and aspects of security. Internal security is
inseparable from external security. Security in real space is inseparable from
security online. The security of our State is inseparable from the security of our
society and from the security of every individual.

10. Czechia associates its security with active participation in NATO’s collective
defence system based on a strong transatlantic link, and with the development
of all areas of the EU Common Security and Defence Policy. Membership of
international organizations does not relieve the Czech Republic of its primary
responsibility for its own defence and security. Moreover, the Czech Republic
often has to reach out far beyond its borders to protect its security interests.

11. Czechia continues to prioritize active prevention of armed conflicts. This
involves the use of deterrence as well as preventive diplomacy. In situations of
crisis or armed conflict, we work towards political and diplomatic settlement.


-----

If this fails, Czechia may use force to protect its vital and, when necessary,
strategic interests in accordance with its constitutional legislation, other
national laws and regulations, the principles of the UN Charter, and within
the framework of our solidarity and commitments to allies. Czechia prefers
cooperation in international organizations, arrangements promoting peaceful
dispute settlement, collective approaches to security and defence and mutually
advantageous economic and technological cooperation.

12. Economic security (including energy, raw material, food, and trade policies)
is an integral part of our national security. It is the linchpin of a functioning
economic system and State. We can achieve economic security only if we work
towards it within the strategic framework of our EU and NATO membership, and
if we maintain an active, transparent and strategically justified international
engagement. The State now plays a much stronger role in preventing economic
dependencies with their potentially serious security implications. Economic
security needs a secure and innovative internal economic environment,
preservation and development of strategic industries, resilient infrastructure,
openness to international trade and investment cooperation with credible
partners, and a secure, affordable, and reliable supply of raw materials,
technologies, and other inputs, including the building and maintenance of the
State’s strategic reserves.

13. The evolving security environment, including its climate-related changes,
puts more pressure on societal resilience and requires us to adapt our
security system to new threats. Czechia takes steps to improve its emergency
prevention, readiness and response, and to further develop its integrated
rescue system, civil protection, and crisis management mechanisms.

14. The security system has to respond to all kinds of threats, and the quality of the
response is conditional on constant improvement in each part of the system.
The security and defence capability of the Czech Republic must be underpinned
by economically strong, technologically advanced, and innovative defence and
security industries, engaging in diversified international cooperation with
reliable partners. The production capacities and capabilities (including access
to raw materials and technologies) must be strong enough to keep our core
defence and security structures supplied in times of peace as well as crisis and
conflict.


## III. Security interests of the Czech Republic

15. Czechia classifies its security interests (“the interests”) according to their
importance. This Security Strategy divides the interests into three categories:
vital, strategic, and other important interests.

16. Vital interests. Our vital interest is to ensure the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, and political independence of the Czech Republic, and to preserve
(in form as well as in fact) all constituent elements of the democratic rule of
law, including the protection and safeguards of fundamental human rights and
freedoms for our people. Protection of the vital interests of our State and its
people is the first duty of the Government and all public authorities. To protect
and defend its vital interests, Czechia is ready to use all legitimate tools and all
means on hand.

17. Strategic interests. The advancement of our strategic interests serves our vital
interests and helps safeguard the social development and prosperity of the
Czech Republic. To promote them, we use approaches and means appropriate
for the given situation. The strategic interests of our State include namely the
following:

   - security and stability, above all in the Euro-Atlantic space and promotion of

international stability and the rules-based order;

    - a strong, operational, and cohesive NATO, based on a firm transatlantic link,

capable to deter and resist a technologically advanced adversary thanks to
its effective and credible nuclear deterrence capability, along with its other
capabilities;

    - a united, operational, and stable EU, working jointly to help build a

democratic, socially just, and economically prosperous community of
countries pursuing open trade policies and championing human rights and
freedoms;

    - NATO-EU strategic unity, complementary development of their defence and

security capabilities, and the ability of NATO and the EU to stay ahead of the
technological game;

    - building technologically advanced and prepared armed forces for our own

as well as collective defence and preserving and developing our defence and
security industry to ensure a secure supply of the necessary material and
services our armed forces;


-----

    - safeguarding our internal security, including the integrated rescue system,

civil protection, crisis management, and protection of critical infrastructure;

   - fostering and building our population’s resilience and active role in security

and fostering and building social cohesion and stability;

   - protecting the institutions of the democratic rule of law;

    - safeguarding the Czech Republic’s economic security, including energy

security, preserving and developing our strategic industries, and improving
the competitiveness of our strategic industries in international markets;

    - safeguarding the Czech Republic’s communication security, information

security, and cyber security and defence and safeguarding an open, stable,
and secure cyber space;

    - systematically reducing our dependence on actors who pose a threat to the

Czech Republic and ensuring that economic coercion by such actors does not
affect the Czech Republic’s sovereign acts and decisions;

    - diversified, reliable, and affordable supply of minerals, nuclear fuel, and

other necessary input for critical infrastructure and industrial production
and maintaining an adequate level of the State’s material reserves;

    - promoting and safeguarding technological development, with special regard

to emerging and disruptive technologies;

    - safeguarding food security: promoting sustainable agriculture and local food

industry and maintaining an adequate level of the State’s food reserves;

   - safeguarding environmental security, with special regard to environmental

protection and ecosystem services, sound management of natural resources,
climate change mitigation, and management of climate change impacts.

18. Other important interests. The advancement of other important interests
serves our vital and strategic interests. It also improves our society’s resilience
to security threats. Our other important interests include namely the following:

    - developing bilateral relations with neighbours, with the other EU Member

States, with the United States, and the United Kingdom;

    - an independent Ukraine, firmly anchored in Euro-Atlantic structures,

capable to resist Russia’s great power ambitions;



- building our political, economic, and security relations with democratic

Asian and Oceanian partners to prepare Czechia for a potential strategic
shock in the event of a conflict in the Asia-Pacific;

- the UN retaining its global stabilizing role: improved efficiency of the UN,

achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, and cooperation with
partners and like-minded countries;

- preparedness for emergencies and crisis situations, both natural and

human-made;

- preventing and managing local and regional conflicts and mitigating

their impacts with special regard to the protection of vulnerable groups of
population;

- the OSCE resuming its role in conflict prevention, democratization,

confidence building, and security and a functioning and transparent
conventional arms control regime in Europe;

- promoting and developing regional cooperation;

- promoting democracy, human rights, fundamental freedoms, and the

principles of the rule of law worldwide;

- promoting equal opportunities and mainstreaming the perspectives of

vulnerable and disadvantaged groups into security agendas at home and
worldwide;

- reducing crime, most importantly violent, economic, organized, and cyber

crime along with fighting corruption;

- fostering a tolerant civil society and suppressing extremism and its root

causes;

- transforming our education system to provide more space for cyber and

information literacy, including critical thinking, self-protection, and mutual
help skills for emergencies and crisis situations;

- improving the efficiency and security of digitization processes in State

bodies and the public administration system and improving the expertise of
civil servants responsible for tasks with security implications.


-----

## IV. Security environment

19. The open conflict caused by Russia in Europe, the joint anti-systemic drive
of Russia and China, the increasing global tension, and the precipitous pace
of technological development – all of this creates a situation where the long
deterioration of our security environment may culminate dramatically.
The preparedness of the Western world (including Czechia) for an intensive
multidimensional conflict is the factor that determines what Europe and the
world would look like in the coming decades.

### Characteristics of the security environment

20. Europe has seen a reversion to the use of armed force for political and
ideological ends. The risk of a direct military threat to the Czech Republic’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity remains low. Even so, the likelihood of a
military attack on our territory is at its highest since the end of the Cold War,
especially in the context of a wider conflict or global strategic competition.

21. Global strategic competition has picked up pace. The democratic world is
confronted with pragmatic groupings of countries seeking to transform the
international rules-based order. The role of the UN as a protector of the order
keeps losing traction. The tendency to assert one’s interests by force means a
danger to the positions of smaller and weaker States. This radically increases
the significance of the Czech Republic’s NATO and EU membership.

22. Our security environment develops ever more rapidly and less predictably.
The worst-case scenario would be an escalation flaring up and spiralling out
of control. Tensions between States are growing: rivalry takes the place of
cooperation when threats are in the air. Polarization between the order and
anti-systemic trends becomes a reality, globally as well as within our societies.

23. Internal security and external security are increasingly interlocked. Our
security environment is multi-layered and interrelated—in the geographic
sense as well as in terms of the range of areas that make up our security
and, as such, may become a source, object, or instrument of hostile activity.
Security cuts across many areas of critical importance to our society’s overall
cohesion and resilience: economy, energy, and technology, as well as culture,
environment, education, healthcare, or social ties at large. It is because of
globalization and interlinked supply chains, including in strategic industries,
that we and our allies feel the repercussions of a security threat even if the
threat itself occurs far from our borders. Climate change with its significant


impacts is a catalyst of threats, natural and human-made, that impair our
security environment and may plunge us into political and security instability.

24. Confrontation and rivalry have found their way into new areas. Just as the lines
between peace and conflict are blurring, so are the lines between operational
domains. The danger of a conflict is now a reality not just in the established
domains – on land, at sea, and in the air – but also in cyber and outer space. Our
economy, the very functioning of our State and the security of our people are
increasingly dependent on outer space data and services. We are vulnerable to
any harmful interference with outer space objects and systems, whether caused
by irresponsible actions of strategic rivals or by collisions among the rapidly
growing number of orbital objects. In the cyber space, our adversaries attack
our critical infrastructure and institutions, seize our sensitive data, undermine
the stability and functioning of our strategic information and communication
systems, and steal our intellectual property. Attacks on international energy
and telecommunication infrastructures, including seabed infrastructures,
have revealed the high vulnerability of these installations.

25. Technologies gain strategic importance: our democratic world must stay ahead
in the technology race. This is crucial to our security, especially in the area
of emerging and disruptive technologies such as AI, quantum technologies,
autonomous systems, and biotechnologies. Development and production of
technologies strategically important to our defence industry—and indeed to
our whole economy—is concentrated in a few facilities in locations vulnerable
to conflicts and natural disasters. We increasingly risk becoming dependent
on supplies of strategic raw materials and on global supply chains. Our
rivals misuse new technologies all the more often in a bid to undermine the
international rules-based order.

### Security threats and sources of instability

26. Russia is the biggest immediate and long-standing direct threat to the security
of Europe and to the international rules-based order. Russia seeks to retain
and expand its sphere of influence in Europe and beyond, whether by means
of political and economic coercion, information and influence operations or,
more recently, by a massive use of force. It continues to treat Central Europe
as its natural sphere of influence. It has questioned the right of sovereign
countries to choose and change their allies. It has deliberately destabilized
countries in its neighbourhood, in the Western Balkans, Middle East, and on
the African continent. Russia’s war in Ukraine, its aggression and its ambitions,
cause a significant buildup of tension in the Black and Baltic Sea regions and
the Arctic.


-----

27. Russia uses a broad range of hybrid operations targeting Czechia’s interests
and security. Its non-military activities attempt to undermine confidence
in democratic institutions and destabilize our society and economy. Unless
Russia goes through a fundamental and deep transformation, political as well
as social, it will remain a threat to European space no matter what outcome the
war in Ukraine may have. Exhausted by the conventional conflict, Russia will
become increasingly reliant on nuclear capabilities to defend its position as a
great power. This is also why it continues with the modernization of its nuclear
weapons and their carriers.

28. China poses a fundamental systemic challenge globally and also in terms of
direct influence operations in democratic countries, including the Czech
Republic. It makes increasingly vigorous efforts to push through its interests
by attempting to change the existing international order. It continues with
massive arming and building of military capabilities, including nuclear forces.
It engages in cyber espionage, seeks to control global data flows, and uses
diverse forms of socio-economic coercion and other hybrid interference tools.
Chinese companies are, in effect, tied to the State and ready to serve its aims.

29. There is a mounting tension between China and some other countries in the
region. A potential regional conflict would affect the security situation in Europe
and threaten to set off global military escalation. It would also have implications
for Czechia’s economic and technological security. The risk factors include
Chinese investment in Czech and European critical infrastructure, China’s
domination of strategic supply chains, its control of the key commodities,
and the way it develops emerging and disruptive technologies, especially AI,
with no regard for ethical rules and international standards. China sets out to
rewrite the standards. It engages in disinformation activities and challenges
the narrative accepted in the international community as a consensual or at
least prevailing view. China fails to adequately protect intellectual property,
and it misuses the instruments of scientific and academic cooperation.

30. Yet another long-term threat comes from the other countries that similarly

stand in opposition to the international rules-based order. Some of them
have (or seek to acquire) nuclear weapons. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has stepped up its ballistic missile testing, declared itself a nuclear
weapons State, and reserved the right to launch a preventive strike. The
Islamic Republic of Iran has long been undermining regional stability by its
aggressive campaign to expand its sphere of influence by military means. It
systematically develops strategic offensive military technologies and nuclear
research activities with the apparent aim to build nuclear weapons. Iran is an
active supporter of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine.


31. The Western Balkans remains a source of instability despite the progress made
by its countries on the path to NATO and the EU. Western Balkan countries are
important partners to the Czech Republic and the EU as a whole. However, the
internal situation in some of them is fragile and the countries, just like their
ethnic groups, have too many outstanding issues in their mutual relationships.
The Western Balkans is a region where Euro-Atlantic values and orientation
come under the adverse influence of Russia, China, and the Gulf countries.

32. Czechia’s security is endangered by active conflicts and lasting instability in the
Middle East, Northern Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa; the source of threats
are terrorism, violent radicalism, forced displacement, and illegal EU-bound
migration. Russia has long been destabilizing the two regions—deploying
private paramilitary companies, conducting manipulative information
campaigns, and fomenting of anti-Western sentiment. Russia intends to
promote non-liberal governance, undermine stabilization efforts, and
weaken the EU’s position. The countries are becoming dependent on Chinese
investment, which is an additional threat. Climate change also has severe
impacts on security and stability in the regions.

33. Decline of democracy and the rule of law in any EU Member State would
cause internal instability within the EU. The unity, cohesion, and respect for
fundamental principles would falter. This would have a damaging effect on the
security of Czechia.

34. Non-State actors are another source of direct threats to Czechia’s security,

ranging from acts of terrorism and violent extremism to activities eroding
and dismantling the rule of law from the inside. Non-State actors exploit
the opportunities and freedoms offered by the democratic rule of law, using
them to engage in crime, disrupt public order, and commit acts of violence.
Organized crime is an important security threat; in combination with corrupt
practices, it may undermine the foundations of our society and destabilize our
State. Another threat is the development and spread of dual-use technologies
enabling non-State actors to operate in domains where they formerly had little
or no access, such as in the air, at sea, and in the cyber space.

35. An additional security threat is unmanaged and uncontrolled migration, both
legal and illegal. This is a situation where the State cannot efficiently control
the migration flow and screen the people entering its territory. A third country
may deliberately increase an illegal migration flow to serve its hostile purposes.
Failed or deficient integration of immigrants is also a threat as it promotes the
rise of self-segregated immigrant communities with parallel power structures,
and the attendant risks of societal fragmentation and the rise of xenophobia,
intolerance, and extremism.


-----

36. The climate change and worsening state of the environment affects Czechia’s

security. Extreme weather events and human-made disasters pose a risk to
our people’s safety, life, health, property, and environment, as well as to the
economy of our State including supplies of raw materials, water, and food.
Disasters may destroy or compromise critical infrastructure and impede the
basic functions of the State. The question of environmental migration is also
relevant to Czechia’s security.

37. The spread of infectious diseases with a pandemic potential poses a direct
threat to the lives and health of Czechia’s population. It makes our people more
vulnerable, including psychologically; it depletes the human resources we need
to maintain our defence capability and to operate our critical infrastructure
and other important public services. What is more, global health crises
may impair international economic relations, which may have significant
geopolitical impacts. A health crisis may be misused deliberately in geopolitical
competition.

38. State and non-State actors may endanger the Czech Republic’s security by
hybrid interference targeting the vulnerabilities of our democratic society.
Their synergic use of cyber, disinformation, economic, political, diplomatic,
military, intelligence, and other tools seeks to disrupt democratic processes,
the functioning of democratic institutions, and mechanisms of the rule of law,
as well as our internal security and social cohesion. It may compromise the
functioning and security of our communication and information systems,
supply chains, and critical infrastructure, including the supply of critical raw
materials, food and energy commodities. The severity and scope of hybrid
interference keeps increasing with the development of new technologies
including AI.

39. The pressure on Czechia’s economic security grows. The quality of our internal
and external economic environment is at risk. Dangerous economic actors
may compromise the functioning of our important infrastructure, gain access
to our sensitive data, rob our businesses of unique technological know-how,
or bar them from accessing crucial resources. They step up the pressure on
our private as well as public sectors, which places increased demands on the
resilience of the system and each of its components. Their drive to harm us in
the economic sphere may impair the competitiveness and functioning of our
economy.

40. Cyber threats take advantage of the vulnerabilities in our information and

communication systems. The greatest source of danger are targeted attacks
by foreign State and State-sponsored actors, often covered up by plausible
denial. International organizations are attractive targets, whether because


the attackers want to demonstrate their geopolitical views, or because of
the large amounts of sensitive data held by the organizations. Originators of
cyber threats may cause considerable asymmetric damage in cyber space. The
situation and activities in cyber space are completely interrelated with crises
and events in the physical space. A large-scale cyber attack may trigger NATO’s
collective defence.

41. The use of conventional military force against the Czech Republic’s territory
is a possibility. Czechia may become involved in a military conflict especially
in the event of an attack against its allies. It cannot be ruled out that allies
including the Czech Republic will be compelled to conduct a high-intensity
defence operation against a technologically advanced attacker possessing
nuclear weapons and other advanced weapon systems. Our territory may be
directly threatened mainly by enemy air forces, ballistic missiles, UAVs, and by
diversion and sabotage operations of intelligence services.

42. The use of nuclear weapons against the Czech Republic’s territory is unlikely.
However, the risk would increase if the nuclear taboo were broken, even
with a very low-yield nuclear attack, in Ukraine or anywhere else. Global
nuclear confrontation would be fatal for Czechia, but this risk remains low.
The architecture of global strategic balance is crumbling because of Russia’s
disregard for treaty-based commitments and China’s unwillingness to
get involved. International mechanisms have been unable to prevent the
proliferation crises associated with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and Iran. Nuclear deterrence is an active element of Russia’s tactics in its war
against Ukraine.

43. The chemical weapons ban has been broken by non-State actors and some
States, namely Russia and Syria. Moreover, research and development in the
fields of nuclear energy, nuclear chemistry, and nuclear biology is essentially
of a dual use nature, which means that it is vulnerable to misuse for military
purposes. China and Russia have thwarted the long-standing international
cooperation in the peaceful use of the results of this research as, from their
perspective, the existing control mechanisms do not serve the interests of their
armament programmes.

44. States may assert their interests through non-State actors. One example are

the private military and security companies contracted by governments or
serving on a commercial basis. Today, Russia, most of all, resorts to military
contractors and demonstrably uses their services in Ukraine, in the Middle Eas,
and in Northern and Sub-Saharan Africa. Transregional criminal organizations
provide mobility for terrorism, human smuggling, and smuggling of prohibited
goods including WMDs.


-----

45. Terrorism is an important asymmetric threat originating from both State
and non-State actors. Czechia is not a major target for international terrorist
groups—that said, we are part of the Western world and as such we may come
under terrorist attack. In any case, terrorist attacks occurring in the other
EU Member States are a threat to Czechia: they may endanger our nationals,
disrupt vital European infrastructure, and compromise the EU’s shared
security interests. A terrorist attack on industrial facilities or pipelines may
seriously affect human health, the environment, or the functioning of our
economic system.

46. Natural and human-made disasters are an ever-present security threat.

Climate change has increased the incidence and intensity of natural disasters.
The causes are normally beyond human control. However, in many cases,
humans can manage disasters and make them happen less frequently thanks
to systematic long-term preparation, planning, adaptation, and efforts
to reverse or prevent the root causes. Severe impacts of natural disasters
are partly the result of human carelessness, ignorance, denial of scientific
evidence, and desire to secure an advantage here and now rather than invest in
prevention, preparedness, and systemic solutions in the longer term. A natural
disaster may be caused by compound hazards. Interaction between the hazards
makes the impacts more severe and complicates disaster response.


## V. Strategy to promote the security interests
 of the Czech Republic

47. The Czech Republic’s security is integral and indivisible. It requires a wholeof-government and whole-of-society approach. This is the starting point for
the work of each public authority as well as for mutual coordination, including
civil-military cooperation. To be successful, the strategy promoting our
security interests must be taken on board by the whole society.

48. The strategy promoting our security interests requires us to prevent, suppress,
and mitigate the impacts of security threats, as well as to build our systemic,
economic, societal, and environmental resilience. Resilience means the ability
to withstand adverse influences, to cope in adverse situations and to overcome
crises. We need to be more resilient to a whole range of hostile interferences,
including those that foment societal tensions. This involves protecting our
critical infrastructure, improving our information and cyber security, dealing
with the impacts of new, emerging and disruptive technologies, safeguarding
our economic security (including energy security), and defending ourselves
against terrorism. Our citizenship education curricula must help raise
awareness of security threats, improve our response capability, and build our
resilience.

49. To safeguard the security of our State we consistently develop an efficient
national decision-making process, as well as cooperation with international
organizations. The functioning and efficiency of our decision-making process
is tested in regular exercises. The process involves democratic control of
the armed forces, a functioning crisis management system, and an efficient
communication system (including secure government communications). It is
supported by interconnected non-military and military information systems.

50. The Czech Republic’s security interests may require us to give the State a
stronger role to play in the market and in free competition. This may become
necessary in order to provide security for our cyber space, energy sector
(including raw material supply), and for other sectors of strategic importance
to the security of our State, our economy, and our people. To make the security
system work for us, it is critically important that the relevant ministries exercise
the State’s shareholder rights in State-owned strategic companies, namely in
the energy and fuel sectors, and in areas such as promotion of export and trade.

51. Our State needs to maintain efficient strategic communication in order
to promote our security interests in today’s accelerated and globalized
communication environment. The communication targets the domestic as


-----

well as international public, foreign partners, and adversaries of the Czech
Republic. Efficient and timely strategic communication may prevent or
mitigate the impacts of security threats. It plays a crucial part in deterring
enemies and gaining allies. What is more, it gives our people better insight into
the security policy and other public policies to build their confidence in the
State and public institutions.

52. An essential part of the work that must be done to build our societal resilience
is to counteract disinformation, information operations, and attempts to
manipulate the information space—especially when undertaken for the
benefit of a State actor who seeks to undermine the democratic character
and security of our State. To defend ourselves successfully, we need to take a
holistic approach: to combine our promotion of media and information literacy
and support for a strong civil society with the State’s strategic communication
and with the development of threat detection and analysis capacities, efficient
cooperation and coordination among the relevant State institutions, and
cooperation within the EU and NATO.

53. The Czech Republic needs to develop a more holistic and united response to
threats. It is important to develop our capability to attribute attacks, threats,
and hostile actions directed against Czechia. This will enable us to target our
response and assert our values with greater accuracy. To this end, we will
obtain and gather data, and build expert analysis capacities.

54. To efficiently manage emergencies, and crisis situations (both human-made
and natural) endangering lives, health, property, and the environment, it is
essential to make sure that every element of the integrated rescue system
remains operational. The great demands placed on preparedness of the
system are proportionate to the high incidence and considerable impacts
of emergencies. The Government of the Czech Republic will facilitate the
provision of equipment for the integrated rescue system, as well as the building
of civil protection and crisis management systems, and cooperation between
the actors involved.


### Collective dimension of defence and security

55. The Czech Republic’s defence hinges on our participation in the collective
defence system of NATO—the only organization genuinely ready and capable
to defend the territories, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of its members.
Czechia takes an active part in efforts to strengthen the Alliance’s deterrence
and defence posture against any adversary in all operational domains—on
land, at sea, in the air, as well as in cyber space and outer space. NATO, just
like Czechia, pays special attention to the defence capability of the Alliance’s
eastern flank. Czechia will bolster its defence capability so as to be a responsible
and credible ally contributing its adequate share to NATO collective defence.

56. Due to its geographic location, Czechia, as a transit country, is likely to play an
important role in deterrence and collective defence in the context of collective
defence operations and efforts to strengthen NATO’s eastern flank. We will
have to take a great deal of responsibility for supporting the allied forces in
our own territory.

57. The European Union makes decisive contributions to Czechia’s security in the
broad sense. It is in our interest that the EU should be a strong political and
security actor. We support efforts to reinforce the EU Common Security and
Defence Policy and, within its framework, to develop all areas of the Common
Security and Defence Policy while respecting the complementary approach to
NATO’s key role in collective defence. Czechia promotes a consistent growth
of EU-NATO cooperation, as well as the development of the EU-United States
security dialogue. Strategic unity in the trans-Atlantic community is the
cornerstone of the defence of the values of our democratic world and the
international order based on them.

58. The EU’s unique strength in addressing external conflicts and crises lies in its
ability to combine civilian and military means. Czechia supports the EU’s drive
to improve its capability to decide and act promptly, assertively, and flexibly
in order to manage different aspects of crises and conflicts. The EU is our key
platform for coordinated prevention and response to a broad range of security
threats such as climate change and illegal migration. Czechia takes an active
part in the EU Civil Protection Mechanism and supports efforts to reduce
disaster risk.

59. The essential tool of the EU Common Foreign and Security Policy are restrictive
measures—sanctions. Their purpose is to protect the EU’s values, fundamental
interests and security, and to lessen the ability of hostile regimes to harm our
interests or the interests of our allies. The Czech Republic’s new legislation
concerning national restrictive measures enables us to create our own national


-----

sanctions list in cases where the EU fails (or takes too long) to agree on its
restrictive measures.

60. Cooperation among EU members, NATO members, and other allies is an

essential part of the drive to improve the security, resilience, and transparency
of our interconnected economic environment, and to counteract the shared
threats to economic security. It is important that we all coordinate the steps we
are taking to safeguard our energy, raw material, and food security (including
adequate strategic reserves of the State), to build our resilience and protect
critical infrastructure and critical information infrastructure, and to screen
foreign investors and suppliers of critical infrastructure components. Just as
importantly, we must align our perceptions of the risks, and improve and/or
preserve the capabilities and production capacities of our strategic industries
(including the defence industry) necessary for our State’s strategic reserves.
Cooperation among EU and NATO members also plays a significant part in
improving and/or preserving the capabilities and production capacities of our
strategic industries, including the defence industry. It helps reduce critical
dependencies in strategic economic sectors, and strengthen the diversity
and resilience of supply chains. The key is to diversify in order to lessen our
dependence on a limited range of sources.

61. What is important for Czechia’s security in the global context is that
international rules, standards and cooperation-based institutions must be kept
in place, and that the international community must respond robustly when
force is being used in breach of the UN Charter. Czechia and its like-minded UN
partners work consistently to safeguard peace and security, to draw political
and other consequences from breaches of international law, and to defend
democracy, human rights, and the rule of law.

62. Czechia takes an active part in preventing and combating terrorism. We
contribute to the counter-terrorist activities of international organizations,
above all NATO and the EU, by sharing intelligence, building the requisite
capabilities, participating in operations and missions, and promoting
cooperation with partners. Czechia assists its partner countries in developing
their capability to deal with the threats of terrorism and radicalization on
the ground, to address the root causes and, importantly, to promote good
governance and socio-economic development in vulnerable regions. Our
assistance helps prevent the dangerous rise of terrorism and radicalization
including the possible impacts on our society. Czechia has adopted systemwide preventive and legislative measures against terrorism in accordance
with the EU strategy. We actively prevent, detect and suppress radicalization,
including on the internet. We have taken steps to protect our population,
critical infrastructure, and other targets vulnerable to terrorist attack. We


have set out to improve information exchange with our NATO and EU allies,
our border protection, and our fight against terrorist financing and terrorist
use of new technologies.

63. Czechia has in place the arrangements necessary for active participation
in NATO, EU and UN missions and one-off coalitions dealing with a broad
range of crises in the pre-conflict, conflict, and post-conflict phases. We fulfil
these commitments in conformity with our integrated approach to crisis
management operations. We assist with the building of security and defence
capacities in our partner countries whose security and resilience is relevant
to the security interests of the Czech Republic. To this end, we develop the
capability to deploy armed forces and civilian experts on capacity building
missions and operations, including especially training missions and supplies
of material.

64. When crisis prevention and peaceful settlement fail, Czechia joins in the

coercive measures in keeping with its NATO and EU commitments and with
the principles of the UN Charter. Moreover, where our capacities permit, we
may contribute civilian and military resources to other peace operations that
are consistent with our interests, even if they remain outside the scope of our
treaty-based commitments and/or if they do not address a direct threat to
Czechia. We are ready to contribute to the international community’s coercive
measures intended to prevent gross violations of human rights, and above all
genocide and other crimes against humanity. In this connection, the Czech
Republic supports further elaboration of the Responsibility to Protect (R2P)
concept adopted by the UN General Assembly. However, this must never
be to the detriment of the defence of the Czech Republic and our adequate
participation in NATO collective defence. .

### Foreign policy and diplomacy

65. Almost all diplomatic tools used to advance security interests are within the
soft power spectrum. This does not lessen their importance as an integral part
of the overall strategy.

66. Diplomacy is an essential element of our security system. It works over

longer time scales to create an environment conducive to the vital interests
of our State. Its core task is to defend and promote a stable, peaceful, and
just international order and to forge alliances with like-minded countries.
Diplomacy helps advance our security interests by building partnerships and
confidence, gathering timely and relevant information, detecting dangerous
trends as they emerge abroad, and taking preventive diplomatic action to cool


-----

down tensions. Czechia uses its engagement in international organizations,
and its bilateral and regional cooperation, to promote its security interests.

67. Czechia is active in human rights advocacy and promotion of democracy. We
are convinced that, by its nature, a country with a poor human rights record
poses a security threat to others and to the international community as a whole.
A regime that violates human rights in its own territory is much more likely to
commit acts of aggression outside its borders. The projects and activities of
Czechia’s transition cooperation programme in priority countries are based
on partnerships with local civil society, NGOs, public administration, and the
media. They are always tailored to the local conditions and the needs of the
country concerned.

68. Development and humanitarian assistance is an important and established
part of efforts to reduce the security risks that originate from failed and
vulnerable countries. We assist through multilateral formats as well
as bilaterally. We seek to interlink our humanitarian, stabilization and
development activities in a way that consistently reduces vulnerabilities
and contributes to all dimensions of resilience, including especially the
humanitarian, security and environmental ones. The tools of development
and humanitarian assistance are also important in mitigating the impacts of
environmental and climate threats and in advancing global health above all in
the areas of prevention, preparedness and adaptation.

69. Our diplomatic service uses consular tools, preventive measures, and crisis
management to lessen the risks to Czech nationals abroad. Digitization of our
consular system will make the service even more efficient.

70. Control of trade in military material, dual use goods and other sensitive
material is another crucial tool of the Czech Republic’s foreign and security
policy.

71. Czechia plays an active part in arms control, disarmament, and nonproliferation efforts. We seek to reverse the ongoing erosion of the
disarmament architecture. We consider it necessary that, in international
forums, responses to this situation should be directed against Russia and, from
now on, also against China with its wholly, non-transparent modernization and
diversification of nuclear arsenal. Czechia is against non-systemic initiatives
calling for a complete ban on nuclear weapons, such as the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW), as these initiatives are not consistent
with the operative Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). The Czech Republic
places an emphasis on third country engagement in international control
regimes. We do not accept the argument that these regimes act as a brake on


the development of the global South. The EU, first of all, should strive harder
for a more assertive control of sensitive exports; this should involve a search for
effective capabilities and activities to complement the demarches carried out
by EU Delegations. The Czech Republic will insist on compliance with existing
international treaties in all cases. At the same time, we acknowledge the
increasingly important role of voluntary codes of conduct: a flexible and less
formal instrument based goodwill, which means that the parties are genuinely
willing to comply.

### Strategy to prevent and suppress threats to economic security

72. Czechia fosters a secure and innovative internal economic environment. We
strengthen, diversify, and safeguard our critical infrastructure, including
critical information infrastructure, and promote secure research and
development in the area of emerging and disruptive technologies. One of
the crucial tools is a mechanism for screening foreign investors who want to
invest in our strategic industries. Czechia realizes how important it is to make
timely decisions on questions of construction and operation of new energy
sources, including the nuclear ones. We consider it essential to reduce our
dependencies on hazardous suppliers of the products and services we need to
operate our critical infrastructure and critical information infrastructure. We
will encourage active public-private cooperation in improving our resilience
to internal and external threats and identifying and reducing risks. We will
develop and maintain, across our public and private spheres, shared situational
awareness regarding hazardous economic actors, including the possibility to
share sensitive unclassified information.

73. Czechia wants to ensure a secure and affordable supply of gas, oil, and oil
products as well as other relevant commodities from reliable and secure
suppliers. We intend to diversify the supply routes and to efficiently build our
raw material storage capacities and emergency reserves of energy feedstock.
We will encourage households and private businesses to build up emergency
stocks. The energy sector is the mainstay of our economy. We need to diversify
the supply routes and suppliers and to ensure that our critical infrastructure
remains operational. We must avoid situations where a dominant supplier has
the opportunity to gain direct leverage over our economy (including the main
macroeconomic indicators such as inflation) just by hiking up the prices of
important energy feedstock, even if the supply itself remains physically secure.
Cyber security is becoming a vital aspect in the increasingly digitized energy
sector.


-----

74. Czechia wants to stave off the danger of economic coercion. The most efficient
tool is to promote the use of FTAs and alternative arrangements for trade
with credible partners as a way to diversify our trade ties and avoid import
and export dependencies. To be more competitive in international markets
and improve our overall economic position, we must find new sources for the
secure supply of vital production inputs and new opportunities for cooperation.


## VI. Areas of strategic concern 

### a. Czechia’s place in international relations 

75. Czechia’s ties with allies and partners are essential to our independence,
sovereignty and economic prosperity. The core task for our diplomacy is to
foster an international environment conducive to the Czech Republic’s security
interests.

76. A credible, confident, and effective foreign policy must be grounded in a
broader political and social consensus on what our country’s main interests
actually are. It must accept that we have to promote these interests over long
time scales and to invest human and financial resources for this purpose. The
exercise of foreign policy is the remit of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the
Government. The President of the Czech Republic and the two parliamentary
chambers have an indispensable role to play. To ensure that the Czech Republic
is recognized internationally as a solid and credible partner, all these actors
must share the loyalty to the main values and directions of our foreign policy,
and they must speak with one voice.

77. NATO and EU membership multiplies Czechia’s political and economic
importance and protects us from aggressive forces in the international
environment. If we are to reap the full benefits, it is all-important that the two
organizations continue to stand firmly together and that we continue to have
friendly and future-oriented relations with allies, including our neighbours,
and efficient Central European cooperation formats. The Czech Republic
supports ongoing NATO and EU enlargement processes in the interests of
security and stability in the Euro-Atlantic space.

78. The Czech Republic is aware of the crucial importance of security, stability,
and development in countries in Europe’s neighbourhood. The key region in
this regard is Eastern Europe: Czechia will support the war-torn Ukraine and
assist with its renewal as a matter of priority. We will also be active in Africa and
the Middle East, especially in the countries where we can build on our historic
presence. Ongoing polarization of world politics is yet another reason why it
is increasingly important to develop relations with the countries of these two
regions. In today’s globalized world, Czechia looks for multi-layered relations
with like-minded democracies in all regions, including the distant ones. We
give special attention to partners in the Asia-Pacific, an emerging world trade
hub that, nevertheless, suffers from the tensions caused by China’s increasingly
assertive conduct.


-----

79. Czechia is one of the world’s most developed economies. Experience of
totalitarian rule and transition to democracy is part of our identity. Timely
humanitarian aid, targeted development and transition cooperation, and
consistent human rights advocacy are elements of our bilateral as well as
multilateral diplomacy. All of this makes up our key role in international
relations and contributes to the good name of Czechia as a country that has
shouldered its share of responsibility for the future of the world.

### b. Czechia’s defence and the tasks of our armed forces

80. The keystone of our defence is NATO’s collective defence system and our active

engagement in it. We contribute to the collective defence capabilities of the
Alliance. We systematically build the national capabilities that enable our
armed forces to take part in NATO deterrence activities and in the planning
and conduct of collective defence operations. We maintain and develop
our capability to deploy forces on NATO, EU, UN, and coalition-led crisis
management operations, including post-crisis operations, stabilization
operations, capacity building operations, counterterrorism operations, and
humanitarian operations.

81. In situations of an attack on the Czech Republic and in situations that trigger
the collective defence commitment, the core task for our armed forces would
be to conduct, in cooperation with our allies, a prolonged high-intensity
military conflict against a technologically advanced adversary both within and
outside Czechia’s territory. Our State and society as a whole must prepare for
that.

82. In addition, Czechia builds its capability to independently deploy our armed
forces outside our territory on rescue operations or operations to evacuate our
nationals from vulnerable regions. In exceptional cases, Czech Army capacities
may be deployed in Czechia to deal with natural disasters, industrial accidents,
and other emergencies, provided that the deployment does not impair our
defence capability.

### Building defence capabilities

83. To be fit for these tasks, the Czech Army must be a combined forces army:
a combination of robust capabilities and heavy military equipment with
advanced technological capabilities, including efficient utilization of emerging
and disruptive technologies.


84. Participation in the collective defence system does not relieve Czechia of its

responsibility to develop the capabilities necessary for the defence of our own
territory. Our national arrangements include, most importantly, air defence
capabilities, protection of critical infrastructure, and defence against hybrid
interference including cyber threats, manipulative information campaigns,
and attempts to influence or paralyze our decision-making processes. Czechia
has bolstered the defence and safeguarding arms of its intelligence services in
order to implement the arrangements for defence against hybrid interference
and to ensure timely identification of strategic threats.

85. Another important defence task is to maintain a complete and reliable
national system of support for the Alliance’s collective deterrence and defence
operations in our territory. The question of military mobility, including support
for the movements of allied armed forces in our territory, becomes highly
relevant because of our geographical position within the NATO area. Some
aspects of military mobility are outside the Defence Ministry’s remit and
require the cooperation of other bodies of the State and public administration.

86. Czechia continuously modernizes the equipment used by its armed forces. We

acquire and maintain sufficient stocks of ammunition, spare parts, fuel, and
other material necessary in a prolonged high-intensity conflict.

87. Czechia’s defence system has combat deployment capability, including the
necessary manpower and material mobilization capability. We continue to
develop all the requisite elements. We build our defence capabilities in each
operational domain—on land, in the air, in cyber space and outer space—
with an emphasis on interoperability in defence and military operations. We
develop our national deterrence capabilities, and we contribute to the Alliance’s
deterrence policy combining conventional and nuclear capabilities. Czechia
will remain an active participant in NATO’s nuclear policy and planning. We will
contribute to the Alliance’s nuclear deterrence as a non-nuclear ally.

### Defence resources and the role of industry

88. To sustain our defence capability and active role in the collective defence

system, we need sufficient financial resources. Czechia increases its defence
spending in accordance with our national needs, NATO commitments and
solidarity with allies. Our defence budget will reach the 2 percent of GDP goal
by 2024, and it will remain at or above this level thereafter. The 2 percent of GDP
threshold is safeguarded in national legislation. In fact, Czechia may yet have
to spend much more in order to meet its defence needs in the years to come.


-----

89. The industrial base, especially the domestic defence industry, plays an
indispensable part in the defence effort. Industrial capacities and technological
innovations are one of the key enablers of defence capability. The steps we
are taking to safeguard Czechia’s security interests must necessarily include
promotion of Czech defence and security industries as suppliers to our armed
forces and other security structures. Similarly, the process of building and
maintaining State material reserves benefits our defence industry as it helps
preserve and develop the capabilities and production capacities necessary to
regularly restock the reserves and provide mobilization supplies. The State
material reserves system ensures that the range and volume of our oil product
stocks is sufficient to meet the needs of the Czech Republic’s defence and
security forces as well as the needs of any allied forces present in Czechia’s
territory in connection with NATO collective defence and deterrence.

### Whole-of-society factors for defence capability

90. A country’s defence requires an integrated approach. Responsibility for

Czechia’s defence capability does not fall on the Defence Ministry and armed
forces alone. Defence is the responsibility of all bodies of the State, the whole
public administration system, and the whole society. What also matters very
much is to get our people prepared for and involved in defence, to promote
military traditions, to enhance the social standing of armed forces personnel
and civil servants, and to use strategic communication effectively. This is
where the education system comes in with its own contribution to defence
preparations. It develops our military, security, and technical expertise, and it
prepares our society to do their part for our country’s defence.

91. Czechia actively builds the non-military elements of its defence capability,
especially in the context of NATO commitments that require us to improve
the resilience of our State and society. The Alliance identifies seven baseline
requirements for national resilience: (1) assured continuity of government,
(2) resilient energy supplies, (3) ability to deal effectively with uncontrolled
movement of people, (4) resilient water and food resources, (5) ability to deal
with mass casualties, (6) resilient civil communications systems, and (7)
resilient transport systems. On this basis, we have adopted a new approach to
civil protection means and arrangements, including protection in the event of a
nuclear attack, as part of our preparation for a potential armed conflict. Czechia
builds its own capacities and tools to ensure civil protection in the event of an
armed conflict affecting our territory.


### c. Cyber security

92. Czechia’s cyber security system involves a broad range of actors from the
public, private, and academic spheres. The cyber space, by its nature, puts
every actor under constant pressure to adapt to a dynamically changing
environment. A common approach to cyber security—coordinated, effective,
proactive, and based on an integrated cyber threat prevention, detection,
and response system—continuously improves the resilience of information
infrastructures crucial to the State. Cyber security is a cross-cutting issue,
and a whole-of-government approach is the best practice in countering cyber
threats. Accordingly, each body of the State, across the broad spectrum, should
have the expertise to deal with these challenges within its respective remit.
The national authority coordinating all the actors is the National Cyber and
Information Security Agency.

93. The cyber space must remain global, open, stable, reliable, and secure. Czechia
must continue to assist with the development of the legal standards and
policies promoting these aspects. We will encourage our partner countries to
adopt a united approach fostering a responsible conduct of States in the cyber
space. An important challenge is to develop the capabilities and capacities that
enable us to prevent, deter, detect and respond to hostile cyber activity and to
attribute attacks if necessary. The cyber attacker still enjoys the advantages
of comparative anonymity, plausible deniability and asymmetric operations.
Even a small group of actors can use the cyber space to cause damage with
strategic implications.

94. In addition to resilient infrastructure, cyber resilience requires continuous

and systematic education of all social groups on secure use of the cyber space.
Czechia has a shortage of cyber security experts. The State together with other
actors must make every effort to enlarge our expert pool.

### d. Economic security 

 Internal dimension of economic security

95. The economic security dimension of prolonged high-intensity conflicts adds
even more importance to the development of industrial, technological, and
research capacities and know-how in areas crucial to the functioning of our
State and economy. Czechia’s security interests require that bodies of the
State occupy positions of influence in strategic companies vital to the very
functioning of our economy. The State’s ownership rights in partly Stateowned companies must be exercised efficiently and with the benefit of expert
knowledge.


-----

96. Digitization is an enabler for efficiency, competitiveness, and environmental

sustainability in all sectors of our economy. Czechia’s security, economic
development, social cohesion, and stability require us to enforce the principles
of digital security whenever digital solutions are used.

97. Secure research, development, and deployment of new technologies is
crucial in driving our future economic growth. The Government will foster
an innovative and secure environment for cutting-edge research and
development. There will be appropriately targeted financial support for
technology projects with potential strategic implications, including projects
with heightened risk factors such as higher degrees of sensitivity in relation to
hazardous entities.

98. Economic security and technological development require efficient use of
human resources and funds and a robust education system. The Czech Republic
and the EU must aspire to get to the top of the technological world. We must
avoid technological cooperation with actors who use advanced technologies to
compromise our security interests and undermine international cooperation
and rules-based order.

99. Public-private cooperation benefits all its actors. The public sector gains
valuable experience and knowledge from the private sector. The secure
communication and information exchange cycle is mutually reinforcing. To
this end, the Government will facilitate targeted communication on security
issues between the public administration system and the academic, nongovernmental, and private sectors. The public administration system will work
together with the private sector to move towards a shared perception of threats
and to assist companies as they adapt to the new environment. The strategic
goal is to build relations and ties with the private sector so that the State has
private sector partners to rely on in emergencies, including the opportunity to
use the full potential and capacities of Czech companies as necessary.

100. The current technological development and increasing complexity of the topics

places ever higher demands on the quality of the State’s employees responsible
for decisions with long-term socio-economic implications. We must further
improve the way we build the competences of such employees through
theoretical and practical training, including training designed to raise their
awareness of the manifestations and impacts of security threats. Decisions
relevant to the secure functioning and development of our economy should
be preceded by a thorough analysis based on sound input data and indicators.
To this end, we must create and develop multidisciplinary research capacities
combining technical, technological, and social science expertise, with socioeconomic, industrial, technological, and security research at the core.


101. To provide a stable energy environment, the State must utilize all competitive

energy sources contributing to Czechia’s energy independence, while taking
into consideration the environmental aspects. The relevant industries will need
to adapt to such sources. The Government will take steps towards building new
energy sources, especially the renewable and nuclear ones. Moreover, to have
a sustainable and well-functioning economy, we should become more energy
efficient. To this end, the Government will support energy efficiency projects
of the private sector. Further development of the Energy Consultation and
Information Centres network along with promotion of responsible consumer
attitudes towards sustainability will also contribute to this goal.

102. Economic development is contingent on the resilience of crucial infrastructure.

We will make our electricity grid even more resilient and prepare it for an
increasing influx of renewable energy, safe integration of community energy
sources, and development of smart networks. We will improve the resilience
of the cross-border elements of our transmission networks. An equally
important concern is security of the energy system as a coherent whole,
especially the cyber security aspect, including the need to redefine critical
energy infrastructure. We will update our national emergency management
legislation to reflect the changed conditions.

103. We will define the essential infrastructures that do not fit within the definition

of critical infrastructure (for example, in the health care, social services, and
education sectors) to ensure that their energy and fuel needs are taken into
account. We will also determine the responsibilities of each regional and
municipal authority in the process of elaborating local energy resilience
programmes for energy supply as well as for heat and fuel supply.

104. The State pays great attention to our water infrastructure. Holistic approach

to water security encompasses the entire supply chain: catchment situation,
water abstraction, treatment, storage, and distribution to consumers. We
must review the risks regularly, including in response to the threats of extreme
hydrometeorological events caused by climate change, as well as changes
caused by human activity in water protection zones. We must effectively
subsidize system-wide measures intended to efficiently interconnect water
infrastructures, diversify water sources, integrate new sources in the system,
optimize drinking water storage capacities, and modernize and develop water
supply and sewage systems.

105. Food security is vital to the functioning of our society and healthy development

of our population. Our State maintains a reasonable food security level:
Czechia’s entire population has access to sufficient quantities of affordable and
nutritious food presenting no risk to human and public health. To attain and


-----

sustain this reasonable food security level, the State promotes the development
of Czech agricultural and food supply chains. This involves taking measures
of economic, diplomatic, environmental, and oversight nature. Absolute food
security, meaning absolute food self-sufficiency, is unattainable. Czechia’s
territory cannot produce the required quantities of every basic agricultural
and food commodity. To attain the highest possible food security level, the
State concentrates on those commodities that can reasonably be produced in
Czechia’s natural and economic conditions. In this context, the State seeks to
protect the soil from degradation and inappropriate use in order to promote
biodiversity and water retention in the landscape. The State, acting through the
State material reserves system, will adjust the food stocks held in the system as
required to keep the population supplied in a food crisis.

106. Strategic reserves help us withstand the impacts of unforeseen events. Our

State material reserves system is now at the operational readiness level. If
the situation changes, we will have to reconsider the range and volume of
the stocks. Another concern is to find ways to motivate our private sector and
individuals to build up strategic and household stocks in anticipation of a
security crisis or disruption of supply chains to ensure that our economy would
continue to function smoothly.

### The international dimension and the sourcing of inputs for secure functioning of our economy

107. The openness of the Czech economy means that when we try to ensure the

security of our internal economic environment, the international dimension
inevitably comes into play. More often than not, the Czech economy faces
threats and risks of an international nature coming from State as well as nonState actors.

108. Czechia must have the capability to actively prevent and deal with economic

coercion and influence operations in the multilateral trading system. We
must counteract the efforts of some State and non-State actors who use
non-legitimate methods to gain economic or technological advantage, cause
damage to private businesses or academic and research institutions, and
even to compromise specific interests of the Czech Republic. The key is to
have in place robust institutional support (including human resources) for the
mechanisms that keep our open environment secure for trade and investment.
Examples may include the foreign investment screening mechanism, the
planned security screening of supply chains, the application of sanction
regimes, export licensing, and the EU’s planned anti-coercion instrument.


109. In terms of economic security, our main interest is to diversify our supply

chains, improve their quality, make them more stable and secure, and to
become less dependent on strategic supplies. The Czech Republic’s economy
is heavily reliant on access to sources of energy, raw materials, and other key
inputs. Our first concern will be to gain secure access to the inputs necessary
to maintain our defence capability and national security, including inputs for
our defence and security industries. The support provided (and constantly
improved) by the State, together with raw material diplomacy, will enable us to
replace supplies of energy feedstock and other raw material from Russia and
other authoritarian or unstable countries with supplies from reliable partners.
Diversity of markets will make it easier for our companies to find alternative
suppliers. Diversified exports and a greater degree of internationalization will
lessen our economic dependencies and help us redirect our exports whenever
we lose an export market. The Government will share the available information
with Czech businesses to reduce the risks of business presence in markets rife
with security problems. In view of the energy transition, increasing digitization,
electrification, and new production trends, our strategic aim is to radically
expand the range of strategic commodities held in the State material reserves
system. This concerns especially commodities necessary for our arms,
steel, and battery manufacturers and other economically important Czech
businesses.

110. Energy security depends not only on the diversification of sources, but also on

the development of national and European infrastructures for the transport of
energy feedstock. The development of infrastructure enabling consistent highcapacity transport of LNG will be an important part of our efforts to stabilize
energy supply. The Government has solutions to replace Russian oil imports:
the TAL-PLUS project to increase the capacity of the TAL pipeline for oil supply
to Czechia, the Adria pipeline for oil shipped via the Adriatic Sea terminals, and
the southern branch of the Druzhba pipeline for oil shipped via the Black Sea
terminals. A concern of strategic importance is that the oil stocks held in our
State material reserves system should consist predominantly of alternatives
to the sulphur-rich Russian oil.

111. Our energy security will also benefit from the development and use of new

technologies such as high-capacity energy storage systems and the use
of hydrogen, including the building of hydrogen producing and utilizing
infrastructures.


-----

### e. Internal security 

112. Internal security and civil protection require a whole-of-government approach.

The Ministry of the Interior has the key, though not sole, responsibility for the
process, and there are a number of other actors, each with its own specific
responsibilities. Czechia’s internal security requires a united approach and
a uniform State policy. The Interior Ministry’s role is to make our State and
society resilient to the threats. To this end, the Government will regularly
analyse the internal security developments. The results of the analysis will
inform our choice of priorities, each priority being allocated the appropriate
capacities.

113. Czechia’s internal security must be seen in the context of global, especially

European, developments. It is inseparable from the security of Europe. Europe’s
security influences Czechia’s security directly as well as indirectly. This means
that the answers to many of our security problems must be searched for at the
EU level. Many of the threats to our internal security originate elsewhere, a fact
to which our internal security policy must give considerable weight.

114. The Ministry of the Interior is a central body of the State responsible for internal

affairs, including public order and some areas of internal order and security:
crime prevention, road safety, possession of arms and ammunition, migration
and asylum, fire protection, crisis management, civil emergency planning,
civil protection, integrated rescue system, and the administrative penalties
procedure. It operates the communication networks serving our security and
rescue mechanisms. It supports the public administration system to work in
the optimal way and to be resilient—a function highly relevant to our internal
security. The Ministry of the Interior has an important role to play in preventing
and suppressing hybrid threats and in building our resilience to the influence
of foreign powers.

115. The Government will pay increased attention to the threats that affect our

internal security on a country-wide scale and are associated with other
security concerns. In these cases, the Government will use the whole-ofsociety approach. The threats include interference by foreign powers in the
internal affairs and functioning of our State and our public administration
at large, in our political or economic decision-making processes and our
information environment, influence of foreign powers on our free society, as
well as dangerous manipulation of information, extremism, radicalization, and
terrorism. These threats exploit the vulnerabilities of the democratic rule of law
to gain control over the political and economic life of our democratic republic
with the assistance of internal actors. The activities aim to progressively
undermine the foundations of our democratic State. We must use all legitimate
means to stave them off.


116. The steps taken by the Government to safeguard our internal security interests

will involve engaging in international cooperation mainly within the EU and
NATO, working together with our civil society as well as business and academic
communities, improving public awareness and education, monitoring and
analysing the security situation, exchanging information, coordinating the
bodies of the State, utilizing the State’s strategic communication, making the
public administration system more resilient to the threats, and consistently
enforcing law. The Government will have to allocate sufficient capacities for
these purposes.

117. Migration has increasing security implications in the European as well as

national contexts. This is partly due to its increasingly strong association
with security threats such as organized crime, human trafficking, and
terrorism. Another reason is the surging migration flow driven by economic
reasons and regional conflicts and increasingly also by the effects of climate
change. Last but not least, this is due to the way some international actors
instrumentalize migration. Czechia’s migration policy will prevent and
efficiently address the negative phenomena associated with migration, and
it will mitigate the impacts. It is important to use a preventive approach in
the potential source countries of the migration flows. It is also necessary to
pay attention to the transit countries affected by the massive movements of
people. The core task is to consistently protect the EU’s external border and
to build the EU’s resilience by efficiently managing the crucial mechanisms
of its migration policy. The number and structure of immigrants residing in
Czechia’s territory must reflect the benefits they bring to our country as well
as our country’s absorption capacity. A successful migration policy requires
thorough monitoring, timely identification of the risk phenomena, flexibility,
and rapid response to emerging trends. It must be underpinned by functioning
administrative, criminal, and returns processes. Last but not least, it must be
allocated sufficient capacities.

118. The crime prevention and suppression system protects individuals as well

as communities. Its role also involves protecting and assisting crime victims,
especially the most vulnerable ones. The key criterion for a State’s credibility
is whether the people feel secure as well as confident that the State is taking
care of their local security situation. Accordingly, the Government will see to
it that security institutions work consistently at the local level and will provide
them with the necessary support in terms of legislation, policies, guidance, and
funding. Internal security is very vulnerable to the impacts of serious general
and economic crime, organized crime and corruption, and the increasingly
widespread and sophisticated online crime. Here, the Government must keep
its priorities under review to reflect the emerging new forms, means and
modalities for the fight against crime. The key is to bolster our capacities for


-----

combating violent, online, and property-related crime. Last but not least, we
must consistently fight hate crime and stand up against verbal and physical
manifestations of hatred, including attacks on democratic values, because
hatred radicalizes, fragments, undermines, and destabilizes societies.

119. A functioning criminal justice system able to flexibly respond to changing

security risks is another crucial enabler for internal security. The Government
must keep tailoring the system’s capacity to the current needs, and it must
protect judicial independence from any interference. Only an independent
justice system, resilient to outside influences, can hand down just and fair
rulings to promote confidence in the democratic rule of law and in a State that
delivers security for its people.

120. The Czech Republic will ensure that the bodies responsible for internal security

have the human resources, organizational, material, and technological
capacities they need to efficiently perform these functions and adequately
prevent and deal with the security phenomena.

### f. Civil protection and crisis management

121. The Ministry of Interior’s responsibility is to make our State and society

resilient to crises of non-military nature. This involves coordinating the nonmilitary crisis management system, and building the expertise needed to
plan, prepare, coordinate and align the roles of public authorities and private
stakeholders. Upcoming legislative changes will facilitate the development of
the State’s single crisis management documentation reflecting the changed
security environment. The Ministry of the Interior will continue to improve
the crisis management tools, especially the national crisis management
information system.

122. Resilient critical infrastructure provides essential support for the vital

functions of the State. The Government will consider new developments
relating to critical infrastructure protection in the light of EU legislation. It
will review the criteria for determining which infrastructures are critical and
expand the rights and duties of State bodies and other critical infrastructure
actors. The Government will initiate a legislative change to consolidate and
bring under one act the rules for critical infrastructure and critical information
infrastructure. This will optimize our crisis management system and improve
the resilience of the State and private stakeholders in managing crisis
situations.


123. We need to develop our civil protection system in a way reflecting the

trends in the security environment, socio-economic influences, as well
as our acceptance of the fact that unforeseen events may occur and that
their impacts on our society may be profound. To this end, the Government
facilitates organizational, material, and financial support measures to
improve civil protection, including volunteerism. The Government promotes
the development of our civil preparedness system since a population that
takes a responsible approach and acts in the right way can do a lot to prevent
emergencies and lessen the impacts. The Ministry of the Interior coordinates
the integrated rescue system and develops the operational capability of all
elements, including volunteer firefighters who are to get a greater role in
emergency response and civil protection.

124. In crisis situations, the Government uses a system of emergency economic

measures (coordinated by the State Material Reserves Administration) to
facilitate supplies of the necessary material in cases where responsibility for
supplying the material rests with bodies at any level of the crisis management
system and the material cannot be obtained in a standard way.

125. Czechia builds the non-military elements of its defence capability, especially

in the context of our commitment to meeting NATO’s baseline requirements
for resilience of our State and society. We utilize and help develop the EU Civil
Protection Mechanism for disaster prevention, preparedness, and response.
This also involves having in place civil protection means and arrangements.
Czechia has set out to improve its all-hazards response capability.

### g. Other important areas of strategic concern

126. Czechia’s security interests require us to pay strategic attention to many other

areas, such as environmental protection, pandemic security, social cohesion,
societal security, protection of the rule of law, supply chain security, and food
security.

127. We need a whole-of-society effort to reduce the risk of human-made and

natural disasters, and to adapt to climate change. The main coordinator is
the Ministry of the Environment. The Environment Ministry’s core strategy
documents, based on the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 20152030, include the Environmental Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 20212030 with outlook to 2050, Strategy on Adaptation to Climate Change in the
Czech Republic, and the State Environmental Policy of the Czech Republic
2030 with outlook to 2050. The Environment Ministry has developed basic
emergency management documentation for newly defined emergency


-----

situations such as floods, flash floods, heavy rainfall, extreme heat, extreme
wind, and leakage of hazardous chemicals from stationary facilities. It
continues to improve the early warning system for events such as heatwaves,
extreme wind, or high-danger fire weather conditions. The Environment
Ministry has a say in the selection of topics for research relevant to climate
change adaptation and disaster risk reduction. On the other hand, issues such
as cooperation with developing countries in the area of resilience building and
disaster risk reduction, international data and technology exchange, and the
building of international early warning and timely response systems are within
the remit of the Foreign Ministry.

128. The State’s core duty is to protect the lives and health of its population not only

in pandemic situations. However, the State can never succeed in this unless
every one of us cooperates and takes responsibility for himself or herself and
for others. The Ministry of Health is the central body of the State responsible
for health services, including public health. It builds a resilient health care
system prepared to manage great patient loads without compromising on the
standards of health care. This involves establishing an early warning system
and information flow pathways, preparing for threats with health care impacts,
developing procedures for in-country and cross-border transfers of patients,
maintaining sufficient stocks of PPE, medical equipment and medicines,
developing procedures to increase staff numbers, delivering security for the
staff and patients, ensuring cyber security, and other related measures.

129. Our quest for a cohesive and secure society confronts us with diverse challenges

such as to eradicate poverty, narrow the social gap, protect vulnerable groups,
integrate immigrants, and to make our people feel more secure. This is where
the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs comes in, and where the education
system must again do its part: namely to introduce citizenship education and
media education curricula. Another necessary element is the State’s strategic
communication with local government and cultural policies that are combined
with policies to bolster our civil society at large.

130. Functioning institutions of the rule of law are the main pillar of a democratic

State. Any shift in the balance of the judicial, executive, and legislative powers
may lead to a loss of public confidence and destabilization of the democratic
system. Accordingly, the State must take effective steps to counteract
disinformation because it challenges the principles of the rule of law and
democratic institutions and to fight clientelism and corruption because they
significantly undermine the State and its institutions


## Concluding note

This Security Strategy is the result of cooperation among a number of ministries and
institutions. The authors applied the whole-of-government approach to the text,
which has improved our understanding of the breadth and complexity of security
policy. On issuing the Security Strategy, the Government undertakes to continue
developing this holistic approach.


-----

