-----

-----

##### Ministry of Defence of the Czech Republic

## THE LONG TERM PERSPECTIVE FOR DEFENCE 2035

##### Prague 2019


-----

© Ministry of Defence of the Czech Republic - Military History Institute, 2019
ISBN: 978-80-7278-XXX-X (English edition)
ISBN: 978-80-7278-772-2 (Czech edition)


-----

### CONTENTS

###### FOREWORD BY THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4

 I . INTRODUCTION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5

 II. BACKGROUND. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6

 III. FUTURE SECURITY AND OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8

 IV. CZECH ARMED FORCES ROLES AND PARTICIPATION IN FUTURE OPERATIONS. . 13

 V. IMPLICATIONS FOR THE MILITARY CAPABILITY DEVELOPMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

 Basic Principles of the Czech Armed Forces Development. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15

 Main Capability Areas of the Czech Armed Forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18

 Principal Directions for the Czech Armed Forces Development. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18

 VI. PREREQUISITES FOR THE ACHIEVEMENT OF THE REQUIRED MILITARY

 CAPABILITIES. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

 VII. CONCLUSION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

 List of Abbreviations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30


-----

### FOREWORD BY  THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE

The Long Term Perspective for Defence 2035 outlines the key pillars and routes
for the long-term development of defence sector in order to meet the political-military ambitions and international commitments of the Czech Republic.
This document translates the guidance set by the 2017 Defence Strategy of the
Czech Republic, new requirements derived from the NATO Defence Planning
Process and also those stemming from the EU defence initiatives into a more
specific tasking. It also reflects the Policy Statement of the Government of the
Czech Republic.

The development of our armed forces is driven by the security environment,
which has been deteriorating and is expected to deteriorate further in the
next 10-15 years. These changes clearly indicate that our armed forces have
to be highly mobile; manned with trained and highly skilled personnel; equipped with advanced systems and supplied with sufficient stocks of material; robust; resilient; and interoperable with our Allies. We also have to closely follow the developments in the field of science and technology
in order to be able to operate successfully in cyberspace, make full use of the unmanned and autonomous
systems, or employ artificial intelligence.

From a resource perspective, we underline the commitment to increase our defence spending to 2% of GDP
by 2024 and to allocate at least 20% of the overall defence expenditures to procurement of major equipment
and research and development, as agreed at NATO Wales summit in 2014.

The Long Term Perspective for Defence 2035 will be followed by a new Concept of the Czech Armed Forces
Development 2030. This document will identify concrete ways and means to deliver the required capabilities
which are essential to meet the political-military ambitions of the Czech Republic and our commitments to
our Allies and Partners.

Lubomír METNAR

###### 4


-----

### I. INTRODUCTION

The Long Term Perspective for Defence 2035 (hereinafter referred to as “Long Term Perspective”) is based on
the relevant law, strategies and policy documents of the Czech Republic[1], and takes into account NATO and
EU security and military policies. The Long Term Perspective provides a framework for meeting the political-military commitments and ambitions of the Czech Republic. It serves as a guideline for defence planning,
particularly in developing five-year mid-term plans. Based on an analysis of trends in the strategic environment, it outlines the basic directions for military capability development and provides guidance for the periodic review of the “Concept of the Czech Armed Forces Development”, and other conceptual documents.

**1** Security Strategy of the Czech Republic (2015) and Defence Strategy of the Czech Republic (2017).

###### 5


-----

### II. BACKGROUND

The Czech Republic’s defence policy is designed with respect to both NATO and EU memberships. They provide us with the advantage of collective defence and security; at the same time, they also commit us to adequately contribute to common defence.

The Czech Republic safeguards its sovereignty
and territorial integrity first and foremost under
the provision of collective defence as defined in
Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty. Membership
in international organizations, however, does not
relieve the Czech Republic of its primary responsibility for its own defence. Therefore, individually as
well as in cooperation with other states the Czech
Republic continues to develop its capacity to resist
armed attack, as stipulated by the Article 3 of the
North Atlantic Treaty.[2]

Within the EU, defence and security cooperation is being further developed and deepened in response to the
EU Global Strategy 2016 and to the activation of the Permanent Structured Cooperation (PESCO) in 2017. The
cooperation between NATO and the EU is being enhanced.

The Czech Republic’s defence posture rests on three pillars: (1) responsible approach by the state to defence
and to the commitments to Allies; (2) capable armed forces; and (3) national defence as a civic duty. The defence posture is supported by the Czech foreign policy, the economy and the willingness of the citizens to
defend their country.

The Government’s approach to safeguarding national defence is established in:

a) the Defence Strategy of the Czech Republic (2017), which further develops the principles contained in
the Security Strategy of the Czech Republic (2015);
b) the Government’s decisions proposed by the Minister of Defence on the structure and personnel strength
of the Czech Armed Forces.

**2** Article 3: In order more effectively to achieve the objectives of this Treaty, the Parties, separately and jointly, by means of
continuous and effective self-help and mutual aid, will maintain and develop their individual and collective capacity to resist
armed attack.

###### 6


-----

###### The Defence Strategy of the Czech Republic sets out the political-military ambitions which translate political
guidance into development goals for the Czech Armed Forces, their responsibilities and tasks. The political-military ambitions determine that:

 - In an armed conflict which threatens the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Czech Republic,
all forces and assets of the Czech Armed Forces will be employed, including invoking citizens’ duty of
military service (mobilisation).

 - Under Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty, the Czech Republic will provide land and air forces earmarked under NATO defence planning, whose core comprises a brigade task force based on a mechanised brigade, prospectively of a heavy type brigade[3].

 - For international crisis management operations, the Czech Republic will, depending on the nature of
crisis, deploy a land brigade task force without rotation for a six-month period. In the event that such
a task force is not deployed, the Czech Republic will be able to simultaneously deploy a sustainable
battalion and company size land task force, or an air force component, with rotation, for international
crisis management operations.

 - The Czech Republic contributes task forces to the NATO Response Force (NRF), EU Battle Groups (EU
BG), or for use within the framework of the enhanced Forward Presence (eFP), totalling up to the
equivalent of a battalion.

 - The Czech Republic contributes to UN missions, primarily by assigning forces to the UN Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System (UNPCRS).

 - The Czech Republic is able to contribute to additional operations and missions by supplying tailored
task forces or individuals, for example Special Forces and teams of experts who can provide training
and mentoring, as well as personnel required to man NATO and EU international command structures. It is also capable of deploying the Czech Air Force to provide air policing for NATO allies.

Based on current security threats and risk assessments, the 2017 Defence Strategy of the Czech Republic concludes that the peacetime structure and strength of the Armed Forces will have to expand in the long term to
reinforce primarily the combat capabilities of the land forces. The Czech Armed Forces strength should thus
increase by 5000 military personnel[4] while keeping as priority the adequate manning, equipment, armament,
training and reaching the full operational capability of the two existing land force brigades, one of them being a heavy infantry brigade.

**3** To be available by 2026 in accordance with the NATO Defence Planning Capability Targets approved in June 2017.

**4** This is an extra increase additional to the target figure of 24 162 military personnel set by the Concept of the Czech Armed Forces
Development 2025.

###### 7


-----

### III. FUTURE SECURITY AND OPERATING ENVIRONMENT

###### STRATEGIC AND SECURITY ENVIRONMENT

The security environment will continue to evolve in all of its dimensions, most notably with a view to the continuing redistribution and diffusion of economic, political, and military power in the world. These ongoing
changes will likely encompass major strategic shifts, including transforming relevance of the different actors,
their core interests and the tools for promoting them at the global, regional and local scale.

The security environment will become more complex, both at the level of the actors and the structure of
threats, namely due to the employment of hybrid approaches, the main purpose of which is to lower the cost
of achieving desired effects by means of highly effective non-military “soft” capabilities.

The behaviour and actions by certain regional powers will, as a key factor, determine further development
of the security environment. The utilization of power by some actors in pursuing their objectives at the international scene will further reduce stability; at the same time, it will have a considerable impact especially on
the smaller states.

The effectiveness of international security institutions, especially their ability to provide security guarantee
and conflict prevention functions, will also play significant role in shaping the security environment both at
global and regional levels.

The most significant source of risk in Europe are the current tensions between European states and Russia
caused by the open Russian aggression against some states. Russia employs broad hybrid campaigns including targeted disinformation activities and cyber attacks against NATO and EU member states. Western
Balkans, Eastern and South-Eastern Europe remain areas of potential instability.

The arc of instability to the south and southeast from Europe which spans over large territory from the North
Africa to Afghanistan has its breeding ground in the weak and failing states whose political systems and governance cannot cope with global economic and technological factors, environmental changes, demographic
development, corruption, and distrust of people toward their state institutions. These states and their governments cannot accommodate political, social, religious or tribal differences which then grow into both
intra- and interstate conflicts. This causes humanitarian crises and mass migration (both humanitarian and
economic); Europe is one of the main destinations of these migration waves. Along with the primary negative
effects of migration, e.g. ghettoization, financial costs, or crime, there are also secondary destabilising effects
on the society in the form of radicalization on both sides: the frustrated migrants as well as the host countries’
populations; in the end, this is a fuel for extremist anti-system political movements and parties.

###### 8


-----

The likelihood of a direct military attack against the territory of the Czech Republic remains low in the 2035
horizon. However, the possibility that other countries, to which the Czech Republic is bound by defence treaty obligations, may be attacked in some way, cannot be ruled out. A conflict, even of a military nature, which
would present a significant threat to the security of the Czech Republic, may occur suddenly with little or no
warning.

The defence posture of the Czech Republic will be determined by the overall standing of Central Europe within the West-European security architecture linked to the
US engagement in Europe.

Europe’s long term security, stability, and prosperity
depends on the success of European integration and a
strong transatlantic bond.

###### MAJOR TRENDS OF SECURITY ENVIRONMENT IN THE 2035 HORIZON

 - The distribution of political power, economic potential, and military capabilities around the globe continues to be diversified and unbalanced. Important regional actors outside NATO and the EU continue
to develop their military capability. There are ambitious states which do not hesitate to use force and
violate international law as an instrument in advancing their objectives and pursuing power politics.
As a consequence, the possibility of a military conflict involving the Czech Republic, either directly or
indirectly, cannot be ruled out.

 - Ongoing economic and information globalization, climate change combined with unequal technological and demographic developments will be the sources of conflicts which may significantly impact strategic interests of geographically very distant actors. Attempts to solve such conflicts unilaterally could
destabilize many countries, having a severe impact on their economies.

 - Enhanced mobility together with a high population density will increase the risk of the spread of infectious diseases, including some with pandemic potential.

 - Modern information and communication technologies, the internet and speed of social media
enable the transfer of tensions and instability.
These tools can be used for information and
psychological operations on an unprecedented
scale.

 - When advancing their political objectives, aggressors are likely to employ hybrid methods
instead of open use of regular military forces.
Hybrid campaigns combine the full range of

###### 9


-----

military and civil instruments including economic pressure, disinformation and propaganda. The purpose of these tactics is to achieve political goals in a foreign country without crossing the threshold into
an open international aggression. The influence and autonomy of non-state actors, such as terrorist and
para-military groups, organized crime, or private military companies, will rise. Terrorism will continue to
be used as a forceful means of achieving political goals.

 - There are a number of factors, such as uneven demographic development in different parts of the world,
global climate change, environmental degradation, lack of water, or growing demand for energy sources, which bring about a clash of various actors’ demands and have the potential to generate or to deepen already existing crises.

 - The dynamic progress of science and technology makes advanced technologies significantly more available (e.g. information, nano- and biotechnologies, artificial intelligence, 3D print). Potential adversaries
can also benefit from this trend. On the other hand, without adequate funding, NATO and EU countries
may lose their leading position in developing and applying the state-of-the-art technologies.

 - Growing dependency of modern societies on information technologies makes security in the cyber domain a critical issue for governments and for the functions they provide, including the defence sector.
A number of state and non-state actors are developing offensive cyber capabilities to be able to attack
digital systems and critical infrastructure of both state and non-state institutions. The difficulty with
identifying the perpetrators of cyber attacks reduces our ability to deter them and also increases the risk
of false attribution.

###### NATO AND THE EU RESPONSE TO THE CHANGES OF SECURITY ENVIRONMENT

NATO and the EU have adopted a number of measures to enhance the security of their member states

**1. Political**

in response to the challenges posed by the deterio- **Guidance**
rating security environment. These measures include **5. Review** **2. Determine**
strengthening of the Alliance’s deterrence and defence **Results** **Improving** **Requirements**

**Alliance**

posture. The key military measures feature enhancing

**Capabilities**

the NATO Response Force (NRF), the establishment of
the Very High Readiness Joint Task Force (VJTF) as part **3. Apportion**

**4. Facilitate**

of the NRF, and the establishment of military forward **Implementation** **Requirements**

**Set Targets**

presence on the Eastern flank (enhanced Forward
Presence, eFP) and on the South-eastern flank (tailored Forward Presence, tFP) of the Alliance. The new
NATO Readiness Initiative, also known as “4x30” is also
a part of the strengthened collective defence posture.
It requires Allies to invest more of their efforts in developing forces ready to respond rapidly to crises with
little or no warning.

At the 2014 NATO Summit in Wales, Allies committed to raise their defence spending to 2% of their GDP by
2024. At the same time, expenditures on major equipment, including research and development, should

###### 10


**1. Political**

**Guidance**

**5. Review** **2. Determine**

**Results** **Improving** **Requirements**

**Alliance**
**Capabilities**

**3. Apportion**

**4. Facilitate**

**Requirements**

**Implementation**

**Set Targets**


-----

represent at least 20% of the overall defence expenditures. This commitment was reiterated at the following
summits, including in 2018, and remains one of the top priorities of NATO agenda.

With a view to the ever-growing role of information technologies and cyberspace, the 2016 NATO Summit in
Warsaw recognized cyberspace as a new domain of operations, equally important as the land, air, and maritime domains. Therefore, cyber defence will be integrated into all Alliance operations planning. Each NATO
nation maintains its primary responsibility for enhancing its resilience and capability to effectively defend
against cyber attacks.

The Alliance has clearly stated its readiness to counter hybrid threats as part of its collective defence under
the provision of Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty. Therefore, Allies have to adopt appropriate measures at
their national level.

The Global Strategy for the European Union’s Foreign and Security Policy adopted in 2016 presented a new
impulse for enhancing defence and security cooperation. New defence initiatives emerged. Permanent
Structured Cooperation (PESCO) was launched in 2017 as a new defence tool, allowing a smaller group of member states to deepen their cooperation in Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) within the framework
of the acquis communautaire. The vehicle for cooperation are the joint projects implemented by the PESCO
participating states, focused mainly on capability development, enhancing of training and interoperability,
and harmonization and standardization of operational procedures. In this way the PESCO initiative contributes to both meeting the CSDP goals and strengthening NATO’s European pillar. In addition, the Coordinated
Annual Review on Defence (CARD) was established. Another new instrument, the European Defence Fund
(EDF) was created to support innovation and competitiveness of the European defence industry. Taking account of the high level of interest expressed by many EU member states, we can expect the European defence cooperation to be further enhanced in the 2035 timeframe.

###### 11


-----

###### THE NATURE OF THE FUTURE SECURITY ENVIRONMENT WILL REQUIRE:

- Ability to counter both state and non-state (asymmetric) actors;

- Comprehensive approach – the ability of all military branches and services to conduct combined joint
operations involving intelligence, military, and civilian elements, in traditional battlefield, as well as in
the cyberspace, and information environment;

- Accelerated and highly effective intelligence, planning, and decision-making processes as part of strategic and operational command and control of the armed forces;

- Robust and resilient armed forces capable of rapid deployment, including on strategic distance;

- Flexibility, enhanced readiness and mobility of forces (in terms of manning, equipment and material,
training, and stocks).

- International cooperation and enhanced responsiveness of NATO and the EU, particularly ability to conduct large-scale multinational operations at the corps level;

- Integrated approach to security and defence, involving overall societal resilience, adequate resources,
effective civil contingency planning, proactive strategic communications etc.

- Amended national legislation to allow adequate response to new challenges and requirements.

###### 12


-----

### IV. CZECH ARMED FORCES ROLES AND PARTICIPATION IN FUTURE OPERATIONS

The Czech Republic prefers active prevention of armed conflicts and the use of preventive diplomacy. Should
a crisis or armed conflict emerge, the Czech Republic will work for its settlement by political and diplomatic
means. If these fail, the Czech Republic may — in accordance with its constitution, laws, principles of the UN
Charter, and within the framework of its commitments to and solidarity with its allies — use force to protect
its vital and strategic interests defined in the Security Strategy of the Czech Republic. In line with this approach, the Armed Forces should be used as a last resort, and always in coordination with other instruments
of national power.

Roles and tasks assigned to the Czech Armed Forces are established by the Armed Forces Act (no. 219/1999);
they also include tasks stemming from the
NATO and EU membership, namely tasks related to collective defence and international
crisis management.

The major tasks of the Czech Armed Forces
are to:

- prepare for the defence of the Czech
Republic and to defend it against external
attacks (the essential mission);

- prepare for and participate in collective
defence of Allies;

- participate in activities to maintain peace and security, particularly through participation in peacekeeping and peace support operations, and in rescue and humanitarian aid missions;

- cooperate with foreign (particularly allied) armed forces in areas of common security interest, including
through military exercises;

- perform other tasks listed in the respective law, such as: to protect permanent and temporary seats of
the President of the Czech Republic (performed by the Castle Guard); to provide support to civilian authorities when employed as an element of the Integrated Rescue System, usually to manage natural and manmade disasters; to reinforce the Police of the Czech Republic during serious internal security contingencies;

###### 13


-----

to protect critical defence infrastructure; or to guard selected sections of state border. The Armed Forces
personnel are assigned to these tasks as necessary according to the actual need, subject to their availability.

The Czech Armed Forces prepare primarily for defence of the national territory. In line with Article 5 of the
North Atlantic Treaty and the Article 42.7 of the Treaty on European Union, they have to be prepared to take
part in collective defence of Allies against an armed attack. This is the fundamental and most demanding
scenario for the employment of the Armed Forces, with significant quantitative and qualitative capability
requirements.

An important way of contributing a fair share to the collective effort and an effective way of enhancing the
quality of the armed forces is to commit force contributions to the high readiness/rapid response forces
of NATO and the EU. In addition to that, the Czech Armed Forces take part in developing NATO’s collective
defence capabilities through participation in larger formations, i.e. multinational force packages foreseen as
follow-on forces destined primarily for collective defence operations. This approach is also addressed by the
NATO’s Framework Nations Concept (FNC).

The trans-regional character of security
threats clearly shows the need for the Czech
Armed Forces to continue their participation
in activities to maintain peace and security,
particularly in peacekeeping and peace support operations; rescue and humanitarian aid
missions; and support to partners’ defence
capacity building. These activities can take
place either within the territory of the host
countries, of the third countries, or in the
Czech Republic proper.

International crisis management and
post-conflict stabilization, typically carried
out as a multilateral effort by the international community, represent continuous tasks, for which the Czech Armed Forces have to be prepared at all times,
within a peacetime structure, possibly augmented by the Active Reserve personnel. These tasks are considered the most likely and the most frequent type of employment within the 2035 horizon. The Czech Armed
Forces will contribute tailored task forces, based on organic units reinforced by specialized combat support
and combat service support modules. These operations, mostly under NATO, EU, or UN auspices, may be of a
long-term duration.

###### 14


-----

### V. IMPLICATIONS FOR  THE MILITARY CAPABILITY DEVELOPMENT

The foreseen security environment and expected types of operations make it clear that the requirements for
the military capabilities of the Czech Republic will continue to grow.

##### BASIC PRINCIPLES OF THE CZECH ARMED FORCES DEVELOPMENT

The Czech Armed Forces development reflects the national defence requirements as well as the requirements
put forward by the NATO Defence Planning Process; it is also aligned with the EU needs. Capability development complies with Allied standards and is designed to meet the NATO Defence Planning Capability Targets.

The Czech Republic will continue to retain the core structure of balanced Armed Forces which can be augmented if the security environment deteriorates. In a crisis, the peacetime structure of the Armed Forces has
to be able to expand its capacities, including the possibility to establish a division-level command prior to
transition into a full wartime structure. Highly capable and general purpose land forces consisting of various
types of capabilities (heavy, medium, light), complemented by air and special operations forces, will constitute the core of the Armed Forces with the appropriate structure of combat, combat support, and combat
service support elements. Given the volatility of the current security environment, the Military Intelligence
will have an essential role in providing early warning and identification of strategic threats. In order to identify
hybrid threats in a timely fashion and to calibrate appropriate response, the cooperation of all intelligence
agencies and other agencies under the national security system will be of crucial importance. The Military
Office of the President of the Czech Republic and the Castle Guard will continue to develop to carry out their
mission and to be ready to perform specific tasks in various emergencies.

The Czech Republic will strive to enhance the level of preparedness of its citizens for the national defence.
The scheme under which both the military personnel and other citizens should be prepared for defence will
be further developed. The Active Reserve corps will assist in augmenting the regular Armed Forces and in
case of need, the mobilization scheme will be employed to augment the Czech Armed Forces on the basis of
liability to conscription.

The advances of science, research and development, advancing technologies, new materials, and new ways
of production are important drivers for the defence capability development. The Armed Forces must keep
up with these trends and, at the same time, enhance interoperability with Allies in NATO and the EU. In this
context, the process of reducing the dependency on equipment of Russian provenience has to continue.

###### 15


-----

Applied defence research, development, experimentation, and innovation will focus on key capability areas
of the Armed Forces.

Taking into account the significant reduction of warning time available to prepare the Armed Forces for employment, a new approach will be adopted allowing for a gradual build-up of wartime capabilities. This will
require advance acquisition of materiel reserves
and stocks to accommodate wartime consumption and combat losses; enhancing preparedness
of reserves; advance contracting of necessary
supplies, and other measures. The concept of
“deferred need” is no longer feasible and will not
be applied.

The Czech Armed Forces, in cooperation with
other entities of the national security system,
have to be prepared to participate in a full spectrum of operations and deliver tasks of a full
spectrum of intensity, as part of the Allied effort.
A special focus will be put on flexible response
to any contingency. To this end, materiel supply
management including immediately available operational stocks will be adjusted. The acquisition of the necessary level of stocks in accordance with NATO standards, including live and training ammunition, remains
a priority. The principle of force modularity based on using organic units will enable force generation of tailored task forces to meet the requirements of specific operations.

The Czech Armed Forces represent a single set of forces potentially available for tasks performed on the
homeland territory and abroad as part of NATO, EU, or UN activities. Forces deployed abroad will usually
be part of a multinational formation. All military branches will be trained to be able to participate in joint
operations.

The Czech Armed Forces must be able to operate without geographical restrictions and in diverse cultural and
ethnic environments. They must be deployable; highly mobile; capable of effective engagement and precision strike; resilient; flexible and interoperable; sustainable; and they must have a real-time situational awareness based on secure Command, Control, Communication and Computers, Intelligence, and Surveillance and
Reconnaissance (C4ISR) systems.

Priority will be given to the improvement of deployable capabilities assigned to high readiness formations
such as NATO Response Force, NATINAMDS (NATO Integrated Air and Missile Defence System), and EU Battle
Groups with a view to reaching required interoperability with allied forces. This will be achieved also through
reinforcing peacetime links and exercising operating procedures between the assigned staffs and units on
the one hand and the multinational higher-level NATO or EU headquarters on the other. Modernization projects focused on NATO and EU requirements will also enhance deployability of forces.

###### 16


-----

In order to improve overall operational effectiveness, deployed units and staffs will capitalize on the experience gained from previous operations (Lessons Learned) and expert consultations through the Reach Back[5]
systems.

The Czech Armed Forces must be able to operate in multiple concurrent operations both at national and
international level, including at strategic distances, and to sustain their contributions for an extended period
of time.

Urban warfare will be one of the focus areas of military capability development. It requires adequate force
protection, reconnaissance (including unmanned systems), precision engagement (both lethal and non-lethal able to avoid collateral damage), and relevant training.

The Czech Armed Forces will be flexible to adapt to the character and type of operations. They will continue to further advance those areas of specialization which are important for deployed operations and provide added value for other Allies. These are, in particular, the Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear
Defence and passive surveillance sensors in the ISTAR domain.

Capabilities to support civilian authorities during national emergencies will be sustained in a necessary
scope. Emphasis will be placed on supporting the search-and-rescue and consequence management functions of the Integrated Rescue System. The Armed Forces will be ready to protect critical defence infrastructure; reinforce the Police during significant internal security contingencies; and take part in protecting the
state borders. The Active Reserve personnel can also be called upon to perform these tasks.

The Ministry of Defence will further coordinate governmental agencies, regional and municipal authorities
in order to manage and develop the national defence system, as part of the national security system. All
planning for national defence is governed by the Central National Defence Plan. Defence-related decision
making process shall be accelerated and the overall responsiveness of the system enhanced. A close link to
the Alliance will be retained by using the already established processes of defence and operations planning,
including the NATO Crisis Response System (NCRS). In order to sustain the mobilization capability of the
Czech Armed Forces, multiple lines of effort are required: planning and implementation of measures for the
enablement of the national territory; provision of materiel using the Crisis Management Economic Measures
arrangements, contracted mobilization supplies, or National Materiel Reserves. Another strand of work is the
preparation of citizens for defence, which involves also cooperation with accredited associations and other relevant entities. The identified critical defence infrastructure, including related land used by the Armed
Forces in peacetime, would become, if it is not already the case, state property managed by the Ministry of
Defence.

Effective and sustainable management of national defence system will also require adequate tools to be able
to address information aspects of security challenges, and particularly the cyber threats. In this regard, the
Military Intelligence will retain its important role and will continue to develop its key capabilities: strategic
intelligence, strategic warning, and cyber defence.

**5** A Reach Back information support system is a capability which provides the commander and the staff of

operationally deployed units with timely and reliable expert information from external sources.

###### 17


-----

##### MAIN CAPABILITY AREAS OF THE CZECH ARMED FORCES

There are seven main capability areas established by NATO to structure and organize the capability development effort: Prepare; Project; Engage; Sustain; Consult, Command and Control; Protect; and Inform.

##### PRINCIPAL DIRECTIONS FOR THE CZECH ARMED FORCES DEVELOPMENT

When considering the ways to deliver the required capabilities, unconventional and innovative approaches have to be applied alongside
with traditional approaches. The potential of
innovation should be considered in order to deliver game-changing improvements to military
capability within the human – equipment – operational environment framework. Taking into
account the rapid pace of scientific and technological advances, we have to expect new types
of warfare combined with use of non-traditional
weapons. The ability to successfully operate in
cyberspace is becoming absolutely essential. A
number of emerging and disruptive technologies
are adapted for military purposes and the Armed Forces have to make best use of them in order to keep their
edge; these include, e.g. unmanned and autonomous systems; robotics; electronics; artificial intelligence;
nanotechnologies; biotechnologies; composite materials; or detection technologies.

###### INTELLIGENCE

Both capability development and operational employment of the Armed Forces require extensive and complex information support. The various ways to provide this critical support will be further developed in cooperation with Military Intelligence and its national civilian and international (NATO, EU) partner agencies.
Intelligence and information support will first and foremost feed into the command and control of the Armed
Forces and should be able to operate under any circumstances.

###### COMMAND AND CONTROL

The command and control of the Armed Forces will be developed as a three-layer structure in order to
provide joint, permanent, reliable, and swift command and control in operations, capable of commanding
also multinational forces, while retaining the ability to carry out regular tasks on home territory. Personnel

###### 18


-----

allocated to the national headquarters and staffs will rotate through multinational staffs of NATO Command
Structure (NCS) and NATO Force Structure (NFS) headquarters. This is a unique opportunity to work inside
and get familiar with operating procedures at higher-level commands.

Apart from the peacetime command and control structure, there will be also rapidly deployable system to
command and control operations conducted both on national territory and in the international theatre. A
new Command for Operations will be established within the Armed Forces’ peacetime structure to plan and
command operations under national responsibility as well as to plan and control forces deployed on international operations abroad. Deployable command and control system will be fielded up to the brigade level
and further developed as modern, flexible and technologically advanced asset. The system will allow communication with other actors and coordination of joint activities in the theatre. National-level logistic, administrative, and operating command and control procedures will be harmonized with those applied by NATO
and the EU; the Federated Mission Networking (FMN) concept will be implemented in the Armed Forces.

###### LAND FORCES

The core of the land force peacetime structure will consist of two mechanized brigades
equipped with various types of combat vehicles
(wheeled and tracked), including main battle
tanks, complemented by one airborne infantry
regiment, in order to provide a range of capabilities for a various types of combat. Capabilities of
both mechanized brigades will be developed in
line with Alliance standards and NATO Capability
Targets, and will meet the national defence requirements. The build-up of the heavy-infantry
brigade is a priority. Newly established units
will enlarge the Czech Armed Forces spectrum
of capabilities while maintaining the priority to
provide adequate manning, equipment, armaments, training standards, and achieving full operational capabilities of the two existing brigades. The elementary requirement to achieve interoperability at the tactical
level is the implementation of a complex C4ISTAR project. Automated, unmanned, and remotely controlled
systems and assets will help save human lives. These systems will play an increasingly important role. In order
to use them to their full potential, the current legislation will need to be amended.

Complex real-time situational awareness of a given area is of paramount importance for any today’s and
future operations. Therefore, ground and airborne reconnaissance and surveillance capability will be developed nationally as well as through the
support of Alliance projects that cover the
whole ISTAR architecture up to the strategic assets.

Armed Forces reconnaissance and electronic warfare capabilities will remain one
of the decisive combat support elements

###### 19


-----

necessary for successful planning and execution of operations. Their development will be focused on technologically advanced surveillance, assessment, situational awareness, active engagement, robotic, automated
sensors, and passive surveillance systems. Airborne reconnaissance will focus on use of unmanned aircraft.
The Czech Republic will continue its participation in the NATO Alliance Ground Surveillance (AGS) and NATO
Airborne Early Warning and Control System (NAEW&C) programmes. NAEW&C capability shall be replaced by
a new system after 2035.

Artillery development will aim at enhancing the fire support capability in terms of both mass and precision
engagement, including the use of precision-guided munition; precise target acquisition and detection of
opposing fire units; C4ISTAR connectivity; automation of control processes; coordination of fire support with
other services, particularly with air force and air defence. These improvements will also set new requirements
for artillery guns and mortars, ammunition, the fire control system and other relevant support (topography,
meteorology, and logistics).

Engineer corps will be capable of providing full spectrum engineer support for all kinds of envisaged tasks
of the Armed Forces. In order to achieve this, all essential engineer roles will be equally developed – support
mobility of friendly forces; restrict mobility of opposing forces; support survivability of friendly forces; and
general engineer support. The ability to support rescue and consequence management roles performed by
the Integrated Rescue System will be retained.

Defence against chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) threats will continue to develop specific capabilities of monitoring the CBRN situation; consequence management related to CBRN attacks or
disasters; force and assets protection in contaminated areas. In cooperation with other elements of the Czech
Armed Forces, i.e. the NBC Defence Institute of the Defence University; Training Command – Military Academy
in Vyškov; and the Joint CBRN Defence Centre of Excellence (COE), the concept and doctrine development,
experimentation and educational activities will continue to be provided to the CBRN units. The CBRN capabilities including biological protection capacities of the Military Medical Agency will regularly contribute to
NATO operations and headquarters, rapid response formations (ARRC, NRF, EU BG) and national tasks – mainly supporting the Integrated Rescue System. CBRN capabilities will be developed also through multinational
cooperation projects. The COE’s further development shall retain its leading role in NATO in this capability
area and further enhance its CBRN Reach Back & Fusion function and support to civil-military cooperation at
strategic level.

###### AIR FORCE

Safeguarding security of national airspace will require
continuous development of reconnaissance capability
based on primary 3D radars and passive surveillance
systems; advanced command and control system;
ground based air defence systems; subsonic and supersonic aircraft. The minimum standard required for the
national air defence posture will be the participation in
NATINAMDS and the provision of assets for the National
Reinforcement System for Air Defence.

###### 20


-----

Tactical Air Force will be capable of engaging the full spectrum of air and ground targets. The main goal
regarding supersonic aircraft is to be able to contribute to the full spectrum of operations in accordance
with NATO Capability Targets and develop full interoperability in NATO environment. The decision on either extended lease or acquisition of supersonic aircraft will be made no later than by 2025. At the same
time, the potential increase of the strength of the supersonic fleet will be considered based on a security
environment assessment and the related defence requirements review. The role of subsonic aircraft will
be to complement the tasks carried out by the supersonic fleet. The multinational cooperation will be
strengthened in order to offer new training opportunities.

The transport fleet will consist of passenger and
cargo aircraft ranging from light to medium category capable of transporting personnel and part
of combat equipment up to strategic distance.
Self-sufficiency of this type of transport will be
increased. Provision of strategic airlift will remain
a priority. This category of transport capacities
will be primarily sought through multinational
programmes.

Rotary wing air force will continue to perform a wide range of tasks including support to land forces,
special operations forces, and the Integrated Rescue System. The core of the fleet will consist of medium
transport helicopters and multirole helicopters.

Given the evolving nature of operating theatres and taking account of the unique capability provided by
attack helicopters, a decision will be made, at the latest by 2024, whether new attack helicopters would
need to be acquired or replaced by unmanned aircraft with appropriate capability. Training, maintenance
and upgrade capacities will be preserved and further developed to meet the needs of both the Czech
Armed Forces and NATO.

The role of ground based air defence is to defend particular territories or deployed land task
forces from current and future airborne threats
up to medium range and altitude. It will also develop the C-RAM capability, i.e. counter rocket,
artillery and mortar munitions.

Air surveillance units will operate mobile 3D air
defence radars interoperable with NATO command and control system. Radars will be able to
identify aerial targets including rockets, artillery
and mortar munitions. Radars will also support
air defence units. The two fixed air defence radars built under the NATO Security Investment Programme
will continue to be used.

Air traffic management will continue to operate as an integrated civil-military function whose navigation
assets and air traffic management systems will be continuously modernized. Air traffic management will

###### 21


-----

provide the required services during crisis and conflict as an essential support to the Air Force command
and control system; it will also meet the requirements of the Single European Sky programme (SES/SESAR).

Training shall focus on enhancing interoperability through international cooperation within NATO and the EU.

###### CYBER DEFENCE FORCES

The role of cyberspace as a domain of future security environment will continue to grow significantly. It is
therefore necessary to develop capabilities and tools for full spectrum of cyber operations. The close collaboration with the Military Intelligence will not only concern the cyber security and cyber defence of the
Czech Armed Forces but also the development of capabilities for active complex cyber operations.

###### SPECIAL OPERATIONS FORCES

SOF will continue to develop in order to remain relevant
with regard to the evolving security environment. They
need to retain full self-sufficiency for their individual employment as well as to remain able to operate along with
other military services, national security agencies, and
Allied forces. SOF will be capable of conducting both the
operations under national responsibility and contributing to NATO-led operations; they have to meet the declared readiness and interoperability requirements. SOF
will continue to be developed as a flexible instrument to
conduct the full spectrum of special operations in a complex environment. The ability to obtain fully trained and
highly qualified personnel together with introducing the
most advanced equipment will be the key drivers for the development of SOF.

###### LOGISTICS

The main effort will be devoted to providing stationary logistics function and its smooth interaction with
deployable logistics. This will require continuous development of particular logistics services; personnel
reinforcement and enhanced presence of logistic expertise at all levels of command and control; continuous modernization of logistics infrastructure; and achieving synergy by using to their full potential all
available information systems and logistics management methods of supply. The Multinational Logistics
Coordination Centre (MLCC) will continue its activities supporting logistics in deployed operations. Another
important strand of work related to collective defence, with the MoD being a national coordinator, is the
improvement of capacities for the reception and support of Allied forces on Czech territory (Host Nation
Support, HNS).

###### 22


-----

New infrastructure will be constructed for materiel reserves required for the Armed Forces in order
to support the implementation of national political-military commitments. The storage capacity
for ammunition will be also enlarged. These new
construction works including their guarding and
security systems will comply with NATO standards to allow their availability for the HNS tasks.
Outsourcing will be used in order to maintain a
wide array of logistic services, while striving for
maximum effectiveness and economy.

###### SIGNALS AND COMMUNICATIONS

All development efforts concerning signals units will aim at ensuring information and decision-making superiority of the Czech Armed Forces in all types of operations. This objective will be achieved through the effective use of information and communication technologies and the provision of the full spectrum of advanced
capabilities and services of the communication and information systems.

###### MILITARY MEDICAL SERVICE

The Medical Service will concentrate on the development of deployable medical treatment facilities, healthcare provision in garrisons and military healthcare facilities, and medical material storage. The Military
Medical Service will also continue to perform its assigned roles as a part of the state medical and veterinary
supervision authority, and in biological protection of forces.

Special attention will be paid to providing appropriate education and training to medical and non-medical
personnel in order to allow their employment in
a wide spectrum of operations.

###### MILITARY POLICE

The Military Police will continue to develop its
capabilities to provide police force protection
and police support to the Czech Armed Forces
when operating both at home and in deployed
operations abroad. It will continue to make its

###### 23


-----

contribution to the Czech Republic’s international ambitions and commitments. The Military Police will enhance the qualification of personnel; modernize its equipment; implement lessons learned, new doctrine,
and defence R&D results; implement innovation in non-lethal measures, biometrics, or detention methods.
The Military Police will be capable of reinforcing the Police of the Czech Republic and will cooperate with
foreign partners in NATO, EU, and UN context.

###### MILITARY OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE CZECH REPUBLIC 

 AND THE CASTLE GUARD

The main task of the Military Office of the
President of the Czech Republic is to support the
President in his role of the commander-in-chief
of the Czech Armed Forces, and to command and
control the Castle Guard.

The Castle Guard will continue its development
in accordance with the Concept of the Castle
Guard Development 2018-2028. Protection of
permanent and temporary residence sites of the
President remain the tasks of highest priority.
The Castle Guard will use modern equipment
and technologies; unmanned aerial systems and
intervention vehicles will be acquired to enhance the effectiveness of the service in complex areas. Special
attention will be paid to developing preparedness to handle any emergencies. Other priorities include gradual increase of personnel strength and amending the law and internal directives in order to allow for a more
efficient performance of the Castle Guard duties. The Castle Guard will carry out all protocol activities and
military honours during official international visits hosted by the President. The Castle Guard will also prepare
for crisis management tasks concerning the official seats of the President and will prepare its own Active
Reserve unit.

###### 24


-----

### VI. PREREQUISITES FOR  THE ACHIEVEMENT OF THE REQUIRED MILITARY CAPABILITIES

In order to deliver on the political-military ambitions of the Czech Republic, the following preconditions have
to be met:

  - sufficient resource framework for the defence budget in the required volume and time for
implementation;

  - a stable environment for the development of the Armed Forces personnel;

  - a comprehensive system for the acquisition of defence equipment, materiel and other services including the whole life-cycle support;

  - a support to the defence industry together with research, development and innovation focused on
the delivery of the Armed Forces’ future capabilities;

  - amendments to the relevant legislation in areas of defence and economic measures for national
emergencies.

###### DEFENCE BUDGET AND BUDGET OUTLOOK

The basic prerequisite for an efficient national defence is a continuous provision of sufficient resources.
Sufficient funding will allow for effective long-term planning of material, human, and financial resources –
the pillars for providing national defence and security, developing the Armed Forces, and delivering on our
commitments to Allies in NATO and the EU.

In order to get the key modernization projects implemented, the required stocks of military materiel acquired, and the expenses for retention and recruitment of military personnel covered, the defence budget
will have to progressively reach, by 2024, the level of 2% of GDP and maintain this level into the future. This is
the core of the commitment which the Czech Republic, together with all other Allies, made at the 2014 NATO
Summit in Wales.

###### 25


-----

Another guiding principle supporting adequate development of defence capabilities is devoting 20% of
defence expenditures to acquisition or modernization of major equipment, including related Research &
Development. It is also important to keep the personnel expenditures below 50% of the overall defence
budget.

###### PERSONNEL DEVELOPMENT

The key factor in the delivery of the required defence capabilities is personnel and related legislation.
Recruitment, education and training of highly qualified and motivated personnel and their welfare are a
priority. The available analyses make it clear that in the coming years the number of people able to perform
military service is likely to decrease. It is therefore important that the MoD maintains the image of a responsible, reliable and attractive employer on the Czech labour market.

The Defence University together with other educational institutions and training facilities of the defence
sector will play a key role in educating the Czech Armed Forces personnel. The education institutions of key
partners in the region and in NATO are also available. Taking into account the fact that the majority of the
innovations come from the civilian domain, we need to maintain close cooperation between public, private,
academia, and industry engaged in research & development, application and production.

In a period when the Czech Republic is not facing a direct threat to its security, there is only the peacetime
Armed Forces structure and strength available. Therefore, the Active Reserve corps will also play an important
role. The MoD will continue to use its capacities to prepare the Czech citizens as well as government employees for their role in national defence, in order to enable mobilization of the Czech Armed Forces.

###### ARMAMENT AND ACQUISITION

Given the changes of security and operating environments there is a need to establish a comprehensive,
transparent, and effective acquisition system that enables coherent acquisition of military equipment and
materiel while respecting required timelines and quality; at an adequate price; providing sufficient security of
supply; and supporting the development of the Czech defence industry. New setting of the system will focus
on accelerating the acquisition processes and increasing their effectiveness.

The approval of individual acquisition projects will depend on a number of supporting analyses, focused on
solutions already available in the market; possibilities of logistic support; life cycle costs; specification of the
requirements across the DOTMLPFI[6] lines of development and throughout all phases of the life cycle. The
complex specification of each project will be prepared along with an assessment to what extent it delivers
the required capability.

**6** Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel, Leadership and Education, Personnel, Facilities and Interoperability

###### 26


-----

Timeliness of delivery of required capabilities will be improved by preferring already available, operationally
proven, and interoperable military equipment.

Selection of contractors will consider potential impact on essential security interests of the Czech Republic;
the guarantee of supplies throughout the life cycle and during crises; potential contribution to stability and
growth of the Czech defence industry, particularly of enterprises established by the Ministry of Defence.

The economic mobilization measures, multi-year contracts, contracts specifying target figures of acquired
equipment, and framework contracts will be used as important tools in order to guarantee continuity of supplies for the Armed Forces and to enable steady development of the defence industry.

###### DEFENCE INDUSTRY AND RESEARCH

Defence industry represents one of the cornerstones of the security architecture of the Czech Republic. The
defence, security and economic benefits it generates are an important element of development and sustainment of national defence capabilities.

The support lent by the MoD to the defence industry will enable to establish and develop R&D and production capacities providing assurance that the acquired military materiel is technologically advanced and its
supplies are secure. The MoD support is also aimed at maintaining key industry capacities in order to guarantee the security of supply and to protect essential security interests of the Czech Republic.

National defence industry capacities and those of the state enterprises established by the MoD guarantee
support and sustainability of the Czech Armed Forces. It is therefore a major task to retain current competitive capabilities of defence industry and to enable its development in domains which are crucial to the needs
of the Czech Armed Forces. The key role of the defence industry is to supply individual soldiers with weapons
and gear; produce key land force systems; supply essential types of ammunition for land forces and the air
force; produce radars and surveillance and monitoring systems; provide communication and information infrastructure and its protection; and also ensure at least basic serviceability of aircraft from domestic sources.

Strategic partnerships will be sought with
close foreign partners in order to complement national financial and technological
resources of our industry. Priority will be given within the Czech Armed Forces to the acquisition of equipment meeting the interoperability requirements defined primarily by
NATO and the EU.

Current European and global defence markets cannot guarantee sufficient security of
supply of materiel. In order to sustain fundamental capabilities of the Armed Forces,
the MoD maintains industry capacities to

###### 27


-----

guarantee supplies of materiel and services, or is engaged in the renewal of such capacities. Specific role in
the security of supply has been assigned to state enterprises established by the MoD. They provide the basic
assurance that the required life cycle management of military equipment will be secured and guarantee the
maximum security of supply for the Czech Armed Forces. Consequently, these enterprises are designed to
serve as strategic suppliers.

The capability development process cannot succeed without cooperation with relevant NATO and EU agencies, namely the NATO Support and Procurement Agency (NSPA), and the European Defence Agency (EDA). At
the same time, there is a number of European defence capability and industry development initiatives which
provide additional opportunities to be considered. These include, in particular, the Permanent Structured
Cooperation (PESCO) projects and projects under European Defence Industrial Development Programme
(EDIDP) and the European Defence Fund (EDF). The MoD will have to take into account opportunities to involve Czech defence industry companies in multinational projects/programmes co-financed by the EU funds
as part of its considerations on future technology and capability needs of the Czech Armed Forces.

###### 28


-----

### VII. CONCLUSION

The Long Term Perspective was developed to embrace the trends and challenges emerging in the 2035 horizon. It will be reviewed after four years. Should the Defence Strategy of the Czech Republic and the political-military ambitions change, or should qualitative changes occur in the security environment which would
have significant implications for the Czech Republic’s defence posture then the Long Term Perspective will
be reviewed sooner.

As a follow-up step, the Concept of the Czech Armed Forces Development will translate the guidelines of the
Long Term Perspective into specific solutions and courses of action designed to achieve the political-military
ambitions of the Czech Republic.

_The Long Term Perspective for Defence 2035 was approved by the Government Resolution Nr. 187 dated_
_18 March 2019._

###### 29


-----

##### LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

###### AGS

 ARRC

 C4ISR

 CARD

 CBRN

 COE Centre of Excellence

 C-RAM

 CSDP

 DOTMLPFI

 EDA

 EDF European Defence Fund

 EDIDP

 eFP

 EU BG

 FMN

 FNC

 GDP Gross Domestic Product

 30

|AGS|Alliance Ground Surveillance|
|---|---|
|ARRC|Allied Rapid Reaction Corps|
|C4ISR|Command, Control, Communication and Computers, Intelligence, and Surveillance and Reconnaissance|
|CARD|Coordinated Annual Review on Defence|
|CBRN|Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear|
|COE|Centre of Excellence|
|C-RAM|Counter Rockets, Artillery and Mortars|
|CSDP|Common Security and Defence Policy|
|DOTMLPFI|Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel, Leadership and Education, Personnel, Facilities and Interoperability|
|EDA|European Defence Agency|
|EDF|European Defence Fund|
|EDIDP|European Defence Industrial Development Programme|
|eFP|Enhanced Forward Presence|
|EU BG|European Union Battle Group|
|FMN|Federated Mission Networking|
|FNC|Framework Nations Concept|
|GDP|Gross Domestic Product|


-----

|HNS|Host Nation Support|
|---|---|
|ISTAR|Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition, and Reconnaissance|
|MLCC|Multinational Logistics Coordination Centre|
|MoD|Ministry of Defence|
|NAEW&C|NATO Airborne Early Warning and Control System|
|NATINAMDS|NATO Integrated Air and Missile Defence System|
|NCRS|NATO Crisis Response System|
|NCS|NATO Command Structure|
|NFS|NATO Force Structure|
|NRF|NATO Response Force|
|NSPA|NATO Support and Procurement Agency|
|PESCO|Permanent Structured Cooperation|
|R&D|Research and Development|
|SOF|Special Operations Forces|
|tFP|Tailored Forward Presence|
|VJTF|Very High Readiness Joint Task Force|


###### 31


-----

###### 32


-----

#### THE LONG TERM PERSPECTIVE  FOR DEFENCE 2035

Published by the Ministry of Defence of the Czech Republic - Military History Institute (MHI)
Address: Vojenský historický ústav Praha, U Památníku 2, 135 00 Praha 3
http://www.army.cz
http://www.vhu.cz

For print prepared by Graphic Section of Presentation and Promotion Department MHI
Address: Rooseveltova 23, 161 05 Praha 6 − Dejvice
Editor-in-chief: Petr ŠIMŮNEK (Defence Policy and Strategy Division)
Layout: Adéla ZEMANOVÁ
Released for print: 2019
Printed by: Presentation and Promotion Department MHI
1st edition


-----

-----

