## Security Strategy of the Czech Republic

# 2015


-----

-----

#### Introduction by the Prime Minister of the Czech Republic

I hope that this updated Security Strategy will prove an efficient tool assisting the Government of the
Czech Republic in its key task, which is to ensure the security of the population and to defend the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of our country.

In the present world full of crises, the Czech Republic naturally has to face an enormous number
of challenges. Economic and social development is our main and immediate concern. However,
today there can be no development without a responsible approach to external security. Our present
dilemma was succinctly expressed by Albert Einstein: “The world is a dangerous place to live; not
because of the people who are evil, but because of the people who don’t do anything about it”.

I believe that given the nature of the current security challenges, it is no longer possible to develop our
security policy on an issue-by-issue basis. To effectively safeguard the Czech Republic’s security, we
need to have an institutionally as well as physically coherent and coordinated set of tools.

Many of the principles and threats identified in the 2011 Security Strategy are valid even today. The
risk of direct military attack on our country remains low. On the other hand, non-military threats
− interruptions of strategic raw material supplies, negative aspects of international migration,
increasing global inequality, and serious economic and financial crime − are on the rise, spilling
across borders and straining the Czech Republic’s ability to respond independently. I believe that in
countering global threats and challenges of this type, the United Nations system with its emphasis on
the principles of collective security has an irreplaceable role to play.

Today, more than ever, the Czech Republic’s security depends on our ability to keep NATO and EU
multilateral mechanisms operational. The North Atlantic Alliance and a functioning collective defence
system are the main sources of our security. We can expect that the guaranteed level of security we
enjoy will directly depend on how we honour our commitments towards our allies. I should stress that
the threats we have been faced with for some time now are directed against targets larger than just our
own country. The relationship we have with our allies is one of mutual dependence – which means
that the security of our allies is also in our interest. Given the overall decline of security and stability
in Europe’s border regions and immediate neighbourhood, we cannot entirely rule out the possibility
that some of the NATO or EU countries might be confronted with an immediate threat.

Most unfortunately, our allies are increasingly faced with threats of a military nature, stemming from
the aspirations of some states that, more than ever, tend to show a disregard for the international
order and basic principles of international law in their pursuit of power. Driven by such aspirations,
these actors substantially reinforce their military capabilities, including offensive cyber capabilities.

A responsible approach to these threats and solidarity with our allies is neither easy nor inexpensive.
However, every spending cut comes at a price, and I believe it would be short-sighted to economize
on security. This is a policy we do not and will not pursue. In this spirit, the Government of the Czech
Republic has undertaken to gradually increase the defence budget in order to reach 1.4% GDP by
2020. Beyond this target, defence spending may be further increased if and when necessary due to
the security environment, insofar as the Czech Republic’s economic capacity allows. I believe that by
setting ourselves clear goals such as this, we send a signal to the general public in our country, as well
as to our allies, that we take security seriously.

I hope that this updated document will help us put our security policy on a qualitatively new basis.

Bohuslav Sobotka

i i i


-----

### Contents

##### I. Introduction 5

 II. Principles of the Security Policy of the Czech Republic 6

 III. The Security Interests of the Czech Republic 8

 IV. The Security Environment 10

 The Strategic Context 10

 The most important trends and factors 10

 Security Threats 13

 V. Strategy for Promoting the Security Interests of the Czech Republic 15

 The collective dimension of safeguarding security and defence 15

 Strategy of prevention and suppression of security threats 17

 The economic framework for safeguarding security interests 22

 The institutional framework for safeguarding security 24

 The Security System of the Czech Republic 26

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 4 │ │


-----

### I. Introduction

1. The Security Strategy of the Czech Republic is the fundamental document of the Czech Republic’s
security policy serving as a frame of reference for related strategies and policy concepts. It is a
government document drawn up in consultation with the Office of the President of the Republic
and the Parliament of the Czech Republic with the aim to seek non-partisan approaches to
security issues. The Czech Republic’s security community, including representatives of both the
government and of the non-governmental sector, has also been involved in the development of
this strategy.

2. The values and legal standards that provide the basic framework for the development and
implementation of the Security Strategy of the Czech Republic are enshrined in the constitutional
legislation of the Czech Republic, namely in the Constitution of the Czech Republic, the Charter
of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms and Constitutional Act No. 110/1998 on the security of the
Czech Republic as amended. Laws based on the Czech Republic’s constitutional legislation, as well
as the international commitments arising from the Czech Republic’s membership of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), the European Union (EU), the United Nations (UN), and
the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) form an integral part of the legal
framework.

3. As regards its principles and its definition of security interests, the Security Strategy of the
Czech Republic builds on the Security Strategy of the Czech Republic from 2003 and updates
the Security Strategy of the Czech Republic from 2011. It reflects and describes changes to the
security environment, including the key threats existing in the Euro-Atlantic area. It aims to
establish a systematic and coordinated framework for the promotion of the Czech Republic’s
security interests, to contribute to the efficient use of individual multilateral, bilateral and national
tools, and to provide guidance for the allocation of appropriate resources for the purposes of the
security and defence policy.

4. The Security Strategy of the Czech Republic presents the basic values, interests, approaches,
ambitions and tools that underlie the process of safeguarding the Czech Republic’s security:

      - The “Principles of the Security Policy of the Czech Republic” formulates the principles on
which the Czech Republic’s security policy is based.

      - The “Security Interests of the Czech Republic” defines the Czech Republic’s vital, strategic
and other important interests.

      - The “Security Environment” identifies the most important trends, factors and specific
threats existing in the security environment in which the Czech Republic protects and
promotes its interests.

      - The “Strategy for Promoting the Security Interests of the Czech Republic” defines the
approaches to the protection of the Czech Republic’s security interests and specifies the
multilateral and national tools available for promoting them, including a short description
of the Czech Republic’s security system.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 5 │ │


-----

### II. Principles of the Security Policy of the Czech Republic

5. The Government of the Czech Republic (the “Government”) and all local government bodies
are responsible for safeguarding, within their respective spheres of authority, the security of the
population, the defence of the country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and the preservation
of all constituent elements of the democratic rule of law. A comprehensive and functioning
security system continuously adapting to the current security situation in the Czech Republic and
worldwide provides the institutional means to attain this end.

6. The Security Strategy of the Czech Republic presents the approaches, tools and measures that
safeguard the security, defence and protection of the population and of the state. Due to the
nature of the present security challenges, the security policy can no longer be strictly segmented
by security concerns. To effectively safeguard the Czech Republic’s security, it is vital to have an
institutionally as well as physically coherent and coordinated set of tools.

7. The central principle of Czech Republic’s security is to safeguard the security of the individual
and to protect his/her life, health, liberty, human dignity and property. To successfully put this
principle into action, it is necessary to safeguard the security of government institutions, including
their full operational capability, and to develop processes and tools reinforcing the security and
protection of the population. Providing for security is primarily the duty of the Government;
however, active cooperation of Czech citizens, including legal entities as well as individuals, with
public administration authorities is also a desirable part of the effort to reduce the probability
that the threats will materialize. This strengthens society’s overall resilience to security threats.

8. The Czech Republic’s security is crucially linked to the political and economic stability of the
EU. As an exceptionally open economy, the Czech Republic is exposed to external influences
particularly as regards access to markets and to energy sources. In view of the values and principles
it advocates, the Czech Republic prefers cooperation within international organisations and
groupings of states that promote peaceful resolution of conflicts, collective approach to security
and defence, and mutually beneficial economic cooperation.

9. The Czech Republic’s security policy is based on a proactive approach; accordingly, it seeks to ensure
that threats are detected early and analysed thoroughly, and that active measures are put into place.
The guiding principle is the indivisibility of security. The Czech Republic’s security is inseparable from
security in the Euro-Atlantic area and, eventually, from the security situation worldwide. Due to the
nature of the security environment, action to defend and protect the population and territory of the state
does not end at the borders of the Czech Republic. On many occasions, the Czech Republic’s security
interests have to be defended in regions far beyond the borders of the allied states. The security policy of
the Czech Republic is governed not only by the country’s own specific interests, but also by its solidarity
with allies in NATO and the EU.

10. The Czech Republic prefers active prevention of armed conflicts and the use of preventive
diplomacy. In the event of a crisis or armed conflict, the Czech Republic works for its settlement
by political and diplomatic means. If these fail, the Czech Republic may — in accordance with its
constitutional legislation, laws, and the principles of the UN Charter, and within the framework
of its commitments to and solidarity with its allies — use force to protect its vital and, if necessary,
strategic interests.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 6 │ │


-----

11. The core elements of action to safeguard the defence and security of the Czech Republic are
active involvement in the NATO collective defence system based on a strong transatlantic link,
the development of EU crisis management capabilities, and cooperation with partner countries.
Membership of NATO and the EU brings the benefits of a collective approach to each member’s
defence and security, as well as the obligation to contribute to this collective defence and security.
Accordingly, the Security Strategy of the Czech Republic takes into account the fundamental
strategy documents of these organisations. Membership of international organisations does not
relieve the Czech Republic of its primary responsibility for its own defence.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 7 │ │


-----

### III. The Security Interests of the Czech Republic

12. The Czech Republic categorises its security interests (“interests”) according to their importance.
The Security Strategy of the Czech Republic divides these interests into three categories: vital,
strategic, and other important interests.

13.13. Vital interests. Vital interests comprise the safeguarding of the Czech Republic’s sovereignty,

territorial integrity and political independence, and the preservation of all constituent elements of
the democratic rule of law, including the guaranteeing and protection of the fundamental human
rights and freedoms of the population. Protecting the vital interests of the state and its citizens
is a fundamental duty of the Government and all public administration authorities. To safeguard
and defend these interests, the Czech Republic is ready to use all legitimate approaches and all
available resources.


**14. Strategic interests. 14.** Pursuit of strategic interests contributes to the protection of vital interests.
It is also part of the action to ensure the Czech Republic’s social development and prosperity. The
approaches and means used to promote strategic interests are chosen with regard to the situation
at hand.
The Czech Republic’s strategic interests include namely:

      - security and stability, especially in the Euro-Atlantic area,

      - preventing and managing local and regional conflicts and mitigating their impacts,

      - maintaining the UN’s global stabilising role and increasing its efficiency,

      - strengthening the cohesion and efficiency of NATO and the EU and retaining a functional
and credible transatlantic link,

      - reinforcing the NATO-EU strategic partnership, including the strengthening of
cooperation in the complementary development of defence and security capabilities,

      - developing the OSCE’s role in the prevention of armed conflicts, in democratisation and
in building mutual confidence and security,

      - a functioning and transparent conventional arms control regime in Europe,

      - supporting and developing regional cooperation,

      - supporting international stability through cooperation with partner countries,

      - supporting democracy, fundamental freedoms, and the principles of the rule of law,

      - safeguarding internal security and protecting the population,

      - safeguarding the Czech Republic’s economic security and strengthening the
competitiveness of the economy,

      - safeguarding the Czech Republic’s energy, raw-material and food security and an
appropriate level of strategic reserves,

      - safeguarding the Czech Republic’s cyber security and defence,

      - preventing and suppressing security threats affecting the security of the Czech Republic
and its allies.

15.15. Other important interests. Promotion of other important interests helps safeguard vital and

strategic interests and strengthen society’s resilience to security threats.
Other important interests include namely:

      - reducing crime, with an emphasis on economic crime, organised crime, information
crime and the fight against corruption,

      - reinforcing the Czech Republic’s counter-intelligence and defence intelligence,

      - fostering a tolerant civil society, suppressing extremism and its causes,

      - making government institutions and the judiciary more efficient and more professional;
to this end, improving the cooperation of public administration authorities with citizens
and with legal entities and individuals engaged in business activities,

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 8 │ │


-----

      - developing civic associations and non-governmental organisations involved in security,

      - improving public awareness and active involvement of the general public in providing
for security,

      - scientific and technological development, with an emphasis on new technologies with a
high added value of innovation,

      - developing technical and technological capabilities for the processing and transmission
of classified and sensitive information, with an emphasis on information protection and
accessibility,

      - protecting the environment.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 9 │ │


-----

### IV. The Security Environment

#### The Strategic Context

16. The environment that affects the Czech Republic’s security is in the process of dynamic change. It
is increasingly unpredictable because of the growing interaction among different security trends
and factors. Threats, their sources and threat actors are state-based but also, increasingly, nonstate and supranational - and therefore asymmetric. The trends existing in the global environment
contribute to the potential of these emerging asymmetric threats and increase the possibility
of their spreading from relatively distant areas of local and regional conflicts and tension. As a
result, one of the characteristic aspects of the present environment is that our security can be
directly affected by instability and conflicts existing far beyond Europe’s borders. Internal and
external security threats keep blending together and the differences between them get blurred.
These aspects have radical implications for the approach to defence and security. It is increasingly
important to have a comprehensive approach that prevents threats and mitigates their impacts
through a combination of military and civil tools, including diplomatic, legal and economic means.
Likewise, there are growing demands on preparedness to respond promptly and effectively to
unforeseen threats.

17. The probability of massive military attack directly threatening the territory of the Czech Republic
is low. However, given the overall decline of security and stability in Europe’s flank regions and
immediate neighbourhood, it is impossible to entirely rule out a direct threat to the territories
of some NATO and EU member states. Threats to the security of allies may be of the classical
military nature or they may take the vague form of hybrid warfare. The basic tool to eliminate
these risks is the Czech Republic’s membership of NATO and the EU and its good relations with
neighbouring countries.

18. The main sources of threat include hard-line attitudes set against the fundamental values of our
society, threatening the concept of the democratic rule of law and denying the fundamental human
rights and freedoms. The carriers of these attitudes are states as well as non-¬state actors, various
groups and their sympathisers. Another source of threat are the power-seeking aspirations of
some states that increasingly refuse to respect the international order and basic principles of
international law.

#### The most important trends and factors

19. The growing ambitions of some actors who are ready to use or threaten to use military force in
pursuit of their interests have a profound impact on the stability of the security environment. The
aspirations of these actors are associated with a substantial build-up of their military capabilities,
including offensive cyber capabilities, weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery,
and with their growing demand for key raw materials, activity in financial markets, struggle for
influence in strategic areas and increasingly aggressive promotion of their political ambitions at
international fora. Unilateral attempts of some states to carve out their own spheres of influence
through a combination of political, economic and military pressures and intelligence activities may
be considered a threat; these pressures and activities occur also in cyberspace. These tendencies
are associated with ongoing erosion of political and legal commitments associated with European
security.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 10 │ │


-----

20. To a large extent, security threats originate from weak or failed states whose governments are
unable to ensure their own defence, the security of their citizens and the rule of law. The result
are internal and regional conflicts with negative impacts on our security. Another cause of
destabilization and resulting conflicts are massive violations of human rights, including political,
social, environmental and other rights.

21. Increasingly serious non-military threats (e.g. energy, migration, cyber attacks) and worsening
security situation in regions immediately neighbouring on NATO and EU member states place
ever greater demands on Europe’s ability to respond independently and make even more apparent
the existing shortfalls in its military capabilities and its readiness to counter security threats.

22. The negative aspects of the globalisation process include namely the opportunities to misuse the
interconnected financial markets in the absence of an efficient international regulatory system,
and the opportunities to misuse information and communication technologies and infrastructure.
Uneven economic development and the ease with which radical political and religious ideas can
spread are additional factors contributing to instability. High mobility speeds up the spreading of
infectious diseases, including those with pandemic potential.

23. One of the effects of the current global economic development may be a shift in the relative
weights of individual actors, including possible weakening of the positions of Europe and the
United States, and the tendency of states to consistently prioritise national interests at the expense
of joint interests, as well as other potential tendencies that might diminish the solidarity and
efficiency of NATO and the EU. The fact that many European countries have kept their defence
budgets underfunded over a long period of time also deepens the disparity of military capabilities
and the asymmetry of defence efficiency in the Euro-Atlantic area.

24. In comparison with states and international organisations, non-state actors are able to make
quicker and more flexible use of the opportunities opened up by globalisation, namely as
regards the integration of information and communication technologies, transport and trade.
States are losing their important position as holders of monopoly over the use of force and as
regulators of key economic and information flows. In contrast, non-state actors are increasingly
able to undermine the interests of states, to replace elements of the state system with their own
structures, to turn their territorial ambitions into reality, and to use extreme violence as a way to
threaten the security of the population and the stability and integrity of the affected states. In this
regard, the phenomenon of foreign fighters poses an increasing security risk to Europe.

25. Demographic change will have increasing security implications namely as regards the risks
associated with population ageing in developed countries and with uncontrollable migration.

26. Problems associated with poverty, long-term social exclusion and lack of basic needs and services
may greatly increase the probability of outbreaks of extremism, crime, local armed conflicts and
mass uncontrollable migration. This is also the problem of large areas and regions, mainly in the
developing world, that lag behind in economic as well as social terms.

27. Due to absolute dependence on information and communication technologies in both the public
and private sectors, failures of critical information infrastructure and important communication
systems have increasingly severe impacts.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 11 │ │


-----

28. Due to increasing dependence on the availability of natural resources, global competition for
access to strategic raw materials and energy sources becomes ever more intense. It is increasingly
important to protect critical infrastructure, in particular the means that are used to transport
strategic raw materials and as such present highly vulnerable targets for both state and non-state
actors. The trend of exclusive suppliers and transit countries of these raw materials misusing
their status to promote their own political and security interests has implications for the ways
in which the Czech Republic and its allies secure their basic needs, poses a threat to the political
cohesion of NATO and the EU, and can be considered an asymmetric threat of a strategic nature.

29. The impacts of climate change on the health of the population and on the environment are
hard to predict. However, the concerns raised by climate change can, in themselves, heighten
tensions between states and result in humanitarian crises with direct impacts on local, state and
international structures, including possible escalation of local conflicts accompanied by increased
migration pressures.

30. The ever more frequent emergencies associated with disasters of both natural and anthropogenic
origin place growing demands on the protection of the population, environment and property, on
the strengthening of societal resilience and on adaptation measures.

31. The trends and changes taking place in the security environment meet with a varying degree
of response from the key international organisations that deal with these problems, though not
always in the most appropriate or adequate manner. The Czech Republic regards the UN’s role
in maintaining international peace and security as fundamental; nevertheless, the organisation is
not fully prepared for the current challenges and still needs reform. As a result of the fact that the
member states are not ready to transform the UN into an instrument for managing larger-scale
crises and related practical problems, regional security organisations, including NATO and the
EU, come under increasing pressure to participate in operations and missions beyond the borders
of the Euro-Atlantic area. Likewise, international law needs to be developed further to reflect the
threats to international peace and security.

32. In its 2010 Strategic Concept, NATO defines its three core tasks: to ensure the collective defence
of its members, to manage security crises beyond its territory, and to build cooperative security
with partners. Beside the ability to defend NATO member states and deter against any threat
of aggression, emphasis is placed namely on the development of capabilities to address a whole
range of crises, from conflict prevention to the achievement of stability in post-conflict situations.

33. The EU likewise seeks to further strengthen its role in crisis prevention and management;
the strategic goal is to continue building the Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) as
a strong and reliable element of the EU external action. Against the background of worsening
international security environment (i.a. multiplying and deepening crises), it becomes urgently
apparent that the EU needs to be able to respond, including independently, to crises in its
neighbourhood as well as to global security challenges. To this end, the EU seeks to continue
building the CSDP civilian and military capabilities, to apply a comprehensive approach to
crisis prevention and management, and to strengthen the independent crisis management
capabilities of third countries through the provision of training and, where appropriate,
supplies of equipment. One of the EU´s main priorities is to safeguard the security of its
citizens in accordance with the EU Internal Security Strategy. In this context, the EU seeks to
enhance the long-term forms of cooperation and solidarity between its member states with the
aim to provide EU citizens with better protection from crime and other internal security risks.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 12 │ │


-----

#### Security Threats 

Specific threats to the Czech Republic’s security can be identified by analysing the country’s
security environment. However, as a responsible member of international organisations, the Czech
Republic includes among the relevant security threats also those that have no direct impact on its
own security, but do threaten its allies.

**Weakening of the cooperative security mechanism and of political and international**
**legal commitments in the area of security. Some states seek to achieve a revision of the**
existing international order and are ready to pursue their power-seeking goals through hybrid
warfare methods combining conventional and non-conventional military means with non-military
tools (propaganda using traditional and new media, disinformation intelligence operations, cyber
attacks, political and economic pressures, and deployment of unmarked military personnel). These
countries build up their military potential and seek to carve out for themselves exclusive spheres
of influence by means of destabilizing the neighbouring countries and taking advantage of local
conflicts and disputes.

**Instability and regional conflicts in and around the Euro-Atlantic area. Unresolved**
conflicts, with all their negative effects, may have direct or indirect impacts on the Czech Republic’s
security. Disputes of an ethnic, territorial or political and economic nature have the potential to
turn into armed conflicts.

**Terrorism. The threat of terrorism as a method of violent pursuit of political goals remains high.**
Its characteristic feature is the existence of supranational networks of loosely affiliated groups and
individuals (“lone wolves”) who, even in the absence of a central command, share an ideology,
goals and plans to achieve them, as well as resources and information. They are capable of directly
threatening human life, health, the environment and also critical infrastructure. The phenomenon
of foreign fighters poses a growing security risk to the whole Europe.

**Proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery. Certain**
state and non-state actors openly or covertly seek to acquire weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery. Such proliferation may have major impacts on security in the EuroAtlantic area. Possible use of ballistic missiles and cruise missiles carrying conventional or nonconventional warheads poses a specific threat. The ability of these weapons to strike the territory of
the Czech Republic or its allies from a great distance places major demands on active and passive
countermeasures.

**Cyber attacks. The cyber space is a very specific environment that has no geographic borders**
and in which the distance between the source of threat and the potential target becomes relative.
Its asymmetric nature makes it possible for state as well as non-state actors to harm the Czech
Republic’s strategic and important interests without using any conventional means. Cyber attacks
directed against the public as well as private sectors are increasingly frequent and sophisticated.
They can cause in particular failures of communication, energy and transport networks, transport
processes and industrial and financial systems, resulting in considerable material damage. The
armed forces´ dependence on information and communication systems may affect the defence
capability of the state. Another problem closely associated with cyber attacks is political and
economic espionage.


Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 13 │ │


-----

**Negative aspects of international migration. The ever more numerous local armed conflicts**
cause an increase in illegal migration, which in turn becomes a source or catalyst of many security
problems. However, insufficient integration of legal migrants can also give rise to social tensions
resulting in undesirable radicalisation of people belonging to immigrant communities.

**Extremism and growth of interethnic and social tensions. The existence of socially excluded**
neighbourhoods and social groups contributes to the development of criminogenic environment
and gives rise to interethnic and social tensions that are exploited by various extremist groups.

**Organised crime, namely serious economic and financial crime, corruption, human**
**trafficking and drug-related crime. In the present security environment, organised crime takes**
on a broader dimension, using business and personal relationships to operate across state borders.
Criminal networks are increasingly able to disrupt the institutions and values of the rule of law,
infiltrate government authorities and threaten the security of the population. This is often achieved
by means of corruption. Organised crime, in combination with corrupt practices, can take the form
of influence-exerting, clientelist or corruption networks and undermine the very foundations
of society. This may entail a loss of public confidence in the integrity and impartiality of public
institutions, as well as distortion of market relationships, economic decline and destabilisation of
the state. Moreover, as there is no clear dividing line between the political and criminal motives
for corruption, organised crime structures often become interconnected with terrorist networks.

**Threats to the operation of critical infrastructure. Critical infrastructure is a key system**
of elements, the disruption or inoperability of which would have a serious impact on the security
of the state, the availability of basic vital needs for the population and on the economy. Due to
the considerable interdependence of individual sectors, critical infrastructure as a whole is
exposed to a number of threats with natural, technological and asymmetric aspects. In particular,
the operational capability of energy infrastructure is exposed both to political pressures and to
criminally motivated threats. Examples of such threats include politically motivated manipulation
of supplies of strategic raw materials, injections of foreign capital of potentially high-risk origin
and purpose into the Czech Republic’s critical infrastructure, sabotage, cyber attacks and economic
crime.

**Interruptions of supplies of strategic raw materials or energy. In the rapidly changing**
globalised world, energy and raw materials security becomes an increasingly important concern.
Competition for access to strategic raw material resources, namely to sources of energy, becomes
an integral part of international relations. The priority is to provide for uninterrupted diversified
supply of strategic raw materials and, at the domestic level, to ensure stable electricity supply and
to build strategic state reserves. The issue of food security and access to drinking water sources is
also gaining importance.

**Disasters of natural and anthropogenic origin and other emergencies. Extreme weather**
events bring with them disasters of natural and anthropogenic origin that may pose a threat to the
population’s safety, lives and health as well as to the environment, affect the country’s economy,
raw material and water supplies, and damage critical infrastructure. The spreading of infectious
diseases with pandemic potential makes the population even more vulnerable and places increased
demands on the protection of public health and provision of health care.


Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 14 │ │


-----

### V. Strategy for Promoting the Security Interests of the 
 Czech Republic

34. The nature of the present security threats and trends requires a broad-based approach to security,
combining military and non-military tools. The Czech Republic develops tools for promoting
its security interests at the national level as well as through active engagement in multilateral
and bilateral relations. To successfully promote security interests, it is necessary that citizens,
including legal entities and individuals, as well as public administration authorities get involved
in the safeguarding of security and in strengthening society’s overall resilience to security threats.

#### The collective dimension of security and defence

35. Active involvement in the NATO collective defence system based on a strong transatlantic
link is vital to the Czech Republic’s defence. The Czech Republic supports measures designed
to strengthen Article 5 of the Washington Treaty and contributes to the development of NATO
capabilities and assets and to NATO’s adaptation to the new security environment.

36. NATO’s importance and functioning depend on each member’s adequate contribution and on
solidarity among the allies. Each Ally’s responsible approach to its commitments, including
participation in NATO programmes and policies, is vital to the Alliance’s continued ability to
ensure the collective defence of its members. Accordingly, the Czech Republic develops the
capabilities necessary for the defence of its territory as well as for its participation in NATO
collective defence. In developing its military capabilities, the Czech Republic is guided primarily
by the NATO Defence Planning Process.

37. Against the background of worsening security environment, NATO develops its collective defence
capabilities and increases its readiness and responsiveness. The Czech Republic accordingly
increases its overall defence effort, improves its capability to receive allied forces on its territory,
supports the building of NATO infrastructure and participates in large-scale live exercises.

38. The Czech Republic participates, on a permanent basis, in the NATO Integrated Air Defence System
(NATINADS), which constitutes one of the main pillars of the Czech Republic’s defence. The Czech
Republic’s role in the system, namely the involvement of its tactical supersonic air force, represents
the country’s another contribution to NATO collective defence.

39. The Czech Republic has in place arrangements for its active participation in NATO, EU and UNled missions addressing the full range of crises – including pre-conflict, conflict and post-conflict
situations. In fulfilling these commitments, the Czech Republic follows a comprehensive approach
to crisis management operations.

40. As part of its crisis prevention and management activities undertaken through international
organisations as well as bilaterally, the Czech Republic contributes to the capacity building in
third countries, for example by providing training to local forces or assisting during security and
defence reform processes, mainly by means of deploying of civilian and military experts.

41. Within NATO, the Czech Republic supports the building of partnerships with the relevant countries
and with other international organisations, as well as an open-door policy of membership for all
democratic European countries that meet NATO standards.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 15 │ │


-----

42. The Czech Republic is involved in the EU Common Foreign and Security Policy and, within its
framework, in the Common Security and Defence Policy and its missions. It takes part in funding
and implementing European development cooperation and humanitarian aid. At the same time,
the Czech Republic also benefits from growing cooperation between EU countries in the areas
of internal security, population protection, protection of critical infrastructure, cyber security,
as well as cooperation in suppressing and mitigating the impacts of illegal migration, organised
crime, terrorism and instability of supplies of key energy resources and other raw materials.

43. The Czech Republic supports, on a long-term basis, the building of a set of EU capacities,
mechanisms and capabilities designed to strengthen the system of cooperative security, to
reinforce stability and to manage conflicts and crises using civil resources. It also participates in
and contributes its capabilities to the building of permanent EU military capacities (including EU
battlegroups), a process which is complementary to and coordinated with NATO and intended
to strengthen the overall defence potential of European allies. The Czech Republic consistently
supports the strengthening of EU-NATO relations and the EU’s cooperation with the United
States on security matters.

44. The Czech Republic advocates the idea that the European integration process should be
accompanied by parallel strengthening of the democratic legitimacy of European institutions.
This is the only way to ensure reliable and transparent implementation of the EU Common
Foreign and Security Policy.

45. The OSCE plays an important role in conflict prevention and post-conflict rehabilitation, as well
as in building stability and enhancing of the cooperative approach to security issues. The OSCE’s
tools, namely its election monitoring missions, mechanisms promoting freedom of the media,
measures increasing transparency in conventional arms control, and missions in support of
political and democratic transformation in countries of the OSCE region are of key importance to
the process of building confidence and security in the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian areas.

46. The Czech Republic regards an efficient European conventional arms control regime as an
important pillar of Euro-Atlantic security. Together with its allies, it will seek to reinstate and
strengthen this regime on the basis of the principles of reciprocity, transparency and host nation
consent.

47. In addition to its activities in the context of international organisations, the Czech Republic
promotes its security interests through its bilateral relations, namely with its neighbouring
countries, and through regional cooperation, including the Visegrad Group.

48. The Czech Republic prefers multilateral approaches to the resolution of international issues and
security challenges. It places emphasis on the prevention of armed conflicts and on the settlement
of security problems by diplomatic, political, and other non-violent means.

49. Where prevention and efforts to peacefully settle crisis situations fail, the Czech Republic joins in
coercive measures in line with its NATO and EU commitments and with the principles of the UN
Charter. In addition, the Czech Republic contributes, within its capacities, civilian and military
capabilities to peacekeeping operations, including in cases where such operations do not fall under
the treaty-based commitments and do not address a direct threat, but are consistent with the Czech
Republic’s interests. The Czech Republic is prepared to take part in the international community’s
coercive actions undertaken with the aim to prevent massive human rights violations, especially
genocide and other crimes against humanity. In this respect, the Czech Republic supports further
development of the “Responsibility to Protect” adopted by the UN General Assembly.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 16 │ │


-----

#### Strategy of prevention and suppression of security threats

50.50. The weakening of the cooperative security mechanism and of political and

**international legal commitments in the area of security, as well as** **instability and**
**regional conflicts in and around the Euro-Atlantic area have a negative impact on the**
Czech Republic’s security. To mitigate these threats, the Czech Republic makes use of its bilateral
relations and of NATO and EU tools, as well as of the UN and OSCE.

51. In accordance with its foreign policy priorities, the Government focuses, in the European space,
namely on the countries of Eastern Europe and Western Balkans, including the EU and NATO
enlargement policies and the EU Eastern Partnership. The Czech Republic is also aware of the ever
greater danger posed by growing instability in Northern Africa, the Sahel and the Middle East, and
is prepared to participate, jointly with its allies, in mitigating this danger. The Czech Republic also
supports the broadest possible involvement of states in arms control and disarmament regimes.

52. The Czech Republic takes an active part in formulating and implementing the EU Common
Foreign and Security Policy and actively participates in missions within the framework of the
Common Security and Defence Policy.

53. The Czech Republic expands its activities in the area of development and transformation
cooperation and humanitarian aid, which represents an efficient tool contributing to regional and
global security and stability.

54. In the EU´s neighbourhood and other regions, the Czech Republic seeks to promote a decisive
EU policy of defending human rights and other common values and supporting democratisation
processes — the rule of law and functioning democratic institutions are important factors
contributing to stability and security in the world.

55. The range of instruments used in settling crisis includes participation in the missions and
operations of international governmental organisations. Accordingly, the Czech Republic
improves its national system for deploying experts to foreign missions on the basis of lessons
learned and close interministerial cooperation.

56. The Czech Republic works actively for the combatting of all forms of terrorism both at the
national level and through its involvement in international organisations, including in the process
of negotiating and implementing anti-terrorist conventions. Its priorities include measures to
counter terrorist financing, radicalisation and recruitment, and to protect the population, critical
infrastructure and other targets potentially vulnerable to terrorist attack. The Czech Republic
adopts systematic preventive and legislative measures in accordance with the EU Counterterrorism Strategy.

57. Within NATO, the Czech Republic helps support the fight against terrorism by sharing intelligence
information, developing response capabilities, broadening consultations with partners, and
actively participating in NATO operations and missions.

58. Within the EU, the Czech Republic contributes to the formulation of specific counter-terrorism
measures aimed to strengthen cooperation, both among the EU member states and with non-EU
countries.

59. The Czech Republic seeks to consistently detect and prosecute manifestations of extremism,
including xenophobia, racism and other forms of intolerance and discrimination.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 17 │ │


-----

60. The Czech Republic works for the deepening and greater efficiency of processes and mechanisms
of disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
**their means of delivery. In response to the adoption of the new NATO Strategic Concept and**
measures aimed to strengthen Article 5 of the Washington Treaty, the Czech Republic actively
supports the development of NATO territorial missile defence and considers the options for
its own involvement in this system. It develops capabilities for its defence against the threat of
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear weapons of mass destruction. As part of the sharing
of common risks and responsibilities within NATO, it continues to develop its armed forces´
specialization in protection against weapons of mass destruction.

61. The Czech Republic supports the NATO’s deterrence policy based on a balanced combination of
nuclear and conventional capabilities. It participates in the shaping of NATO’s nuclear policy in
line with the principles of nuclear consultations and nuclear planning.

62. The Czech Republic supports the implementation of all articles of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty, including Article VI calling for the conclusion of a treaty on general and complete nuclear
disarmament using strict and effective international control. Complete elimination of nuclear
weapons is, however, a long-term goal that requires the fulfilment of many conditions especially
in the area of non-proliferation. In the area of peaceful use of nuclear energy, the Czech Republic
supports the activities of the International Atomic Energy Agency aimed at strengthening the
safeguards system, including universal application of the Additional Protocol, with an emphasis
on nuclear safety.

63. In international control regimes outside the remit of the UN, the Czech Republic promotes steps
towards the strengthening of the export control system, prevention of the diversion of dual-use
items, and towards non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. It actively supports the
effort to get all EU countries involved in all international control regimes as a way to improve the
efficiency of control on exports within the area of free movement of goods as well as on exports
from this area to third countries.

64. The Czech Republic seeks to improve its transparent system for controlling and supporting trade
in military material, other defence and security commodities and dual-use goods. It supports
dialogue with partners on the broadening of mutual cooperation at the regional level in areas of
common interest to the defence and security industries.

65. Concerning the threat of cyber attacks one of the Government’s priorities is to provide for the
security of the Czech Republic’s critical information infrastructure and important information
systems, using for this purpose the governmental CERT. The Czech Republic supports the
development of systems that facilitates broad cooperation of all actors, including those who are
not part of the public administration but contribute to the exchange of experience related to cyber
incidents at the national and international levels. The Government promotes legislative and nonlegislative measures consistent with the principles for the development of information society
and with the National Cyber Security Strategy 2015-2020.

66. The Czech Republic prefers to build flexible resilience systems that allow it not only to
minimise the impacts of cyber attacks but also to quickly restore the operability of the system
concerned. It promotes consistent adherence to security standards applicable to information
and communication systems operated by public administration authorities. It supports public
awareness activities focused on cyber and information security, since the general public may
become the most vulnerable element in the whole system. It defines the methods for protecting
sensitive information in information systems operated by public administration authorities,
namely in information systems necessary for the operation of critical state infrastructure.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 18 │ │


-----

67. The Czech Republic actively contributes to the development of anti-cyber threat measures
within international organisations, namely the EU and NATO. It supports the strengthening of
international judicial and police cooperation with the aim to apprehend perpetrators of cyber
attacks. The Czech Republic joins initiatives promoting the development of international legal
standards on cyber security.

68. A complex phenomenon that may affect the Czech Republic’s security is **international**
**migration. The Czech Republic’s approach to analysing the migration phenomena, developing**
the relevant policies and addressing potential threats is determined by its membership of the
EU and the Schengen Area. Abolition of internal border controls within the EU has considerable
implications for the way the Czech Republic protects its territory and fights illegal migration; it
also entails greater demands on cooperation between the EU member states in protecting their
external borders. As regards protection of the EU´s external borders, the Czech Republic advocates
the completion and use of modern high-capacity information systems and the introduction of
entry and exit registration systems that will contribute to the security of the common area. The
Czech Republic will continue to advocate the retention and effective administration of key EU
migration policy mechanisms, including asylum policy cooperation under the Dublin System, and
consistent adherence to the Schengen acquis by all European states that are bound by it.

69. A crucially important part of action to prevent the potential risks is management of immigration,
including integration of immigrants in the territory of the Czech Republic. So far, the Czech
Republic has retained a large degree of sovereignty in this field. As regards legal migration,
the Czech Republic promotes an integrated and active approach to the economic benefits of
immigration, taking into account the needs of the labour market. At the national level, it continues
to apply a conceptual approach to integration of immigrants involving a broad range of actors,
including non-governmental organisations. The Czech Republic continues to encourage the
merging of immigrant communities with the majority population, and the social and economic
self-sufficiency of individual immigrants.

70. The Czech Republic will actively work to suppress and prevent crime and socio-pathological
**phenomena in socially excluded neighbourhoods. The aim is to build public confidence**
in the ability of government institutions to enforce law in such neighbourhoods and to prevent
the emergence of the factors that contribute to the growth of crime. It is necessary to improve the
population’s subjective sense of safety and security in order to deprive political extremists of one
of their topics.

71. A fundamental part of action to protect public order and internal security is prevention and
suppression of all forms of crime. Accordingly, the primary task for the country’s security structures
is to combat all forms of organised crime and corruption. In this area, the Czech Republic is
guided by a comprehensive government policy concept. Its focus is primarily on supporting direct
national and international cooperation between police forces in order to facilitate rapid response
to the activities of the criminal structures that often expediently move from state to state. It also
focuses on lasting improvement of conditions for the work of the personnel of security services,
including the legal environment, expertise and the equipment and funding available to specialised
departments. A matter of key importance is the support of efforts to trace and seize the proceeds
of crime. The core problem of the fight against organised crime and corruption remains the
potential vulnerability of the state. Accordingly, it is above all necessary to build the capacities
that government institutions need to protect society from organised crime and corruption.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 19 │ │


-----

72. The Government’s priority is to fight corruption, tax evasion and serious economic crime as
channels through which organised crime infiltrates public administration, distorts competition
and undermines the basic principles of democracy. In line with its anti¬corruption strategy, the
Government focuses on action to efficiently prevent corruption, minimise the opportunities for
corrupt behaviour and increase the transparency of all processes that contribute to the capability
of the state to punish corrupt behaviour.

73. In addition, the Czech Republic takes an active part in the work of international organisations
combating all forms of corruption and honours its commitments arising from the relevant
international treaties. The Government will ensure the ratification of all relevant international
treaties on organised crime and corruption.

74. Another priority in the area of internal security is to suppress the trafficking in narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances and poisons which represents one of the key activities of international
organised crime. In this area, the Czech Republic pursues a balanced drug prevention strategy. It
strengthens the control mechanisms and their forms that are in place within the external as well
as internal borders of the Schengen Area and works for greater harmonisation of legislation in
the EU, especially as regards the differences in criminal legislation applicable to drug possession
and use and as regards ways to strengthen supranational forms of prompt international judicial
cooperation. It also supports the activities of its international partners focused on preventing the
import of drugs to Europe.

75. Particular importance is attached to the **protection of critical infrastructure. The Czech**
Republic monitors foreign investment into individual sectors of critical infrastructure and into
strategic companies in order to avert the threat of misuse of such investment as a channel through
which a foreign power might promote its economic and politic interests at the expense of the
Czech Republic. In order to protect critical infrastructure and strategic companies, namely in the
energy sector — in the subsectors of electricity, natural gas, crude oil and oil products, and heat
energy — and the information and communications technology sector, it is necessary:

      - to increase the protection and resilience of national and European critical infrastructure,

      - to cooperate with the owners/operators of elements of critical infrastructure,

      - to retain control over critical infrastructure where it is still owned by the state, and to
avoid diminishing the state’s influence and control over strategic companies operating in
individual areas of critical infrastructure.

76. Concerning the threat of interruption of strategic raw material or energy supplies, the
Government’s priority is to ensure the diversification of strategic raw material supplies, to put
into place measures ensuring the stability of electricity supply within the Czech Republic, and to
create strategic state reserves in the domestic energy sector. Food security and access to sources
of water are also of growing importance.

77. In order to ensure its energy and raw materials security, the Czech Republic:

      - provides for the maximum possible diversification of source territories and transit
infrastructure for imported strategic raw materials, with an emphasis on retaining the
transit status of the Czech Republic,

      - makes a prioritised and effective use of domestic sources of raw materials, including
measures to provide scope for their exploration and territorial protection, with the aim
to prevent an unfavourable shift in the domestic energy mix towards materials which
the Czech Republic needs to import or which are uneconomic and uncompetitive, and
maintains reserves of strategic commodities in cases where the Czech Republic has no
or only limited access to the primary sources, including the building of a system of fresh
nuclear fuel stocks held by the operator,

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 20 │ │


-----

      - ensures the protection of energy infrastructure (oil pipelines, gas pipelines, distribution
networks and nuclear power plants), and builds such infrastructure with foresight and
sufficiently in time,

      - ensures, in the electricity generation and supply industry, source and transmission
stability with an emphasis on preserving adequate and sustainable domestic generation
capacities with a net surplus; it also concentrates on building isolated operations and on
maintaining an adequate level of regulatory output; it improves the legal framework that
ensure a secure and continuous operation of elements of the energy infrastructure, and
minimises the negative factors affecting the Czech transmission network,

      - focuses its efforts, in the public heat generation and supply sector, on securing a sufficient
resource base and on upgrading the existing central heating system operations, and
ensure that heat generation capacities can be switched to alternative types of fuel in a
crisis situation,

      - avoids diminishing the state’s influence and control in strategic energy companies and
avoids strengthening the influence, anywhere in the energy sector, of those entities,
countries or regions on whom the Czech Republic is significantly energy dependent,

      - cooperates effectively on energy and raw-materials security with energy and mining
companies, whether privately owned or state-controlled,

      - supports investment into science, research and human resources development in the
energy sector.

78. As regards the growing of crops for energy use, the Czech Republic makes arrangements to enable
the cultivation of commodities for this purpose without undermining the country’s food security.
It maintains adequate stocks of strategically important agricultural and food commodities.

79. The Czech Republic pays attention to strategic stocks of underground water that can be used for
public drinking water supply, as well as to surface water sources.

80. The Czech Republic actively promotes its interests in the area of energy and raw materials
security in international organisations, especially the EU and NATO, and specialised agencies,
and develops specific projects as part of bilateral relations. The Czech Republic supports mutually
beneficial economic relations with raw materials producing states, including through development
cooperation projects.

81. In the event of **disasters of natural or anthropogenic origin or other emergencies**
threatening life, health, property, the environment, internal security or public order in the Czech
Republic, the Government uses an integrated emergency system and other relevant structures. The
Government will continue to improve the arrangements for the operation and effective concerted
action of these structures, including greater cooperation with the Army of the Czech Republic,
and will support acquisition of equipment for the basic units of the integrated emergency system
and volunteer fire brigades, so that they can increase their participation in the management of
emergency situations. Earth observation data and data from forecast and warning meteorological
service systems will be used to monitor, predict and warn against landslides, land subsistence
and floods.

82. In the event of outbreaks and spreading of infectious diseases with pandemic potential, the
Government takes the appropriate preventive and repressive anti-epidemic measures at the
national level and makes arrangements for the provision of health care. Public health protection
authorities ensure rapid and valid international exchange of information on the spread of the
disease and on countermeasures taken.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 21 │ │


-----

83. The Czech Republic takes an active part in the EU’s Civil Protection Mechanism and develops
effective cooperation with the EU Emergency Response Coordination Centre and with the NATO
Euro-Atlantic Disaster Response Coordination Centre.

84. As part of its international cooperation, the Czech Republic provides humanitarian aid as required
and deploys emergency teams abroad with the aim to prevent loss of life and damage to health,
and to restore basic living conditions.

85. In order to ensure the appropriate level of prevention and suppression of threats, the Government
makes arrangements to improve the expertise of the staff of public administration authorities
responsible for the fulfilment of security tasks. It supports the training of units of the integrated
emergency system and personnel of the security services. The appropriate training programmes
are prepared and implemented in cooperation with the broader security community.

86. The Czech Republic supports public security awareness activities focusing primarily on threat
prevention but also on self-protection and mutual assistance during emergencies as an important
factor in eliminating the impacts of emergencies. Systematic security education, using, for
example, public service media, is also an important crime prevention tool. To this end, the
Czech Republic promotes intensive interministerial cooperation, cooperation between units of
the integrated emergency system, and cooperation with civic associations involved in security
education.

87. In cooperation with local government bodies, the Government will explore additional ways to
more efficiently protect the public order at the local level.

88. The Czech Republic makes the necessary material, technical, organisational and legislative
arrangements for the preparation and implementation of preventive measures intended to
minimise the risk and impacts of emergencies.

89. The Government will encourage the building of capacities for analysing and predicting security
threats.

#### The economic framework for safeguarding security interests

90. Economic policy is part of the groundwork for the Czech Republic’s security and defence.
Favourable economic and legal climate combined with macroeconomic stability is necessary for
the development of the human, material and financial resources essential to the security and
defence of the state.

91. The Czech Republic supports measures promoting sustainable economic growth and fostering a
favourable economic environment by:

      - maintaining and strengthening the Czech Republic’s international competitiveness,
including support for innovation, research and development,

      - preventing risks such as the misuse of dominant market position by economic operators,
the control of strategic sectors of the Czech economy by a foreign power, influx of high¬risk capital with an opaque or problematic ownership structure, and threats to the
operation of Czech companies abroad,

      - minimising the impact of negative economic phenomena and activities (tax evasion,
financial fraud, international arbitration),

      - optimising, on an ongoing basis, protective mechanisms in the economic sphere,

      - analysing the steps taken by high-risk foreign entities seeking to acquire shares in selected

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 22 │ │


-----

strategic companies in the Czech Republic, including comprehensive vetting of foreign
economic entities with interests in the Czech Republic if there are grounds to believe that
their activities might harm the Czech Republic’s economic interests or reputation,

      - minimising the presence of high-risk foreign investment in the Czech Republic, and
ensuring early detection of flows of problematic foreign capital into the Czech Republic,

      - reducing economic dependence on potentially unstable countries if there are grounds to
believe that they might take advantage of such dependence to promote their interests visà-vis the Czech Republic, including the likelihood of steps that might impair the Czech
Republic’s independent decision-making processes,

      - preventing and eliminating international arbitration claims brought against the Czech
Republic,

      - vetting the activities of sovereign funds if there are grounds to believe that the fund might
deliberately seek to influence the country’s economic and political development,

      - ensuring the security and credibility of the cyber space and protecting information and
communication infrastructure.

92. Policies arising from the Security Strategy of the Czech Republic are funded from public budgets,
subject to rigorous fiscal consolidation. The Czech Republic applies a complementary approach
and seeks to limit expenditure duplication. In implementing the tasks arising from the Security
Strategy, it uses opportunities to obtain additional funding from bilateral and multilateral sources.

93. The level of expenditure associated with internal and external security must be such as to ensure
the required defence capability of the state, protection of the lives, health and property of its
citizens, and compliance with the Czech Republic’s collective defence commitments within NATO
and EU. To promote and implement an effective security and defence policy, the Government will
establish a predictable and adequate budget framework. In line with the Czech Republic’s NATO
commitments, the Government will ensure that the Czech Republic’s defence budget is gradually
increased to reach 1.4% of GDP by 2020. At the same time, the Czech Republic will seek to move
towards the 2% of GDP defence spending guideline, insofar as possible while ensuring the longterm sustainability of its public finances.

94. Involvement in the NATO and EU joint acquisition and armaments programmes for strategic
capability development gives the Czech Republic access to capabilities that would otherwise
be out of its reach. Over and above its role in international organisations, the Czech Republic
develops a strategic partnership with the United States, as well as regional and bilateral
cooperation projects. These joint projects lead to more efficient maintenance and strengthening
of capabilities development, and enhance military interoperability as well as political solidarity.
Cooperation with the Visegrad Group countries has a specific role to play in this respect.

95. The Czech Republic supports and develops, on a long-term basis, security and defence research
and development. It facilitates the involvement of its research and development organisations in
international collaborative research, development and innovation activities within the EU and
NATO, the participation of its defence and security industries in NATO armament programmes,
international development and investment programmes (above all in the European Defence
Agency), the integration of its industry into the European industrial base, and the development of
a single European defence technology market.

96. The Czech Republic develops a system of economic measures to be taken in crisis situations, and
creates and maintains optimal levels of vital commodities and production capacities. It intends to
continue maintaining the capabilities that enable it to mobilise material and financial resources
to deal with crisis situations as and when necessary.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 23 │ │


-----

#### The institutional framework for safeguarding securit

97. The institutional tool for the national security policy is the appropriate security system, the
basic function of which is to integrate, coordinate and manage the individual components and to
flexibly respond to threats as they arise.

98. The diplomatic service has a major role to play in safeguarding the Czech Republic’s security
interests, namely by developing good bilateral relations and cooperation and by working in
international organisations with focus on information gathering, crisis prevention and stabilisation
of crisis areas, support of transformation and democratisation processes and cooperation in the
fight against terrorism and non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. An integral part
of these efforts is development and transformation cooperation. The Czech Republic uses its
diplomatic and consular service to protect its citizens and interests abroad. It provides assistance
to its citizens in the event of emergencies and crises worldwide. To this end, it will develop an
appropriate legislative and financial framework.

99. The Czech Republic’s intelligence services have an irreplaceable role to play in acquiring, gathering
and analysing the information necessary for the security of the Czech Republic.

100. The armed forces, with the Army of the Czech Republic at their core, play a key role in supporting
the implementation of the defence policy. Additional defence policy tools include the Military
Intelligence Service, other government institutions and local government bodies, and, within the
limits set by law, also other legal entities and individuals. The Czech Republic makes systematic
arrangements for efficient national and international coordination of its defence policy tools.
Preparation of the population for crises and for the defence of the state is another tool supporting
the implementation of the security and defence policy.

101. A key role in safeguarding internal security and protection of the population is played by the
security forces, namely by the Police of the Czech Republic and the Fire and Rescue Service of
the Czech Republic. Other actors include municipal police forces, which assist in maintaining
public order within their statutory authority, and the Army of the Czech Republic, which may
contribute its assets and capabilities to assist the Police of the Czech Republic and the integrated
emergency system in cases where their capacities do not suffice. An irreplaceable role is played
by the medical rescue service, by medical facilities providing emergency care, and by public
health authorities. Law enforcement authorities have a substantial role to play in ensuring an
independent and efficient administration of criminal justice. Cooperation with the general public
and civic associations active in the security domain, as well as the use of volunteer services, are
important for effective safeguarding of internal security and the protection of the population.
Private security services also contribute to individual security by providing surveillance and
protection of individuals and property.

102. The main role in cyber security is played by the National Security Authority, which coordinates all
activities related to cyber security, and serves as the national authority in this area. The National
Cyber Security Centre set up within the National Security Authority is part of the national and
international early warning system and has responsibility for the coordination of national and
international cooperation in preventing and addressing cyber attacks, and for the introduction
of necessary measures in this area.

103. The Czech Republic develops its crisis management system and crisis planning methodology
with the aim to provide a more informed basis for the planning, preparation, coordination

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 24 │ │


-----

and unification of steps taken by public administration authorities, and by legal entities and
individuals engaged in business activities in the context of preparation for crisis situations. It
systematically develops and strengthens its crisis management tools and its preparation for
managing non-military crises and dealing with their impacts. Another priority in the area of
crisis management is to integrate crisis management and defence planning measures and tools
particularly in order to make optimum use of public budgets and to efficiently plan and use the
capacities of public administration authorities, the assets and capabilities of the armed forces
and security structures, as well as the resources of the private sector.

104. The Government actively supports preparation of the population for emergencies and crisis
situations, ensures the cooperation of crisis management bodies with the private sector in
preventing crisis situations and improving the Czech Republic’s resilience to their impacts, and
takes adaptation measures.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 25 │ │


-----

#### The Security System of the Czech Republic

To safeguard its security interests, the Czech Republic sets up and develops a comprehensive,
hierarchical security system combining the political (domestic and foreign), military, internal
security, population protection, economic, financial, legislative, legal and social levels. The
system is based on legislation defining the competences of the individual components (legislative,
executive and judicial branches, local governments, legal entities and individuals), their mutual
relations and their relations with entities outside the security system, and their respective duties.
The Czech Republic’s security system provides an institutional framework/tool for creating and
implementing the security policy.

The basic function of the Czech Republic’s security system is to manage and coordinate the work
of the individual components responsible for safeguarding the security interests of the Czech
Republic. The security of the Czech Republic is not solely a task for the structures that are explicitly
designed for this purpose; government and local government bodies, legal entities and individuals
each contribute their share as required by law.

The structure of the security system includes namely the President of the Republic, the Parliament
of the Czech Republic, the Government, the National Security Council and its working bodies,
central government authorities, regional and municipal offices, the armed forces, armed security
corps, intelligence services, and rescue and emergency services. The overall responsibility for
the security of the state and for the management and operational capability of the entire security
system lies with the Government as the supreme body of the executive power.

A functioning security system is a tool that helps not only to efficiently manage military and
non-military crises, but also to prevent and prepare for potential crisis situations, including early
detection and warning.

The functioning of the security system, the building and development of the capabilities of its
components, as well as the provision of the necessary economic and financial resources, is a longterm, demanding process drawing on lessons learned from the management of various crisis
situations and from systematic preparations (e.g. in the form of various exercises) and preventive
activities of the individual components.

The security system must consistently respond to changing circumstances, to changes in the
security environment and to emerging new threats. Accordingly, the security system of the Czech
Republic should be viewed as an open system dynamically adapting itself to the current security
situation in the Czech Republic and worldwide.


Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 26 │ │


-----

ISBN 978-80-7441-007-9
© Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic, 2015
Approved by the Government of the Czech Republic in February 2015
Prague, February 2015.


-----

