## Security Strategy of the Czech Republic

# 2011


-----

#### Introduction by the Prime Minister of the Czech Republic

Why, in times of peace, should we concern ourselves with security issues? Would it not be better to
concentrate instead on building new homes, hospitals and schools?

As the British Labour statesman Denis Healey said more than 40 years ago, “Once we cut defence
expenditure to the extent where our security is imperilled, we have no houses, we have no hospitals,
we have no schools. We have a heap of cinders.”

The security of its citizens is a fundamental responsibility of the state. The Government of the
Czech Republic, aware of this obligation, has updated the Security Strategy of the Czech Republic.
The previous Security Strategy was drawn up in 2003, since when the security environment and
the international context have changed. By adopting the Treaty of Lisbon, the European Union has
gained a new institutional framework. The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) adopted
a new Strategic Concept at its summit in Lisbon in the autumn of 2010.

The Security Strategy of the Czech Republic takes these developments into account. It shares the
principles of its 2003 predecessor, but develops them to reflect the new context. What differentiates
it most from the previous Security Strategy is that it conceives the security issue as a whole. First,
it defines our values and interests, and then describes the current security environment, including
trends and threats and their possible impact on our interests. In the second part, it sets out the
approaches to be employed in countering those threats — using all possible national, bilateral and
multilateral tools. It aspires to be a strategy document valid for at least five years.

I very much welcome the fact that the academic and expert security communities from institutions
outside the government have been involved in the preparation of the Security Strategy.
Communication with the broader professional public has made the Security Strategy a better-quality
document. We also wish to continue seeking out such a consensus in the preparation of further
policy documents and the sub-strategies that will build on it.

The process of safeguarding our security and defence is a permanent task, one that never ends. It is
the state’s debt to its citizens, and it is the mutual commitment that citizens make to each other— to
defend their country, their lives and their freedom. Ultimately, this is the most basic purpose of civil
solidarity.

Security understood in this way — safeguarding not only the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of our country, but also the democratic rule of law and the fundamental rights and
freedoms of our citizens — is a continuous task. If we keep it sufficiently in our sights and if we act
accordingly, both as a state and as citizens, then our future need not be a heap of cinders, but peace,
freedom, prosperity and cooperation between all of us and with the nations of the world.

The Security Strategy is a conceptual framework which will help that happen.

Petr Nečas

Prime Minister


-----

### Contents

**I.** **Introduction** 4

**II. Principles of the Security Policy of the Czech Republic** 5

**III. The Security Interests of the Czech Republic** 6

**IV. The Security Environment** 8

The Strategic Context 8

The most important trends and factors 8

Security Threats 10

**V.** **Strategy for Promoting the Security Interests of the Czech Republic** 12

The collective dimension of safeguarding security and defence 12

Strategy of prevention and suppression of security threats 13

The economic framework for safeguarding security interests 19

The institutional framework for safeguarding security 20

The Security System of the Czech Republic 22

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 3 │ │


-----

### I. Introduction

1. The Security Strategy of the Czech Republic is a fundamental document in the framework of the
Czech Republic’s security policy, which has become the basis for sub-strategies and concepts. It
is a government document drafted in consultation with the Office of the President of the Republic
and the Parliament of the Czech Republic with the aim of seeking non-partisan approaches to
security issues. The Czech Republic’s security community, including representatives of both state
and non-governmental sectors, has also been involved in the production of this strategy.

2. The value and legal framework underlying the creation and implementation the Security Strategy
is provided by the constitutional order of the Czech Republic, in particular by the Constitution
of the Czech Republic, the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms and Constitutional
Act No. 110/1998 on the security of the Czech Republic, as amended. Laws based on the Czech
constitutional order and the international commitments arising from the Czech Republic’s
membership of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), the European Union (EU), the
United Nations (UN), and the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) are
an integral part of the legal framework.

3. In its principles and in its definition of security interests, the Security Strategy builds on the
Security Strategy of the Czech Republic from 2003. It takes account of, and describes changes to,
the security environment, including key threats in the Euro-Atlantic area. Its aim is to establish
a systematic and coordinated framework for the promotion of the Czech Republic’s security
interests and to contribute to the efficient use of individual multilateral, bilateral and national
tools and the corresponding allocation of resources for these purposes.

4. The Security Strategy of the Czech Republic represents the basic values, interests, approaches,
ambitions and tools in the safeguarding of its security:

-  The “Principles of the Security Policy of the Czech Republic” formulate the principles on
which the security policy of the Czech Republic is based.

-  The “Security Interests of the Czech Republic” define the Czech Republic’s vital, strategic
and other important interests.

-  The “Security Environment” identifies the most important trends, factors and specific
threats in the security environment within which the Czech Republic protects and
promotes its interests.

-  The “Strategy for Promoting the Security Interests of the Czech Republic” defines
approaches to the protection of the Czech Republic’s security interests and specifies
multilateral and national tools for promoting them, including a short description of the
Czech Republic’s security system.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 4 │ │


-----

### II. Principles of the Security Policy of the Czech Republic

5. The Security Strategy of the Czech Republic presents approaches, tools and measures to safeguard
the security, defence and protection of citizens and the state. The nature of contemporary security
challenges excludes the strict segmentation of security policy by individual security concern. The
institutional and physical cohesion and coordination of tools is essential to safeguard the Czech
Republic’s security efficiently

6. The Government of the Czech Republic (the “Government”) and all local and regional government
bodies are responsible for safeguarding, within their respective areas of competence, the security
of the population, the defence of the country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and the
preservation of the prerequisites for the democratic rule of law. A comprehensive, functioning
and dynamically developing security system provides the institutional means to attain these aims.

7. The Czech Republic’s security is based on the principle of safeguarding the security of the individual
and protecting his life, health and property. The successful practice of this principle relies on
the safeguarding of the security of state institutions, including their full operational capability,
and the development of processes and tools intended to strengthen the security and protection
of the population. While it is primarily the Government’s duty to safeguard security, the active
cooperation of Czech citizens, businesses and entrepreneurs, and public authorities is desirable
in efforts to mitigate threat risks. This strengthens society’s overall resilience to security threats.

8. The political and economic stability of the European Union is of key significance in safeguarding
the Czech Republic’s security. The exceptional openness of the Czech economy exposes it to
external influences, particularly with respect to market access and energy supplies. In view
of the values and principles which it espouses, the Czech Republic favours joint action within
international organisations and groupings of states that advocate peaceful conflict resolution,
a collective approach to security, and mutually beneficial economic cooperation.

9. The Czech Republic’s security policy is based on the principle of the indivisibility of security. The Czech
Republic’s security is inseparable from security in the Euro-Atlantic area and from the global security
situation. The nature of the security environment is such that the defence and protection of the state’s
citizens and territory does not end at the borders of the Czech Republic. Security interests often need to
be defended far beyond the borders of allied states. The Czech Republic’s security policy is governed not
only by its own specific interests, but also by solidarity with its allies in NATO and the EU.

10. The Czech Republic prefers the active avoidance of armed conflicts and preventive diplomacy.
If a crisis or armed conflict arises, it strives to reach a solution by political and diplomatic means.
If these fail, the Czech Republic may — in accordance with its constitutional order, laws, and the
principles of the UN Charter, and within the framework of its commitments to and solidarity with
its — use force to protect its vital and, if necessary, its strategic interests.

11. The basic principles for safeguarding the defence and security of the Czech Republic are active
involvement in the NATO system of collective defence based on a strong transatlantic link, the
development of EU crisis management capabilities, and cooperation with partner countries.
Membership of NATO and the EU brings with it the advantages of a collective safeguard for our
own defence and security, as well as the commitment to contribute to collective defence and
security. The Security Strategy therefore takes into account the strategy documents of those
organisations. Membership of international organisations does not relieve the Czech Republic of
primary responsibility for its own defence.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 5 │ │


-----

### III. The Security Interests of the Czech Republic

12. The Czech Republic categorises its security interests (“interests”) according to their importance.
In the Security Strategy, these interests are divided into three categories: vital, strategic, and
other important interests.

**13. Vital interests.13.** Vital interests comprise the safeguarding of the Czech Republic’s sovereign
existence, territorial integrity, and political independence, and the preservation of all prerequisites
of a democratic rule of law, including the guarantee and protection of the fundamental human
rights and freedoms of the population. Protecting the vital interests of the state and its citizens
is one of the Government’s fundamental obligations. To this end, the Czech Republic is ready to
exploit all legitimate approaches and to use all available resources.


14.14. Strategic interests. The promotion of strategic interests is necessary in order to safeguard vital

interests. It is also necessary for the Czech Republic’s social development and prosperity. The
approaches and means chosen for their promotion are commensurate to the situation.
The Czech Republic’s primary strategic interests are:

-  security and stability, especially in the Euro-Atlantic area

-  preventing and managing local and regional conflicts and mitigating their consequences

-  maintaining the UN’s global stabilising role and increasing its efficiency

-  strengthening the cohesion and efficiency of NATO and the EU and retaining a functional
and credible transatlantic link

-  promoting a strategic partnership between NATO and the EU, including the strengthening
of cooperation in the complementary development of defence and security capabilities

-  developing the role of the OSCE in the prevention of armed conflicts, in democratisation
and in building mutual trust and security

-  maintaining a functioning and transparent conventional arms control regime in Europe

-  supporting and developing regional cooperation

-  supporting international stability through cooperation with partner countries

-  supporting democracy, fundamental freedoms, and the principles of the rule of law

-  safeguarding internal security and protecting the population

-  safeguarding the Czech Republic’s economic security and strengthening the
competitiveness of the economy

-  safeguarding the Czech Republic’s energy, raw-material and food security and an
appropriate level of strategic reserves

-  preventing and suppressing security threats affecting the security of the Czech Republic
and its allies.

15.15. **Other Important Interests. Other important interests are promoted as a means of contributing**

to the protection of vital and strategic interests and strengthening society’s resilience to security
threats.
Other important interests include, in particular:

-  reducing crime, with an emphasis on economic crime

-  developing the conditions for a tolerant civil society, suppressing extremism and its
causes

-  making state institutions and the judiciary more efficient and more professional; to this
end, improving public authorities’ interaction with citizens, businesses and entrepreneurs

-  developing civic associations and non-governmental organisations involved in security

-  improving public awareness and citizens’ active involvement in safeguarding security

-  supporting scientific and technological development, with an emphasis on new

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 6 │ │


-----

technologies with a high added value of innovation

-  developing technical and technological capabilities for the processing and transmission
of classified and sensitive information, with an emphasis on information protection and
accessibility

-  protecting the environment.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 7 │ │


-----

### IV. The Security Environment

#### The Strategic Context

16. The environment influencing the Czech Republic’s security is going through dynamic changes.
The growing interconnectedness of security trends and factors is reducing its predictability.
Threats, the sources of threats and those carrying them out are of both a national and,
increasingly, a non-governmental and supranational nature. Internal and external security
threats are becoming entwined and the differences between them effaced. These characteristics
have a fundamental impact on the approach to the safeguarding of defence and security. It is
becoming increasingly important to take a comprehensive approach combining military and civil
tools, including diplomatic and economic means, to prevent threats and mitigate their negative
impact. Preparedness to react promptly and effectively to unforeseen threats is also becoming
more essential.

17. The probability of a direct threat to the territory of the Czech Republic by massive military attack is
low. This favourable state of affairs is guaranteed primarily by the Czech Republic’s membership
of NATO and the EU and its sound relations with neighbouring countries. However, the growth of
asymmetric security threats is in contrast to this position. These are linked to trends in the global
environment which strengthen their potential and increase the possibility of a growth in threats
from relatively distant areas of local and regional conflicts and tension. A feature characteristic
of the current environment is the fact that instability and conflicts beyond the borders of Europe
can also have a direct impact on our security.

18. The main sources of threat include hardened attitudes towards the base values of our society,
casting doubt on the concept of the democratic rule of law and denying fundamental human
rights and freedoms. Those espousing these attitudes may be states, but increasingly it is the nonstate actors, various groupings and their supporters.

#### The most important trends and factors

19. The growing ambitions of new global and regional actors have a fundamental influence on
equilibrium in the security environment. The aspirations of some of these states are associated
with a major growth in their military capacity, including weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery, a growing demand for key raw materials, activities on financial markets,
the vying for influence in strategic areas and the more aggressive promotion of their political
ambitions at international fora. The unilateral attempts by some states to build up spheres of
influence through a combination of political, economic and military pressure and intelligence
activities may be considered a threat. A risk of the erosion of political and legal commitments to
European security is associated with these tendencies.

20. To a major extent, security threats arise from weak or failed states whose governments are unable
to secure their own defence, the safety of their citizens and the rule of law. Internal and regional
conflicts can occur as a consequence, with a negative impact on our security.

21. One of the negative aspects of the globalisation process is, in particular, the possibility of the
misuse of the interconnectedness of financial markets, information and communication
technologies and infrastructure. Uneven economic development and the easy spread of radical
political and religious ideas also contribute to instability. Greater mobility speeds up the spread
of infectious diseases, including those with pandemic potential.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 8 │ │


-----

22. One of the consequences of the current trends in the global economy could be a change in
the relative weight of the individual actors, including a possible weakening in the standing
of Europe and the USA. Also, there could be an increased tendency for states to prioritise
national interests at the expense of joint interests, as well as other possible trends which
might lead to a reduction in the solidarity and effectiveness of NATO and the EU. The
reduction in defence budgets by a number of European countries also deepens differences
in military capabilities and the asymmetry of defence efficiency in the Euro-Atlantic area.

23. Non-state actors, in comparison with states and international organisations, are able to make
quicker and more flexible use of the possibilities arising from globalisation, and in particular from
the integration of information and communication technologies, transport and trade. The status
of states as entities having a monopoly on the use of force and as regulators of key economic and
information flows is diminishing. In contrast, non-state actors are becoming increasingly capable
of undermining the interests of states and the security of their populations.

24. The security implications of demographic change continue to grow. Problems associated with
poverty and a lack of basic needs and services in regions with large and rapidly expanding
populations may significantly increase the probability of outbreaks of extremism, crime, local
armed conflicts and mass uncontrollable migration.

25. Growing dependence on the availability of natural resources is leading to more intensive global
competition to secure access to strategic raw materials and energy sources. It is becoming
increasingly important to protect critical infrastructure, and in particular the means used to
transport strategic raw materials, characterised by a high level of vulnerability to both state and
non-state actors. The trend by exclusive suppliers of these materials or by transit countries to
abuse their position to promote their own political and security interests also has an impact on
the securing of the Czech Republic’s basic needs and can be considered an asymmetric threat of
a strategic nature.

26. The impact of climate changes and their influence on the environment and on the health of the
population are hard to predict. However, the very fear of these changes can lead to a growth
in tension between states and result in humanitarian crises with direct impacts on local, state
and international structures, including the possible escalation of local conflicts accompanied by
increased migration pressures.

27. The increased frequency of emergencies associated with disasters of both natural and
anthropogenic provenance places greater demands on the protection of the population.

28. Key international organisations also react in varying degrees to the trends and changes in the
security environment by addressing problems, although in some cases their reactions need not
be appropriate. However fundamental the Czech Republic may see the UN’s role in maintaining
international peace and security, this organisation is not fully prepared for the current challenges
and is still in need of reform. Likewise, international law needs to be developed further. The
unwillingness of member states to make the UN an instrument for managing larger-scale crises
and their related practical problems places pressure on regional security organisations, including
NATO and potentially the EU, to become involved in operations and missions beyond the borders
of the Euro-Atlantic area.

29. NATO’s Strategic Concept from November 2010 defines its role in an environment where the
main threats to the Euro-Atlantic area originate beyond its borders and are not of a purely military

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 9 │ │


-----

nature. An emphasis is placed in particular on building capabilities that can address a whole
range of crises, from conflict prevention to the achievement of stability in post-conflict situations.

30. The EU is also seeking to strengthen its role in crisis prevention and management. The Treaty of
Lisbon contains a number of institutional and functional changes, the implementation of which
should lead to the overall greater efficiency of EU foreign, security and defence policy. Demands on
the use of EU civilian and military capabilities outside European space are clearly set to grow. One
of the main EU priorities is to safeguard the security of its citizens; its vision and aims in this respect
are contained in the EU Internal Security Strategy.

#### Security Threats 

Analysis of the security environment in which the Czech Republic finds itself can identify specific
threats to national security. As a responsible member of international organisations, the Czech
Republic also numbers among relevant security threats those which have no direct impact on its
own security, but do threaten its allies.

**Terrorism. The threat of terrorism as a method for the violent pursuit of political objectives**
remains high. A characteristic feature is the existence of a supranational network of loosely affiliated
groups, which, even in the absence of a unified command, share an ideology, objectives and plans to
achieve them, as well as funding and information. They are capable of directly threatening human
life and health, and also critical infrastructure.

**Proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery. Certain state**
and non-state actors are openly or covertly seeking to obtain weapons of mass destruction and the
means to deliver them. Such proliferation could have major consequences for security in the EuroAtlantic area. A specific threat is the possible use of ballistic missiles and cruise missiles carrying
conventional or non-conventional warheads. The ability of these weapons to strike the territory of
the Czech Republic or its Allies from a great distance places major demands on active and passive
counter-measures.

**Cyber attacks. Growing dependence on information and communications technologies increases**
the vulnerability of the state and its citizens to cyber attacks. These attacks could constitute a new
form of warfare or may have criminal or terrorist motivations, and could be used to destabilise
society. Leaks of strategic data and the hacking of the information systems of state institutions and
strategic enterprises serving the basic functions of the state could threaten the Czech Republic’s
strategic interests.

**Instability and regional conflicts in and around the Euro-Atlantic area. Unresolved**
conflicts, with all their negative consequences, could have a direct or indirect impact on the security
of the Czech Republic. Unresolved disputes of an ethnic, territorial or political and economic
nature have the potential to turn into armed conflicts or to tempt certain states to build spheres
of influence and also to weaken the mechanisms of cooperative security and political and legal
commitments in the field of European security.

**Negative aspects of international migration. One particularly negative phenomenon is**
illegal migration, together with its possible consequences, such as links to organised crime. The
inadequate integration of immigrants could weaken the positive benefits of legal migration for
the cultural, political and economic development of society. This can be a source of social tension,
resulting, for example, in the unwanted radicalisation of members of immigrant communities.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 10 │ │


-----

**Organised crime and corruption. Organised crime is spreading in the current security**
environment, extending beyond national borders through business and personal relationships.
Criminal networks are increasingly able to disrupt the institutions and values of states run under
the rule of law, infiltrate government bodies and threaten the security of citizens. A common vehicle
for this is corruption. Organised crime, in tandem with corruption practices, can take on the form
of networks of influence, clientelism or corruption and undermine the very foundations of society.
This could result in the loss of citizen’s trust in the honesty and impartiality of public institutions,
the distortion of market links, economic decline and destabilisation of the state. Moreover, the
hazy boundary between political and criminal motivation fuelled by corruption often leads to the
forging of links between organised crime structures and terrorist networks.

**Threats to the operation of critical infrastructure. Critical infrastructure is a key system of**
components, the disruption or inoperability of which would have a serious impact on the security of
the state, the availability of basic vital needs for the population and on the economy. In view of the
high degree of mutual dependency between individual branches, critical infrastructure is exposed
to a composite threat comprising natural, technological and asymmetric elements. In particular,
the operational capability of energy infrastructure is at risk of both political pressures and threats
with a criminal undertone. One example of such threats is the politically motivated manipulation
of supplies of strategic raw materials, injections of foreign capital with potentially dubious origins
and risky objectives into the Czech Republic’s critical infrastructure, sabotage and economic crime.

**Interruptions to supplies of strategic raw materials or energy. In a rapidly changing**
global world, questions of energy and raw-material security continue to grow in importance.
Competition for access to sources of strategic raw materials, and energy sources in particular, has
become an integral part of international relations. The priority is to create capacity for uninterrupted
diversified supplies of strategic raw materials and then, in the domestic environment, to pave the
way for stable supplies of electricity and the creation of strategic state reserves. Food security and
access to sources of drinking water are also growing in importance.

**Disasters of natural and anthropogenic provenance and other emergencies. Extreme**
weather and disasters of natural and anthropogenic origin, besides threatening the safety, lives
and health of the population, its property and the environment, could also impact the economy,
raw materials and drinking water supplies as well as damage critical infrastructure. The spread of
infectious diseases with pandemic potential increases the vulnerability of the population and places
greater demands on the protection of public health and the safeguarding of health care provision.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 11 │ │


-----

### V. Strategy for Promoting the Security Interests of the  Czech Republic

31. The nature of contemporary security threats and trends necessitates a broad approach to security
combining military and non-military tools. The Czech Republic is developing tools to promote
its security interests both at national level and through its active involvement in multilateral and
bilateral relations. The successful promotion of its security interests also requires the involvement
of the population, legal entities, individuals and public authorities in the safeguarding of security
and strengthening society’s overall resilience to security threats.

#### The collective dimension of safeguarding security and defence

32. Active involvement in the NATO system of collective defence based on a strong transatlantic link
is vital to the defence of the Czech Republic. The Czech Republic supports measures designed
to strengthen Article 5 of the Washington Treaty, and contributes to the development of the
Alliance’s capabilities and assets and to NATO’s adaptation to the new security environment.

33. NATO’s function and importance depends on a sufficient contribution from each of its members.
Therefore, the Czech Republic, in accordance with Article 3 of the Washington Treaty, is developing
its capacity to ensure the defence of its own territory, to involve the country in the NATO system
of collective defence, and to perform its key NATO tasks. Solidarity among the allies and their
credibility in honouring their commitments is crucial to NATO’s ability to meet its commitments.

34. The Czech Republic participates, on a permanent basis, in the NATO Integrated Air Defence
System (NATINADS), which is one of the basic pillars of the Czech Republic’s defence. The Czech
Republic also contributes to collective NATO defence through its involvement in this system, in
particular through its tactical supersonic air force.

35. The Czech Republic creates conditions for active participation in NATO, EU and UN missions
addressing the full range of crises - before, during and after conflicts. In the process of meeting
these commitments, it maintains a comprehensive approach to crisis management operations.
An example of such an approach is the international community’s involvement in dealing with
the situation in Afghanistan.

36. In the crisis management activities of international organisations, the Czech Republic contributes
to the training and development of security forces in crisis areas, in particular by providing
civilian and military experts to help local authorities and by assisting in the reform of the security
and defence sectors.

37. Within NATO the Czech Republic supports the building of partnerships with relevant countries
and other international organisations, as well as an open-door policy of membership for all
democratic European countries meeting NATO standards.

38. As an EU Member State, the Czech Republic participates actively in the development of tools and
policies defined by the Treaty of Lisbon. It is involved in the Common Foreign and Security Policy
and, within its framework, in the Common Security and Defence Policy and its missions. It takes
part in the funding and implementation of European development cooperation and humanitarian
aid. At the same time, it benefits from the growing cooperation between EU countries in the area
of internal security, population protection, the protection of critical infrastructure, cyber security,

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 12 │ │


-----

as well as cooperation in suppressing and mitigating the consequences of illegal migration,
organised crime, terrorism and instability in supplies of key energy and other raw materials.

39. The Czech Republic has long supported the building of a set of EU capacities, mechanisms and
capabilities to deepen the system of cooperative security, reinforce stability and manage conflicts
and crises using civilian resources. It also participates and contributes its capabilities to the
building of EU military capacities complementary to and coordinated with NATO. It consistently
encourages the development of the potential in the relations between the EU and NATO and in
the EU’s cooperation with the USA in security matters.

40. The Czech Republic advocates the idea that the process of European integration should run in
parallel to the strengthening of the democratic legitimacy of European institutions. This is the
only way to ensure a reliable and transparent implementation of the EU Common Foreign and
Security Policy.

41. The OSCE plays an important role in conflict prevention, post-conflict rehabilitation, the
promotion of stability and the reinforcement of a cooperative approach to security issues. The
OSCE’s tools, in particular election monitoring missions, mechanisms to promote freedom of
the media, measures to increase transparency in conventional arms control, and missions to
aid political and democratic transformation in countries in the OSCE region are of unrivalled
significance in building confidence and security in the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian areas.

42. The Czech Republic regards an effective conventional arms control regime in Europe to be an
important pillar of Euro-Atlantic security. Together with its allies, it will seek to strengthen this
regime on the basis of reciprocity, transparency and host-nation consent.

43. In addition to its involvement in international organisations, the Czech Republic also promotes
its security interests through bilateral relations, in particular with neighbouring countries and
through regional cooperation, including the Visegrad group.

44. The Czech Republic prefers international issues and security challenges to be addressed
multilaterally. It emphasises the prevention of armed conflicts and the handling of security
problems by diplomatic, political, and other non-violent means.

45. Where prevention and efforts to find a peaceful solution to crisis situations fail, the Czech Republic
will join coercive measures in accordance with its commitments within NATO and the EU and
with the principles of the UN Charter. In addition, the Czech Republic will, within its capacities,
contribute civilian and military capabilities to peacekeeping operations which are consistent with
its interests, even if they are not based on its treaty obligations or related to a direct threat. The
Czech Republic is ready to take part in the international community’s coercive actions intended to
prevent massive human rights violations, especially genocide and other crimes against humanity.
In this respect, the Czech Republic supports the further development of the “responsibility to
protect” adopted by the UN General Assembly.

#### Strategy of prevention and suppression of security threats

46. The Czech Republic actively advocates the combating of all forms of terrorism at both national
level and as part of international organisations, including the negotiation and implementation
of anti-terrorist treaties. Priorities include measures to deal with terrorist financing, population
protection, critical infrastructures, and other targets which are potentially vulnerable to terrorist

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 13 │ │


-----

attack. The Czech Republic is adopting systemic preventive measures in accordance with the EU
Counter-terrorism Strategy.

47. Within NATO, the Czech Republic helps to support the fight against terrorism by sharing
intelligence information, developing response capabilities, extending consultations with partners,
and actively participating in NATO operations and missions.

48. Within the EU, the Czech Republic contributes to the formulation of specific counter-terrorism
measures aimed at cementing cooperation between EU Member States and with third countries.

49. The Czech Republic focuses on the consistent detection and prosecution of manifestations of
extremism, including xenophobia, racism and other forms of intolerance and discrimination.

50. The Czech Republic advocates the intensification and greater efficiency of processes and
mechanisms for disarmament, arms control, and **non-proliferation of weapons of mass**
**destruction and their means of delivery. Further to the adoption of the new NATO**
Strategic Concept and measures aimed at strengthening Article 5 of the Washington Treaty, the
Czech Republic actively supports the development and construction of NATO territorial missile
defence and is considering the options for its own involvement in this system. It is developing
capabilities to protect itself against the threat of chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
weapons of mass destruction. As part of the sharing of common risks and responsibilities within
NATO, it is continuing with its armed forces’ specialisation in protection against weapons of mass
destruction.

51. The Czech Republic supports the Alliance policy of deterrence, which is based on a balanced
combination of nuclear and conventional capabilities. It participates in the shaping of NATO
nuclear policy in line with the principles of nuclear consultations and nuclear planning.

52. The Czech Republic supports the implementation of all articles of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty, including Article VI calling for the conclusion of a treaty on general and complete nuclear
disarmament using firm and effective international controls. The complete elimination of nuclear
weapons is, however, a long-term goal, the attainment of which will require many conditions
to be met, particularly in the area of non-proliferation. In the peaceful use of nuclear energy,
the Czech Republic supports the activities of the International Atomic Energy Agency aimed at
strengthening its system of guarantees, including universal application of the Additional Protocol,
with an emphasis on nuclear safety.

53. In international control regimes outside the remit of the UN, the Czech Republic promotes such
steps as will lead to the strengthening of the export control system, the prevention of misuse of
dual-use items and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. It actively supports
attempts to incorporate all EU countries into all international control regimes, which will make it
possible to improve the efficiency of export controls in the area of free movement for goods and
when exporting controlled items from this zone to third countries.

54. The Czech Republic seeks to improve the quality of the transparent system for the control and
support of trade in military material, other defence and security commodities, and dual-use
goods. It supports dialogue with partners on more extensive mutual cooperation at regional level
with regard to the common interest of the defence and security industries.

55. The Government’s priorities related to the threat of cyber attacks include safeguarding the
security and protection of information and communication systems connected to the Czech

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 14 │ │


-----

Republic’s critical infrastructure using a government coordination centre for immediate
response to computer incidents (Computer Security Incident Response Team – CSIRT). This
facility is part of the national and international early warning system. The Czech Republic
supports the building of systems that facilitate the broad cooperation of all actors, i.e. including
those who are not part of public administration but contribute to the exchange of experience
of cyber incidents at national and international level. The Government promotes legislative
and non-legislative measures in such a way that they are in line with principles for the
development of the information society and with the strategy for cyber and information security.

56. The Czech Republic favours the building of systems of flexible resilience which are capable of
minimising the impact of a cyber attack and quickly restoring system operability. It promotes
consistent adherence to security standards in the information and communication systems
operated by public authorities. It also supports public education focused on cyber and information
security, since the public at large may be the most vulnerable element of the whole system. It
defines the methods for protecting sensitive information which is stored in the information
systems operated by public authorities and in particular those information systems essential to
the operation of critical state infrastructure.

57. The Czech Republic makes an active contribution to the development of measures against cyber
threats within international organisations, in particular the EU and NATO. It supports the
strengthening of international judicial and police cooperation with the aim of apprehending
those who perpetrate cyber attacks. The Czech Republic is active in initiatives promoting the
development of international legal standards on cyber security.

**58. 58.** **Instability and regional conflicts in and around the Euro-Atlantic area have a negative**
impact on the Czech Republic’s security. In accordance with its foreign policy priorities, the
Government focuses primarily on the countries of Eastern Europe and the Western Balkans. To
achieve its aims, the Government draws on bilateral relations, as well as EU and NATO tools and
the OSCE. The Czech Republic supports the enlargement of NATO and the EU, provided that
candidate countries meet all the criteria of membership in those organisations.

59. In addition to its participation in EU Common Security and Defence Policy missions, the Czech
Republic is also actively involved in European Neighbourhood Policy projects. These projects
develop political, economic and energy cooperation in neighbouring regions and strengthen
security and stability in these regions and their individual countries. The Czech Republic also
actively contributes to the targets of the EU Eastern Partnership.

60. The Czech Republic is developing its activities in development and transition cooperation and
humanitarian aid, which are an effective tool contributing to regional and global security and
stability.

61. Particularly in the neighbourhood of the EU, but also further afield, the Czech Republic is
focused on promoting a decisive EU policy to defend human rights and other common values
and to support the processes of democratisation — the rule of law and functioning democratic
institutions are significant factors contributing to stability and security in the world.

62. Participation in the missions and operations of international governmental organisations is
one crisis management tool. To this end, the Czech Republic is improving its national system
for posting experts on foreign missions based on lessons learned and close inter-departmental
cooperation.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 15 │ │


-----

63. One complex phenomenon which could affect the Czech Republic’s security is **international**
**migration. The Czech Republic’s involvement in the EU and in the Schengen Area is significant**
for assessments of migration phenomena, the configuration of related policies and the handling
of possible threats. The abolition of internal border controls in the EU significantly influences
the approach taken to the protection of Czech territory and to the combating of illegal migration,
and places increased demands on cooperation between EU Member States in the protection
of their external borders. From the perspective of EU external border protection, the Czech
Republic advocates the completion and use of modern high-capacity information systems and the
introduction of entry and exit registration systems, which will have the effect of contributing to
the security of the common area. The Czech Republic will continue to promote the retention and
effective administration of key EU migration policy mechanisms. These include cooperation on
asylum policy based on the so-called Dublin System, and consistent adherence to the Schengen
acquis by all the states in Europe which are bound by it.

64. The control of immigration, including the integration of foreigners living in the Czech Republic, is
critical for the prevention of potential risks. The Czech Republic has so far retained a large degree
of independence in this field. In the case of legal migration, the Czech Republic promotes an
integrated and active approach to the economic benefits of immigration, bearing in mind the needs
of the labour market. The integration of foreigners at national level continues to be addressed by
means of a conceptual approach involving a broad range of actors, including non-governmental
organisations. The Czech Republic continues to seek to integrate foreign communities with the
majority population and to ensure the social and economic self-sufficiency of individual immigrants.

65. An important task for the country’s security forces is to combat all forms of organised crime and
corruption. In the fight against organised crime, the Czech Republic is focused in particular on
supporting direct international police cooperation, facilitating quick responses to the activities of
criminal structures, which often deliberately transfer their activities between individual states.
The Czech Republic concentrates on improving the legal environment and increasing the expertise
of members of the security services responsible for handling organised crime, and on securing
adequate material and financial resources for specialised departments. Support in identifying
and seizing proceeds from criminal activity is of key importance.

66. Another government priority is the fight against corruption and serious economic crime, which
distort competition, undermine the basic principles of democracy and offer a gateway through
which organised crime can penetrate public administration. In accordance with the anticorruption strategy, the Government focuses on the effective prevention of corruption, a reduction
in the opportunities for corrupt actions, and an increase in the transparency of all processes for
strengthening the Government’s ability to crack down on corruption.

67. The Czech Republic also actively combats all forms of corruption as part of international
organisations and meets its commitments arising from the relevant international treaties. The
Government will arrange for the ratification of all relevant international treaties on organised
crime and corruption.

68. The Czech Republic’s internal security priorities include the suppression of trade in narcotics,
psychotropic substances and poisons as one of the main activities of international organised crime.
The Czech Republic pursues a balanced drug-prevention strategy in this field. It is strengthening
control mechanisms and their forms in relation to the external and internal borders of the
Schengen Area, and is seeking a greater degree of harmonisation of legal measures within the
EU, particularly as regards the differing criminal justice measures for drug possession and use,

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 16 │ │


-----

and the strengthening of supranational forms of rapid international judicial cooperation. It also
supports the activities of its international partners focused on limiting the import of drugs into
Europe.

69. Particular importance is attached to the **protection of critical infrastructure. The Czech**
Republic monitors foreign investment in branches of critical infrastructure and in strategic
companies in order to avert the threat that such investment will be misused to promote the
economic and politic interests of a foreign power at the expense of the Czech Republic. The
protection of critical infrastructure and strategic companies, particularly in the energy sector —
in the subsectors of electricity, natural gas, crude oil and oil products, and heat energy — and the
information and communications technology sector, requires:

-  the increased protection and resilience of national and European critical infrastructure,

-  cooperation with the owners/operators of elements of critical infrastructure,

-  the retention of control over critical infrastructure where it still belongs to the state, and
non-impairment of the influence and control of the state in strategic companies operating in
individual areas of critical infrastructure.

70. In connection with the threat of interruptions to supplies of strategic raw materials or
**energy, the Government’s priority is to create capacity for diversified supplies of strategic raw**
materials and capacity for stable supplies of electricity, as well as the creation of strategic state
reserves in the domestic energy sector. Food security and access to sources of drinking water are
also of growing importance.

71. In order to ensure its energy and raw-materials security, the Czech Republic:

-  safeguards the maximum possible diversification of source countries and transit infrastructure
for imported strategic raw materials, with an emphasis on retaining the transit status of the
Czech Republic,

-  makes prioritised and effective use of domestic sources of raw materials, including the
development of scope for their exploration and territorial protection, with the aim of
preventing an unfavourable swing in the domestic energy mix towards materials which
the Czech Republic needs to import or which is uneconomic and uncompetitive to use, and
maintains reserves of strategic commodities whose primary sources are not under the Czech
Republic’s control or only under limited control, including the creation of a system of fresh
nuclear fuel stocks held by the operator,

-  ensures the protection of energy infrastructure (oil pipelines, gas pipelines, distribution
networks and nuclear power plants), and builds such infrastructure with foresight and
sufficiently in time,

-  ensures, in the electricity generation and supply industry, source and transmission stability,
with an emphasis on preserving adequate and sustainable domestic generation capacities with
a net surplus; it also concentrates on building isolated operations, maintaining an adequate
level of regulatory output and improving the quality of the legal framework for safeguarding
the security and continuity of operations of elements of the energy infrastructure, and also
minimises negative factors impacting the Czech transmission network,

-  focuses its efforts, in the public heat generation and supply sector, on securing a sufficient
resource base and upgrading current central heating system operations, and makes sure that
heat generation capacities can be switched to alternative types of fuel in a crisis situation,

-  does not diminish the state’s influence and control in strategic energy companies and does
not strengthen the influence, anywhere in the energy sector, of those entities, countries or
regions on whom the Czech Republic is significantly energy dependent,

-  cooperates effectively in energy and raw-materials security with energy and mining
companies, either privately-owned or state-controlled,

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 17 │ │


-----

-  supports investment in science, research and the development of human resources in the
energy sector.

72. With regard to the growing of crops for energy use, the Czech Republic creates conditions
commodities to be cultivated for this purpose without undermining the country’s food security. It
maintains adequate stocks of strategically important agricultural and food commodities.

73. The Czech Republic devotes attention to strategic stocks of underground water to supply the
population with drinking water and explores potential sources of surface water.

74. The Czech Republic actively promotes its interests in energy and raw-materials security within
international organisations the EU and NATO in particular, and specialised agencies, and
develops specific projects as part of bilateral relations. The Czech Republic supports mutually
beneficial economic relations with raw material producer states, including the use of development
cooperation projects.

75. In the event of disasters of natural or anthropogenic provenance or other emergencies
threatening life, health, property, the environment, internal security or public policy in the
Czech Republic, the Government employes an integrated emergency system and other relevant
structures. The Government will improve the conditions for their readiness and effective
cooperation including greater collaboration with the Army of the Czech Republic, and will
encourage the basic units of the integrated emergency system and volunteer fire services to be
properly equipped so that they can be more involved in the management of emergency situations.

76. If infectious diseases with pandemic potential were to occur and spread, the Government adopts
appropriate preventive and repressive anti-epidemic measures at national level and creates
the conditions for the provision of health care. Public health protection bodies will arrange for
the rapid and valid international exchange of information on the spread of the disease and on
countermeasures taken.

77. The Czech Republic is actively involved in the EU’s Civil Protection Mechanism and is developing
effective cooperation with the EU Monitoring and Information Centre and with the NATO EuroAtlantic Disaster Response Coordination Centre

78. As part of its international cooperation, the Czech Republic provides humanitarian aid as required
and deploys emergency teams abroad with the aim of limiting loss of life and damage to health,
and of restoring basic living conditions.

79. In order to ensure the appropriate level of threat prevention and suppression, the Government
creates conditions to improve the level of expertise of those public sector employees responsible
for performing security tasks. It supports the training of units of the integrated emergency
system and members of the security services. Relevant training programmes are prepared and
implemented in cooperation with the broader security community.

80. The Czech Republic supports education on security for its citizens, with a particular emphasis on
threat prevention, but also including self-protection and mutual assistance during emergencies as
a significant factor in helping to eliminate the consequences of emergencies. Systemic education
on security issues, using, for example, public-service media, is another important means of
crime prevention. To this end, the Czech Republic is developing intensive inter-departmental
cooperation, cooperation between the units of the integrated emergency system, and cooperation
with civic associations dealing with security-related education.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 18 │ │


-----

81. In conjunction with local and regional government agencies, the Government will seek out further
possibilities to render public order protection more efficient at local level.

82. The Czech Republic is developing the necessary material, technical, organisational and legislative
conditions for the preparation and implementation of preventive measures intended to minimise
the risk that emergencies will occur and the extent of the consequences thereof.

#### The economic framework for safeguarding security interests

83. Economic policy helps to foster conditions for safeguarding the Czech Republic’s security and
defence. A favourable economic and legal climate combined with macroeconomic stability is a
prerequisite for the creation of the human, material and financial resources essential to ensure
the security and defence of the state

84. The Czech Republic supports measures leading to sustainable economic growth and the creation
of a favourable economic climate by:

-  maintaining and strengthening the international competitiveness of the Czech Republic,
including support for innovation, research and development,

-  preventing risks such as the abuse of a dominant market position by economic operators, the
control of strategic sectors of the Czech economy by a foreign power, the penetration of highrisk capital with an opaque or problematic ownership structure or threats to the operation of
Czech companies abroad,

-  minimising the impact of negative economic phenomena and activities (tax evasion, financial
fraud, international arbitration),

-  engaging in the consistent optimisation of preventive mechanisms in the economic sphere,

-  assessing the efforts of high-risk foreign entities to obtain shares in selected strategic
companies in the Czech Republic, including comprehensive vetting of foreign economic
entities with interests in the Czech Republic where it is suspected that their activities may
harm the Czech Republic’s economic interests or reputation,

-  minimising high-risk foreign investment involvement in the Czech Republic and early
indications of any inflow of problematic foreign capital to the Czech Republic,

-  preventing and eliminating international arbitration proceedings against the Czech Republic,

-  vetting of activities of sovereign funds where attempts at targeted influence over the
country’s economic and political development might be expected.

85. The Czech National Bank maintains an independent monetary policy pursuing currency stability
together with supervision of the financial markets.

86. The resource framework for policies under the Security Strategy comprises public budgets with
rigorously implemented fiscal consolidation. The Czech Republic applies a complementary
approach and attempts to limit expenditure duplication. To implement the tasks arising from
the Security Strategy, it also makes use of the option to top up public budgets from bilateral and
multilateral sources.

87. The level of expenditure associated with internal and external security must ensure the required
defence capability of the state and the protection of the lives, health and property of its citizens.
To promote and implement an effective security and defence policy, the Government will draw up
a predictable and adequate budget framework.

88. Involvement in joint strategic capability development programmes within NATO and the EU
provides access to capabilities which the Czech Republic would not otherwise have. Over and

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 19 │ │


-----

above its involvement in international organisations, the Czech Republic is developing a strategic
partnership with the USA and regional and bilateral cooperation projects.

89. The Czech Republic supports and, on a long-term basis, carries out security and defence
research and development. It creates conditions for the involvement of its research and
development laboratories in international cooperation in research, development and
innovation within the EU and NATO, the participation of its defence and security industries
in NATO weapons programmes, international development and investment programmes
(primarily the European Defence Agency), the integration of industry as part of the European
industrial base, and the development of a single European market for defence technologies.

90. The Czech Republic is developing a system of economic emergency-related measures and creates
and maintains optimal stock levels of the necessary commodities and production capacities. It
intends to continue maintaining the capabilities that enable it to mobilise material and financial
resources to deal with a crisis as and when necessary.

#### The institutional framework for safeguarding security

91. One institutional security policy instrument is an appropriate security system, the basic function
of which is to integrate, coordinate and manage its individual components and react flexibly to
any threats that arise.

92. A significant role in safeguarding the Czech Republic’s security interests is played by the diplomatic
service, especially through the development of sound bilateral relations and cooperation and
through international organisations with the intention of gathering information, preventing
crises and stabilising crisis areas, supporting processes of transformation and democratisation
and cooperating in the fight against terrorism and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. An integral part of these efforts is the area of development and transition cooperation.
Through its diplomatic and consular services, the Czech Republic ensures the protection of its
citizens and its interests abroad. In the event of emergencies and crises in the world, it provides
assistance to its citizens. It creates a corresponding legislative and financial framework with this
aim in mind.

93. The main tool for the implementation of defence policy is the armed forces, with the Army of the
Czech Republic at their core. Further defence policy instruments include Military Intelligence, other
central and local government bodies, and legal entities and individuals to the extent defined by law.
The Czech Republic systematically creates conditions for the efficient national and international
coordination of its defence policy instruments. The preparation of citizens for crises and for the
defence of their country is another tool for the implementation of security and defence policy.

94. A key role in safeguarding internal security and the protection of the population is played by
the security forces, and particularly by the Police of the Czech Republic and the Fire and Rescue
Service of the Czech Republic. Municipal police forces also play their part, contributing as far as
their statutory authority permits to local public order, along with the Army of the Czech Republic,
whose forces and resources may be used to reinforce the Police of the Czech Republic and the
integrated emergency system in the event that the latter’s forces are shown to be insufficient.
An irreplaceable role in obtaining, gathering and assessing the information needed to safeguard
the security of the Czech Republic is played by the intelligence services. A role which must not
be overlooked is that of the law enforcement agencies in securing the independent and efficient
execution of justice. For the effective safeguarding of internal security and the protection of the
population, cooperation with citizens, civic associations operating in the field of security and the

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 20 │ │


-----

use of volunteer services are all significant. Private security services also contribute to individual
security by providing surveillance and protection of persons and property.

95. The Czech Republic is developing a crisis management system and crisis planning methodology
with the aim of strengthening the professional backdrop for the planning, preparation, coordination
and unification of measures adopted by public authorities, businesses and entrepreneurs
in preparations for crisis situations. It is systematically developing and strengthening crisis
management tools, preparations for non-military crisis management and management of the
consequences thereof. The medical rescue services and healthcare facilities play an indispensable
role by providing urgent health care and arranging for the protection of public health by the
relevant bodies.

96. The Government actively supports the preparation of the population to handle emergencies
and crisis situations and arranges for cooperation between crisis management bodies with
the private sector in preventing crises and improving the resilience of the Czech Republic to
them. The priorities in crisis management also include the unification of crisis management
and defence planning measures and tools, particularly with regard to the optimal use of public
budget resources, effective planning and the use of public authorities’ capabilities, the means and
resources of the armed forces and security services, and resources from the private sector.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 21 │ │


-----

#### The Security System of the Czech Republic

To safeguard its security interests, the Czech Republic creates and develops a comprehensive,
hierarchically organised security system which is a combination of the political (domestic and
foreign), military, internal security, population protection, economic, financial, legislative, legal
and social levels. The primary basis of this system is to express legislatively the competence and
mutual links of the individual components (legislative, executive, juridical, local and regional
government, legal entities and individuals) and their links outside the security system, to establish
their duties. The security system provides an institutional framework/tool for the creation and
implementation of the Czech Republic’s security policy.

The basic function of the Czech Republic’s security system is to manage and coordinate the activities
of the individual component parts responsible for safeguarding the security interests of the Czech
Republic. The security of the Czech Republic cannot be just a matter for those components which
are explicitly designated for this, but should also involve central and local government bodies, legal
entities and individuals to the extent set out in law.

The structure of the security system includes the President of the Republic, the Parliament of the
Czech Republic, the Government, the National Security Council and its working bodies, central,
regional and municipal authorities, the armed forces, armed security corps, intelligence services,
and rescue and emergency services. As the supreme executive authority, the Government is
responsible for the management and operational capability of the entire security system.

A functional security system is not only a tool for the effective management of military and nonmilitary crises, but also ensures the prevention of and preparations for potential crisis situations
and their early identification and warning.

The functioning of the security system, the construction and development of the capabilities of its
components, and economic and financial backup all constitute a long-term, demanding process
drawing on lessons learned from the management of various crisis situations and from systematic
preparations (e.g. in the form of various exercises) and preventive activities by the individual
components.

The security system must constantly react to the changing circumstances and changes in the
security environment and to newly emerging threats. For this reason, the security system of the
Czech Republic should be viewed as an open and dynamically developing system.

Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 22 │ │


-----

ISBN 978-80-7441-007-9
© Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic, 2011
Approved by the Government of the Czech Republic in September 2011
Prague, September 2011.


-----

