# DANISH DEFENCE AGREEMENT 

 2010 – 2014

Copenhagen, 24 June 2009

The Liberal Party, the Social Democratic Party, the Danish People’s Party, the Socialist People’s
Party, the Conservative Party, the Radical Liberal Party and the Liberal Alliance Party have entered into the following agreement regarding Danish Defence for the period 2010-1014.

**Introduction**

The primary purpose of the Danish Armed Forces is to enforce the sovereignty of the Kingdom
of Denmark and to ensure the continued existence and integrity of the country.

In the light of security policy developments in recent decades, the Danish Armed Forces are also
assuming an increasing role as one of several important instruments of a pro-active Danish foreign and security policy that, whilst respecting human rights, can contribute to the prevention of
conflicts and war as well as the promotion of democracy and freedom in the world.

In this context and in the light of the absence of a conventional threat to Danish territory, the
Danish Armed Forces are currently undergoing an extensive transformation from a traditional
mobilisation defence to a modern deployable defence force. By international standards, the Danish Armed Forces have progressed far in this transformation process, and it is vital that this
process is continued.

Denmark’s membership of NATO is a cornerstone of Danish security and defence policy. In a
strategic perspective Denmark’s sovereignty is secured through NATO’s Article 5 commitment to
collective defence of Alliance territory. At the same time, NATO provides a framework for the
participation of the Danish Armed Forces in international missions. Denmark will thus continue
to work in favour of a transformation of the Alliance in tandem with the transformation of the
military forces of Member States, seen also in relation to a strengthening of the demands placed
by the Alliance on the usability of these military forces.


-----

An active Danish involvement in the UN is another cornerstone of Danish security and defence
policy. Denmark should therefore work to ensure that the UN continues to constitute the foundation of the international system as the source for global legitimacy and the establishing of
universal norms. Furthermore, Denmark should contribute to enhancing the UN’s capability for
the conduct of peacekeeping operations. This could be achieved partly through focused cooperation in Nordic circles. The already ongoing Nordic cooperation on the training and instruction
of African peacekeeping forces will be continued and intensified, and potential opportunities for
joint Nordic peacekeeping operations within the UN framework will similarly be pursued.

Furthermore, in the event of the discontinuation of the Danish EU defence opt-out, the Danish
Armed Forces must be able to participate in EU operations outside Union territory relating to
peacemaking, peacekeeping, conflict resolution and humanitarian assistance as well as to
strengthening international security in accordance with the principles of the UN Charter.

The security policy platform for this agreement is based on the security policy recommendations
set out in the report drafted by the 2008 Defence Commission. In relation to the future role of
the Danish Armed Forces, it is, amongst other issues, concluded in the report, that the demand
for Danish military contributions will not be diminished, and thus a continued transformation of
the Danish Armed Forces is absolutely necessary.

Western military forces, including the Danish Armed Forces, must continue to be able to fight
conventional conflicts, but there will be an increasing need to be able to participate in other
types of conflicts, such as counter-insurgency operations, peacemaking operations and reconstruction efforts.

In summary, the Defence Commission Report recommends that the present national level of
ambition regarding the ability of the Danish Armed Forces to contribute to international operations be maintained. On this basis, the level of ambition determined by the political parties behind the Defence Agreement (hereinafter referred to as the Parties to the Defence Agreement)
for the Danish Armed Forces is described in the present Defence Agreement’s section on the
structure and tasks of the Danish Armed Forces, which thus serves as the basis for the Agreement.

At the same time, the Arctic regions are expected to gain increasing international importance.
The melting of the polar ice cap as a result of global warming will open new opportunities for
the extraction of raw materials and the opening of new shipping routes. The rising activity will
change the region's geostrategic dynamic and significance and will therefore in the long term
present the Danish Armed Forces with several challenges.

The tasks of the Danish Armed Forces can be divided into national and international tasks.


-----

The national tasks comprise – besides monitoring of the national territory and enforcement of
sovereignty – a range of more civilian-oriented tasks in support of Danish society, such as
search and rescue operations, environmental tasks as well as providing support to a number of
other public authorities, such as the police, the emergency rescue services and the tax authorities.

The international tasks will typically fall within the following main areas: armed conflict, stabilisation tasks and international policing.

In relation to the international tasks, the Defence Commissions Report points out that the Danish Armed Forces’ deployable capabilities in principle should be capable of being deployed globally. This means, for example, that the Danish Armed Forces should have the ability to deploy
forces in areas which feature demanding climate and terrain conditions, such as desert and
mountain areas. In addition, the Danish Armed Forces should be able to operate in areas with
limited infrastructure as well as in urbanised areas. Combined, these operational conditions will
therefore place great demands on the Danish Armed Forces’ personnel, equipment, training, logistical capability and mobility, including for example strategic maritime and air transport capability.

In addition, the Defence Commission Report states that it is expected that the future operational
environment will continue to place great demands on the operational units of the Danish Armed
Forces, with regard also to training and equipment. Past developments and expected future developments within international operations indicate, for example, that the future operational environment could be characterised by a high threat level. The accompanying need to protect personnel places great demands on the equipment, personnel and training of contingents. At the
same time, it is expected that the Danish Armed Forces, in connection with international missions, must increasingly be prepared to encounter both asymmetric instruments of warfare (e.g.
improved explosive devices (roadside bombs) and suicide attacks) and more conventional instruments of warfare (e.g. indirect fire from rockets and mortars).

More technologically advanced instruments of warfare, such as long-range rockets and missiles
as well as cyberspace attacks against computer systems, must also be expected to be used
against Danish contingents from all three armed services.

At the same time, according to the Defence Commission Report, the possibility of having to conduct operations against more conventionally organised and operating opponents still exist. The
Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that the Danish Armed Forces must also
maintain the ability to fight and win this type of conflict.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement are also in agreement that the developments in line with
the Defence Commission Report indicate that the demand for Danish contributions to international operations will not diminish in the future and that such operations will often be long-term


-----

in nature. This underscores the need for the operational capabilities of the Danish Armed Forces
– of all services – to be, as a whole, sufficiently robust and capable of a sustained effort in order
to support long-termed international engagements. Moreover, in special situations the Danish
Armed Forces should possess the ability to deploy additional or larger contingents for shorter
periods of time as well as the ability to deploy contingents at short notice in connection with crisis management, humanitarian disasters, evacuation operations, demonstrations of solidarity or
of NATO’s commitment, etc., which can be ensured through, among other things, participation
in NATO´s response forces.

The Defence Commission Report also states that in the future a growing need for the Danish
Armed Forces to be able to contribute to military capacity building is foreseen, both preventively
in order to prevent conflicts and in parallel with, for example, performing stabilisation tasks during a conflict. At the same time, it is expected that also in the future the objective of stabilisation operations – and to a certain extent armed conflicts – can only be achieved by integrating
military and civilian activities in the area of operation. This means, on the one hand, that the already initiated integration efforts must be maintained and broadened. On the other hand, this
aspect entails that the achievement of the goal of a military operation is often dependent on civilian initiatives, such as reconstruction. In order to ensure future military and overall political
success in international operations, it is therefore in general necessary that the Danish Armed
Forces continue to maintain also a certain ability to contribute to reconstruction efforts – particularly in areas of operation where civil reconstruction capacities are unable or unwilling to operate due to an unstable security situation. This may typically occur in cases where the security
situation during a transitional period hampers the ability of the civilian actors to operate.

It follows from the above that the Danish Armed Forces must be able to perform a wide variety
of tasks. The Danish Armed Forces must remain able to participate in difficult and intensive operations, including the continued contribution to the Danish engagement in Afghanistan in the
coming years in accordance with Denmark’s Afghanistan Strategy. However, the Danish Armed
Forces must also preserve and develop the ability to execute other types of stabilisation tasks
and international policing operations, including such mission types as the KFOR mission in Kosovo and the operations against piracy off the Horn of Africa.

**Main Challenges in the Upcoming Defence Agreement Period**

As mentioned, the ongoing transformation of the Danish Armed Forces is to be continued. As
part of this process, the Danish Armed Forces underwent an extensive re-structuring during the
last Defence Agreement period. In the upcoming Defence Agreement period, there is a need to
ensure that this reorganisation is consolidated and that the focused further development of the
structure and tasks of the Danish Armed Forces is continued. In order to enhance the basis for a
continued reorganisation of Danish defence, the already launched measures to improve the financial management of the Danish Armed Forces need to be continued and further enhanced,


-----

and the ability of the Danish Armed Forces to plan and execute tasks in a professional and costeffective manner needs continuous strengthening. This also applies to the Danish Home Guard.

In recent years, there have been significant changes in the conditions in connection with conducting the Danish Armed Forces’ international operations, namely in the form of changes in the
nature of the tactical threats, the greater intensity of missions, the greater number of international operations and their greater distance from Denmark, as well as the wide dispersal of the
contingents within the specific mission areas. These changes have resulted in a present imbalance between the tasks and resources of the Danish Armed Forces, presenting the Danish
Armed Forces with extraordinary and major financial challenges on the threshold of a new Defence Agreement period. On entering the new Defence Agreement period, the Danish Armed
Forces will also have approx. 2,300 vacancies.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that the main challenges in the Defence
Agreement period for 2010-2014 will comprise:

1. The continued consolidation of the Danish Armed Forces’ structure following the extensive reorganisation that took place during the last Defence Agreement period, and the
continued ongoing reorganisation and transformation and thus adjustment of the structure of the Danish Armed Forces in a number of areas.

2. The development in relation to the Danish Armed Forces’ operational tasks and the increasingly demanding conditions in connection with the operations have a great impact
on, among other things, the security of personnel, the equipment investments and the
equipment operation and maintenance. There is thus a need, for example, for equipment
enhancing security, new equipment, climate adaptation, modernisation and updating of
existing equipment as well as equipment for training and instruction purposes. Similarly,
the wear and tear on equipment and the consumption of spare parts and munitions have
risen dramatically in recent years. Action must be taken to rectify this situation.

3. As mentioned, the Danish Armed Forces performs a number of more civilian-oriented
tasks that are of vital importance for society in general. In this regard, the Danish Armed
Forces utilise not only strictly military capabilities but also special purpose-built capabilities. The Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that both types of capability must be utilised in the most appropriate way, both for the society in general and in
regards to the finances of the Danish Armed Forces.

4. Up-to-date and modern defence establishments, training facilities and accommodation
facilities are important for a Danish Armed Forces ready to undergo transformation. Furthermore, a number of the defence establishments are in need of maintenance. The
freeing up of resources for this maintenance work should therefore be incorporated into


-----

the continued efforts of the Danish Armed Forces to perform their tasks in the most optimal way.

5. The efficiency requirements that are placed on the rest of the Danish Armed Forces are
also placed on the Danish Home Guard. Therefore, the Danish Home Guard and the organisation, operation and maintenance of the Danish Home Guard Command must be
adjusted and streamlined.
6. The national military service scheme faces a number of challenges in the future, and the
recruitment efforts must be broadened and focused on the entire youth cohort. A close
examination of the military service scheme is therefore to be launched during the upcoming Defence Agreement period.
7. In recent years, the Danish Armed Forces have worked on improving their efforts within
financial management. These efforts must be intensified so as to ensure a stronger focus
on financial management and efficient performance of tasks by the Danish Armed Forces. Therefore, work will be commenced in order to ensure such a focus.

**The Danish Armed Forces – Structure and Tasks**

In order to enhance the readiness of the Danish Armed Forces to undergo reorganisation and
contribute to meeting the security policy challenges that Denmark faces, this new Defence
Agreement entails the following challenges and further development of the Danish Armed
Forces’ structure:

  - The possibility of merging the officer training academies of the Danish Armed Forces into
a single organisational unit is to be examined.

  - There is to be increased focus on changing how the appropriation and incentive structures in the Danish Armed Forces are organised in relation to structural changes. For example, it must be ensured that the commanders of individual elements are motivated to
run the activities in their unit in a satisfactory and cost-conscious way, which includes
ensuring that there is an incentive also at a local level to optimise structures and processes.

In addition, the Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that, with the aim of ensuring the continued development of the Danish Armed Forces, a committee should be set up to
examine the opportunities for improving the overall defence establishment structure of the Danish Armed Forces in relation to the wish for a continued high level of international engagement,
efficient operation and maintenance, and optimal execution of tasks. In this regard, a study is to
be conducted to determine whether the Danish Armed Forces’ present operational and geographical structure has adverse impacts on the Danish Defence personnel and personnel support
structure, also taking into regard for example the recruitment, retention, training and operational use of Danish Defence personnel. If this study should reveal significant problem areas or


-----

future challenges, proposals are to be made on solving or meeting such problem areas or challenges. The results of the committee’s work are to be presented to the Parties to the Defence
Agreement no later than autumn 2011. The terms of reference for the study are to be presented
to the Parties to the Defence Agreement.

As mentioned in the Defence Commission Report, the Danish Armed Forces’ capabilities are deployed in the form of units, elements and individuals, as the aim should be to draw broadly from
the operational structure of the Danish Armed Forces, especially with the intention of distributing the strain placed on the personnel and structure of the Danish Armed Forces evenly. Thus,
the sustaining of deployed capabilities corresponding to up to some 2,000 soldiers, sailors and
airmen could be achieved through a combination of some of the examples described below. The
examples are by no means exhaustive. Note is made of the fact that the composition of the individual force contributions, including their size, etc., will most often need to be adjusted according to the possibilities for cooperation with other countries.

  - The Army should be capable of simultaneously deploying up to two units organised as
battlegroups, as well as a number of smaller contingents. In terms of the structure of the
battlegroups, their composition will be tailored to task and they will thus vary in size,
typically from approx. 300 and up to approx. 800 soldiers. Similarly, smaller-sized contingents of company size – typically approx. 150 soldiers – are also to be configured to
task.

  - The Navy should, with the commissioning of three new frigates, be capable of simultaneously deploying two frigates, support ships or ocean patrol vessels. Additionally, occasional deployment of smaller contingents in the form of, for example, Flyvefisken-class
vessels (Standard Flex 300) or the Royal Danish Navy’s Task Group is a possibility.

  - The Air Force should be capable of simultaneously deploying up to three contingents,
which will typically consist of transport aircraft, helicopters, combat aircraft, as well as
surveillance and early warning contingents. Furthermore, the Air Force should be capable
of contributing with an expeditionary staff along with a range of specialised personnel in
the form of, for example, support crews for loading and unloading aircraft as well as for
air base operations, etc.

  - Additional contributions from the Army, Navy, Air Force and Home Guard might encompass Special Operations forces, smaller units and elements designed for military capacity
building, as well as individuals dispatched to staffs and as observers, etc.

In general all contingents should be capable of performing normally occurring tasks within all
three mission types: armed conflict, stabilisation tasks and international policing. Conditions in
the specific mission areas – e.g. Afghanistan – along with high intensity levels, large geographi

-----

cal distances, poor infrastructure and difficult climatic conditions may lead to increased strain
and additional expenditures and in turn reduce the overall capacity for sustaining deployed
forces or for the deployment of additional forces.

At the same time, relatively expensive, equipment-heavy contingents such as ships and aircraft
– which contribute to the operational execution of tasks with an effect that cannot solely be
measured in terms of the number of soldiers, sailors and airmen deployed in the relevant contingents – could in periods reduce the financial scope for deploying a large number of soldiers,
sailors and airmen.

Operational structure, tasks and capabilities

The Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that in general, the resource allocation
to the Danish Armed Forces should to a higher extent follow the current tasks bestowed on
them.

Army
Experiences from deploying Army contingents in international operations show that the Army
primarily deploys units of battalion size, to which elements of all the branches of arms of the
Army can be assigned: so-called battlegroups. However, so far this fact has not been adequately
reflected in the Army’s operational structure, leading to a practice of Army units being broken
up and reconfigured from deployment to deployment in connection with international operations.

On this basis, there is agreement that the Army’s operational structure should be focused
around the battlegroup level and modified so as to meet the requirements of long-term deployments in international operations. Furthermore, the areas where the present manpower level is
too small are to be strengthened, which in turn will enhance the ability to maintain the simultaneous deployment of several contingents in long-term international operations and thus enable
the Army to meet the defined level of ambition.

Besides the ability to deploy battlegroups, the Army must maintain an ability at longer notice to
deploy a brigade-sized formation. Support units must be modular and capable of being deployed
within the framework of battlegroups. The Army maintains a fire-support capability that is designed for deployment in international operations.

Navy
The ability of the Navy to perform international tasks must be developed. In the previous Defence Agreement period, large ships were procured for the Navy in the form of frigates, support
ships and ocean patrol vessels.


-----

Thus, with a view to enhancing the ability of the Navy to participate in international operations,
to support ground operations and to perform tasks in the North Atlantic and the Arctic, new
ship-based helicopters that can both enhance the capabilities of the larger ships when going into
action as well as replace the present Lynx helicopters, will be procured during the upcoming Defence Agreement period. A helicopter type will be procured that can flexibly support the units in
carrying out their tasks both internationally and in the North Atlantic, i.e. perform tasks in relation to transport, surveillance, and search and rescue operations. Emphasis is placed on helicopters that can, among other things, enhance the capability for supporting ground operations.

Furthermore, the Navy’s ability to perform tasks in the North Atlantic region must be further
strengthened by, in the long term, replacing the last inspection cutter in Greenland with a new
and significantly larger patrol vessel. This must also be seen in the light of the altered traffic
pattern near Greenland and the subsequent necessity for being able to operate further from the
coast.

Air Force
The ability of the Air Force to carry out long-term deployment of air force contingents in international operations must be developed. The existing support structure is to be adjusted so as to
enhance the capability of sustaining fixed-wing aircraft or helicopter contributions deployed outside Denmark for longer periods of time, including the deployment of C-130J Hercules aircraft.

The helicopter troop transport capability is in the process of being established in the form of
EH101 helicopters in the troop transport version. There is agreement that this capability is to be
established and made available for deployment in international operations. This includes establishing the necessary logistical support for such a capability.

Special note on combat aircraft
In connection with national operations, tasks will need to be performed in the form of sovereignty enforcement in the Danish national air space and of surveillance and patrolling of areas of
national interest on a short as well as on a long-term basis. There will in the future continue to
be relevant missions for combat aircraft in connection with all types of international tasks.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement are therefore in agreement that the Danish Armed Forces
must maintain a combat aircraft capability for upholding the sovereignty of domestic air space
as well as the surveillance and patrol of areas of national interest. Furthermore, the Danish
Armed Forces must continue to maintain the capability for deploying combat aircraft in international operations.

There is agreement that the F-16 structure is to be modified in the upcoming Defence Agreement period with the aim of reducing running costs, which includes reducing the number of operational F-16 aircraft.


-----

The Parties to the Defence Agreement attaches importance on the process of procuring new
combat aircraft being organised as an open process based on an independent basis for decision
that contributes to creating a public debate. See also Appendix 1 for a description of the process.

Joint armed services solutions

Officer training academies
The possibility of merging the officer training academies of the Danish Armed Forces into a single organisational unit is to be examined.

Helicopters
The Navy and Air Force helicopters are to be integrated into the Helicopter Wing at Karup Air
Base, whereby all Danish military helicopters are brought together in a single organisation.

Military capacity building
Experiences from deploying the Danish Armed Forces in stabilisation operations clearly indicate
that the building of competent security structures locally, including military training capabilities,
is crucial for the success of an international mission. Therefore, there is a substantial need for
the Danish Armed Forces to have the capability of training and instructing local security forces,
enabling them to acquire the capability themselves to resolve local conflicts and take responsibility for performing security tasks. This task of providing training and instruction may encompass
a wide variety of activities, ranging from, for example, training foreign personnel in Denmark
and deploying advisory and training staff contributions to countries with military development
needs, to deploying training teams in order to train local security forces in the mission area before, during and after a potential conflict. The Danish Armed Forces have until now not had capacities dedicated to performing such tasks. In this respect, the capability for performing such
tasks has partly been limited and partly had to be established from time to time by seconding
personnel from other parts of the Danish Armed Forces. This has contributed to the strain
placed on the personnel. The Danish Armed Forces will to a certain extent continue to participate in more traditional capacity building tasks, which are carried out, for example, in the Balkans, the Ukraine and Georgia.

On this basis, there is agreement that the Danish Armed Forces’ ability to perform capacity
building tasks is to be strengthened, so as to enable the Danish Armed Forces in the future to
contribute further to the performance of this type of task internationally, particularly within the
framework of the UN. Therefore, capacities in the Danish Armed Forces are to be dedicated to
capacity building. Likewise, operational capacities in the three armed services and in the Danish
Home Guard are to remain able to perform capacity building tasks as and when required.


-----

Computer Network Operations
Like other parts of modern society, the Danish Armed Forces will become increasingly vulnerable
to, among other things, hacker attacks on their information and communications infrastructure.
Likewise, the use of cyberspace in general is rapidly gaining increasing importance in connection
with military operations. Cyberspace has, in other words, become a battlespace. This development therefore places increasing demands on the ability of the Danish Armed Forces to take defensive and offensive measures in cyberspace.

On this basis, there is agreement that a Computer Network Operations (CNO) capability under
the auspices of the Danish Ministry of Defence should be established with the aim of defending
the ministry’s own use of cyberspace and preventing opponents from exploiting it. Such a capability should be able to be put into action in support of both domestic as well as international
operations. Furthermore, a CNO capability under the auspices of the Danish Ministry of Defence
must possess the ability to work in conjunction with other Danish capabilities in this area and
with corresponding capabilities in other countries. The elements of the CNO capability should be
placed in one location with the aim of achieving maximum possible synergy and establishing a
technical environment that is sufficiently robust and adequately dimensioned.

Planning capability in relation to, for example, the UN
A planning capability in relation to, for example, humanitarian operations that can encompass
military contributions from all armed services and contributions from relevant civil authorities,
etc. is deemed likely to be in greater demand in the future, particularly within the framework of
UN operations.

On this basis, there is agreement that the tactical command staffs of the three armed services
should be made available for the UN as a planning capability in connection with UN operations,
including as a replacement for SHIRBRIG’s capability in this area. In this role, the command
staffs can be deployed individually or as a collective capability.

Rooted in this capability, the three armed services’ tactical command staffs are to be developed
in order to – as a collective capability – acquire the ability to plan and lead the deployment of
relevant capacities from the combined national preparedness capabilities, for example in connection with humanitarian deployments, evacuation operations, etc., materialising in response
to, for example, natural disasters. Such tasks are anticipated to be undertaken either independently at a national level, for example in the case of an evacuation operation, or as a contribution
to a multinational response.

On the basis of the Danish Armed Forces’ existing structure, capabilities and tactical command
staffs, the ability to configure a temporary Task Force that can prepare and deploy, depending
on the situation and the task, relevant capacities in connection with humanitarian deployments,
evacuation operations etc, is to be established. The ability to form this Task Force will both en

-----

hance the Danish ability to carry out humanitarian deployments and evacuation operations, etc.
and enhance the Danish Armed Forces’ ability to plan and lead complex and joint operations.

Special note on Greenland and the Arctic
As mentioned earlier, the melting of the polar ice-cap as a result of global warming and the resulting increased activity in the Arctic will change the region’s geostrategic significance and thus
entail more tasks for the Danish Armed Forces.

Regarding the North Atlantic operational commands, the structure is to be streamlined in order
to take into consideration the actual and expected developments in and around Greenland and
the Faroe Islands. The Greenland Command and the Faroe Command are to be combined into a
joint service Arctic Command. The most appropriate location of such an Arctic Command is to be
considered and determined. In this connection it is to be examined whether the base at Thule
may play a larger role in regard to the tasks performed in and around Greenland by the Danish
Armed Forces in cooperation with other partner countries. The modification of the North Atlantic
operational commands is to take place in a dialogue with Greenland and the Faroe Islands,
where all parties are to be involved and have an opportunity to influence the process.

In addition, an Arctic Response Force is to be designated from the existing capabilities of the
Danish Armed Forces, which, depending on the situation, can be established and composed of
units from all armed services that possess an Arctic capability. The response force will contribute
to increase the Danish expertise in the area and will be deployable in Greenland or in international tasks undertaken in an Arctic environment.

There is agreement that, as a result of the expected increased amount of traffic and level of activity during the upcoming Defence Agreement period, a proper risk analysis of the maritime environment in and around Greenland is to be conducted.

There is agreement that during the Defence Agreement period a comprehensive analysis of the
future tasks of the Danish Armed Forces in the Arctic is to be conducted, including an analysis of
whether or not advantages exist in entering into closer cooperation with other Nordic countries,
the USA, Canada, Russia and the UK regarding surveillance and other similar tasks. The analysis
is also to establish whether or not surveillance and other similar systems - such as exist in other
maritime regions - could also be implemented and further developed in regard to shipping near
Greenland. The implementation of such systems is expected to be able to improve the ability of
the Danish Armed Forces to develop an assessment of the situation in and around Greenland
and thereby focus the deployment of available operational capabilities.

In connection with the aforementioned analysis of the future tasks in the Arctic region, consideration can also be given to utilising, for example, combat aircraft in the occasional performance
of tasks in relation to surveillance and upholding sovereignty in and around Greenland.


-----

Furthermore, options for enhancing the contribution of patrol aircraft to the operations in and
around Greenland in the short term are to be investigated during the upcoming Defence Agreement period. Additionally, an investigation is to be conducted to determine whether, in the
longer term, unmanned aircraft systems and satellite-based surveillance could take on some of
the tasks that patrol aircraft currently perform.

The Danish Armed Forces support structure

The Danish Armed Forces’ support structure and support processes have in recent years undergone extensive trimming and streamlining through a centralisation of the support activity into
joint military functional services. The concept of the functional services is to be retained.

There is, however, agreement that the business model for the support area and the functional
services is to be further developed, thereby clarifying the customer-supplier relationship between the various units of the Danish Armed Forces and the functional services. This entails,
among other things, the establishment of relevant agreements, management tools, etc. Furthermore, an appropriate incentive structure should be established for the military units that are
customers of the functional services, so that the units are encouraged to use the fewest possible
resources on support activities.

As a point of departure, the support activity must be planned and implemented with due consideration for the needs and decentralised conditions of the operational units. At the same time,
the opportunities of local commanders to use support services for the benefit of local needs
must be strengthened.

In connection with Defence Agreement 2005-2009, it was decided to sell Sjælsmark Barracks
and to make efforts to exchange and decommission Hevring Live Firing Range. Since then, the
Danish Armed Forces’ need for live firing ranges and training areas as well as defence establishments has, however, increased, partly due to the substantial need to provide training in connection with preparing personnel for international operations as well as the Danish Armed
Forces’ increasing amounts of equipment. Therefore, in the upcoming Defence Agreement period the Danish Armed Forces will have a continued need for Hevring Live Firing Range. On this
basis, there is agreement that Hevring Live Firing Range is not to be sold but to remain in use
by the Danish Armed Forces. With regard to Hevring, it is a priority that the use of the live firing
range by the Danish Armed Forces does not cause neighbours, etc. unnecessary nuisance and
inconvenience. Based on an overall assessment, including the financial situation in relation to a
potential sale, Sjælsmark Barracks is not to be sold.

The defence establishments of the Danish Armed Forces are a part of the combined overall facilities of the Danish society. The Parties to the Defence Agreement therefore agree that the
general public must as far as possible have access to the areas and facilities of the Danish


-----

Armed Forces in those periods when such areas and facilities are not used by the Danish Armed
Forces. This access should be subject to reasonable conditions that contribute to promoting the
general public’s use of such areas and facilities and emphasise the interplay between the Danish
Armed Forces and the Danish society in general..

The Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that in the upcoming Defence Agreement period DKK 100 million is to be earmarked for maintaining the militaryhistorical buildings
of the Danish Armed Forces, such as the Nyboder residential area.

An analysis is to be conducted of the overall task portfolio of the Defence Health Service and its
interfaces with the public health care system in order to identify potential efficiency benefits for
the Danish Armed Forces as a whole.

**The Danish Armed Forces Personnel**

The Danish Armed Forces must continue to focus on personnel as their most important resource.

On this basis, the Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement to continue the already
launched initiatives in the personnel field that are designed to ensure that the Danish Armed
Forces are able to recruit, train and retain the necessary personnel. In addition, it is to be examined whether there is basis for further initiatives directed at families of deployed soldiers, sailors
and airmen.

The tasks of Danish Armed Forces and the conditions under which these tasks are executed
have changed significantly in recent years. On this basis, the Parties to the Defence Agreement
are in agreement that a study should be conducted to determine whether the composition and
administration of the payments to the personnel is still up to date or whether an alternative
more simple and less bureaucratic system, including in regards to bonuses, might be agreed
upon.

Special note on recruitment
Seen in the light of, among other things, the current problems regarding manpower in the Danish Armed Forces, together with the complex and intense environment that it is expected Danish
military personnel will have to work in while conducting future Danish defence tasks, the Parties
to the Defence Agreement find that it should be ensured in the future that the Danish Armed
Forces have the best and broadest foundation for recruitment. The recruitment efforts must be
focused to a further extent on the entire annual cohort of young people and not only on the
young people who annually serve their national military service in the Danish Armed Forces.


-----

Women in the Danish Armed Forces
The Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that the Danish Armed Forces must further develop the present initiatives being taken to ensure a higher percentage of female personnel. Using, for example, external assistance, this development includes a continuation of the focus on those cultural and traditional aspects in the Danish Armed Forces that can affect the opportunities to recruit and retain female personnel.

The national military service scheme
The Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that the national military service training should be further improved. The training of conscripts who wish to continue on in the Danish
Armed Forces is to be strengthened in the direction of their coming tasks, while the training of
the conscripts who do not continue on in the Danish Armed Forces is to be strengthened in the
direction of performing tasks related to the combined national emergency and disaster management response system. In this way, for those conscripts signing response force contracts in
continuation of their conscript’s training, the final part of the conscripts’ training can be targeted
towards their subsequent response force training.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement also find that, in the future, national military service faces
a number of challenges. Furthermore, the Parties to the Defence Agreement have noted the fact
that a number of comparable European countries have discontinued nationnal military service,
while other comparable countries have decided to maintain national military service.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement are therefore in agreement that a study of the future of
national military service should be conducted during the upcoming Defence Agreement period.
As part of the study, the present and future challenges of the national military service should be
identified and addressed. The study should analyse how national military service can be optimally organised in the future and also examine the Danish Armed Forces’ opportunities for potentially performing defence-related tasks without national military service or with an increased
intake of conscripts. The study should also incorporate aspects relating to the age of deployed
Danish soldiers at the time of deployment and the possibility for also making it obligatory for
women who are citizents of or resident in Denmark to attend Danish Armed Forces Day in the
year they turn 18 years of age. Furthermore, the study should also incorporate the significance
of national military service in terms of the people’s will to defend and the rooting of the Danish
Armed Forces in the Danish society, along with the “character building” and educative significance that national military service has for conscripts.

Reserve officers
Experiences from the Defence Agreement period 2005-2009 show that the Danish Armed Forces
cannot function effectively without an active and well-trained pool of reserve officers and other
reserve personnel. Reserve officers and other personnel from the reserve constitute both an important personnel reserve for the Danish Armed Forces – also in connection with the Danish


-----

Armed Forces’ international engagement – and a valuable capability that can contribute to
strengthening the connection between the Danish Armed Forces and the rest of the Danish society.

During the upcoming Defence Agreement period and partly in order to maintain an adequate level of professionalism, it must be ensured that reserve officers as a rule are designated for specific positions in the Danish Armed Forces’ operational structure. In order to meet the need for
reserve officers, the Danish Armed Forces established a new reserve officer training programme
in 2009, partly targeted at using reserve officers for training conscripts. In extension of this programme, further structural in-service training and continuing education programmes for reserve
officers are to be introduced during the Defence Agreement period, with the aim of increasing
the opportunities of reserve officers to be utilised in the Danish Armed Forces’ operational structure.

The military psychology field
The capacity within the field of military psychology (psychological crisis services) has increased
in keeping with the developments in relation to international operations. As the present intensity
of operations must be expected to continue, and thus the strain on personnel, there is agreement that this field should be monitored closely with the aim of ensuring an optimal and adequate performance of tasks. In this regard, it should be considered whether and how the psychological assistance provided to personnel can be optimised, for example by improved screening of applicants and a more proactive effort in relation to posted and returning personnel, or
similar. In this connection, lessons learned from other countries will be incorporated.

Veterans policy
The Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that a working group is to be set up to
draw up proposals for an official Danish veterans policy, which is to be ready by the middle of
2010. The working group is to be anchored in the Danish Ministry of Defence and should in connection with the formulation of the policy itself partly examine the opportunities for, in society in
general, increasing support for deployed military personnel and their families before, during and
after the deployment, and partly examine the opportunities for enhancing recognition of their efforts. In order to ensure optimal conditions for the study, all relevant ministries, public authorities and organisations should be incorporated in the working group’s work.

A veterans policy should, among other things, describe the range of options available for help
and support in dealing with potential psychological and social strains as well as physical injuries
sustained during a deployment. Lastly, the policy should take into account the need to ensure
that the contribution and effort of the deployed soldier, sailor or airman is valued and appreciated, and society’s responsibility for this is to be made clear.

A proportion of the present support to returning soldiers, sailors and airmen is facilitated
through the help provided by the Veterans Support Organisation (Kammeratstøtteordningen)


-----

under the association “The Blue Berets” (De Blå Baretter). In light of the expected continued
high intensity of international operations, the Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that initiatives targeted at veterans are important and should be continued and further developed in cooperation with professional organisations and other charitable foundations such as
“The Blue Berets”.

On this basis, the Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement to establish a funding
pool of DKK 8 million in the Defence Agreement period which, subject to the specific conditions
defined by the Parties to the Defence Agreement, can be used to support initiatives taken by associations, etc. for the benefit of veterans. In addition, an unchanged price-indexed amount of
DKK 2.2 million per year is to continue to be earmarked for the work carried out by the “The
Blue Berets” for the benefit of personnel that have been deployed on international duty, conditioned in part on “The Blue Berets” maintaining its affiliation with the Veterans Support Organisation.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement have noted that the Danish Armed Forces, at the request
of the Danske Soldaterforeningers Landsraad (Danish Ex-servicemen’s Association), provide
premises for military personnel associations to offer support and help to ex-servicemen and
women who have been deployed on missions abroad. The Danish military authorities provide
three premises at different locations in Denmark free of charge to the Danske Soldaterforeningers Landsraad, which has responsibility for running and staffing the premises.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that the Danish Armed Forces’ pilot
project regarding a three-month reintegration and readjustment period for response forcecontracted soldiers who are part of returning units from Afghanistan appears to be a valuable
supplement to other initiatives designed to facilitate the reintegration and readjustment of Danish servicemen and women returning from international duty. The decision to possibly make the
scheme permanent should be taken as soon as the results of the pilot period are ready.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement find that the future commemoration of 5 September as
“Soldatens Dag” (National Soldier’s Day) is a valuable display of the Danish society’s recognition
for the service and contributions rendered by serving personnel and veterans.

**The Danish Armed Forces’ Equipment**

As mentioned above, developments in the Danish Armed Forces’ operational tasks and the ever
more demanding conditions in connection with the operations put a huge strain on equipment.

Operation, maintenance, training and stocks
The ever more demanding conditions to which the Danish Armed Forces’ capabilities and equipment are exposed during deployment have led to increased wear and tear on defence equip

-----

ment and a dramatic increase in the consumption of munitions and spare parts, etc. The Parties
to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that in the future the Danish Armed Forces must
have at their disposal adequate resources for operating and maintaining the equipment that
forms part of the Danish Armed Forces’ structure.

The need to have the best possible equipment available for the deployed forces has led to the
procurement of more equipment for deployed forces, but has simultaneously led to a shortage
of resources for procuring corresponding equipment for the domestically-based training. The
Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that the quantity and quality of the equipment available for domestically-based training should be adequate to enable not only the units
preparing for specific deployments to have access to the same types of equipment used in the
mission areas, but also the other units in training and those standing ready to be deployed to
have access to modern and relevant equipment. In this way, the Danish Armed Forces’ capabilities can be trained according to the principle “Train as You Fight”.

The increasing intensity of the missions in which the Danish Armed Forces have participated and
the increased consumption of munitions and spare parts have meant that the Danish Armed
Forces’ stock levels in important areas have become so depleted that they are now at an unsatisfactorily low level. On this basis, the Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that
the equipment capacity and stock supplies of the Danish Armed Forces should as soon as possible be expanded and proportioned in relation to current conditions and needs.

Equipment procurement
There is agreement that the ongoing professionalisation of the Danish Armed Forces’ equipment
procurement should continue, including by continuing to make use of external assistance in areas where the Danish Armed Forces’ own competencies are deemed to be inadequate. External
quality assurance must continue to be used in situations where the size or risk of the project
based on a holistic assessment makes this appropriate. The scale of external quality assurance
should be balanced in relation to the substantial consumption of resources that is typically associated with the use of such external quality assurance.

In addition, there is agreement that in connection with equipment procurement the Danish Armed Forces must continue to focus on minimising risks.

In the Defence Agreement period, a number of major equipment acquisitions will be made, partly to replace worn-out and obsolete equipment as well as equipment that has been lost during
combat operations, and partly to ensure that the Danish Armed Forces have at their disposal
adequate equipment to run domestically-based training, thereby ensuring that the units which
are preparing for a specific deployment have access to the same type of equipment that will be
used in the mission areas.

In the Defence Agreement period, the disposition and disbursement budget for equipment acquisitions constitutes an average of approx. DKK 3 billion per year (2010 price-level).


-----

For the Army, equipment acquisitions generally comprise, for example:

  - Fire-support systems. This includes examining, for example, the possibility of upgrading
the Danish Armed Forces’ rocket launchers to GMLRS standard, as experience from Afghanistan shows that GMLRS can deliver precise and effective fire support to deployed
force elements.

  - Armoured personnel carriers and other armoured vehicles

  - Radio and communications equipment

  - Engineering equipment

  - Individual equipment, including personal protection equipment.

For the Navy, equipment acquisitions generally comprise, for example:

  - Ship-based helicopters

  - Small vessels and ships, including tugboats, target towing vessels and diving vessels

  - Weapons systems and ammunition
The last inspection cutter in Greenland is expected to remain in commission until approx. 2017.
Its replacement will therefore not be addressed until the next coming Defence Agreement period.

For the Air Force, equipment acquisitions generally comprise, for example:

  - Supplementary equipment for EH-101 helicopters

  - Radar and control systems

  - Communications and identification systems

The needs and opportunities for equipment acquisitions are to be assessed regularly throughout
the Defence Agreement period and the procurement plan is to be adjusted according to need.

Major equipment acquisitions and possible adjustments to the procurement plan are to be discussed among the Parties to the Defence Agreement. The Minister of Defence is to secure appropriations for major equipment acquisitions in the Folketing’s Finance Committee.

Cluster munitions
In accordance with the Convention on Cluster Munitions (Oslo Convention), Denmark has committed itself to destroying the Danish stockpiles of cluster munitions. The Danish Armed Forces’
cluster munitions for artillery and rocket launchers have already been taken out of operational
use and are no longer available for use in operations. In accordance with the Government’s Report to the Folketing, the destruction of the Danish stockpile of cluster munitions will be implemented when the preconditions for such destruction are fulfilled. It is also the Danish Armed
Forces’ expectation that the costs of destruction will gradually fall over time, as the international
market for destruction of such munitions evolves. On this basis, there is agreement that the destruction of the cluster munitions is not to be implemented during the upcoming Defence
Agreement period.


-----

**The Danish Armed Forces’ Civilian-Oriented Tasks**

The Danish Armed Forces perform two types of civilian-oriented tasks: civilian tasks of an authoritative nature that fall within the auspice of the Danish Ministry of Defence, such as the operation of the national ice-breaking services, national maritime environmental surveillance and
the state maritime pollution control; and occasional tasks for which the national civilian capabilities in the particular area are either inadequate or less well-suited than the national military capabilities.

The general rule is that the Danish Armed Forces’ capabilities are dimensioned for performing
the tasks of an authoritative nature that fall within the auspice of the Danish Ministry of Defence, and in addition contribute to performing occasional other tasks provided the Danish
Armed Forces’ capabilities are not engaged elsewhere and where the Danish Armed Forces’ capabilities are those best-suited for performing such tasks.

Search and rescue service
The Danish Armed Forces’ helicopter rescue capability is used predominantly to provide support
to the civilian community. This helicopter rescue capability must continue to operate and, in due
consideration of its primary task, support the community through performing tasks relevant to
the helicopter capability. Given the phasing in of the modern EH101 rescue helicopter, which
possesses greater performance, there is agreement that during the Defence Agreement period it
should be examined how task performance can be streamlined through, for example, differentiation of the level of readiness according to the time of year and traffic patterns. Furthermore, it is
to be examined in this connection whether the number of rescue helicopter stations can be reduced and their location optimised without diminishing the overall rescue capability. Lastly, the
opportunities are to be examined for further utilising the Naval Home Guard’s and Air Force
Home Guard’s capability in this area.

Maritime environment protection capability
The Danish Armed Forces’ overall maritime environment protection capability, including the opportunities for further utilising the Danish Home Guard’s capability within this area, must continue to be assigned priority, in that it must continue to be ensured that the marine environmental protection task is planned and executed in the most appropriate way in the future. In
this connection, priority must also be assigned to improving the benefit and effect of the airborne surveillance of the marine environment.

There is agreement that the Home Guard’s maritime environment protection capability during
the Defence Agreement period must be strengthened. This is to be partly achieved by implementing the recommendations of the capability study conducted of the maritime environment
protection capability, including:

- Improving the equipment of Naval Home Guard vessels in general with the aim of facilitating
the effective performance of environmental protection tasks.


-----

- Examining the opportunities to enhance the Home Guard’s capability to perform environmental protection tasks in the coastal zone, including oil spill recovery and detection capability.

- Examining whether the Naval Home Guard fully or partially can man and possibly take over
responsibility for the Danish Armed Forces’ new shallow-water environmental protection vessel.

- Insofar as the ongoing pilot project regarding hull extension and refitting of existing Naval
Home Guard vessels has the expected success, hull extension and refitting of more of these
vessels in the Defence Agreement period will be considered..

- Utilising the Air Force Home Guard’s aircraft for maritime environmental surveillance, etc.

The Home Guard’s funds for operating and maintaining equipment is to be adjusted accordingly.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement have noted the use of, among other things, satellite imagery as a supplement to airborne maritime surveillance. This and other similar measures must
where possible be implemented and developed with a view to improving the efficiency of operations in the area.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement have also noted that the new fisheries inspection ship of
the Danish Directorate of Fisheries is built with an environmental protection capability. The Parties to the Defence Agreement find that consideration should be given during the Defence
Agreement period to whether a further fisheries inspection ship could be equipped with this capability. Corresponding considerations should be made in relation to other state vessels, including the inspection vessels of the Danish Maritime Safety Administration.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement also note that a number of further initiatives in the area,
such as the Navy’s ”STOP OIL SPILLS” campaign, which, besides improving the efficiency of the
surveillance, are also judged to have a preventive effect.

**The Danish Home Guard**

The primary aim, identity and relevance of the Danish Home Guard as a voluntary military organisation must continue to be founded on supporting the operational tasks of the Danish
Armed Forces as well as contributing to the overall national emergency and disaster management response system, on the basis of a popular, voluntary commitment. The organisation of
the Home Guard and the Home Guard Command, however, is to be modified and made more efficient in the short term, so that it is organised according to the same organisational and leadership principles as the corresponding staffs of the armed forces and with the same principal requirements to efficiency improvements and structural adjustments, including personnel reductions.


-----

During the Defence Agreement period, opportunities are to be examined for further enhancing
the cooperation between the Home Guard Command and Defence Command Denmark. The top
leadership of the Home Guard and the Danish Armed Forces must jointly draw up a proposal for
such cooperation.

The Home Guard should focus its contribution on the domestic commitments of the Armed
Forces, first and foremost on guarding responsibilities as well as with a focus on civilian-oriented
tasks and the maritime environment protection.

However, the Home Guard must continue and, where possible, increase its contribution to the
Armed Forces’ international tasks in terms of, among other things, guard duty and other relevant functions, not least activities in connection with civil reconstruction supporting the Armed
Forces as well as other cooperation partners. Furthermore, the Home Guard can provide valuable support to the Danish Armed Forces’ intenational engagement by in periods relieving units
from the Danish Armed Forces that have been deployed in international operations, for example
in relation to guard duties, driving duties, ammunition supply service, communication service
and staff functions.

Based on the above, the Home Guard’s national contribution is likewise to continue to be developed in support of Denmark’s general emergency and disaster management response system
through an efficient utilisation of the Home Guard’s combined capabilities.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that it should be ensured that adequate
compensation is offered to volunteers to cover lost earnings, inconveniences, etc. when volunteer Home Guard personnel provide long-term service in support of the Danish Armed Forces
and the Danish society in general.

The requirements demanded of active Home Guard membership in the highest priority units will
be increased and, to this end, it is to be ensured that the relevant educational and training requirements for the various types of units are maintained and that appropriations are used efficiently.

On the basis of the above described developments, the composition of the Home Guard units is
to be modified and additionally streamlined in relation to assisting the Danish Armed Forces in
their tasks and participating in the combined national emergency and disaster management response system, for example through support provided from the Police Home Guard as well as
performing guarding responsibilities. In this respect, the Infrastructure Home Guard is to undergo development. Furthermore, the role of the Home Guard is to be strengthened and developed to facilitate the performance of territorial waters surveillance and environmental tasks.
Lastly, opportunities are to be examined for developing the Home Guard’s capabilities to provide
additional support to the Danish Armed Forces’ execution of tasks, for example support to manning the ice-breaking service. With an increase of the reserve-officer capacity, it is, moreover,


-----

possible to conduct a qualitative strengthening and streamlining of the regional command structure.

For the Home Guard, equipment acquisitions in the Defence Agreement period generally comprise, for example:

- Vehicles as well as communications and environmental equipment, including equipment for
implementing anti-pollution measures in the coastal zone.

- New construction or refitting of vessels for the Naval Home Guard, with the aim of enhancing the environmental capability. This includes examining opportunities for hull extension of
more 800-class vessels.

- Individual equipment

**Other Areas**

Funding for Global stabilisation efforts
The Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement on the need to strengthen and expand
the overall ability of the Danish State to carry out stabilisation, reconstruction and capacity
building projects in conflict areas.

From 2010, a total of DKK 20 million is to be earmarked annually under Section 6: Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Beginning 2010, the appropriation is to be financed by an annual contribution of DKK 10 million from the Danish Ministry of Defence and DKK 10 million from within the
Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ total budget. With the aim of ensuring a coordinated use of
the DKK 20 million annually, an inter-ministerial coordination body is to be established from
among representatives from the Danish Ministry of Defence and the Danish Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, which is to decide how the specific funds are to be used.

In addition, the Ministry of Defence is to allocate DKK 65 million annually within the framework
of the Danish Armed Forces’ security cooperation programme to supporting broader stabilisation
efforts, security cooperation, etc. Similarly, the Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs is to allocate
DKK 65 million annually within the framework of Danish development assistance to supporting
broader stabilisation efforts, etc.

Likewise, the inter-ministerial coordination body is to be assigned the task of coordinating and
ensuring synergy between initiatives financed by the two appropriations. The coordination body
is to be responsible for the overall coordination of the two appropriations. Responsibility for the
administration of the specific appropriation will continue to be clearly assigned.

In total, DKK 150 million may be used annually towards stabilisation efforts, security cooperation, etc. (see table below).


-----

**Earmarked Appropriations – Global, broader stabilisation efforts, etc.**

**Annual**
**DKK million (2010 price-level)** **expenditure**

Funding under Section 6: Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs – for stabilisation efforts, etc.
(not development assistance) 20

Focusing of appropriation within the Danish Armed Forces’ security cooperation programme 65

Focusing of appropriation within development assistance 65

**Total** **150**

National Museum of Military History
With the aim of ensuring the necessary coherence between the Danish Armed Forces and the
activities of the museum, a survey is to examine within the defence agreement period the feasibility and desirability of returning the responsiblity for the National Museum of Military History,
which comprises the Royal Danish Arsenal Museum and the Royal Danish Naval Museum, from
the Danish Ministry of Culture to the Danish Ministry of Defence.

Military manual on the laws of armed conflict
With the aim of further strengthening the Danish Armed Forces’ education and training in, and
use of, humanitarian international law and the laws of armed conflict, a Danish military manual
is to be drawn up on the area. Before embarking on the work, it should be decided what type of
military manual Denmark should thus have, as the Parties to the Defence Agreement are in
agreement that the manual should provide value added in relation to the status quo.

Danish Armed Forces and environmental considerations
The Danish Armed Forces are expected to contribute to the realisation of the Danish Government’s goals within the climate and environmental field.

The Danish Armed Forces’ focus on initiatives aimed at reducing the Danish Armed Forces’ overall environmental footprint and energy consumption is to be further enhanced. In specific terms,
environmental leadership in the Danish Armed Forces is to be focused on reducing the Danish
Armed Forces’ environmental impacts. As part of the efforts in this regard, a climate strategy is
to be formulated that, among other things, sets specific targets in relation to the Danish Armed
Forces’ CO2-reducing initiatives, whereby the Danish Armed Forces in the future integrate environmental and climate considerations into their activities, buildings, etc. where this makes sense.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement note in this connection the participation of the Danish
Armed Forces in research projects, etc. that seek to reduce particle emissions from large diesel
engines, in particular ship engines.


-----

The Danish Armed Forces and research
The Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement on the continued need to ensure that
an unchanged amount in the Danish Ministry of Defence budget is earmarked annually for conducting specific defence and security policy projects at the Danish Institute for International
Studies (DIIS).

In addition, the appropriation allocated to the Danish Institute for Military Studies (DIMS), which
is organisatorically placed under the Royal Danish Defence College (RDDC), is to continue unchanged compared to 2009, in that the appropriation is to be used specifically to meet current
defence and security policy research needs. Under this appropriation, the Parties to the Defence
Agreement can request the implementation of analyses, etc. It is to be examined whether it
makes greater sense to locate DIMS under the University of Copenhagen or another university.

Legislation
The Act on the Aims, Tasks and Organisation, etc. of the Danish Armed Forces as well as any
other relevant laws are to be adjusted in accordance with the present Defence Agreement and
with a point of departure in the Danish Defence Commission’s related recommendations.

Annual security policy report and debate in the Folketing (Danish Parliament)
The Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that there should be an ongoing security policy debate in the Folketing. If the Danish security policy is to gain a foothold in the minds
of the population, there is a need for the Folketing to discuss regularly what the Danish security
policy strategy should be.

For use in these discussions, the Government is to draw up an annual report on the Danish security policy. In step with the increasing influence of the security policy on the whole of Danish
society, such a report should provide information about goals and resources in Danish security
policy. Possible themes could be assessments of the long-term challenges that Denmark faces,
and a prioritisation of the security policy opportunities and challenges, not to mention solutions.

In addition, a debate about Denmark’s future security policy could lead to a greater degree of
coordination between the many stakeholders in the area and make it easier to create an overall
picture of goals and means in Danish security policy.

**Defence Agreement Finance**

As described above, there is an imbalance today between the tasks and resources of the Danish
Armed Forces, which means that the Danish Armed Forces, on the threshold of a new Defence
Agreement period, face significant financial challenges. There is thus an additional need for
funds.


-----

In order to contribute to financing this additional need, there is agreement among the Parties to
the Defence Agreement to carry out a number of capability reductions and closures as well as
implement extensive streamlining and trimming measures. These are described below:

Capability reductions and closures in the Danish Armed Forces
With the aim of contributing to financing the Danish Armed Forces’ additional need for funds,
the following operational capabilities are to be reduced in size or decommissioned:

- The number of main battle tanks is to be reduced. This measure entails that the number of
operational Leopard 2 main battle tanks is to be reduced from 57 to approx. 34.

- The Army’s overall fire-support capability is to be reduced. This entails, for example, the decommissioning of the Army’s present and obsolete long-range, fire-support system: the selfpropelled M109 howitzers.

- The Army’s air-defence capability is to be decommissioned. This measure entails that the
Danish Armed Forces’s ability to conduct land-based active defence against aircraft and helicopter threats is eliminated. The control and early warning component, however, is to be
preserved and transferred to the Air Force, where it is to be merged with the Air Force’s control and early warning capability.

- The Army’s anti-tank missile capability is to be decommissioned. This measure entails the
abolition of the Army’s long-range, anti-tank missile units.

- The Navy’s standard flex capability is to be reduced. This entails, among other things,that
the number of maritime response vessels for permanent surveillance of the internal Danish
waters, etc. is to be reduced from four to three.

- The Air Force’s Fennec helicopter structure is to be reduced both in terms of personnel and
equipment, thereby eliminating the international capability.

- The Air Force’s combat aircraft capability is to be reduced from 48 to 30 operational combat
aircraft.

- The Air Force’s airspace surveillance capability is to be reduced. This entails the decommissioning of the last stationary air space surveillance radar station on Zealand (Multebjerg Radar Station).

Trimming measures in the Danish Armed Forces
Besides the abovementioned measures, the following trimming measures are to be implemented:


-----

- The staffing level – and thus the number of full-time equivalents – within Defence Command
Denmark’s area of responsibility is to be trimmed by 1% by 2010, increasing to 5% by 2014.

- The running costs for ”Other expenditures” within Defence Command Denmark’s area of responsibility are to be trimmed by 10% from 2010, increasing to 18% by 2014.

- Payment for irregular work-hours-related services within Defence Command Denmark’s area
of responsibility is to be trimmed.

- Responsibility for the main part of the operation and maintenance of the defence estates is
to be contracted out through competitive tender.

Trimming measures in the Danish Home Guard
Within the Home Guard Command’s area of responsibility, streamlining and trimming measures
are to include, for example:

- The staffing level – and thus the number of full-time equivalents – within the Home Guard
Command’s area of responsibility is to be trimmed by 1% by 2010, increasing to 5% by
2014. On this basis, the following measures, among others, are to be implemented:

  - The organisation of the Home Guard Command is to be modified and made more efficient, so that it is organised according to the same organisational and leadership principles as the corresponding staffs of the other armed forces.

  - The Army and the Home Guard’s local command structure is to be streamlined.

Furthermore, it is to be examined whether it would be possible, as with other branches of the
Danish Armed Forces, to streamline other parts of the Home Guard’s areas of running operation.
In this respect, it should be noted that the streamlining measures implemented in relation to the
Danish Armed Forces’ support structure will also affect the Home Guard’s running operations,
which is why savings on running costs cannot generally be found in the Home Guard to the
same extent as in other branches of the Armed Forces.

Use of proceeds derived from streamlining and trimming measures
The proceeds derived from the above streamlining and trimming measures within the Danish
Armed Forces and the Danish Home Guard are to be channelled to the Danish Ministry of Defence with a view to being used for performing core operational tasks.

Besides the above streamlining and trimming measures, the Danish Armed Forces are to establish a Reorganisation Funding Pool. The proceeds derived from additional streamlining and
trimming measures that are externally or internally initiated and implemented in the Defence
Agreement period, are to be injected into this pool. The Reorganisation Funding Pool is to be


-----

used to support the Danish Armed Forces’ continued transformation towards a modern, deployable defence, with focus on the Armed Forces’ operational capability.

The defence budget
The Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that the defence budget is to be allocated DKK 205 million annually as a permanent increase of the defence budget expenditure
level. Similarly, an average of DKK 395 million is to be allocated annually in order to cover oneoff expenditures, corresponding to DKK 3 billion over the Defence Agreement period. Similarly,
another DKK 0.5 billion is to be earmarked for the establishment of a so-called Protection Funding Pool.

The additional appropriation to the operating budget expenditure level is to be used as follows:

- Forming a capability to secure the Danish Armed Forces’ interests in cyberspace through a
Computer Network Operations capacity as well as an enhanced and more focused ability to
support other countries’ building, education and training of relevant and democratically governed military capabilities, including local security forces. Therefore, plans are being made to
spend approx. DKK 140 million annually for building up and operating these two capabilities
during a coming five-year period.

- DKK 65 million is to be earmarked annually for the establishment of funding for Global stabilisation efforts.

Injection of funds towards coverage of one-off expenditures comprises:

- Procurement of necessary and relevant training equipment that enables soldiers, sailors and
airmen to be trained and instructed on equipment corresponding to that which is used in the
area of operation. This also to further enhance the protection of the soldiers, sailors and
airmen. The investment will amount to approx. DKK 600 million – corresponding to an average annual investment of approx. DKK 120 million.

- Extraordinary replenishment of the Danish Armed Forces’ stocks of munitions and spare
parts with the aim of, among other things, ensuring the best possible support of the deployed units’ operations. This also to further enhance the protection of the soliders, sailors
and airmen. The investment will amount to approx. DKK 900 million – corresponding to an
average annual investment of approx. DKK 180 million.

- Ensuring up-to-date and modern defence establishments, training facilities and accommodation facilities, partly out of regard for retaining military personnel. The investment will
amount to approx. DKK 500 million – corresponding to an average annual investment of
approx. DKK 100 million, of which DKK 20 million is to be reserved annually for maintaining
the Danish Armed Forces’ historical military buildings, such as the Nyboder residential area.


-----

The Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that the above amounts relate to oneoff investments, although it will be necessary during the Defence Agreement period to examine
more closely the Danish Armed Forces’ future level of expenditure at the end of the Defence
Agreement period.

As mentioned above, the Parties to the Defence Agreement are also in agreement to earmark
DKK 0.5 billion in the Defence Agreement period to financing unforeseen and emerging expenditures in the Defence Agreement period, with the aim of ensuring the best possible protection of
Danish military and civilian personnel deployed in mission areas. The funds in this pool are to be
earmarked under Section 35 of the Finance and Appropriations Act and are solely to be used
with the approval of the Parties to the Defence Agreement. The pool is described in Appendix 2
of this Defence Agreement.

In instances where altered and unforeseen conditions and threats necessitate additional expenditures, the Danish Armed Forces is to examine first whether there are funds available in the
Danish Armed Forces’ Reorganisation Funding Pool. If this is not the case, the matter is to be
put before the Parties to the Defence Agreement, who will decide any use of funds from the
Protection Funding Pool. Thereafter, an approval request document for funds is to be drafted
and submitted to the Folketing’s Finance Committee in accordance with normal procedure, taking into account any special security related aspects.

The Protection Funding Pool can be used, for example, to finance protection equipment and
measures should deployed Danish personnel be exposed to new and unforeseen threats in international operations or to finance new technology or new methods, etc. in order to tackle serious threats that already exist.

On this basis, the defence budget for the Defence Agreement period is to be determined as
shown in the table below, as the defence budget is assumed to be regulated in line with previous practice[1]:

Defence Budget[2] (all amounts in DKK million at 2010 price-level)
Year 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

Previous expenditure 22,240 22,010 22,015 22,015 22,020
level

Additional perma- 205 205 205 205 205

1 Besides the defence budget, the Danish Armed Forces may use any earned interest income under the
arrangement regarding independent liquidity. Incidentally, the defence budget is regulated according to
the same rules that apply to other state institutions.
2 Exclusive separate appropriation to the Danish National Rescue Preparedness, the Danish Civil Protection
League and the Conscientious Objector Administration.

|Year|2010|2011|2012|2013|2014|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Previous expenditure level|22,240|22,010|22,015|22,015|22,020|
|Additional perma-|205|205|205|205|205|


-----

|nent appropriation|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Defence expenditure level|22,445|22,215|22,220|22,220|22,225|
|One-off expenditures|395|395|395|395|395|
|Funding pool under Section 35 for ensur- ing security of de- ployed personnel|100|100|100|100|100|


The Danish Armed Forces is to be awarded full compensation for the operation and maintenance
of the ice-breaking service and any related new acquisitions to the service.

Additional expenditures for international operations
The Danish Armed Forces’ additional expenditures in connection with conducting international
military tasks within the UN, OSCE, NATO or within other relevant frameworks are to be defrayed within the defence expenditure level with an amount up to DKK 1,030 million (2010 pricelevel)[3]. Besides the standard balance transfer facility, the Danish Armed Forces are able to
transfer increases and decreases in expenditure for international operations between the years.
This level will thus also be a determining factor for the Danish Armed Forces’ specific ability to
deploy contingents.

Reports are to be prepared regularly which provide visibility into all net additional expenditures
related to the Danish Armed Forces’ international engagement, including expenditures related to
losses and write-offs of equipment as a result of the operations, etc.

Insofar as the Danish Armed Forces provide personnel or support to facilitate the participation of
other ministries in international operations, the relevant ministry is to refund in full the related
expenditures incurred by the Danish Armed Forces. Out of regard for the primary military tasks,
the Danish Armed Forces, at the request of the relevant ministry, are to provide relief assistance
in connection with humanitarian or environmental disasters abroad, insofar as the assistance
provided by the Danish Armed Forces is more effective, more rapid or more economical than
would otherwise be the case if the assistance was provided by another public body or private
organisation. In this regard, the Danish Armed Forces have assigned assets to the UN. The Danish Armed Forces’ expenditures in connection with providing the assistance are to be refunded in
full by the relevant ministry.

3 The DKK 1,030 million at 2010 price-level corresponds to the annual amount that was earmarked for the
purpose in the Danish Defence Agreement 2005-2009 (i.e. DKK 900 million at 2005 price-level).


-----

Management of proceeds from the sale of military properties
In the Defence Agreement period 2005-2009, the proceeds from the sale of military properties
have been registered under Section 35.11.27 – Reserve for the Danish Armed Forces’ new facilities in consequence of relocations, etc. – from where, following the submission of an approval
request document to the Folketing’s Finance Committee, they can be utilised to finance direct
capital expenditures or the acquisition of properties in connection with the relocalisation of the
relevant authorities and units (one-to-one principle). It is estimated that in 2009 the Danish Armed Forces will not be able to complete all the sales transactions specified in the 2005-2009 Defence Agreement. The proceeds from these sales are to be channelled to the Danish Armed Forces, cf. provisions contained in the Danish Defence Agreement 2005-2009 of 10 June 2004.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that in the Defence Agreement period
the Danish Armed Forces must adjust the number of housing units as well as other properties.
In this regard, the Danish Armed Forces must assess whether there are properties among the
existing property portfolio that with advantage could be replaced by more profitable properties,
for example in relation to running costs, location etc. or other solutions, such as allotment of
rented accommodation. It is estimated that such an adjustment could provide proceeds totalling
DKK 400 million during the Defence Agreement period that would be channelled to the defence
budget.

In addition, a target is to be set for generating additional proceeds of approx. DKK 200 million
over the Defence Agreement period, which are to be channelled to the Reorganisation Funding
Pool, cf. above.

In 2012, consideration is being given to whether, among other things, in the light of experience
to date, there is basis for setting a target of generating additional proceeds of approx. DKK 300
million.

**The Danish Armed Forces – Financial Management**

The measures taken to improve financial management that the Danish Armed Forces have already implemented are to be continued and strengthened in the Defence Agreement period. The
Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that in the Defence Agreement period focus
must be placed on ensuring a reliable and accurate picture of the financial expenditure, on ensuring transparency and a basis for further efficiency improvement measures etc., and on ensuring balance between goals and financial resources. Appendix 3 to this agreement describes the
Danish Armed Forces’ future system of financial management.


-----

**Follow-up**

Detailed information about structure and resource consumption will be provided in the annual
Finance and Appropriations Acts. The annual budget proposals for the Finance Bill and the approval request documents to the Folketing’s Finance Committee that fill the budget are to be
discussed in advance with the Parties to the Defence Agreement.

As mentioned, a general implementation plan is to be drawn up that, among other things, contains a number of benchmarks for the Danish Armed Forces’ development, including in regard to
financial position as well as implementation and realisation of the above-described capability
changes as well as streamlining and trimming measures. The implementation plan is to be submitted to the Parties to the Defence Agreement.

As in the past, regular meetings will be held between the political parties behind the Defence
Agreement. Such meetings will, at minimum, always examine status regarding the implementation of the Defence Agreement, status regarding the international operations, and status regarding the Danish Armed Forces’ financial position.

On the basis of the current status of implementation, including status in relation to Danish Armed Forces’ financial position and achievement of the benchmarks set out in the implementation
plan, discussions are to take place regularly – and at least once a year – among the Parties to
the Defence Agreement concerning the status of the Defence Agreement’s implementation, including follow-up on international operations, financial position and benchmarks as well as other
matters within the framework of the Defence Agreement that have a bearing on personnel
structure and equipment acquisitions, etc.

The objective of the discussions is partly to ensure that the Danish Armed Forces’ structure, capabilities and equipment acquisitions are regularly adjusted in line with developments in the Danish Armed Forces’ tasks, missions and finances. Therefore, the Parties to the Defence Agreement must, among other things, regularly consider any necessary adjustments of the Danish
Armed Forces and the Danish Home Guard’s development in the Defence Agreement period, so
as to optimise the relevance of their capabilities.

**Appendices:**
1. Process for the acquisition of new combat aircraft
2. Use of the Parties to the Defence Agreement’ Financial Disposition Funding Pool (“Protection
Funding Pool”)
3. Future financial management in the Danish Armed Forces


-----

Appendix 1 – Danish Defence Agreement 2010–2014 of 24 June 2009

**PROCESS FOR THE ACQUISITION OF NEW COMBAT AIRCRAFT**

The political agreement on Danish Defence states, among other things, the following in relation
to the Danish Armed Forces’ future need for a combat aircraft capability:

“The Parties to the Defence Agreement are therefore in agreement that the Danish Armed
Forces must maintain a combat aircraft capability for upholding the sovereignty of domestic
air space as well as the surveillance and patrol of areas of national interest. Furthermore,
the Danish Armed Forces must continue to maintain the capability for deploying combat
aircraft in international operations.”

The combat aircraft capability comprises in the short term the present F-16 aircraft, but in the
longer term it will entail the acquisition of new combat aircraft. The basis for a decision on new
combat aircraft will be finalised and subjected to external quality assurance in the autumn of
2009. It is the intention that a decision in principle on the acquisition of new combat aircraft, including provisional type selection, will be made in 2009.

The basis for decision will comprise a number of different factors, including:

 - Security policy issues that relate to an assessment of the use of combat aircraft as an active security policy instrument. The assessment is to be conducted primarily on the basis of
chapter 1 “The premises of security policy” of the Danish Defence Commission Report of 25
March 2009.

 - Strategic issues that relate to an assessment of the different combat aircraft candidates in
relation to strategic cooperation in NATO and with other nations.

 - The military recommendation is the Chief of Defence’s recommendation regarding which
combat aircraft candidate should be chosen as the replacement for the F-16 aircraft. The
recommendation is to be drawn up on the basis of an extensive analysis.

 - Financial issues that have the aim of providing a comprehensive financial basis that can
form part of the overall basis for decision concerning new combat aircraft. The basis is to
be provided by an intra-ministerial working group on financial matters composed of representatives from the Danish Ministry of Finance, the Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the
Danish Ministry for Economic and Business Affairs and the Danish Ministry of Defence, etc.

 - Industrial cooperation that relates to an assessment of the scope and nature of industrial
participation and cooperation with each combat aircraft candidate and the associated socio

-----

economic consequences. The assessment of industrial cooperation is to be conducted by
the Danish Ministry of Economic and Business Affairs, including the Danish Enterprise and
Construction Authority.

The basis for decision will also contain a number of reports in relation to maintaining the combat
aircraft capability based on F-16 aircraft. These include, for example, reports that highlight the
feasibility of acquiring new or used F-16 aircraft as well as the feasibility of service life extension
and prolonged use of the Danish Armed Forces’ F-16 aircraft, where by modifying their use
these aircraft can remain in service for a longer period than the present planning prescribes.

The basis for decision as well as the process regarding a potential acquisition of new combat aircraft is subject to an extensive and rigorous external quality assurance procedure, so as to ensure an open process that provides a transparent and independent basis for decision. This complies with the resolutions passed from parliamentary debate F4 on 29 February 2008 regarding
procurement of combat aircraft, whereof the following was stated:

“The Folketing takes note of the Minister of Defence’s account regarding the future acquisition of combat aircraft. The Folketing calls on the Minister of Defence to ensure an
open process, so as to secure a transparent and independent basis for decision.”

The external quality assurance process involves both Rigsrevisionen (The National Audit Office
of Denmark) and two independent consultancy firms. Over a period of 18 months, Rigsrevisionen examined the Danish Ministry of Defence’s work on elaborating a basis for decision concerning new combat aircraft. On 26 March 2009, the findings of Rigsrevisionen’s study, including
the comments of the Public Accounts Committee, were published. Both the Public Accounts
Committee and Rigsrevisionen concluded that the basis for decision concerning new combat aircraft is expected to be significantly better than has been the case with previous major equipment acquisitions by the Danish Armed Forces. The Public Accounts Committee and Rigsrevisionen also conclude that it is a significant strength of the process that the financial basis for
decision is dealt with in an intra-ministerial working group and that external quality assurance is
used to ensure the quality of the overall basis.

The Danish Ministry of Defence has taken the initiative to secure the services of two independent consultancy firms – Deloitte Business Consulting and the Danish Technological Institute – to
conduct a comprehensive external quality check of the basis for decision and the underlying
evaluations, etc. The external quality assurance procedure will continue until the basis for decision has been finalised and is ready for publication.

In summary, a nuanced and independent basis for decision will be produced. It is seen to contain much more than just military assessments, including not least a comprehensive assessment
of the financial issues.


-----

An agreement among the Parties to the Defence Agreement to procure new combat aircraft will
constitute the necessary basis for opening contract negotiations with the preferred supplier of
new combat aircraft. The contract negotiations will result in a draft contract, which by the nature of things will contain binding prices. The draft contract will thereafter enable the Danish
Ministry of Defence to submit an approval request document to the Folketing’s Finance Committee concerning procurement of new combat aircraft, which is expected around 2012 at the earliest.


-----

Appendix 2 – Danish Defence Agreement 2010–2014 of 24 June 2009

**USE OF THE FINANCIAL DISPOSITION FUNDING POOL ESTABLISHED BY THE PAR-**
**TIES TO THE DEFENCE AGREEMENT**

**(“THE PROTECTION FUNDING POOL”)**

The Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that the defence budget is to be injected with an additional appropriation of DKK 3 billion in the upcoming Defence Agreement period.

In addition, the Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that a Protection Funding
Pool is to be established to finance unforeseen and sudden expenditures that arise in the Defence Agreement period, with the aim of ensuring the best possible protection of Danish military
and civilian personnel deployed in mission areas. The funds in this pool are to be earmarked under Section 35 of the Finance and Appropriations Act and are solely to be used with the approval
of the Parties to the Defence Agreement.

In instances where altered and unforeseen conditions and threats necessitate additional expenditures, the Danish Armed Forces must determine first whether there are funds available in the
Danish Armed Forces’ Reorganisation Funding Pool. If this is not the case, the matter is to be
put before the Parties to the Defence Agreement, who will decide any use of funds from the
Protection Funding Pool. Thereafter, an approval request document for funds is to be drawn up
and submitted to the Folketing’s Finance Committee in accordance with normal procedure, taking into account any special security related aspects.

The Protection Funding Pool may be used, for example, to finance protection equipment and
measures should deployed Danish personnel be exposed to new and unforeseen threats in international operations or to finance new technology or new methods etc. in order to tackle serious threats that already exist.

In the Defence Agreement period, a one-off amount of DKK 500 million is to be earmarked for
the Protection Funding Pool.


-----

Appendix 3 – Danish Defence Agreement 2010-2014 of 24 June 2009

**FUTURE FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT IN THE DANISH ARMED FORCES**

**Introduction**
In 2008, the Danish Armed Forces reorganised their financial management by establishing an
independent finance staff function and a finance director, which are embedded within the Danish Armed Forces’ senior leadership structure. The reorganisation has at the same time led to an
altered approach to financial management in the Danish Armed Forces, with a focus on better
management, better budgeting and better planning.

As a result, the follow-up on periodical budgets has been strengthened, which to a greater degree than earlier entails systematic and detailed reporting, including not least in relation to the
functional services. In the future, the budgeting process will be strengthened at the relevant detail level and in relation to governance-relevant parameters, which will provide the basis for improved follow-up and efficiency improvements, etc. The Annual Programme of the Danish Armed
Forces will also ensure greater balance between goals and financial resources, and financial opportunities for action in the financial year will likewise be identified.

The revised internal system of financial management has been presented to Rigsrevisionen (The
National Audit Office of Denmark) and is being implemented by all defence authorities.

**Future financial management in the Danish Armed Forces**
The Parties to the Defence Agreement are in agreement that in the Defence Agreement period
focus must be placed on ensuring a reliable and accurate picture of the financial expenditure, on
ensuring transparency and a basis for further efficiency improvement measures etc., and on ensuring balance between goals and financial resources.

Consequently, in the course of the upcoming Defence Agreement period, Defence Command
Denmark will conduct budget analyses of central parts of the Danish Armed Forces’ finances.
The budget analyses are designed to ensure efficiency improvements in the Danish Armed
Forces and to contribute to better financial management and increased transparency regarding
the financial position of the Danish Armed Forces. The Danish Ministry of Defence and the Danish Ministry of Finance will jointly organise and implement the budget analyses.

In addition, close and clear coherence will be established between the Finance Act appropriations and Defence Command Denmark’s internal Annual Programme, and the Danish Armed
Forces’ balance transfer facility is to be gradually reduced to the level for state institutions in
general.


-----

By the start of 2010, the Parties to the Defence Agreement are to be presented with strategies
concerning opportunities to:

  - Ensure ongoing cost-effective governance of the Danish Armed Forces.

  - Optimise the organisation of case and work procedures in the Danish Armed Forces, including the Danish Home Guard.

  - Identify on an ongoing basis best practice in different branches of the Danish Armed
Forces, in order to ensure ongoing organisational development, more efficient use of resources and clear focus in the Danish Armed Forces’ overall performance of tasks.

Lessons learned from similar reorganisation and development processes in state institutions are
to be incorporated in the defence leadership’s work, by embedding development of the above
strategies in a steering group composed of representatives of the Danish Ministry of Defence
and the Danish Ministry of Finance.

Detailed information about structure and resource consumption will be provided in the annual
Finance and Appropriations Acts. The annual budget proposals for the Finance Bill and the approval request documents to the Folketing’s Finance Committee that fill the budget are to be
discussed in advance with the Parties to the Defence Agreement.

In addition, a status report is to be presented to the Parties to the Defence Agreement regarding the implementation plan, in which the Defence Agreement’s goals, implementation and financial budget, as well as results of benchmark studies are to be incorporated.

As in the past, regular meetings will be held between the political parties behind the Defence
Agreement. Such meetings will, at minimum, always examine status regarding the implementation of the Defence Agreement, status regarding the international operations and status regarding the Danish Armed Forces’ financial position, as well as other matters within the framework of
the Defence Agreement that have a bearing on personnel structure and equipment acquisitions,
etc.

The objective of the meetings is partly to ensure that the Danish Armed Forces’ structure, capabilities and equipment acquisitions are regularly adjusted in line with developments in the Danish Armed Forces’ tasks, missions and financial position. Therefore, the Parties to the Defence
Agreement must, among other things, regularly consider any necessary adjustments of the Danish Armed Forces and the Danish Home Guard’s development in the Defence Agreement period,
so as to optimise the relevance of their capabilities.


-----

