# Foreign and Security Policy Strategy


###### MAY 2023


-----

# Contents

**Preface .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .** **5**

**Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .** **7**

**Intensified security situation in Europe .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .** **11**

**Global partnerships and building alliances** .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . **17**

**A more robust society** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . **23**


-----

not mean that everything is equally good and that it
does not matter what you fight for. Thus, pragmatic
idealism is not a confrontation with our values
either. On the contrary.

If we are to leave a mark on the world around us,
we will not get very far alone. Denmark is a big
nation, but a small country. Therefore, our relation­
ships with our closest friends are a cornerstone
of the strategy. The times call for a wholehearted
Danish commitment to the EU. And for an EU that
stands firm and assumes a more active role on the
foreign policy stage. The EU must not be just a
meeting place; it must dare to be a player in its own
right. If we put our forces together, 2 plus 2 may
well add up to 5.

This is not a news catalogue that you have in front
of you. It is Denmark’s official new Foreign and
Security Policy Strategy. The document that the
government will govern by when we have to make
decisions about the big and small things in the
world. And which we will use as the starting point
for many of the other strategies that will follow in
the near future. But it is not completely devoid of
new thoughts and perspectives. Those thoughts, I
look forward to developing further.

**Lars Løkke Rasmussen**
Minister of Foreign Affairs

May 2023


# We must deal with the world as it actually is: uncertain, unpredictable, and complicated


# Preface

The most recent foreign and security policy strat­
egy was presented just weeks before the first Rus­
sian tanks rolled across the borders of Ukraine on
24 February 2022. The ink had barely dried before
a new geopolitical reality came crashing down.
Therefore, this new strategy that you have in your
hands does not arrive a day too early. The strategy
sets the course for how we can best secure Danish
interests and values when meeting the world as
it looks today. With pragmatic idealism as the
headline.

To begin with, this means that we must deal with
the world as it actually is: uncertain, unpredictable,
and complicated. Brutal at times. Russia disregards
international law. China wants more elbow room.
The USA is turning its attention to developments in
Asia. There is more tension and greater competition
than there has been for a long time. We will have
to size up the situation. We must not be naive.
Countries act according to their own interests, not
according to what would be good for Denmark.
If we ignore that fact, we will find ourselves in
trouble.

At the same time, we must hold on to our belief
in ourselves. There is no use in hiding under the
bed and hoping that the storm will pass. We must
pursue an active, ambitious, and optimistic foreign
policy based on the values that we ourselves are
formed by. Because we believe that democracy,
freedom, and human rights make life better no
matter where in the world you live. Realism does


-----

# Introduction

##### The new geopolitical reality demands that Denmark’s foreign and security policy adapts in order to be able to continue to defend and promote Danish values and interests


Certain years and dates imprint themselves on our
consciousness. They mark turning points in world
history.

On 9 November 1989, the Berlin Wall came down
and we could celebrate the end of the long and
dark period of the Cold War in Europe.

11 September 2001 ushered in a new era of global
terrorist threats.

On 24 February 2022, we woke up to Russia’s
illegal war of aggression against Ukraine. Images
of invading Russian troops and the bombing of
Ukrainian cities made it crystal clear that the era
of reaping the peace dividend had come to an end:
There is once again war on the European conti­
nent. Our belief that the liberal international order
would only lead to peace and prosperity proved
untenable.

Against the backdrop of Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine, Europe now finds itself in a new and
intensified foreign and security policy reality. It is a
situation that is not going to change in the foresee­
able future. Regardless of how the war develops,
for many years to come there will be a need for
thorough adjustments to our foreign and security
policy.

Since the Russian invasion, we have, together with
our partners and allies, shown an impressive unity
in responding to the greatest security policy chal­
lenge in decades. This must be maintained.

We must do this in NATO, which is the corner­
stone of Danish defence and security. The USA will


continue to be Denmark’s most important security
policy ally, and we must continue to strengthen the
transatlantic bond. Together with the USA and our
other partners, Denmark must stand by the fun­
damental principles of a rules-based international
order. In the future, Europe and Denmark must
assume greater responsibility in NATO.

We must do this through the EU, which, with its
resolute and unanimous response to the war in
Ukraine, has demonstrated a new weight as a
geopolitical actor. In the future, to an even greater
degree than before, a core Danish priority will be
to strengthen European cooperation in a broad
sense so that the EU can continue to constitute a
driving force for peace and freedom, contribute to
Europe’s security, and better translate its economic
weight into defending European interests and
values globally.

And we must do this through the UN and the mul­
tilateral cooperation which constitutes the frame­
work for a common set of rules. A rules-based
world order is crucial for small countries like Den­
mark and for effectively handling global challenges.
We must assume global responsibility and work
constructively to find pragmatic solutions that the
countries of the world can rally around.

The government’s foreign and security policy strat­
egy sets out the overall indicators for how Den­
mark should navigate in a world that has changed
significantly following 24 February 2022.

We must continue to support Ukraine’s fight for
freedom and the country’s European integration.
We must strengthen Danish defence and security


#### There is once again war on the European continent. Our belief that the liberal international order would only lead to peace and prosperity proved untenable


-----

and further contribute to NATO’s deterrence and
defence, especially in our neighbourhood area.
At the same time, one of Europe’s most important
foreign policy tasks will be to continue to support
the EU’s neighbours to the east and in the Western
Balkans, who are particularly vulnerable to Russia’s
destabilising activities.

We must adapt to a world characterised by
increased global strategic competition. We are
witnessing major demographic and economic
changes that are shaking up the distribution of
power. China, in particular, is taking up more space
on the global stage and is working to revise parts
of the international order to its own advantage.
In response, the USA has been turning its strate­
gic focus towards Asia for several years now. At
the same time, new actors are appearing on the
global stage and are contributing to an increased
worldwide regionalisation. Europe’s ̶ and thus also
Denmark’s ̶ relative weight and influence in the
world is decreasing. This, in turn, increases unpre­
dictability, competition, and complexity, and calls
for a stricter Danish and European foreign policy
prioritisation. But it also creates new opportunities
for collaboration and partnerships. The ability to
strengthen our partnerships around the world will
be crucial.

We must deal with the subsidiary consequences of
Russia’s war of aggression, which are manifesting
themselves around the entire world and which
in many cases have reinforced existing dynamics
and challenges. Food crises, energy crises, and
a changing world economy affect countries and
populations which, in many cases, are also affected
by climate change and natural disasters. All of this
creates fertile ground for economic and political
instability with the risk of new crises, radicalisation,
and increased irregular migration. We must prepare
to deal with a new migration crisis that could put
the cohesion of Europe under pressure.

We must strengthen Denmark’s and Europe’s resil­
ience, broadly speaking. Foreign and security policy
is increasingly intertwined with domestic policy.
Different crises interfere with each other and are
inextricably linked, for example when international
developments affect our supply chains or when we
need to reduce our critical dependencies in order
to reduce our foreign and security policy vulner­
abilities. At the same time, global developments
can affect our internal security. We must therefore
strengthen our ability to think across the board so
that we can deal effectively with new vulnerabili­
ties and threats.

Denmark must continue to be a leading green
country. We must continue the significant Danish


climate diplomacy efforts in order to address the
climate crisis, which is the 21st century’s greatest
global challenge, affecting all countries, all sectors,
and all ecosystems. And we must take advantage of
the many new opportunities that the green transi­
tion also holds for Denmark.

In the future, we must continue to be a digital
front-runner. In light of the global technological
competition, we must expand Danish positions
of strength in areas such as quantum technology.
At the same time, we must work for a responsible
technological development globally.

Companies are important partners, and we must
support them and work closely with them in order
to ensure that they can navigate in a reality char­
acterised by increased uncertainty, complexity, and
geopolitical competition.

The new geopolitical reality demands that Den­
mark’s foreign and security policy adapts in order to
be able to continue to defend and promote Danish
values and interests. It requires level-headed analy­
sis, realism, and a balanced approach in close coop­
eration with European and transatlantic partners.
Denmark must be present in the world. And that
requires us to increase our engagement and build
new alliances and equal partnerships globally. All of
this requires a strengthened Danish diplomacy that
is prepared to tackle the challenges we face.

Danish foreign policy must continue to be based
on democracy and fundamental freedoms: that
all people are born with equal rights and are free
to, among other things, speak, think, believe, and
assemble as they wish. This is the basis on which
we must engage with the world. At the same time,
we can best pursue our interests and values based
on a realistic assessment of the world that we are
operating in. Our starting point must be common
interests and equal dialogue. We must become
better acquainted with the perspectives, needs, and
interests of other countries and present solutions.
Only in this way can we achieve common goals and
more effectively promote democracy, respect for
human rights, and sustainable development. If we
are to look after Denmark, we will need more part­
ners and friends in the future, not fewer.


### Indicators for Denmark’s
 foreign policy


-----

# Intensified security situation in Europe

##### Even after the war is over, Denmark and our allies will have to continue to be engaged in the security of Ukraine


Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine is not
only a threat to the peace and security of all of
Europe. It is also a breach of the fundamental
principles of the UN Charter. Russia seeks to use
military force to change borders and re-establish
a security order based on the spheres of interest
of the great powers. If Russia achieves its strategic
goals, the world will become a more dangerous
place, especially for smaller countries.

Therefore, support for Ukraine’s ability to defend
its sovereignty and territorial integrity will be a high
strategic priority for Denmark in the coming years.
At the same time, we must be prepared for the fact
that, regardless of the outcome of the war, Russia’s
political, military, and territorial ambitions will pose
a threat to Denmark and Europe for years to come.

This intensified security situation will define the
framework for Denmark’s foreign and security
policy in the coming years. In many areas, Denmark
and Europe will have to adapt to a geopolitical
reality characterised by deep mistrust, prolonged
confrontation, and unpredictability. Security and
crisis management will become more prominent
and encroach further on our daily lives.

**Strengthened defence and security in Denmark**
**and Europe**

Denmark’s and Europe’s defence and security must
be strengthened in order to be able to handle both
classic and hybrid threats. NATO and a strong
transatlantic bond remain the linchpin for our secu­
rity, and we must continue to strengthen the coop­
eration in the Alliance. We must bear our share of


the burden in the Alliance. The government will
therefore bring forward the phasing in of the longterm increase in regular spending on defence and
security to 2 per cent of GDP until 2030. This con­
stitutes an historically large and long-term invest­
ment in our security. The upcoming defence agree­
ment must contribute to ensuring that Denmark is
able to take care of our joint security to a greater
degree and to shoulder our share of the responsi­
bility. This applies particularly with regard to our
neighbouring areas in the Baltics and the Baltic
Sea region, in Eastern Europe, and in the Arctic
and the North Atlantic. At the same time, we must
maintain our capability for being able to contribute
to carrying out tasks elsewhere in the world within
the framework of, for example, NATO, the EU, and
the UN. In addition, due to Denmark’s geographical
location, we have a responsibility to provide sup­
port to allies on Danish ground.

The intensified security political situation also
means that there is a need to further develop
NATO so that the Alliance can deal with future
threats, including the serious threat from Russia.
This will require a strengthened deterrence and
a stronger defence, for example through NATO’s
strengthened preparedness and forward defence,
to which Denmark will continue to contribute.

At the same time, Europe must assume greater
responsibility for its own security. It is in Denmark’s
interest to actively contribute to increased defence
cooperation in the EU in close cooperation and in
complementarity with NATO. On 1 June 2022, a
large majority of Danes paved the way for this by
ending the Danish opt-out from EU’s security and


#### Denmark and Europe will have to adapt to a geopolitical reality characterised by deep mistrust, prolonged confrontation, and unpredictability


-----

### Military
 support

###### Military support for Ukraine’s fight
 for freedom in the form of, among
 other things, weapons, military material and training initiatives

### Business
 support

###### Support to business ventures that
 provide Danish companies an
 opportunity to play an active role in
 the efforts to rebuild the country


Ukraine’s long-term security, including with regard
to strengthening NATO’s partnership with Ukraine
on the road to future membership.

At the same time, Ukraine is facing a massive
reconstruction effort. There will be a demand for
skills and solutions that Danish companies can
offer, for example within the green transition,
energy infrastructure, water, and food. Denmark
and Danish companies have, therefore, an opportu­
nity to play an important role in the reconstruction,
and Danish companies will be able to contribute
to stability and economic development in Ukraine
by creating growth and employment. This applies


especially with regard to Mykolaiv, where Denmark
has assumed a special responsibility for the recon­
struction, just as we must intensify our cooperation
with the authorities in, for example, the energy
field.

Ukraine belongs to the European family. It will
require far-reaching, structural, political, economic,
and administrative changes before Ukraine can
meet the EU accession criteria. The EU should
therefore play a central role in the reconstruction
of Ukraine, which must be linked to these reforms.
Denmark has previously contributed to prepar­
ing countries for EU membership, and we must


defence policy. It sent a strong signal that Denmark
is ready to assume greater co-responsibility for
security in Europe and our neighbouring areas.

A strengthened defence cooperation in the EU
opens up new opportunities for Denmark. This
applies, for example, to areas such as cyber secu­
rity, hybrid threats, and military mobility as well as
with regard to research. It also applies to materiel
cooperation and within the defence industry,
where Europe has strategic challenges. Anchored in
both NATO and the EU, Denmark has an interest in
exploiting and promoting these opportunities diplo­
matically, militarily, and with regard to our business
policy. Denmark must also take part in building up
the European defence industry and in strengthen­
ing the engagement of our companies with regard
to international collaboration for the benefit of our
security, prosperity, and welfare.

**Nordic defence cooperation and security in the**
**Baltic Sea region**

Finland’s recent accession and Sweden’s future
accession to NATO strengthens the Alliance.
Together with ending the defence opt-out, this
means that the Nordic countries are now more
united than ever before in the area of security and
defence policy. This provides new opportunities
for a stronger Nordic security policy and military
cooperation, including exercise activities and coor­
dination of defence plans. Denmark must assume
a central position in the development of this
cooperation.

The Baltic Sea region is increasingly important, and
Denmark has a strategic interest in strengthening
relations with the Baltic countries. Together with
our Nordic allies, Denmark has a special respon­
sibility for security in the Baltic Sea region. This
applies especially in relation to the Baltic countries,
which feel the military and hybrid threat from
Russia to a particularly high degree.

**The Arctic and the North Atlantic**

The intensified global strategic competition also
carries implications for the Arctic and the North
Atlantic. Over recent years, Russia has increased its
military strength and expanded its military capabili­
ties in the Arctic.

Although Russia is weakened militarily at the
moment as a consequence of the war in Ukraine,
the situation also makes Russia a more unpredict­
able actor – including in the Arctic and the North
Atlantic. Together with our allies, this is something
we must address. The war in Ukraine has created
subsidiary consequences for the region. Most


significantly, cooperation in the Arctic Council has
been put on hold. At the same time, the new and
future membership of the two Arctic states Finland
and Sweden represent a positive development.
Their membership will strengthen our security and
the cooperation in NATO - also in the Arctic and
the North Atlantic.

We will work to ensure that the Arctic does not
become a scene for confrontations originating else­
where in the world. The government will continue
working to ensure low tension and the continued
development and protection of the Arctic region in
close cooperation with the governments of Green­
land and the Faroe Islands and with our interna­
tional partners - even though it has become more
difficult. Russia’s military forces in the Arctic are
largely intact. China has long-term interests in the
region. We will work to promote peace and security
in the Arctic. The presence of the Danish Defence
is to ensure improved surveillance and enforcement
of sovereignty as well as to contribute to safe­
guarding the interests of the allies and NATO in the
region.

**Significant and continuous support for Ukraine**

Ukraine’s fight for freedom is also Europe’s fight for
freedom, for European security, and for the global
rules-based order. Together with our partners and
allies, Denmark must support Ukraine in being able
to defend itself and re-establish its territorial integ­
rity and self-determination. This requires continued
military, economic, and humanitarian contributions.
Only Ukraine can decide the time and terms for
negotiations and what a durable solution might
look like. Our role is to continue our support to
Ukraine in a way that helps put the country in the
strongest possible position.

The government will continue the significant
Danish support for Ukraine as long as there is a
need for it. We will do this both nationally and
in particular through European and transatlantic
cooperation. Since the start of the war, we have
provided wide-ranging and long-term contribu­
tions. With the creation of the Danish National
Ukraine Fund, we ensure continued military sup­
port, civilian support, and support for business
initiatives to and in Ukraine.

Even after an end to the war, Denmark and our
allies and partners will have to take part in ensur­
ing Ukraine’s security. This will require continued
support with military equipment and training
to strengthen Ukraine’s resilience so that it can
defend itself both in the short term and with regard
to deterring Russia in the longer term. We will also
continue to take part in the discussions regarding


### Danish support to
 Ukraine

###### Since Russia’s invasion, Denmark has been one of the
 biggest donors to Ukraine, based on country size


### Civil
 support

###### Civil support to both acute
 humanitarian initiatives and to the
 long-term rebuilding of the country

### Political
 support

###### Together with our partners,
 we must support Ukraine’s
 path to NATO and the EU


-----

also actively support Ukraine’s European path,
for example within the framework of a so-called
twinning programme, which enables cooperation
between public authorities in Ukraine and EU
member states.

**Resolute response to Russia**

As long as Russia continues as an aggressor and
violates Ukraine’s territorial integrity, Denmark,
together with our partners and allies, must continue
to work to weaken and isolate Russia internation­
ally. We must ensure that Russia does not achieve
its strategic goals in Ukraine. We must ensure that
aggression and violations of international law do
not pay off. We must therefore work for the broad­
est possible support globally for Ukraine. And we
must speak out against countries that directly or
indirectly support Russia’s continued aggression.

This is not something that Denmark can do alone.
Unity in the EU and a coordinated approach with
our partners and allies are our strongest cards. The
government will work to maintain the toughest
possible sanctions that could weaken the Russian
war machine and impose a clear cost on Russia
for the war. We must counter the Kremlin’s false
narratives and the radicalisation of Russian society
through support for Russian democratic forces, civil
society actors, and independent media.

Russian decision-makers must be held accountable
for the crimes committed in Ukraine. In this regard,
and with our strong profile in international prose­
cution and justice, Denmark can play an active role
in relevant initiatives to ensure that legal responsi­
bility can be placed in due course, for example by
collecting evidence of war crimes in Ukraine.

**Increased engagement in the EU’s neighbourhood**

In Moldova and Georgia as well as in the Western
Balkans, Russia, in particular, is trying to oppose
the independence and European orientation of
these countries in order to maintain its destabilising
influence.

The stability of these countries is fragile in the
wake of decades of weak institutions, internal
tensions, and in some cases a continued Russian
military presence. Many countries are economically
and especially energy dependent on Russia and are
vulnerable to hybrid threats. Although Russia’s abil­
ity to destabilise the EU’s vulnerable neighbouring
countries has weakened in certain areas and their
attention is primarily focused on Ukraine, a signif­
icant threat to the independence and resilience of
these countries remains. At the same time, China
is working purposefully to gain influence with the


countries in Europe’s Eastern neighbourhood and
in the Western Balkans, for example through infra­
structure projects.

One of Europe’s most important foreign policy
tasks over the next several years will be to
strengthen the relationship with the EU’s vulnera­
ble neighbouring countries. This involves support­
ing them in building up resilience and in reducing
their dependencies and thus their vulnerability, also
with regard to other actors attempting to influence
them negatively.

Supporting the political and economic modernisa­
tion of these countries is absolutely key to securing
their consolidation in the European community and
in supporting their ambitions for EU membership.
We must strengthen our commitment and our
presence in these countries. Denmark must help
strengthen the institutions in these countries so
that they can meet the EU accession criteria. This
must be done through official cooperation with
Danish partners, for example in relation to com­
bating corruption, energy transitioning, and decen­
tralisation. We must engage with the young gener­
ation, as they are the future of these countries. In
this context, youth organisations will also be able
to play an important role, including in relation to
exchange programmes. In addition, strengthened
cooperation with civil society and local media will
contribute to strengthening the resilience of these
countries with regard to Russian attempts at influ­
ence and disinformation.

Although the countries in North Africa have a
different starting point than the EU’s vulnerable
neighbouring countries to the east and in the
Western Balkans, many of the same dynamics are
also still at play here. In addition, the pressure of
irregular migration poses a further threat to these
countries - and to Europe. And this is also why the
EU must work to create new alliances and strong
equal partnerships, especially with regard to our
North African neighbours, which can support the
independence and economic progress of these
countries and in this way contribute to the security
of Europe at the same time.

**A strengthened EU on the global stage**

The EU cooperation is the most important plat­
form for Danish foreign policy and is crucial for
our prosperity, security, and safety. It is therefore
in Denmark’s interest that the EU continues to
develop and strengthen its geopolitical relevance.
An EU with a greater geopolitical capacity will also
strengthen the balance in the transatlantic relation­
ship. Denmark must work for an active EU that is
able to translate its economic weight into influence


throughout the world, entering into global part­
nerships, and defending European interests and
values. The economic sanctions against Russia are
unprecedented and constitute a clear example
that a united EU can and must use its economic
strength to reach foreign policy goals. We must
strengthen Denmark’s capacity in the field of sanc­
tions so that we to a greater degree can contribute
to the EU’s work on sanctions. We must ensure
an effective implementation and enforcement
throughout the EU and a common effort against
circumvention of sanctions.

In the run up to the Danish presidency of the
Council of the EU in 2025, the government will
strengthen Denmark’s European political efforts
and take the initiative for the upcoming European
Political Agreement to ensure, among other things,


that Denmark is able to play an active part in the
development of the European cooperation in light
of the new geopolitical conditions.

Enlargement the EU has moved up on the agenda
as a result of the intensified security policy situ­
ation. Denmark must continue to insist that new
member states fully meet the EU’s accession
criteria. It is the best way to ensure that the EU
becomes as strong and coherent as possible. For
the same reason, we must also engage actively in
helping these countries prepare for membership.
The prospect is an EU with well over 30 member
states. We must therefore actively participate in
the deliberations on how the EU’s policies and
rules must be adapted to ensure that the EU will
also be ready for enlargement.


-----

# Global Partnerships and Alliance Building

##### The world is changing and that creates new opportunities for Denmark


The distribution of power in the world is changing.
Europe’s weight in the world is decreasing while
other countries and regions are growing, economi­
cally, population-wise, and technologically.

China’s global ambitions and weight have grown
significantly. At the same time, China has an essen­
tial aspiration to revise parts of the international
rules and standards to make them more compatible
with the Chinese political system and its interests.

Other countries and regional powers are also
making their voices heard globally as they wish to
translate their relative weight into influence. How
these countries position themselves in the global
strategic competition will have a major impact on
the shape of the future international order. There
will be increased competition and an increased
complexity to navigate. But there will also be
opportunities for new and constructive partner­
ships globally.

These developments mean that we must rethink
how we engage with the world. There will not be
one single answer that will apply to all situations.
But there will be a general need for increased com­
mitment and renewed dialogue on equal terms.
This requires us to support a strong and active EU
on the global stage. And that we work for a UN
that delivers effective solutions to global problems
that no country can solve on their own.


**The battle for influence**

Russia’s war of aggression has caused subsidiary
global consequences, in many cases thousands
of miles from the battlefield in Ukraine. For many
countries outside of Europe, the war in Ukraine
has contributed to making a difficult situation
even more difficult. Prices of basic necessities
such as food and energy have increased while
securing financing for long-term sustainable eco­
nomic development has become more difficult.
Several countries see the West’s strong solidarity
with Ukraine but do not feel that they are heard
when they are negatively affected by global
developments.

In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, the global
ramifications of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine have
revealed that the EU and the West are challenged
in the battle for influence that is unfolding globally.
China and Russia in particular are very actively
seeking to increase their influence, each in its own
way. In many countries, both China and Russia
assert themselves through offers of investments,
cooperation, and support, which is often aimed
directly at the local elites, and thus seek to shape
the foreign policy orientation of these countries.
It is a problem that Denmark and the EU must deal
with - together with our partners.


#### We must cultivate and develop more equal partnerships, not close doors. We must become better at listening and understanding the points of views of others


-----

**Africa**

Africa is Europe’s neighbour and a growing conti­
nent, politically, economically, and population-wise.
This creates great potential for strong partnerships.
At the same time, Africa is characterised by exten­
sive challenges, including armed conflicts and nat­
ural disasters. We must therefore strengthen both
our own and the EU’s engagement with Africa and
the African Union in order to find joint solutions

### The balance is shifting
 in the global economy

###### The development in the global economy leading up to 2050 is expected
 to alter the distribution of power in the world such that especially the
 EU and the USA will lose ground to the growing economies

### 2022

###### 24.9%16.2%

 7.9%
 3.3%

 17.5%
 38.0%

**EU** **The rest of** **China**
**the world**

**China** **India** **USA**

Remark: Development in GDP for chosen countries, nominal prices.

_Source: Oxford Economics._


**Equal partnerships**

We must create equal partnerships. Without com­
promising on the requirements of transparency and
accountability, we must guarantee attractive and
more sustainable solutions that meet the demands
of the countries and that can contribute to their
development and independence. Our approach
must be characterised by pragmatic idealism and
must be based on shared interests.

Danish foreign policy must continue to be based on
our fundamental values, especially democracy and
human rights. The rights of women and girls, minor­
ities, and workers. The freedom to express yourself,
think, believe, and assemble freely. And the right to
a life free from torture.

We must promote our values and rights with an
eye on the political reality that we live in. We must
become better at listening and understanding the
points of views of others. And the starting point for
our engagement must be common interests and
Danish competences so that we can effectively
contribute to sustainable development. We must
cultivate and develop more equal partnerships,
not close doors. There will always be dilemmas
when we engage with others who do not share the
same values as us. But that must not prevent us
from cooperating in areas of common interest – or
engaging in critical dialogue when we disagree.

The EU plays a crucial role for Denmark’s opportu­
nities to build equal partnerships. That is why we
must work for an EU that speaks with one voice
on the global stage. In the EU, we must coordinate
and reach out to relevant countries in a targeted
manner. There is a need for both strengthened
political dialogue and for the EU to offer even more
concrete, sustainable solutions that are adapted to
local demand. This applies in Asia, Africa, and Latin
America. The EU’s Global Gateway initiative, which
aims to safeguard the EU’s interests by delivering
new, sustainable, quality investments on a large
scale holds potential for exactly that. Trade policy
must also support the EU’s partnerships and strate­
gic goals while strengthened relations between the
EU and partner countries will ensure better access
to important growth markets and contribute to the
security of supply in the EU.

Our successful strategic sector cooperation where
Danish competences come into play, is one of Den­
mark’s most important foreign policy tools in the
effort to create equal partnerships. In particular,
we must maintain and strengthen strategic sector
cooperation that promotes the green transition in
the best possible way through capacity and knowl­
edge building in partner countries. There is also a


need for us to think of our development cooper­
ation as an integral part of our overall efforts. We
must ensure that it contributes even more to find­
ing common solutions to global problems, including
with regard to the fight against poverty and climate
change. This will constitute an important point of
departure for the upcoming Strategy for Denmark’s
Development Cooperation, which will be based on
human rights.

**Asia and the Indo-Pacific region**

The global power shifts mean that Asia and the
Indo-Pacific region are increasingly the world’s
economic and geopolitical centre of gravity. China,
India, Indonesia, Japan, and South Korea will
together account for almost half of the world’s
growth up until 2030 while the EU and the USA
will account for just over a tenth. At the same time,
the region is increasingly subject to security policy
tensions. These developments call for an increased
Danish and European diplomatic and economic
engagement.

The Indo-Pacific region is a main artery for global
trade, and as a maritime nation, Denmark has a
clear interest in ensuring the freedom of navigation.
At the same time, we must seize the opportunities
that the growth markets in the region offer, both
politically and commercially. It will particularly be
in Denmark’s interest to collaborate with regard
to the green transition, sustainability, and digital
transformation. We must therefore strengthen the
existing green strategic partnerships with Japan,
India, South Korea, and Indonesia as well as estab­
lishing new strategic partnerships with countries
such as Australia and Vietnam. At the same time,
we must explore opportunities for new collabora­
tion in the region, including with the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).

**China**

We recognise that for a long time we have been
too naive and therefore, Denmark, the EU, and our
allies have significantly sharpened the approach to
China over recent years. This has been a necessary
and appropriate reaction to China’s conduct.

At the same time, China is an inevitable global
political and economic factor and also the world’s
biggest emitter of greenhouse gasses. This is what
we need to address. We must therefore manage
the challenges, but also work together when it is in
our interest. Denmark’s China policy must continue
to be engaged, clear-sighted and realistic, anchored
in a common strategic EU approach and in close
dialogue with the USA and our allies in NATO.


to global challenges. The EU must be Africa’s
preferred and closest cooperation partner across
policies and instruments. The government’s upcom­
ing Africa Plan will guide the Danish efforts for
stronger consensus and for strengthening bilateral
and European initiatives across our engagement.

The development cooperation effort will continue
to be a central element, but it is also crucial to
strengthen the political, economic, and security


-----

cooperation with the African partners. The Afri­
can countries have different needs and interests.
Therefore, we must build targeted, equal, and
trustworthy partnerships based on shared interests.
Our efforts must contribute to political stability and
security, sustainable economic development, and
the strategic independence of the countries as well
as curbing irregular migration. This requires that we
can deliver attractive solutions that are in demand
by the African countries, including investments and
support for a green transition. We must therefore
also think in terms of instruments with a focus on
finding sustainable, lasting, and locally anchored
solutions.

**The rules-based world order and multilateralism**

Due to the intensified global strategic competition
the rules-based order and multilateral cooperation
is under pressure. A world order that we, as a small
country, have benefited from. This is particularly
serious at a time when we are facing both shifts in
power dynamics and global challenges such as pov­
erty that require global solutions. Denmark must
continue its strong and unequivocal support for the
UN Charter and rules-based cooperation. Where
might does not make right. And where global prob­
lems related to for example climate change and
biodiversity are addressed through multilateral
cooperation.

Denmark’s candidacy for a non-permanent seat in
the UN Security Council in 2025-2026 is there­
fore a high priority. In this context, Denmark must
assume its traditional role as a bridge builder and
work constructively so that the Security Council
can function and achieve results even under diffi­
cult conditions. With a firm footing in international
law, we must work to maintain respect for the
common rules that are so crucial for the security of
small countries. At the same time, we must push for
a more holistic and thus long-term approach to the
prevention and stabilisation of crises and conflicts
that cause great human suffering and also affect
the security in our part of the world.

We must help in rethinking the international finan­
cial architecture and the role of the multilateral
development banks etc. to ensure their future con­
tribution to addressing the climate crisis, the debt
crisis, and the global poverty problems. We must
support the work to reform and future-proof the
WTO. Finally, we must strengthen the EU’s impact
as a multilateral actor and expand the EU’s partner­
ships with the United Nations, the African Union,
ASEAN, and the League of the Arab States.


**Climate**

The climate crisis constitutes the 21st century’s
greatest challenge. It will require global cooperation
and action if we are to avoid enormous economic,
security policy, and environmental and climate
consequences. Denmark must continue to be at the
forefront of the global climate action.

Our international influence in the climate area is
anchored in the fact that Denmark has set some of
the world’s most ambitious national climate targets,
accelerated the green transition, and assumed
leadership to ensure European energy independ­
ence. We thus have particular prerequisites for
acting as a bridge builder and for forming alliances
with regard to the climate agenda. The Danish
approach to international climate policy is based
on a wide range of mutually supportive efforts with
political dialogue, bilateral and multilateral devel­
opment cooperation, international fora such as the
COP negotiations, green exports, strategic sector
cooperation as well as international coalitions and
partnerships.

In the COP negotiations, Denmark must continue
to assume a leading role in pushing for increased
ambitions with regard to reduction efforts and
adaptation to climate change, especially for the
most vulnerable countries. There is a credibility
about Denmark’s commitment to the climate nego­
tiations and as a small, ambitious country, Denmark
is well suited for raising the global ambitions.

With ambitious Danish climate aid, we must also
continue to strengthen the bridge to countries out­
side of Europe that need assistance, partnerships,
concrete solutions, knowledge, and an exchange
of experience to link socially just economic devel­
opment in a way that is also adapted to the threat
that climate change constitutes. At the same time,
we must strengthen the cooperation with the larg­
est emitters and pull them in a more climate-ambi­
tious direction so that we, globally, can live up to
the Paris Agreement and keep the 1.5-degree target
alive. This must be done through, for example, a
strong engagement in the EU’s climate policy and
through our green strategic partnerships, strate­
gic sector cooperation, and green solutions, all of
which draw on our green societal model, where the
green transition goes hand in hand with economic
growth.

**Geopolitical challenges for Danish companies**

Danish companies are important cooperation part­
ners. They can contribute to safeguarding Danish
and European interests, and they can offer solu­
tions to global challenges in areas such as the green


transition, health, and the development of new
critical technology.

At the same time, Danish companies operate today
under altered framework conditions characterised
by geopolitical uncertainty, climate change, ambi­
tious climate targets as well as technological break­
throughs. For example, war and sanctions can close
markets over night or challenge supply chains.


This entails risks, new opportunities, and dilem­
mas. We must assist companies in navigating an
uncertain world with complex challenges. There is
an increased demand from companies for business
advice as a result of the global shifts that have
followed Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. We must
strengthen the geopolitical business advice regard­
ing, for example, sanctions, export controls, invest­
ment screening, and critical technology.


**Europe** **North**
**America**


Remark: The demographic development of the continents, the percentage of the world’s population.

_Source: UN, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2022). World Population Prospects 2022, Online Edition._


-----

# A more robust society

##### Globalisation is changing, and security policy considerations are increasingly included in these deliberations


For decades, we have benefited from the many
advantages of globalisation. As a small open econ­
omy, Denmark has been a champion of free trade
and of building up a strong internal market in the
EU. Danish companies have benefited from the
development of global value chains where Danish
expertise and knowledge have been able to show
themselves to their best advantage. Although the
benefits of globalisation have not always been
equally distributed, overall, open global trade has
contributed to growth and prosperity in both Den­
mark and in the world around us. It must continue
to do so.

But globalisation is changing. While previously
the focus was on the greatest possible growth
and prosperity, security policy considerations are
increasingly included in these deliberations. This
applies in China. This applies in the United States.
This applies in the EU. And this is also the case in


Denmark. Although trade contributes to a more
peaceful world, particularly in light of Russia’s war
of aggression, we must also recognise the fact
that interdependence does not preclude conflict
or guarantee peace. On the contrary, trade and
dependencies can also bring risks and vulnera­
bilities and can be used as pawns in the global
strategic competition. When global supply chains
break down, it matters where important goods are
produced or assembled.

**New vulnerabilities and threats**

It is becoming ever more apparent that tomorrow’s
threats and vulnerabilities will be of an increasingly
hybrid nature. The sabotage on the Nord Stream
gas pipelines in the Baltic Sea in 2022 has under­
lined the need to strengthen the protection of
critical infrastructure. The threat of cyber-attacks
remains very high, both in terms of espionage and


#### When global supply chains break down, it matters where important goods are produced or assembled


-----

with regard to crime, and Russia in particular makes
use of hybrid tools such as influence campaigns
with the aim of undermining our democracy and
our cohesion. In a short space of time, pandemics
and other global health threats can have major
consequences for everything from security to the
economy. Population growth, instability, climate
change as well as rising prices and food insecurity


create a risk of increased irregular migration from
Europe’s neighbouring areas.

Trade and industrial policies as well as areas such
as energy, health, food, research, digital transfor­
mation, and the development of new technologies
are increasingly intertwined with our foreign and
security policy. We must therefore increase our


ability to think across the board so that we can deal
effectively with the complex threat assessment that
we face and make the Danish society more robust
in the face of future challenges and crises.

**Resilience and open strategic autonomy**

Denmark must achieve increased resilience through
closer European cooperation. We need an EU that
can act quickly and decisively when crises strike.
Denmark must therefore work to strengthen the
EU through open strategic autonomy.

First and foremost, we must reduce Denmark’s and
Europe’s critical dependencies and vulnerabilities.
This applies especially to energy when it comes to
Russia and critical raw materials and technologies
when it comes to China. We must diversify our
supply in a broad sense and strengthen European
production by way of free trade agreements and a
continued realisation of the internal market – even
when this means difficult compromises. Faster
deployment of renewable energy is a crucial part
of the answer. In this context, Denmark has attrac­
tive solutions to offer. At the same time, together
with the other EU countries, we must think more
strategically with regard to our export controls.
Increasing resilience also requires that we continue
to systematically screen foreign investments and
increase awareness of risks in collaboration on
research and innovation within sectors that are
critically important to society. At the same time,
the upcoming National Strategy for Critical Supply
must ensure that we do not make ourselves unnec­
essarily vulnerable and that functions critical to
society can continue to operate in the event of
supply crises.

**Robust trade and industrial policy in the EU with**
**an eye for balance**

The ability to set our own direction for the society
that we want requires both resilience and a certain
ability to produce and obtain through trade what
we need. With robust trade and industrial policies
in the EU, we can secure both Europe and Denmark
a strong position within strategic sectors and tech­
nologies. This applies especially to the technologies
that support the green transition. This must con­
tribute to Europe being able to do more on its own,
while at the same time strengthening the internal
market and the EU’s global competitiveness.

This does not mean that Europe should close itself
off. The EU and Denmark must continue to be
champions of global trade. We must secure the
future basis for green growth and prosperity in
Denmark and in the world around us. It requires
a single market in development, healthy public


finances, and a responsible economic policy.
Companies must continue to be able to sell goods
and services in markets in third countries, and
global imports and security of supply are crucial
for companies’ production among other things.
But we must have an eye out Denmark’s and
Europe’s strategic interests. We must think more
strategically when we, in the EU, enter into trade
agreements with third countries. We must promote
independence when necessary and ensure freedom
of action, not putting all of our eggs in one basket.
We must be prepared to defend the EU’s own
interests against unfair trade practices and eco­
nomic blackmail. We must not think that the rest of
the world puts security policy aside when they do
business with us.

We will often have to strike a balance. On the one
hand, we must not be strategically dependent on
China or forget the risks of being in the Chinese
market. On the other hand, it is also not in Den­
mark’s or the EU’s interest to decouple ourselves
from China or to disregard the growth potential
for Danish exports. But we must insist on equal
market access and trading conditions for Danish
and European companies in China.

The trade ties between Europe and the USA are
important for Danish and European companies, and
we must work to strengthen them. At the same
time, the EU must demand fair competition in the
American market and ensure Europe’s long-term
competitiveness.

**Danish positions of strength**

Danish companies’ exports, internationalisation,
and general integration into the world economy
constitute an important foundation for Danish
growth and employment. International invest­
ments, high levels of innovation, and talent are
essential elements for strengthening Denmark’s
competitiveness. We need therefore to promote
Danish positions of strength within, for example,
green technology and the green transition, life
sciences, robotics, food, digital transformation, and
shipping.

We cannot achieve all that without the EU, where
we must work to ensure the best possible frame­
work conditions for Danish companies. Denmark
must work actively to ensure that the EU’s sector
policies support Danish interests and positions of
strength and that the EU contributes to combating
protectionism and strengthening equal conditions
of competition globally. We must assist companies
by working for stable supply and value chains and
advise them on foreign and security policy issues.
And we must continue official cooperation with


-----

business partners who play an important role for
Danish exports. The government’s upcoming Glo­
balisation Strategy must contribute to supporting
continued competitiveness for Danish companies
leading up to 2030 with a view to strengthening
Danish growth in the long term.

**The green transition**

The green transition is absolutely central to ensur­
ing Europe’s own independence from fossil fuels
and thus increased resilience.

The front runner role that Denmark has achieved
through decades of investments in, for example,
wind energy and energy efficiency is, at the same
time, an example of due diligence which today ben­
efits us both financially and in our foreign policy.
Many countries call for Danish solutions, and Den­
mark is currently involved in strategic sector coop­
eration in the energy field in a number of countries.
This also illustrates the fact that the green transi­
tion provides important commercial opportunities
for Denmark.

At the same time, we must ensure that we do not
build up new critical dependencies within the green
transition which could cost us dearly in the future.
Creating secure, stable, and sustainable supply
chains and access to critical resources requires new
international partnerships. For the same reason, the
EU’s green industrial policy will play an important
role both in terms of our ability to adapt, but also in
terms of our foreign policy objectives.

**The digital age**

The ubiquitous role of technology and society’s
engendered dependence on it means that tech­
nology has become foreign and security policy.
On the global stage, a technological race is
unfolding between China and the USA. We must
stand together in Europe and ensure that the EU
becomes a player and is not reduced to being a
playing field. Denmark must work to ensure that
the EU continues to assume a leading role in global
efforts to ensure responsible, regulated, and fair
technological development with respect for fun­
damental rights and democracy. This applies espe­
cially with regard to artificial intelligence, which
holds both great potential and entails significant
pitfalls. These developments will be reflected in
the government’s upcoming Strategy for Tech
Diplomacy.

The dialogue with the private sector and civil soci­
ety regarding fair technological development is
more important than ever. In this context, the gov­
ernment will continue to take the lead in preparing


Denmark against cyber threats and building inter­
national alliances. The government will also work to
expand Danish positions of strength, for example
within the field of quantum technology, which
has the potential in the long term to revolutionise
everything from green technologies to health to
our future defence. This creates new opportunities
for Danish companies and for Denmark as a digital
showcase and pioneering country. At the same
time, we must ensure that critical technologies
developed and manufactured in Denmark are not
transferred to other countries in an undesired way
or end up in the wrong hands.

**Denmark’s and Europe’s internal security**

The threat from the activities of foreign states
in Denmark, including intelligence activities and
espionage, has become significant, multifaceted,
and persistent. Added to this are new and hybrid
threats where the threat from cyber-espionage and
cyber-crime from both state and non-state actors is
particularly high. This requires an increased military
and civilian defence effort against hybrid threats
such as cyber-threats and influence campaigns, and
requires increased cyber and information security
and strengthened intelligence efforts.

The terrorist threat against Denmark remains seri­
ous. The lack of economic development and violent
conflicts in the Sahel and in the Middle East, among
other places, can contribute to creating a fertile
ground for instability, radicalisation, and the spread
of violent extremist movements. And in a globalised
society, the consequences can quickly affect Den­
mark. This requires continued multilateral engage­
ment and coordination and effective intelligence
cooperation with Denmark’s partners.

Instability can also accelerate irregular migration
towards Europe at a time when the migration
pressure on the EU’s external borders has already
increased. In addition, recent years have shown
that neither smugglers nor states shy away from
cynically exploiting migrants as a means of exerting
pressure on Europe. The increasing irregular migra­
tion towards Europe risks putting cohesion and the
internal market under pressure. Ultimately, it can
undermine the free movement within the EU.

It is both a global and a European challenge that
requires a reform of the European asylum system
with a focus on the external dimension. The gov­
ernment will work for sustainable European solu­
tions to the challenge of irregular migration, includ­
ing in cooperation with third countries within the
framework of our international obligations.


-----

Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Asiatisk Plads 2
1448 Copenhagen K

Phone: +45 33 92 00 00
um@um.dk
www.um.dk

Layout: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Public Diplomacy, Press and Communication

ISBN : 978-87-94339-36-0 (printed version)
ISBN: 978-87-94339-35-3 (digital version)

Photo credits:
Page  6: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Public Diplomacy, Press and Communications
Page 10: Ulrich Baumgarten via Getty Images
Page 16: Takahiro Yamamoto/Moment via Getty Images
Page 22: monap via Getty Images
Page 27: Yevhenii Dubinko via Getty Images

May 2023

Find the strategy online at www.um.dk


-----

