###### The Danish  National Strategy  for Cyber and Information Security


-----

###### This page has been intentionally left blank.


-----

#### Contents

**Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .** **4**

**A significant and complex cyber threat in constant change . . . . . . . . . . . . . .** **6**

**A cyber and information security boost in Denmark** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . **10**

**Strategic objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .** **16**

1. Robust protection of vital societal functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

2. Level of skills and management commitment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

3. Strengthening cooperation between the public and private sectors . . 26

4. Active participation in the international fight
against the cyber threat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

**Governance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .** **36**

**Appendix. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .** **41**


-----

#### Preface

Denmark is one of the world’s leading
countries when it comes to digitisa­
tion. Daily life in Denmark is digitised,
whether in private life, at work, or
in encounters with the Danish public
sector.

Digitisation is a key driver for the
development of Danish society.
New opportunities for economic
growth and increased prosperity
come with technological progress.
However, the high level of digitisation
does also include increased vulnera­
bility with criminals trying to exploit
the vulnerabilities of our digital
society.

The cyber threat is one of the most
serious threats against Denmark.
This threat has become a basic condi­
tion to which we must all adhere
to in our private lives, in our working
lives and in society as a whole.

Every day, our public sector, busi­
nesses and citizens are a target of
large or small-scale cyberattacks.
Hackers, criminals and hostile intelli­
gence services put the digital security
of people in Denmark under pressure.


The Danish government takes this
threat very seriously.

Denmark already has a solid founda­
tion to meet the challenges. The
Danish citizens generally have a strong
digital understanding, and ICT security
has for many years been a focus area
for many companies. In the public
sector, decades of focused efforts
from the public side to promote
digitisation in Denmark have given us
a well-developed foundation.

However, digital developments are
evolving fast, and new forms of cyber­
attacks are emerging at the same pace.
The cyber threat is constantly chang­
ing. Thus, a more concentrated effort
is needed to keep up with and be at
the forefront to meet developments
in threats and digital vulnerabilities.
This is why the government is now
launching a new Danish National
Strategy for Cyber and Information
Security 2022-2024.


-----

The strategy focuses on government
and critical infrastructure, as well as
citizens and businesses. External cyber
threats demand a joint effort if we are
to protect Denmark from malicious
cybercrime and cyber espionage.

The Danish government has already
agreed with a majority in Parliament
to strengthen Denmark’s cyber
defense by DKK 500 million through
the implementation of the political
agreement on the cyber reserve.
Municipalities and regions are also
continuously working to strengthen
cyber and information security.

The Danish National Strategy for
Cyber and Information Security will
further strengthen Denmark’s cyber
and security with a number of new
initiatives that will tie the overall effort
together. With this strategy, the
government is allocating a total of
DKK 270 million to 34 new key
initiatives that will equip us to keep
the cyber threat at bay and help
Denmark be digitally secure – also
in the future.


The threat we face is constantly
changing and requires public
authorities, businesses, and citizens
to continuously participate and take
active responsibility. Cyber security
is a continuous process. Hackers,
criminals and cyber spies are constantly challenging our security with
new and more advanced methods
of attack. With the Danish National
Strategy for Cyber and Information
Security, we are taking an important
step towards increased joint efforts
and strengthening our defences
against cyber threats, which today
constitutes one of the greatest threats
to Denmark and Danish society.

/The Danish Government


-----

#### A significant and complex cyber threat in constant change


-----

The threat from cybercrime and
cyber-espionage is considered very
high and is expected to remain so in
the future. Foreign states and criminal
hackers are working systematically,
persistently and purposefully to hit
carefully selected targets in Denmark.
They are continuously trying to abuse
the digitisation of our society to spy,
commit crimes, undermine democratic
processes, and ultimately to perpetrate
potentially destructive cyberattacks
against Denmark.

The digital infrastructure is increas­
ingly more vital to the functioning of
our society. As the society becomes
increasingly connected via digital
solutions, the amount of digitally
transferred information and data
increases. In turn, the consequences
of breakdown or attack will grow. The
cyber attacks of recent years against
the Irish health care service and the oil
and food industries in the US, among
others, clearly demonstrate some of
the consequences such attacks can
have on a country’s ability and capacity
to maintain vital societal functions.

Cybercrime is a highly profitable
industry at present. The criminals
are skilled, professional and driven
by the opportunities to gain profit.


They adapt quickly when profit
opportunities arise, when new tools
are developed, or when external
circumstances change their business
landscape.

At the same time, the threat from
espionage by the intelligence activities
of foreign states has become more
pronounced. Foreign state intelligence
services use technological advances
and make use of sophisticated hacker
groups who, through cyberattacks, are
able to compromise and gain access
to ICT systems to conduct intelligence
operations against Denmark. The intel­
ligence activities of certain states are
used to steal valuable knowhow from
both Denmark and our allies. Attacks
are often complex, and politicians,
officials and authorities, as well as
research institutions and companies,
can be included as either targets or
means in these activities.

Denmark is an attractive target for
cyberattacks due to our active role
internationally, in increased globalisa­
tion and international competition.
Digitisation and the general openness
of society, as well as a high level
of technological knowledge, make
Denmark an attractive target for
cyberattacks.


-----

Likewise, Denmark’s active interna­
tional role attracts both desired and
unwanted attention.

Simultaneously, new digital opportuni­
ties, such as artificial intelligence,
big data, quantum technology and
5G are on the horizon. This puts high
demands on how we as a society
protect valuable information and the
digital infrastructure that is so crucial
for the maintenance of our vital
societal functions. It also places
demands on the companies that
are part of our supply chains.

Every day, cyber criminals and spies
attack Denmark to blackmail Danish
companies, authorities and citizens
in order to steal our business secrets
that ensure Denmark’s prosperity,
and to reveal and challenge details
of our security and foreign policy to
harm Denmark and Danish interests.


Most cyberattacks are averted thanks
to advanced technology as well as
informed and vigilant public authori­
ties, companies and citizens. However,
things do go wrong from time to time,
and there are too many security gaps
today, which could potentially be
discovered by hackers and cyber
criminals.

Just as many people do not install
home security systems until after they
have been robbed, many cyberattacks
succeed due to cyber security negli­
gence because of overlooked or
downgraded cyber security, which is
only prioritised once the damage is
done. The hackers have far from won
the battle for the digital domain, but
the work of making Denmark digitally
secure is more important and more
urgent than ever.


###### Digitisation and the general openness

### “

###### of society make Denmark an attractive target for cyberattacks


-----

###### The Centre for Cyber Security’s key assessment of the cyber threat against Denmark


###### The threat from cybercrime: VERY HIGH

Cybercrime poses a real and persistent threat to all Danish
public authorities, private companies and citizens. The ability
of cyber criminals to develop and adapt their tactics to new
realities and the specialized cooperation that takes place on
closed Internet forums increases the threat.


#### !


###### The threat from cyber espionage: VERY HIGH

The Centre for Cyber Security assesses that foreign states
can and will try to steal valuable information from Denmark.
Time after time, specific incidents and attempts to attack
have given credence to this assessment.


#### !


###### The threat from destructive cyberattacks: LOW

The Centre for Cyber Security assesses that the threat from destructive
cyberattacks against Danish public authorities and private companies
is LOW. Though several foreign states have the capabilities to launch
destructive cyberattacks, they are currently less likely intent on conducting
destructive cyberattacks against Danish targets.


###### The threat of cyber activism: LOW

The numerous protests seen in 2020 have not been reflected in
more cyber activism attacks worldwide. The number of attacks has
thus remained at the same level as in previous years.


-----

#### A cyber and information security boost in Denmark


-----

The efforts made so far to ensure a
high level of cyber and information
security have increased a maturity
across society. There is a greater
awareness and attention to the area.
Cyber security has been strengthened
in the state and in six designated criti­
cal sectors (energy, health, transport,
telecoms, finance and maritime) with
the establishment of decentralised
cyber and information security units
(DCIS) and targeted strategies. In addi­
tion, government agencies are required
to follow the international manage­
ment standard, ISO 27001, and a set of
technical minimum requirements has
been introduced in government that
establishes a framework for risk-based
management of information security.


There has also been a general
strengthening of the skills of citizens
and businesses in terms of cyber and
information security.

At the same time, there is a strong
focus in the EU on enhancing cyber
security, including through the revision
of the Network and Information Secu­
rity (NIS) Directive. This also requires
Denmark to increase the level of ambi­
tion, including in terms of manage­
ment-based risk control, implementa­
tion of security measures and ICT
preparedness.


###### The NIS Directive


The EU Network and Information Security (NIS) Directive

The EU Network and Information Security (NIS) Directive from 2016 is an
important instrument in enhancing cyber and information security in the
vital societal functions of Denmark. In December 2020, the Commission
proposed to revise the Directive to expand the scope. E.g. in the form of
new cyber security requirements targeting companies and public authori­
ties and member states’ supervision of cyber security. The goal is manage­
ment-based risk control, implementation of organisational and technical
measures, as well as control of emergency preparedness, which enables
organisations to handle incidents (before, during and after) and operatio­
nal cooperation across organisations and national borders in the EU.


-----

Improving cyber security in Denmark
requires a concerted effort and a
shared responsibility across society.
The state is responsible for national
security. Companies and public author­
ities have a responsibility to safeguard
the security of their own organisation.
Moreover, all citizens need to under­
stand how their actions can affect their
own and others’ digital security.


The Danish National Strategy for
Cyber and Information Security 20222024 raises the ambitions and objec­
tives for a cyber and information
secure Denmark. The strategy of the
Danish government focuses on the
security of the critical ICT infrastruc­
ture that supports vital societal
functions.


###### Definition  of terms


Vital societal functions
The activities, goods and services that are the basis for the general
functioning of society.

Critical infrastructure
Infrastructure, including facilities, systems, processes, networks,
technologies, assets, and services - necessary to maintain or restore
vital societal functions.

Critical ICT infrastructure
The subset of critical infrastructure that includes the digital infra structure needed to maintain or restore vital societal functions.

ICT systems critical to society
ICT systems where major disruptions result in significant challenges
for society as a whole. The unavailability and unstable operation of
ICT systems can have significant consequences for society and for
the maintenance of processes critical to society.


-----

An ambitious effort
targeting government and
vital societal functions
Vital societal functions that are
robust and resilient require a high
level of cyber and information security
in the critical ICT infrastructure that
support these functions. This requires
ambitious efforts from both public
and private actors. The strategy is
expanded from covering the six
current sectors critical to society to
include a wider range of ministries
with responsibility for IT-supported
vital societal functions.


All government agencies must
continue to comply with a number
of technical minimum requirements,
which will be expanded during the
strategy period. The same applies to
ministries responsible for ICT systems
critical to society or vital societal func­
tions for which a number of additional
security requirements also apply.
Overall, this will contribute to ensuring
that ministries with a particular
responsibility for vital societal func­
tions is able to act quickly and
efficiently in the event of a serious
cyber incident.


###### Cyber and information security in the central government: New requirements for government agencies


All government
agencies


Must comply with a set of minimum require­
ments, including the organisation of security
work, compliance with ISO 27001 and techni­
cal minimum requirements


-----

Focus on the business sector
Cyber and information security must
be a priority for all Danish businesses,
especially small and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs). Many SMEs are
affected by cyberattacks and the
trend is increasing. The approximately
300,000 SMEs must prioritise cyber
security, as an attack can have huge
costs for the individual company, for
example in lost turnover. Ultimately,
this can result in a company losing
its business foundation and has to
cease operations.


With this strategy, the government
focuses on a stronger and more
coherent effort on SMEs. By strength­
ening the digital security level of SMEs,
we ensure that Denmark remains
competitive and has good conditions
for growth.


###### Growth for companies


Growth conditions for the cyber and information
security ecosystem in Denmark

A strengthened Danish cyber ecosystem can both create growth in the
cyber security industry and boost the general level of cyber security
in Denmark across authorities and companies, with a stronger foundation
of suppliers who understand the Danish market and its needs. A strong
Danish cyber security industry is key to contributing to European strategic
autonomy in this area. This requires strong knowledge sharing and net­
working. The EU has decided to set up national cyber security coordina­
tion centres in each Member State to support the cyber security industry
and work with the European Cyber security Competence Centre (ECCC).


-----

Citizens
Denmark is one of the countries in
the world where the digitisation of
the daily life is most advanced. Being
able to venture safely in digital daily
life requires a high level of trust among
citizens in the public ICT systems and
solutions.

It can be challenging as a citizen to
navigate in a constantly changing
threat landscape where new methods
of attack and approaches are continu­
ously evolving. Growing cybercrime
and digital fraud targeting citizens
demand a need for secure digital


behaviour and increased knowledge
about cyber and information security.

Thus, people in Denmark must be
equipped to act in the digital daily life
and use digital services and products
safely. The strategy aims to raise the
level of knowledge and skills of digital
behaviour and security among citizens
with initiatives that motivate and
engage, promote increased knowledge
and interest, and develop sound and
secure digital habits among citizens.


###### Hotline


Identity theft hotline

The government has initiated a new hotline for citizens to help with
digital identity theft. The hotline was launched in June 2021 by the
Danish Agency for Digital Government. The hotline is open 24 hours
a day all year round and provides a one-stop shop for citizens who either
have been victims of, or suspect, digital identity theft.


-----

#### Strategic objectives

###### With the strategy, the government  has set four strategic objectives, which sets the framework for the development of a stronger and more secure digital Denmark.


-----

###### The government wants

 1. Robust protection of vital societal functions

- We need to be able to maintain vital societal functions and economic activity
in a crisis where critical ICT infrastructure is non-functional for a short or
longer period.

- Government agencies and businesses must have a certain level of security
to be able to act on a short notice in the event of serious cyber incidents.

###### 2. Increased level of skills and management commitment

- Cyber and information security must be embedded in top management,
and skills must be strengthened. This applies to an overview of assets,
vulnerabilities and knowledge of potential threats.

- Citizens, businesses and government agencies need to know how to protect
themselves and stay safe digitally.

- Demand for cyber and information security skills must be accommodated
by training more specialists and building stronger capacity across society.

###### 3. Strengthening of the cooperation between the public and private sector

- Government agencies and businesses need to cooperate more closely
and share knowledge and experience about threats and incidents.

- Government agencies and businesses need to be supported with highly
specialised consultancy through centralised coordination.

###### 4. Active participation in the international fight against the cyber threat

- International cooperation in the EU, UN, NATO and like-minded countries
must be strengthened. It must be difficult and consequential to conduct
cyberattacks against Denmark.

- Denmark must actively contribute to ensuring an open, secure and reliable
internet, along with protecting critical ICT infrastructure.


-----

# 1

###### Robust protection of vital societal functions

 We need to be able to maintain vital  societal functions and economic activity in  a crisis where critical ICT infrastructure is non-functional for a short or longer period.

  Government agencies and businesses must have a certain level of security to be able  to act on a short notice in the event of serious cyber incidents.


-----

Maturity in working with cyber
and information security is generally
increasing in Denmark, including
among government authorities.
However, several key challenges
remain, including a lack of under­
standing of the cyber threat in
general, and complex ICT systems
that makes the work difficult.

Vital societal functions, such as energy
supply, rail transport and research,
are increasingly digitised, requiring a
focus on the critical ICT infrastructure
that supports them. There is a need
for a better overview of the critical
ICT infrastructure and dependencies
between the ICT systems that support
vital societal functions. Therefore,
ministerial areas with responsibility
for vital societal functions must have
a clear plan for their cyber and infor­
mation security and be able to partici­
pate in operational cooperation and
emergency preparedness.

Many government agencies lack
basic technical security measures
and continue not to comply with
the established technical minimum
requirements. Likewise, the level
of security for a large part of the
ICT systems critical to society in
the central government is currently
inadequate.

Since 2016, government agencies
have been required to follow the inter­
national security standard ISO 27001,
which sets best practices for informa­
tion security management. Over a third
of the agencies have yet to complete
the implementation of the standard.


Vital societal functions that are robust
and resilient also require that Danish
companies have adequate digital
security and that the police have the
capacity to prevent and investigate
cyber-related financial crime.

At present 40% of Danish SMEs have
an inadequate level of digital security
compared to their risk profile, and
many companies lack basic measures
in their digital security[1]. As a result,
there is a need to strengthen the
digital resilience of Danish enterprises,
especially SMEs.

Reports of financial cybercrime have
increased significantly in recent years.
Since its establishment in December
2018, the police’s Nationwide Centre
for IT-related Economic Crime (LCIK)
has received 70,000 reports of finan­
cial cybercrime[2]. This underlines
the need for enhanced prevention
and investigation efforts.

The strategy launches a series of
strategic actions to strengthen the
security of vital societal functions
and ensure that government agencies
and businesses have an adequate
level of security.


-----

###### The level of security of government agencies is inadequate in several places


**Status of ISO 27001 implementation**


**Status of the technical minimum requirements**


35%

43%
57% 65%

Implemented Not implemented Implemented Not implemented

Government agencies are required to comply with the ISO 27001 security standard and implement
20 technical minimum requirements. Only 57% have fully implemented the ISO 27001, and only 35% comply
with all 20 requirements.

_Source: Danish Agency for Digital Government_

###### Too many ICT systems critical to society in the central government are in an inadequate state

54% 46%

0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%

Adequate state Inadequate state

46% of the ICT systems critical to society in the central government are in an inadequate state. For a large proporti­

on of ICT systems, the cause is the inadequacy of the technical conditions and/or an inadequate level of security.

_Source: Danish Agency for Digital Government_

###### Companies have not implemented basic security measures


54% 46%

0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%

Adequate state Inadequate state


35%

65%

Implemented Not implemented


**Security measures deficiencies**


43%
57%

Implemented Not implemented


**Inadequate level of security**


##### 24 % 40 %


of SMEs have not implemented the two basic
security measures of back-up and automatic
updating of software


of SMEs have an inadequate level
of digital security in relation to their
risk profile


-----

###### Strategic initiatives

 Security and cooperation regarding vital societal functions  and ICT systems critical to society will be strengthened  with new requirements for the organisation of security work, including requirements for a partial strategy and decentralised cyber and information security units.

 Security requirements for the management of government  ICT systems critical to society will be tightened to ensure  that security in and around ICT systems has the right  managerial focus.

 The security in government agencies will be strengthened  by introducing new technical minimum requirements.  At the same time, advisory work on the ISO 27001 security standard will be increased to ensure full implementation by  all government agencies.

 A stronger technical bulwark will be built within central  government with new common technical solutions to protect government employees from phishing and malware. Common government logging is established as an ICT security shield  to provide better opportunity to identify and counter threats. The ability of government agencies to report and share threats with each other will also be strengthened.

 A better overview of critical ICT infrastructure supporting  vital societal functions will be created.

 Knowledge and awareness of digital security among business managers, employees and advisors, e.g., accountants and bank advisors will be increased. In addition, businesses will have access to powerful and easy-to-use tools that they can use  to raise their digital security level, especially targeting the  SME segment.

 Police response to cybercrime will be strengthened by  expanding the capacity to retrospectively investigate and  disrupt as well as enabling the deployment of the police to businesses in the event of a cyberattack.


-----

# 2

###### Level of skills and management commitment

 Cyber and information security must be  embedded in top management, and skills  must be strengthened. This applies in relation  to an overview of assets, vulnerabilities and knowledge of potential threats.

  Citizens, businesses and governments need to know how to protect themselves and stay safe digitally, and more specialists with cyber and information security skills need to be trained.


-----

Danes are becoming increasingly
aware of cyber and information secu­
rity[3]. However, there is a challenge in
translating awareness into knowledge,
skills, and action to boost cyber and
information security.

Cyber security requires top manage­
ment commitment to make security a
more integral part of the management
function, and this requires the posses­
sion of the right skills.

However, SMEs, in particular, lack
the skills and resources to implement
appropriate security measures. More­
over, there is a cross-cutting challenge
in recruiting and retaining relevant
cyber and information security skills.
The demand for cyber and information
security skills is great, but both author­
ities and companies find it difficult to
obtain the right profiles for the tasks.
Thus, there is a need to strengthen
the supply of skills if security is to be
raised across the board.


Finally, there is a need for initiatives
to promote increased skills within the
Danish population.

Citizens must be able to act safely
in the digital daily life. This applies
to children and young people, as well
as adults, so that they avoid, to the
greatest possible extent, becoming
victims of cybercrime or digital fraud.

In order to ensure a high level of
cyber and information security across
society, the strategy launches several
initiatives with a focus on increasing
skills and providing a better foundation
for top management commitment.
Efforts targeting children, young
people and adults through education
will also be created, to make the
Danish population more digitally
literate.


###### The survey Information Security among

### “

###### Danes 2020 has shown that knowledge about cyber and information security is  not sufficiently widespread among the population and among employees in both government agencies and companies


-----

###### Lack of top management commitment and competencies


##### 22 %

of companies and authorities that have tried
to recruit information security staff have either
been unable to recruit or had to hire a profile that
did not have all the desired competencies.

_Source: Labour market for information_
_security skills in Denmark_


##### 26 %

of Danish SMEs make decisions about
the company’s digital security work, where
the management is less than fully involved.

_Source: Digital security in Danish SMEs 2021_


###### Citizens lack knowledge about  cyber and information security


##### 16 %

of citizens comply with the recommendation of
making a password of more than 12 characters and
that this is not reused in multiple places


##### 21 %

of Danes in 2020
received scam phone calls.


-----

###### Strategic initiatives

 Embedding and prioritising cyber and information security  at all levels of management will be ensured by strengthening the knowledge, awareness and behaviour of top managers  and leaders in government through increased requirements  and expectations as well as new skills initiatives.

 The skills of government employees in cyber and information security will be strengthened with new training initiatives, including the State Digital Academy, which targets both  specialists and generalists.

 Equipping children, young people and adults to be digitally  literate will be ensured by implementing a broad initiative  in the field of education and training, e.g., by disseminating inspirational material and increasing awareness at all levels  of education.

 Society’s access to cyber and information security skills will  be strengthened through higher education, e.g., within ordinary education, and post-graduate and higher education.

 Cyber and information security among citizens, businesses  and government agencies will be enhanced by strengthening information efforts aimed at target groups through further development of the information portal, Sikkerdigital.dk.


-----

# 3

###### Strengthening cooperation between the public and private sectors

 Government agencies and businesses need to work more closely together and share knowledge and experience about threats  and incidents.

  Government agencies and businesses need to be supported with highly specialised consultancy through centralised coordination.


-----

The ability to share knowledge and
experiences on cyber and information
security incidents is vital to achieve
a high cyber and information security
level. Therefore, there is a need to
strengthen cooperation across sectors
so that we can become even better
at sharing knowledge and learning
from each other. Government agencies
also need to be better at using existing
data and incident reports to disseminate knowledge about threats and
vulnerabilities.

There is a high demand for centralised
consultancy, and there is a need to
strengthen capacity and the overall
advisory support of government
agencies to meet this demand.

In addition, citizens and businesses
exposed to phishing attempts and
hacking are unclear as to where to
address their issues and what sort
of assistance they need. Citizens
can now get advice from the identity
theft hotline, but there is a need for
broader help and consultancy for
both businesses and citizens: this also
includes basic cyber and information
security.


In the business sector, stronger
and closer cooperation is needed.
In general, initiatives targeted at
SMEs remain fragmented and often
only take the form of awarenessraising activities and guidance initia­
tives. If cyber and information security
is to be boosted in the entire business
sector, it is crucial that the overall
business effort for cyber and infor­
mation security is coordinated and
coherent. Concrete tools are needed
to keep Danish companies competi tive.

Through a number of concrete actions
in the strategy, the government is
strengthening public-private coopera­
tion on cyber and information security.
The initiatives ensure better opportu­
nities for knowledge and experience
exchange, strengthen the advisory
efforts towards public authorities,
companies and citizens and contribute
to the competitiveness of Danish
companies through concrete tools.


-----

###### Unreported figures expected

## ?
Since not all businesses, citizens and authorities are supposed
to report all incidents, a significant number of ICT security incidents
are expected to go unreported.

###### Scope of the incident and routes of attack vary

 In 2020, the Centre for Cyber Security handled 467 security incidents that had an impact on the affected organisations.

 433

 31
 2 1

Less Moderate Larger Severe

###### Identified routes of attack 2020

Others
14%

Technical Phishing
attacks and the like
34% 53%


###### 433

 31
 2 1

Less Moderate Larger Severe


-----

###### Strategic initiatives

 Better help for citizens and businesses will be offered through a cyber-hotline, where it will be possible to seek advice and guidance if you suspect or have been exposed  to cybercrime. The cyber hotline will be combined with  the already established identity theft hotline.

 Situation-specific advice to government agencies will  be strengthened. The central advisory capacity of the  Centre for Cyber Security, which provides advice and guidance on cyber and information security management, will be strengthened.

 Experience sharing and insight into cyber and information security incidents, as well as data sharing between  government agencies and businesses, will be strengthened to better provide advice on, warn and prevent incidents.

 Focus on the SME segment will be increased, so that know­
 ledge and experience are intensified. A cyber security unit for SMEs will be established to implement a comprehensive and coordinated effort to strengthen knowledge sharing and cyber security levels at SMEs. Among other things, the unit will help facilitate and launch new public-private initiatives to help strengthen SMEs’ cyber security.

 Cooperation and coordination between government  agencies on the protection and safeguarding of information across government agencies will be strengthened through advisory services.


-----

###### Public-private cooperation on cyber and information security

The Danish Cyber Security Council advises the government on how
to strengthen digital security and ensure knowledge sharing between
authorities, the business sector and the research community. During
its first term, the council has contributed to the development of the
Danish National Strategy for Cyber and Information Security 2022-2024,
held a number of webinars and contributed to the National Cyber Security
Month. The Council has also been involved in the development of the
SmitteStop app and the digital corona pass.

The Business Forum for Digital Security supports the government’s
work to promote and strengthen the digital security level of the Danish
business sector. The forum contributes to an overall boost to digital
security in the Danish business sector, by making recommendations to
the government and the business sector and acting as a strategic partner
for the government in the development and implementation of concrete
initiatives. Including the upcoming cyber security unit for SMEs.


-----

###### This page has been intentionally left blank.


-----

# 4

###### Active participation in the international fight against the cyber threat

  International cooperation in the EU, UN, NATO and with like-minded countries must be strengthened. Conducting cyberattacks  against Denmark has to be difficult and have consequences.

  Denmark must actively contribute to ensuring an open, secure and credible internet and protect critical ICT infrastructure.


-----

The digital domain is an integral part
of 21st century international politics,
and it has become one of the first lines
of defence of law-based international
order, which too has come under
strain.

Denmark is continuously under attack
conducted by other states. Malicious
actors want to steal valuable infor­
mation and high-tech knowledge or
deploy malware that can later be used
in tense situations. Although Denmark
can do much on its own, there is a
need for strengthening international
cooperation within the organisations
that can develop norms and define
standards for cyberspace if the under­
lying causes of cyberattacks are to be
fought.

Certain authoritarian states are
actively trying to undermine the
application of international law in
cyberspace and increase control over
the internet, while at the same time
exploiting the same global ICT infra­
structure for cyberattacks, influence
campaigns and aggressive cyber
espionage. When a rule-based inter­
national order does not exist in cyberspace, the distinction between war
and peace becomes blurry. This makes
it difficult for Denmark and our allies
to deter and to respond to malicious
cyber activity. In addition, it compro­
mises our safety, security and eco­
nomic progress. There is therefore a
need to be able to hold criminal actors
accountable and be able to deter and
counter malicious cyberattacks.


Multinational cyber security compa­
nies are often the first to detect and
respond to cyberattacks. In addition,
tech and cyber security companies are,
therefore, vital partners when it comes
to developing and maintaining stability,
order and rules in cyberspace. Thus,
there is a need to improve cooperation
between governments and private
companies at the strategic and political
level, and to clarify the division of
responsibilities and tasks when dealing
with specific cyber incidents.

In order to face the challenges,
but also to take advantage of the
opportunities that exist on the inter­
national cyber and information
security scene, the strategy initiates
a number of efforts in order to
strengthen Denmark’s international
profile, build stronger bridges to the
international tech and cyber security
industry and ensure that it remains
expensive and costly to conduct
cyberattacks and espionage against
Denmark and our allies.


-----

###### Strong focus on cyber security in  the EU with the following initiatives

- Establishment of a cyber diplomacy toolbox, which forms the basis for the EU to
increasingly call attention to the cyber threat, and through which sanctions have been
adopted against hackers from Russia, China and North Korea.

- The decision to establish the European Cyber security Competence Centre (ECCC)
and the Network of National Coordination Centres, which will, among other things,
enhance the competitiveness and resilience of the European cyber security industry
and turn cyber security into a competitive advantage for EU companies.

- A revision of the NIS Directive, putting additional focus on cyber security in critical
sectors and among suppliers to these sectors.

- A revision of directives, inter alia, the directive for products and radio equipment,
in order to include cyber security.

- Prioritising cyber security in the European funding programmes, Digital Europe and
Horizon Europe, including the establishment of cross-border cooperation between
industry, research institutions and government agencies.

- Launch of an EU cyber security strategy, including focus on building collective
resilience in Europe.


###### European framework for  cyber security certification

Increased digitisation of everything from toothbrushes to cars, increased use of the internet
and storage of data and systems in the cloud means increased risk of cyberattacks. It is a risk
that is difficult for both citizens and businesses to understand and to protect themselves against
adequately. To strengthen cyber security and the internal digital market, the EU has adopted
regulation that allow for the cyber security certification of products, services and processes.
This will make it easier for citizens and businesses to be better informed about which products
and services that meet the relevant safety requirements.


-----

###### Strategic initiatives

 Denmark’s efforts in international cooperation for an open, secure and reliable internet will be strengthened through  an increased involvement in the EU, NATO and the UN.

 Denmark’s position and profile when it comes to international cyber cooperation will be boosted, with the aim of strengthe- ning the possibility of diplomatic responses, including sanctions and work for active defence using offensive cyber capacity.

 The deterrence of cyberattacks will be strengthened by  raising the costs of attacking Denmark, our allies or our  close partners in cyberspace by strengthening Denmark’s  contribution to detecting, deterring and prosecuting  individuals, actors and organisations that abuse digital  networks to steal and spy on the people in Denmark,  companies and government agencies.

 Export control of digital products from Danish companies  and help to businesses to effectively freeze the financial  assets of criminals will be improved and strengthened.

 Cooperation with the multinational tech industry, think  tanks and academia to counter cyberattacks and other hybrid threats will be strengthened through technological diplomacy and the direct channel to tech company headquarters.


-----

#### Governance

###### Responsibilities and roles for authorities’ work on cyber and information security


-----

The cyber and information security
work is organized according to the
principle of sectoral responsibility.
This means that the authority, which
has day-to-day responsibility is also
responsible in the event of a serious
incident. This applies with respect to
daily preparedness, during an ongoing
incident and in connection with
recovery work following an incident.

Intra-sector incidents
The entity (authorities, businesses
and organisations) which has day-today responsibility for a given service
or function will continue to have this
responsibility in the event of a cyber
incident. In connection with this, the
entity must ensure that it receives
assistance from any operational
supplier. Furthermore, the entity may
request assistance from decentralised
cyber security units. The entity is
responsible for requesting this


assistance and for preliminary
incident management.

Furthermore, depending on the
scope of the incident, the entity is
responsible for reporting the incident
to all competent authorities and to
the Centre for Cyber Security. Finally,
the entity is responsible for any
external communication concerning
the incident.

Major cross-sectoral incidents
In connection with major cyber
incidents that affect several sectors,
The National Operative Staff (NOST,
which includes among its permanent
members the Danish National Police,
the Danish Security and Intelligence
Service and the Danish Defence
Intelligence Service/the Centre for
Cyber Security) may be activated.


###### Principle of sectoral responsi - bility


Among other things, the principle of sectoral
responsibility implies that:

1. All ministers must ensure an appropriate emergency response
within their own remit.

2. Sector-specific responsibility encompasses all critical functions
and services required by law, politically or administratively.

3. The authorities’ emergency response planning must be based on
an ongoing and systematic risk assessment process, for which
management assumes overall responsibility.

4. The public authorities must monitor the risk scenario for their
own sector on a regular basis.


-----

However, in these situations the prin­
ciple of sectoral responsibility contin­
ues to apply, which means that it is the
authorities responsible for the relevant
sectors who must ensure that a com­
prehensive overview of the scope of
the incident is carried out and the
reporting of this to the relevant
authorities, including to the Centre
for Cyber Security (and to the National
Operative Staff if this unit has been
established), just as it is the responsi­
bility of the affected authorities,
businesses and organisations to
manage the incident and its conse­
quences. Depending on the scope and
nature of the incident, the Centre for
Cyber Security may assist the entities
affected by the incident in their
response. For instance, the Centre for
Cyber Security may carry out technical
investigations of cyberattacks with a
view to stopping the specific incident,
as well as to clarify any methods of
attack or vulnerabilities, such that
prevention of similar situations can
be improved. These investigations will
be carried out in close collaboration
with the entity that has been subject
to the incident.

In connection with the majority of
major cyberattacks there will be a
need for both general investigations
and technical, ICT-security investiga­
tions. To this end, close cooperation
has been established between the
police (including the Danish Security
and Intelligence Service) and the
Centre for Cyber Security. This cooperation entails mutual briefing in
the event of major cyber incidents,
including intentional attacks. Similarly,
concerted operational efforts will typi­
cally be implemented in connection


Communication
As a general rule, external communica­
tion in connection with minor incidents
which do not affect several sectors
will be managed by the authority
responsible for the relevant sector.
Communication concerning cyber
threats and the current situation
report as well as other crisis communi­
cation in connection with cyber
incidents is the responsibility of the
Centre for Cyber Security in collabo­
ration with the authority responsible
for the relevant sector.

Communication will need to be
coordinated in the event of a major,
cross-sectoral incident. This coordina­
tion is the responsibility of the Central
Operational Communication Staff
(DCOK) under the auspices of National
Operative Staff (NOST). The DCOK
is responsible for ensuring rapid
disclosure and coordination of relevant
information to the general public,
including to the media. The DCOK is
also tasked with establishing ad hoc
units from which the public can obtain
further information concerning the
specific incidents.

Government bodies with crosssectoral responsibility for cyber
and information security
Public authorities’ work with cyber
security will be supported through
assistance, information, guidance and
advice from government bodies with
cross-sectoral and coordinating func­
tions in the field. Public authorities
must actively request the assistance
they require.


-----

###### Government bodies that supply information, advice and guidance on cyber and information security matters

1. The Centre for Cyber Security is the national authority on ICT security. The centre is
responsible for a number of tasks of a preventive and mitigating nature, including advisory
services. The Centre for Cyber Security’s infrastructure and Internet security service can
help detect and warn of advanced cyberattacks on authorities and businesses that subscribe
to the service. The Centre for Cyber Security warns relevant authorities and businesses
about specific cyber threats. The centre also prepares national and sector-specific situation
reports and threat assessments.

2. The police are tasked with preventing and investigating IT-related crime and with
stopping such crime. The police also have a coordinating role in the event of major,
cross-sectoral incidents.

3. The Danish Security and Intelligence Service is the national security authority for
Denmark and provides consultancy and assistance to public authorities and private
businesses in security matters, including the handling and storage of documents
based on the safety circular.

4. The Danish Agency for Digital Government supports information security in the public
sector, including through guidance on ISO 27001 and setting requirements for government
agencies, including as part of the government’s ICT portfolio management. In addition, the
Danish Agency for Digital Government carries out a number of citizen-focused information
[tasks, including Sikkerdigital.dk and the identity theft hotline. The agency is also responsible](http://Sikkerdigital.dk)
for coordinating the implementation of the strategy in concert with the Ministry of Defence.

5. The Danish Business Authority is tasked with developing and offering knowledge,
guidelines and tools and coordinating efforts aimed at strengthening digital security
in the wider business community, especially in SMEs.


-----

###### This page has been intentionally left blank.


-----

#### Appendix


-----

###### Initiatives

 Robust protection of vital societal functions

1.1 Strengthened security regarding vital societal functions

1.2 Critical ICT systems in the central government need to be more secure

1.3 Better security through ISO implementation and new minimum
requirements targeting government agencies

1.4 Greater focus on ICT security in public ICT procurement and tendering

1.5 Common technical solutions

1.6 Strengthening digital resilience and digital management commitment in SMEs

1.7 Strengthening police efforts against cybercrime

1.8 Increased web patrolling

1.9 Recovery of data and critical ICT systems in the central government

1.10 Legal basis to counter broad and disruptive destructive cyberattacks

1.11 Expanded analysis of critical national ICT infrastructure

1.12 Coordinated vulnerability Disclosure (CVD) within central government

1.13 Strengthened accreditation and technical security audits

1.14 Focus on ISPs’ ability to block malicious domains

1.15 Alternative to satellite-based time management

1.16 Strengthening the first-time registration of foreign nationals in the
Central Population Register

###### Increased level of competence and management commitment

2.1 Strengthened efforts in relation to knowledge, awareness and conduct
for top management and government leaders

2.2 Government employees need better skills in cyber and information Security

2.3 Competencies in cyber security for children, young people and adults

2.4 Competence building in cyber and information security through higher
education

2.5 Knowledge sharing and cyber and information security in in the field
of research and education

2.6 Strengthened information efforts for citizens, authorities and businesses
[and strengthening of the portal Sikkerdigital dk](http://Sikkerdigital.dk)


-----

###### Strengthening cooperation between the public and private sectors

3.1 Better help for citizens and businesses through a cyber-hotline

3.2 Strengthened central advisory capacity

3.3 Establishing a cyber security unit for SMEs

3.4 Strengthened exchange of experiences and insights into cyber and
information security incidents

3.5 Enhanced investigative capability for cyber espionage

3.6 Strengthening the protection of the information of the central government

3.7 Strengthened security oversight of system vendors and data processors

###### Active participation in the international fight against cyber threats

4.1 Strengthening the contribution to a rules-based international order

4.2 Diplomatic responses

4.3 Strengthened capacity to counter cyberattacks by state and
non-state actors

4.4 Strengthened deterrence of cyberattacks

4.5 Strengthening controls on the proliferation of cyber products and
the freezing of economic resources


-----

###### Robust protection of vital societal functions

1.1 Strengthening security around vital societal functions

Ministerial areas responsible for vital societal functions that are significantly
IT-enabled are required to develop cyber and information security strategies
and establish a decentralised cyber and information security unit (DCIS).
The strategies will initially cover state-owned critical ICT infrastructure and
in the next phase address the private, regional and municipal sectors.

1.2 Critical ICT systems in the central government need to be more secure

New cyber and information security requirements are introduced for
government agencies responsible for ICT systems critical to society. Since
a significant part of the government’s ICT systems critical to society are
currently outsourced to private suppliers, the possibility for the government
to take over the ICT systems, if necessary, must also be considered if the
supplier in question goes bankrupt or decides to liquidate its business.

1.3 Better security through ISO implementation and new
minimum requirements for government agencies

The management of information security in the central government is
strengthened by increasing guidance initiatives in relation to ISO 27001.
At the same time, security is strengthened through the further development
of minimum technical requirements, which are mandatory for all government
agencies.

1.4 Greater focus on ICT security in public ICT procurement
In order to improve cyber and information security among public authorities,
it needs to be identified how ICT security aspects can be better integrated
into public framework and procurement contracts, and whether the level of
ICT security in the contracts is sufficiently transparent for the authorities.

1.5 Common technical solutions
Several common solutions are being established to strengthen security
among the authorities, including 1) a joint state-safe DNS service to protect
government employees against phishing and malware, 2) a joint state
security shield (GovShield), which, through logging and the possibility of
expansion, must help identify and counter cyber threats against authorities
that are not customers of the central government’s IT, 3) an effective report­
ing system for phishing emails (phishing portal), so that sharing information
about threats and indicators of compromises is improved. In addition,
4) a National ICT Contingency Plan will be established, which authorities
will have to take into account in their contingency plans


-----

1.6 Strengthening digital resilience and digital
management commitment in SMEs
The digital resilience of Danish SMEs is increased by giving their manage­
ment, employees and existing advisors the best possible conditions to
secure themselves against the digital threat with, among other things,
a user-friendly and interactive toolbox and a bridge-building effort.

1.7 Strengthening police efforts against cybercrime
Strengthen police response to cybercrime by expanding the capacity
to investigate and disrupt cybercrime from behind the scenes and enable
police to deploy to businesses in the event of a cyberattack.

1.8 Increased web patrolling
Under the multi-year agreement for the police and the prosecution, a web
patrol unit will be set up in the Danish police, which will enable the police
to prevent, monitor and investigate activities in the digital space in order
to prevent cybercrime.

1.9 Recovery of data and ICT systems critical to
society in the central government

Government agencies must have plans in place to be able to recover data
and ICT systems critical to society in the event of damaging incidents.
Guidelines and instructions must be developed for the application of
recovery plans and tests in the central government, with a view to more
government agencies testing their recovery plans. In addition, the efforts
of the Centre for Cyber Security are strengthened regarding assistance
with recovery, particularly in cases of importance to national security.

1.10 Legal basis to counter broad and disruptive destructive cyberattacks
The feasibility of building the capability to counter disruptive or destructive
cyberattacks against vital societal functions in Denmark by providing the
legal basis to take down compromised servers will be examined.

1.11 Expanded analysis of critical national ICT infrastructure
An analysis of the digital dependencies between critical ICT infrastructures
is to be carried out. The analysis will be a supplement to the ongoing
mapping of critical infrastructure in Denmark. The purpose is to equip
society to continue vital societal functions in a better way if these are
affected by major or global cyber security incidents.


-----

1.12 Government CVD policy
A pilot of a government CVD (Coordinated Vulnerability Disclosure) policy
will be launched. A government CVD policy will describe the framework
for government agencies to allow private individuals (“helpful hackers”)
to identify and report vulnerabilities in ICT systems.

1.13 Strengthened accreditation and technical security audits
The capacity of the Centre for Cyber Security to accredit ICT systems
that process classified information is strengthened. In addition, the capacity
to conduct technical safety inspections, to a limited extent, for special
authorities is strengthened, as well as guidelines and advice from authorities
in this regard.

1.14 Focus on ISPs’ ability to block malicious domains
The possibility for ISPs to provide DNS blocking of malicious domains
as a standard service will be explored. The aim is to strengthen the ability
to identify, remove or block malicious domains and thereby achieve greater
security for Internet users in Denmark.

1.15 Alternative to satellite-based time management
A cross-sectoral analysis is to be prepared of the need to establish
one or more time management systems as an alternative to the existing
satellite-based time management system. The aim is to create a framework
for the establishment of robust and accurate time management, on which
many current and future technologies in Denmark depend.

1.16 Strengthening the first-time registration of foreign
nationals in the Central Population Register

Training efforts will be launched for control staff of relevant authorities
to ensure more valid personal data in the Central Population Register,
which is a prerequisite for trust in the personal data used by many public
and private bodies.


-----

###### Increased level of competence and management commitment

2.1 Strengthened efforts in relation to knowledge, awareness and
conduct for top management and government leaders

Increased demands are placed on the personal ICT security of top govern­
ment leaders, and competence initiatives are strengthened so that security
will become a integral part of the management task in the future.

2.2 Government employees eed better skillswithin the
field of cyber and information security

New competence initiatives will be launched to ensure that all government
employees know what constitutes safe digital conduct and can put it into
practice.

2.3 Competencies in cyber security for children, young people and adults
New initiatives are being launched in primary schools to strengthen the
management of data in the education sector through guidelines and aware­
ness-raising activities. This will ensure that children, young people and adults
are equipped to navigate safely in a digital world.

2.4 Competence building in cyber and information
security through higher education

New training elements in mainstream education and a strengthened effort
in higher education and follow-up training will contribute to reducing the
skills gap in cyber and information security in society.

2.5 Knowledge sharing and cyber and information
security in the field of research and education

Increased focus is being placed on cyber security in the educational offer
in the research and educational environments.

2.6 Strengthened information efforts for citizens, authorities and
[businesses and strengthening of the portal Sikkerdigital.dk](http://Sikkerdigital.dk)
[Sikkerdigital.dk will become Denmark’s common and authoritative informa­](http://Sikkerdigital.dk)
tion portal for help and guidelines on digital security. This is to ensure
a high level of knowledge and competence among citizens, authorities and
companies, including large companies. By building on the information efforts,
the conduct of each target group also needs to be addressed.


-----

###### Strengthening cooperation between the public and private sectors

3.1 Better help for citizens and businesses through a cyber-hotline
A government hotline will be established for citizens and businesses,
including large enterprises, to seek help and guidance on basic cyber and
information security. The hotline should also be able to provide concrete
guidelines on, for example, data recovery, phishing attempts and/or securing
data for possible subsequent police investigation. The hotline is established
[in close cooperation with Sikkerdigital.dk.](http://Sikkerdigital.dk)

3.2 Strengthened central advisory capacity
The initiative strengthens the central advisory services of the Centre for
Cyber Security in a number of areas: (1) strengthening the highly specialised
advisory unit with a focus on situational advice to government agencies with
regard to solution-specific and practical challenges; (2) increasing the capac­
ity to conduct security technological studies; (3) strengthening the analytical
capacity in relation to cybercrime and cyber espionage; and (4) strengthen­
ing the capacity of the telecommunications section with regard to being able
to follow the development of 5G technology and provide advisory service.

3.3 Establishing a cyber security unit for SMEs
In order to have a comprehensive and coherent initiative targeting SMEs,
a cyber security unit will be established to, among other things, gather and
share SME-relevant knowledge and experience on incidents and threats.
Among other things, the unit will help facilitate and launch new publicprivate initiatives to help strengthen SMEs’ cyber security. The initiative is
adapted to different types of SMEs, as they have varying levels of maturity
and needs.

3.4 Strengthened exchange of experience and insight
into cyber and information security incidents

Possibilities must be investigated for strengthening the exchange of
experience and knowledge building across public and private actors and
between sectors, so that relevant knowledge about specific incidents is
shared as widely as possible. There is also a need to look at how data from,
for example, the Danish Data Protection Agency and the Danish National
Police can be made more available to others.


-----

3.5 Enhanced investigative capability for cyber espionage
The Danish Security and Intelligence Service’s capacity to investigate
cyber espionage by state actors is strengthened.

3.6 Strengthening the protection of the information
of the central government

A national coordination group is set up to strengthen cooperation and
coordination between authorities and to step up advisory efforts in relation
to the physical security at government agencies.

3.7 Strengthened security oversight of system vendors
and data processors

A cost-effective basic model for the supervisory task is being developed
with a view to strengthening and streamlining the authorities’ supervision
of data processors and system suppliers in the field of information security
and data protection. Based on the results, a concept test of the supervision
model can be carried out on one or more ICT systems in the central
government.


-----

###### Active participation in the international fight against  cyber threats

4.1 Strengthening the contribution to a rules-based international order
Through significantly strengthened efforts in the UN and other norm and
standard-setting organisations, as well as through increased cooperation
with the tech industry, Denmark will increase its contribution to a rulesbased international order in cyberspace and shape the rules of the game
in an area that is crucial for our security, safety and economic prosperity.

4.2 Diplomatic responses
Denmark’s capacity to initiate and engage in international coordination
of diplomatic responses to cyberattacks, such as attributions and sanctions,
is strengthened, including in the EU context, with a view to increasing
Denmark’s deterrence profile in the cyber area.

4.3 Strengthened capacity to counter cyberattacks
by state and non-state actors

A number of actions are being implemented to strengthening national cyber
defence, including 1) strengthening the Cyber Analysis Division of the Centre
for Cyber Security to increase technical attribution capabilities, 2) it must be
possible to track influencing activities abroad on social media, 3) establishing
an offensive cyber defence capable of detecting preparations by, warning of,
deterring and countering cyberattacks by state and non-state actors against
Denmark or our allies, 4) the Danish knowledge building and influence in the
field of cyber operations and security in NATO is strengthened through the
secondment of staff and 5) strengthening cyber security at the embassy level
through the recruitment of designated technical standards, technical solutions
and the institutionalisation of sustained dedicated cooperation in this area.

4.4 Strengthened deterrence of cyberattacks
An active cyber defence must be built that will enable us to disrupt, mislead
or stop an adversary’s cyber operations against Denmark. This includes
the deployment of a liaison officer to Europol’s Joint Cyber Action Task force
(J-CAT).

4.5 Strengthening controls on the proliferation of cyber
products and the freezing of economic resources

Controls on the proliferation of cyber products are being strengthened so
that Denmark does not proliferate sensitive technology that cybercriminals
can access At the same time we need to help businesses become better


-----

December 2021

The Danish Ministry of Finance
Christiansborg Slotsplads 1
1218 Copenhagen K
Denmark
Tel: +45 3392 3333
[E-mail: fm@fm.dk](mailto:fm@fm.dk)

ISBN 978-87-93073-51-7 (digital version)
ISBN 978-87-93073-52-4 (printed version)

Design: BGRAPHIC
Photos: Getty Images

The publication can be downloaded
[at fm.dk / regeringen.dk](http://regeringen.dk)


-----

The Danish Ministry of Finance
Christiansborg Slotsplads 1
1218 Copenhagen K
Denmark
Tel. +45 3392 3333
[E-mail: fm@fm.dk](mailto:fm@fm.dk)


-----

