## DANISH DEFENCE AGREEMENT 2013-2017

Copenhagen, 30 November 2012

The Danish coalition government (the Social Democrats, the Social-Liberal Party and the
Socialist People's Party) and the ‘Venstre’ (the liberal party), the Danish People's Party, the
Liberal Alliance and the Conservatives have entered into the following agreement regarding
the Danish defence for the period 2013-2017.

**Introduction**
_The future role of the Danish armed forces and the security policy framework_
The primary purpose of the Danish defence is to enforce the sovereignty of the Kingdom of
Denmark and to ensure the continued existence, integrity and safety of the nation. The
threats against Danish interests can occur anywhere in the world, and they are
unpredictable and complex. Our contributions to international operations in recent years
have given Denmark significant international recognition. Along these lines the Danish
defence will continue to contribute to safeguarding Danish foreign and security policy
interests, while also our national security is safeguarded by international deployment of
military capabilities.

In the light of the security policy development of recent decades, the Danish defence is also
assuming an ever-increasing part as one of several important instruments of a pro-active
Danish foreign and security policy, contributing to the prevention of conflicts and war, in
respect of democracy, freedom and human rights.

The Danish armed forces will be organized with the purpose of continuing to contribute with
well-armed and well-trained military forces to all types of international missions, from actual
combat as part of a larger coalition, to peacekeeping and humanitarian operations. In this
respect it is crucial that the Danish defence is organized in order to be able to participate in
short as well as protracted international operations.

The Danish defence will continue to have the capacity to deploy multiple smaller or larger
contributions for shorter periods of time, as well as the capability to deploy force
contributions at short notice in connection with crisis management, humanitarian disasters,
evacuation operations, demonstration of solidarity, NATO's commitment, etc. This is
ensured by our participation in NATO's expeditionary forces. According to the Defence


-----

Commission report of 2008, the demand for Danish contributions to international operations
will not decrease, and we will often be dealing with protracted operations. This emphasizes
the need for sufficiently robust and durable collective operational capabilities of the Danish
defence as a whole, in order to support and maintain a sustained international commitment.

NATO remains a cornerstone of Danish security and defence policy, and is a crucial
framework for the close transatlantic cooperation. Denmark's sovereignty is secured in a
strategic perspective through NATO's Article 5 commitment to collective defence of Alliance
territory. At the same time, NATO provides a framework for the participation of the Danish
defence in international missions. The defence will continue to provide its share to NATO by
being able to contribute to international efforts and to maintain and develop the appropriate
military capabilities. As a leading nation, Denmark also remains committed to the ongoing
transformation of the Alliance and the military forces of its member states, including
strengthening of the requirements of the Alliance for the usability of military forces, and the
feasibility of the NATO Smart Defence initiative to seek still greater operational effect. Thus,
Denmark will continue to focus on maintaining our position as a NATO core member state.

An active Danish engagement in the UN is another cornerstone of Danish security and
defence policy. Denmark should therefore work to ensure that the UN (Security Council)
continues to constitute the foundation of the international system as the source of global
legitimacy.

Within the framework of the UN Charter, and in accordance with the principle of
responsibility to protect (R2P), the Danish defence will also continue contributing to
international operations, whenever a coalition of nations deems it necessary to carry out a
military intervention.

The security policy challenges mean that a strong international rule of law, adherence to
international humanitarian law and effective multilateral cooperation remain a Danish
priority.

The continued proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and long-range missiles, as well
as the threat in cyberspace from governmental and non-governmental actors alike,
represent an increasing security risk for Danish society and the Danish armed forces.

Furthermore, an increased focus has been put on the Arctic within the past few years. Here,
climate change is gradually leading to increased geographic accessibility, resulting in larger
commercial and scientific activity in the area. This also implies increasing awareness of the
right to extract natural resources in the Arctic.

_Level of ambition_
The focus of future international capabilities for the Danish defence will be the ability to react
quickly in relation to international deployments in a UN, NATO or other relevant setting, in
order to contribute to maintaining international peace and security. At the same time, the
defence must retain the ability to establish major contributions to sustained international
operations.

In order to safeguard Danish interests, the Danish defence must be able to participate in the
full range of international missions, from high-intensity combat operations, stabilization tasks
and international law enforcement, to preventive interventions, capacity-building, and
evacuation of Danish citizens from abroad, as well as international rescue and disaster
relief.


-----

Alongside national tasks, which include surveillance, assertion of sovereignty and rescue
operations, the defence is required to continue solving international tasks.

The tasks of the Danish defence point towards an increased focus on the ability for
transverse planning, and to deploying the capabilities of the Danish army, navy and air force
in a joint services framework, incorporating the capabilities of the Danish home guard and
the Danish Emergency Management Agency (DEMA).

Continued cross-services prioritization, also in order to perform the aforementioned tasks,
will enable the defence to contribute to capacities for international operations and efforts
within the framework of the UN and NATO, among others, of the following nature:

-  Force contributions set up across defence and government agencies, such as a task
force for humanitarian operations.

-  The army will have the capacity to deploy a battalion combat command (typically from
abt. 300 and up to abt. 800 soldiers) on short notice, either for short or sustained
missions.

-  Up to two large units from the navy deployed at short notice, or a large unit from the
navy deployed in a sustained mission.

-  Up to three simultaneous military air contributions at short notice consisting of, for
example, transport aircraft, helicopters, combat aircraft, and capabilities in monitoring
and warning systems. Some of these deployed to sustained[1] missions.

-  Special operations forces as well as capabilities from the rest of the Danish armed forces
in support.

-  Tactical planning staffs from the army, navy and air force.

-  Contributions from the army, navy, air force and home guard to the military capacitybuilding, and military support to the civilian capacity building. The contribution must be
adaptable into a comprehensive approach together with civilian elements in the
combined effort.

-  Other smaller contributions from the army, navy, air force and home guard, including
single person deployments to international staffs, etc.

As mentioned, the above listing is merely examples of possible force configurations due to
on-going cross-services prioritization.

In this context, NATO's recommendations to Denmark on the availability of specific types of
capabilities will be given special attention.

Alongside the contribution of the defence to international operations and task solutions, the
defence will continue to carry out national tasks, including surveillance, assertion of
sovereignty and rescue operations, and ultimately engage in a collective defence within the
framework of NATO.

Due to the development in the Arctic, the defence must have the capability to carry out all
current tasks in the Arctic. This includes a series of civilian tasks, which the defence attends
to by its presence in and around Greenland, as it supports other authorities in their solution
of these tasks. The defence will further be able to deploy capabilities from the entire ambit to
the Arctic.

1 For the army, sustained means missions lasting more than eighteen months.


-----

The defence must have the capability for military operations in cyberspace, including the
ability to protect own network infrastructure, and also to affect opponents’ use of
cyberspace.

_Overall financial framework for the Danish defence_
Denmark is facing a time of economic challenges, and a continuity of public finances must
be secured. The political parties behind the Defence Agreement (hereinafter referred to as
the Parties to the Defence Agreement) agree that the defence must also contribute to this
continuity. At the same time it is crucial that Denmark continues to have an effective and
usable defence that can flexibly and speedily solve the tasks decided upon by the
government and the Folketing (the Danish Parliament).

In the light of this, there is agreement that the annual defence spending[2] is to be reduced by
DKK 2.5 billion in 2015, DKK 2.6 billion in 2016, and by DKK 2.7 billion in 2017, see Table 2.
The gradual phasing in of measures to improve efficiency and development initiatives entails
that a total of DKK 2.4 billion is to be released in 2013 and 2014. The defence budget is
reduced correspondingly, and the released funds of DKK 2.4 billion are used according to a
separate agreement in the Ministry of Finance between the Parties to the Defence
Agreement, see Appendix on released funds.

The defence has a solid platform for these cost reductions. In the Defence Agreement 20102014, the Parties to the Defence Agreement agreed that the financial management of the
defence should be strengthened. On basis of this, among other things, the defence has,
implemented strict financial management, and improved the possibilities for prioritization
through an improved overview of the defence finances. For instance, through strict financial
management, the Danish defence has enjoyed positive economic results in 2010 and 2011.
The total accumulated financial reduction carried over in the defence budget totalled abt.
DKK 1.8 billion at the beginning of 2012, of which about DKK 1.5 billion in the Danish armed
forces.

In addition to this, based on the Defence Agreement 2010-2014, a series of comprehensive
budget analyses of the defence have been conducted. The overall conclusion of these
suggest that comprehensive measures to improve efficiency may be implemented without
affecting the operational capability of the defence. Thus the measures to improve efficiency
do not target the military operational capabilities of the defence (aircraft, ships, etc.).

At the end of 2012, the defence is expected to have accumulated significant savings. Of
these savings in the defence area in Section 12 of the Danish Finance Act, a total of abt.
DKK 1.2 billion is carried over to a new agreement. This is based on the present estimation.
Of this sum, DKK 0.5 billion is not earmarked for equipment projects or the like. The funds
are carried over under Section 12 “The Ministry of Defence”, and their use will take place in
accordance with the provisions concerning expenditure limits, etc.

The Danish defence is therefore well prepared for the adjustment to a reduced financial
framework.

The remaining savings are to be used according to a separate agreement in the Ministry of
Finance between the Parties to the Defence Agreement, see Appendix: released funds.

2 The defence budget includes the main areas 1 and 2 of Section 12 of the Danish Finance Act 2012. Besides the
armed forces, it includes the Ministry of Defence, the Defence Internal Audit, the Defence Intelligence Service, the
home guard and the Danish contribution to NATO joint-funded budgets.


-----

The Parties to the Defence Agreement note with satisfaction that the measures to improve
efficiency of the defence are not going to affect the future operational capability of the
Danish Armed Forces.

There is also agreement that the Danish defence must be adapted to and prepared for
future tasks and challenges. Among other things, this must take into account the upcoming
end of actual combat operations in Afghanistan, development in the Arctic and the
development of operations in cyberspace.

For this reason, it is agreed to adopt a new agreement for the period 2013-2017, which
replaces the last two years of the Defence Agreement 2010-2014.

**Measures to improve efficiency**
The committee for analyses of the Danish armed forces has, pursuant to the Defence
Agreement 2010-2014, carried out a number of comprehensive budgetary analyses of
defence activities.

In continuation of this, there is consensus in the Parties to the Defence Agreement that
during the agreement period, the defence will implement the measures to improve efficiency
of the support structure and adjustment of wage and employment conditions to general
national practice, which are identified in the efficiency analysis.

There will be no change towards remuneration by State Education Grant (SU) for the basic
officers’ training programs. Instead, an accreditation model will be introduced for officers’
training. The model aims to achieve accreditation of basic officers’ training programs at a
diploma level, which means that the defence will be able to provide regular wages during
training. It is set as a target that 1/3 of those admitted will henceforth be admitted on the
basis of a civilian education at bachelor level. In addition to this, as is the case today, there
must also be recruitment for the new officers’ training from among suitable regular
personnel.

This is a major change of the officers’ training, so initially it will be introduced as a trial
scheme to be evaluated in connection with the recruitment/selection, midway in the process,
and again when the training period is completed for the first teams. The new training model
and evaluation system are detailed in the Appendix.

The initiatives in the budgetary analyses and the restructuring of officers’ training will provide
combined total revenues of abt. DKK 2,4 billion a year at full phase-in in 2017.

The efficiency improvement measures will lead to structural changes and staff reductions in
the support structure, and in some ways it will change the current wage and employment
conditions, including, for example, abolition of public servant appointments to the largest
possible extent, and targeting of health benefits. The initiatives are detailed in the Appendix.

The measures to improve efficiency and other adaptations are to be implemented without
reducing the operational capabilities that the defence may provide in a national or
international context.

**National Service**
For the agreement period 2013-2017, the Parties to the Defence Agreement have agreed
that the national service is retained in all the three services, but adjusted to the current


-----

needs of the Danish armed forces. The total number of conscripts in the Danish defence is
to be reduced from a total of abt. 5,000 in 2012 to a total of abt. 4,200, see below.

The adjustment should not be seen as a reflection of a gradual phasing-out of national
service as an institution. Therefore the Parties to the Defence Agreement also agree that
national service in the defence is retained until 2020.

The Minister of Defence is authorized to increase the intake, in case of a changed need for
conscripts in the defence.

The total defence force is maintained, but adjusted to the reduced intake. The regional
command structure is retained, but adjusted according to the adjustment of the total defence
force and the total defence regions.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement have agreed to keep the Day of the Defence as a
compulsory information day for all men in the year they turn 18. The compulsory information
day is considered to have a positive effect on the knowledge of and interest in the training
programs of the Danish defence.

Women will continue to be employed on conscription-like terms. Apart from the type of
employment, they are on equal terms with men.

The above-mentioned adaptation of the national service will result in a revenue of DKK 60
million in 2013, increasing to DKK 132 million annually from 2014, as compared to the
current national service model in the Danish armed forces, see Table 1.

Table 1. Revenue in million DKK at the 2013 level for the Danish defence by adjusting the existing
national service scheme

|Reduced national service intake Revenue|2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 60 132 132 132 132|
|---|---|



**Financing international operations – phasing out of the Afghanistan effort**
In step with the gradual redeployment of Danish combat units from Afghanistan during 2013
and 2014, costs of the Afghanistan effort are reduced. After 2014, it is expected that we still
have a Danish military commitment in Afghanistan. However, the level of spending is
expected to be lower than the current, which means that the current annual incremental
costs of abt. DKK 1 billion can be re-prioritized:

-  The Parties to the Defence Agreement have agreed, as of 2015, to use DKK 300 million
a year of the current additional costs to Afghanistan for the financing of the development
initiatives of the agreement. This re-prioritization does not imply to any significant degree
that the ability of the defence to participate in international operations will be reduced.

-  It is agreed that as of 2015, DKK 200 million annually of the previous additional costs of
the Afghanistan effort will be used for exercises, etc., in the domestic structure. The
purpose is to ensure that the combat units of the defence maintain their professional
level and deployment capability, even if the defence is not deployed in highintensityoperations. To some extent, this expenditure will be releasable from the
domestic structure in case of new international deployments.


-----

-  It is agreed that as of 2015, DKK 500 million annually from the previous additional costs
to Afghanistan will be placed in reserve within the general military budget for use to
cover the additional costs associated with new international operations and efforts,
including training and direct contributions to Afghanistan after 2014. Based on an annual
individual assessment, also in the light of the introduction of spending limits, unused
funds in the reserve for international operations will either be carried over or be made
forfeit in connection with the annual settlement of appropriation accounts.

This means that new operations are financed within the reduced economic framework of the
defence, where several options for financing and thus flexibility are available. First and
foremost, the resources that are already allocated to a given capacity could be redirected
towards a specific deployment. Furthermore, additional costs could be financed by the
aforementioned reserve, by adjusting the readiness of non-deployed capabilities according
to political priorities, through prioritizations in the field of management, and by releasing
funds from other ongoing international operations, etc. In addition to this, the political parties
of the parliament can decide to allocate further resources to the operations concerned, when
deciding on an international deployment.

According to the new ambition level, the defence maintains its ability to conduct international
operations in the next agreement period.

**Development initiatives**
In recent years, the Danish defence has undergone a number of major reorganizations, and
therefore now possesses relevant and contemporary capacities. However, a number of
factors will lead to altered requirements for the capacity development of the defence. In
general, it is judged that it will be necessary to be able to deploy military forces quickly and
flexibly, with a focus on short as well as sustained missions. The continued transformation of
the international effort in Afghanistan will gradually reduce the need for military ground
contributions to the ISAF mission. In addition to this, there will be new challenges in the
Arctic and in cyberspace, which the Danish defence must be able to handle. This in turn will
strengthen the ability of the defence to execute tasks in these areas, by the addition of new
capabilities, among other factors.

There is therefore agreement on developing capacities in all the armed services, including
the special operations forces, so that in the future they can be deployed at short notice in a
broad spectrum of operations. The Parties to the Defence Agreement further agree that the
tasks which must be solved by the capacities of the armed services, demand an increased
focus on the ability to plan and deploy across the capacities of the Danish army, navy and
air force, as well as the Danish home guard and the Danish Emergency Management
Agency, including development and reinforcement of the capacity for international capability
building.

It follows that the capabilities of the defence must continue to be up-to-date, robust and
flexible, and the personnel must be well trained and issued with modern equipment,
including precision weapons and sensors that may help further minimize the risk of civilian
casualties.

Where possible, the capacities should furthermore partly contribute to alleviating NATO’s
general lack of capabilities, and partly meet the specific military targets that NATO sets for
Denmark, including contributing to NATO's smart defence initiatives, and actively take part
in multinational cooperation, also in a Nordic context.


-----

Focus on transverse planning and deployment of capabilities, challenges in the Arctic and in
cyberspace, as well as the adaptation of not least the army, will dominate the development
of the defence.

A financial overview of development initiatives is detailed in the Appendix.

Army
Subject to an ongoing transverse prioritization in the Danish armed forces, the army will be
able to contribute with capabilities for international operations and efforts in the framework of
the UN and NATO, among others, of the following nature:

-  The army must command the necessary capacities to be able to on short notice to
deploy a force of up to battalion combat command size (typically from abt. 300 and up to
abt. 800 soldiers), either for short or sustained missions.

-  Contribution to a joint force from across defence and government agencies, such as a
task force for humanitarian operations or support for special operations forces.

-  A tactical planning staff.

-  Contribution to military capacity-building and military support to civilian capacity-building.

-  Other minor contributions, including single person deployments to international military
staffs, etc.

The army’s capacities must be flexible and ready for deployment, and thus be deployable at
short notice, while also entirely retaining the ability to be deployed in sustained missions.
There is therefore consensus on joining and strengthening existing capacities into three
battalion combat commands that are assigned combat, intelligence, combat support and
support capabilities, according to the mission. These capacities are established and trained
in a number of military professional centres, ensuring a highly professional training and force
generation environment.

_Permanent battalion combat commands_
The Army's current six combat battalions are to be restructured into three larger standing
battalion combat commands with the ability to increase force generation, and thus the ability
to support a protracted commitment with a large contribution, such as a battalion combat
command.

One standing combat command will be in a state of high preparedness. The level of
preparedness will be adapted to the situation. The combat command - or parts of it - can at
short notice be deployed as a self-sustained military ground contribution or as a contribution
to a task force for humanitarian missions, for instance.

_Sustained deployments_
The ability is maintained to make the transition to force generation in support of a protracted
commitment. The necessary capabilities for a battalion combat command can be provided
through a combination of standing and generated forces. It is essential to set a robust
procedure for a timely set-up, training and deployment of subsequent groups. An example of
force generation is shown in the Appendix, demonstrating that the first five groups can be
composed from standing units.

The army`s tank capability which was previously entered as tank sub units in the basic setup, will also be able to transform to deploying contributions in longer missions.


-----

_Centre and establishment structure_
The Parties to the Defence Agreement have agreed that the army capacities must be
established and trained in a number of military professional centres, which will ensure a
high-quality professional training and force generation environment. Thus the army's new
structure is divided into five centres:

-  Army International Centre

-  Army Combat Centre

-  Army Combat Support Centre

-  Army Support Centre

-  Army Special Centre

The army’s garrisoning is currently characterized by geographically dispersed
establishments with unused capacity. This is inconvenient from a military, practical and
operational point of view. Furthermore, in the current establishment structure, the full
professional benefits of the army's new centre structure cannot be obtained.

Thus there is potential to optimize the establishment structure. Based on this fact, among
others, and on the establishment analysis in the first quarter of 2013, the chief of defence in cooperation with the chief of the home guard – will make his recommendation regarding
establishment-related changes in the area of the defence and the home guard. The Parties
to the Defence Agreement have agreed that the recommendation from the chief of defence
should be the foundation of the political decision regarding the field of military
establishments. See the Appendix concerning the army centre structure.

Navy
Subject to an ongoing transverse priority in the Danish armed forces, the navy will be able to
contribute with capacities for international operations and efforts of the below nature in the
framework of the UN and NATO, among others:

-  Up to two major units from the navy deployed at short notice or one large unit from the
navy deployed in sustained missions.

-  Contribution to a joint force from across defence and government agencies, such as a
task force for humanitarian operations or support for special operations forces.

-  A task group staff

-  Contribution to the military capacity-building and military support to the civilian capacitybuilding.

-  Other lesser contributions, including single person deployments to international military
staffs, etc.

There is consensus to maintain the navy's existing capacities for national and international
tasks.

_Reinforcement of present crews_
The navy continues to retain two full crews and a maintenance crew for the three frigates.
This is still considered an appropriate utilization of the total capacity, in that all three frigates
are used to maintain the level of ambition stated above for the navy. The navy's capacity for
international operations is strengthened through the commissioning of frigates and the
coming new maritime helicopters.


-----

In continuation of this, the current crews of support ships and frigates are reinforced with a
view to ensuring a robust capacity and longer endurance of the units, particularly in relation
to conducting longer and more intensive international operations. The reinforcement
primarily affects the areas of tactical command, technical control, combat information and
weapons safe handling.

_Maritime surveillance centre_
The domestic land-based surveillance structure is to be optimized and the maritime
surveillance centres in Frederikshavn and on Bornholm are to be closed down. This,
however, should be viewed in conjunction with the analysis regarding a possible merger of
the operational commands into a single joint military operational command.

Maritime Surveillance Centre North in Frederikshavn is to be closed and disposed of
completely, except for the operation of the naval radio receiving station which will be
preserved. The remaining personnel and functions of Maritime Surveillance Centre South on
Bornholm are expected to be placed at, for instance, Almegård barracks. This will make way
for the closure and complete disposal of the facilities of Maritime Surveillance Centre South
in a foreseeable future. However, this decision is pending a further analysis.

_Coastal lookout service_
The coastal lookout service is to be closed down due to enhanced use of remote sensors by
extending an ongoing project regarding electronic surveillance.

_Merging the naval schools, etc._
The Naval Specialist School and the Naval NCO and Basic Training School are merged into
one school, as the acquisition of external training for relevant parts of the present structure
is included as part of the overall streamlining. The new school is called the Naval School.

The establishment of the Naval School means that the staff at the Naval Specialist School at
Holmen is discontinued, and that the Naval Damage Control School, the Naval Weapons
School, the Naval Diving School, and the Naval Warfare School are transferred to the Naval
School, while the program of the Naval Technical School will be handed over to external
suppliers to the greatest possible extent.

_New inspection vessel_
The navy's ability to perform tasks in the Arctic is further developed according to plans with
the replacement of the last ocean patrol cutter "TULUGAQ" with a modern new ocean patrol
vessel of the KNUD RASMUSSEN class, possibly with marine environmental capability.
Among other tasks, the ship will be able to occasionally support research activities in the
Arctic. The replacement, originally scheduled after the agreement period 2010-2014, is
brought forward to 2014, where the expenditure is kept within the acquisition budget.

_Operation of distress, urgency and safety radio services_
There will be a reorganization of the maritime distress and safety services in Denmark and
Greenland. The task is divided into the operation of radio networks and operation of radio
rooms, respectively, in Denmark and Greenland.

In this respect, the state will assume the task of operating the radio rooms from 2015 and
not put them out for competitive tendering. As a result, the defence assumes the task of
operating the radio room in Denmark from 2015 and onwards. As far as the radio room in
Greenland is concerned, the outcome awaits the interpretation of the EU Court regarding
the EU directive’s applicability to Greenland (expected in 2014).


-----

Air force
Subject to an ongoing transverse priority in the defence, the air force will be able to
contribute with capabilities for international operations and efforts of the below nature in the
framework of the UN and NATO, among others:

-  Up to three simultaneous military air contributions at short notice consisting of, for
example, transport aircraft, helicopters, combat aircraft, and capabilities in surveillance
and warning systems. Some of these are deployed in longer missions.

-  Contribution to a joint force from across defence and government agencies, such as a
task force for humanitarian operations or support of special operations forces.

-  A tactical staff.

-  Contribution to the military capability building and military support to civilian capability
building.

-  Other smaller contributions, including single person deployments to international staffs
etc.

The air force must maintain flexible and deployable capabilities that are deployable at short
notice in both domestic and international operations.

_Combat aircraft_
The Parties to the Defence Agreement have agreed that by summer 2015, a decision must
be made regarding combat aircraft. The Defence Commission report was reflected with
broad political consensus in the Defence Agreement 2010-2014. The report concluded that
Denmark must continue to have a combat aircraft capacity, which on a short view is made
up of the current F-16 aircraft, but on a longer view will involve the acquisition of new
combat aircraft.

The purpose of the process leading towards the type selection is to provide the best
possible basis for a political decision on the preferred combat aircraft among the
participating combat aircraft candidates. The type selection alone provides the basis for
initiating negotiations with the selected candidate regarding a subsequent purchase. It also
establishes the basis, partly of defining the most favourable economic and operational
phase-out and phase-in times for combat aircraft, and partly of initiating discussions on
multinational cooperation and the level of ambition. In addition to this, the type selection will
establish optimal conditions for Danish industry to concentrate its efforts and resources on
the full contract potential for one candidate.

The type selection process is estimated to last abt. two years, before a collective basis for a
decision is established. And in continuation of this, there must be the necessary time for
relevant political discussions prior to the final type selection. The type selection process
must thus be initiated as soon as possible with a view to a political decision on the type
selection before the end of June 2015.

There is consensus that combat aircraft acquisition must be kept within the defence budget.
An annual DKK 25 million from 2013 to 2014 is earmarked for the implementation of the
type selection process, as well as an annual DKK 25 million from 2015 to 2016 for the type
selection and acquisition process.


-----

_New maritime helicopters_
To replace the current Lynx helicopters of the air force, it has been decided to acquire nine
new type MH-60R SEAHAWK helicopters. With this acquisition the ability to support the
navy's tasks is reinforced, also in the Arctic. The helicopters are expected to be delivered
from 2016 to 2018, and are expected to completely take over operational tasks as of abt.
2019.

The joint services sphere
_Joint military academy_
In order to strengthen the joint services perception already in the training of new officers, an
organizational merger of the military academies of the three services under the Danish
Defence Academy will be implemented from mid-2014. If there is a sufficient basis for it,
including a sufficiently attractive economic basis, there may subsequently be made a
decision on joining the military academies in one location. The organizational merger will
strengthen the joint services training, while the aspects of the individual services can and
must be retained in the curriculum.

_Joint services special operations forces_
The current special operations forces of the defence are made up of the Jaeger Corps and
the Frogman Corps. There is a need to strengthen and increase the overall future Danish
special operations capacities, including the capacities of the air force in order to establish a
future robust special operations capability.

Subject to an ongoing transverse priority in the Danish armed forces, the special operations
forces of the defence will - be able to contribute with capabilities for international operations
and efforts in the framework of the UN and NATO, among others, as independent
contributions, or participate in a national or multinational task force.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement have agreed that synergy can be obtained for
continued development of special operations and the training of special operations forces,
as well as increased flexibility for deployment in operations uniting the Jaeger Corps and the
Frogman Corps in a joint special operations force capability. The starting point is also in the
future to target the special operations forces to the strategic challenges, rather than the
present tactical focus. The special operations forces will be organized under a permanent
Special Operations Command and placed immediately under the chief of defence. The
Special Operations Command must define policy and doctrine, as well as define training
needs, resource management and administration, defence procurement, personnel
management, and logistics responsibility. The organization shall be robust in terms of size
and be fully able to carry out the tasks described. In management level terms it should
match an operational command. The key is to establish a joint services strategic special
operations environment, cover the operational support functions, and secure short and clear
chains of command between the upper level of responsibility and operational special
operations capacities.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement are fully committed to the establishment and initiation
of the Special Operations Command. They will be informed every six months about the
status and progress of the development of the joint command and control structure. The
structure of the Special Operations Command will be initiated in 2013 and is expected to be
fully established in 2017. DKK 50 million a year is earmarked upon full implementation.


-----

The Parties to the Defence Agreement have therefore agreed to merge the two special
operations forces under a single command and control structure. On the basis of the overall
determined limits and directives, the Special Operations Command is responsible for
preparing the foundation, i.e. demands and conditions for training, and the criteria for
ensuring training of support units of the defence. This will enable the units to be deployed in
support of special operations, such as transport aircraft, helicopters, command support
units, and logistic units to a relevant extent in relation to being part of a joint services
operational force.

A detailed analysis will be conducted of, among other things, the establishment-related
conditions with a view to identifying the advantages and disadvantages of a physical merger
of the two special operations units, as well as an analysis of which relevant parts of the
other capabilities in the area of the Ministry of Defence, on a permanent basis, or as needed
and in certain periods of time, may be a part of the combined capability, and be placed
physically together with the special operations units, not least the support functions. The
analysis and any initiatives will be financed within the reduced economic framework.

_Task force for humanitarian deployments, among other aims_
As stated in the Defence Agreement 2010-2014, the defence has analyzed the options of
assembling a task force on the basis of existing military capabilities, including tactical
command staffs. The analysis has uncovered the situational options of the defence for
combining force contributions across the services, and with the involvement of other
capacities of the area of the Ministry of Defence to a task force - led by a military staff set up
for the purpose - for deployment to humanitarian operations, among others. The concept of
this will be developed and trained as an integral part of future exercise activities, in order to
include predictable types of tasks into the planning and training activities.

_Joint services military police_
The three services all have military police capacities to varying degrees. There is consensus
that synergy can be obtained by a merger of the capacities of the defence in this area.

Consequently, a joint military police capability is to be established. The framework for the
future joint services military police capacity will be the army’s military police battalion in
Aalborg.

_Joint services planning and command capacity_
Each of the three services has a tactical staff capacity at their disposal which will be able to
establish a planning and command capacity to enable participation in multinational tactical
staffs. As stated in the Defence Agreement 2010-2014, the defence has analyzed the
options for establishing a planning capability for insertions in the framework of the UN,
among other things. Based on the situation and the tasks, the defence will be able to
establish a Danish planning and command capacity to head capacities of the defence and of
the combined civilian emergency preparedness, for instance in connection with
humanitarian missions, evacuation operations, and deployment of the Arctic response force.

_Joint services command support_
The parties agree to analyze, in the course of 2013, how to establish a joint services
command support capacity, based on the present command support capacities of the air
force and the army.


-----

_The merging of agencies of the defence_
In view of the extensive streamlining process that has been initiated in the Danish defence,
an analysis must be conducted of the possibilities of an organizational merger of some of
the current Level II agencies of the defence, in order to exploit synergies between
authorities, and achieve operational streamlining, as well as create a clearer management
structure to effectively support the business model.

Analyses will be carried out with the involvement of external consultants. See the Appendix
regarding the organisational merger of several of the agencies of the defence.

_Judge advocate corps_
The Parties to the Defence Agreement have agreed to ensure an effective advocate office,
which delivers quality investigations, as well as a speedy handling of cases. By the end of
May 2013, an external analysis must be conducted of options for integrating the two present
judge advocate offices under the same management in Copenhagen or in Karup. The
analysis results will be discussed by the Parties to the Defence Agreement in June 2013, at
the latest.

The home guard
The Parties to the Defence Agreement have agreed that the home guard's overall structure,
including the relationship between the home guard districts and police districts, as well as
existing capacities of the national and international tasks, is to be retained, but continually
sought to be made more efficient and developed. The role of the home guard in relation to
supporting and assisting the defence in both national and international tasks must be
strengthened.

The Total Defence Region of Funen and Southern Jutland, the Total Defence Region of
Northern and Central Jutland, and the Total Defence Region of Zealand will be merged to
form, respectively, Total Defence Region West covering Denmark west of the Great Belt,
and Total Defence Region East covering Denmark east of the Great Belt. The home guard
district structure will be further streamlined.

The home guard supports the collective search and rescue service. The home guard is to
contribute to the maritime effort in the coastal zone by providing a command and
communication structure to support the emergency services of other actors, and support
efforts in general. In cooperation with the Danish Emergency Management Agency, the
home guard will also man and operate shallow water vessels inshore where environmental
ships cannot operate. The air force home guard capabilities are also used in the combined
marine environmental effort in the coastal zone, among other places.

The home guard will provide a capacity-structuring unit to carry out its contribution to the
military capacity structure, civilian reconstruction, and other international contributions.

With respect to establishment-related conditions of the home guard, please see above in
"centre and establishment structure".

The development of the home guard is funded within the current framework of the home
guard.

The Arctic


-----

Climatic change in the Arctic has led to increased geographic accessibility, which has
resulted in increasing awareness of the right to extract natural resources, and in a generally
larger commercial and scientific activity in the Arctic. The Parties to the Defence Agreement
have agreed that the capacity of the defence to perform tasks in the Arctic needs to be
adjusted in the light of this development. This includes both the assertion of sovereignty and
the civilian-related tasks, where the defence, through its presence in and around Greenland,
supports other authorities in their task solution. In this context, the defence seeks
cooperation in performing its tasks, including the involvement of the citizens of Greenland to
reinforce the core tasks of the defence in the Arctic in accordance with the ‘Kingdom of
Denmark Strategy for the Arctic 2011-2020’.

The adaptation of the presence of the Danish defence should be seen in the context of the
challenging geographic and climatic conditions of the Arctic, including very large distances,
and extreme weather and sea conditions. Thus the Parties to the Defence Agreement
appreciate that for example the contribution of the Danish defence to the search and rescue
services in Greenland - regardless of its reinforcement - will continue to be challenged by
the harsh conditions. The preparedness will therefore not be comparable to the
preparedness in Denmark, for instance, and it will not be possible to provide assistance to
an extent that allows for a comparable level in relation to a similar emergency situation
around Denmark.

_Arctic Command_
The North Atlantic operational commands are amalgamated into a joint services Arctic
Command in Nuuk, Greenland. At intervals, the Arctic Command prepares for upgrading
with additional staff in the form of planning officers and experts to support the planning and
execution of major operations, as in connection with the deployment of an Arctic
preparedness force.

In connection with the establishment of the Arctic Command in Nuuk, a study of the
possibilities for a joint placement of the three current rescue coordination centres in
Greenland has been initiated.

_Joint Arctic preparedness force_
As described in the Defence Agreement 2010-2014 an Arctic preparedness force is
established in order to complement the efforts of the defence in the Arctic, and also to be
able to assist the preparedness in Greenland, when needed. By 2013, the defence must
draw up a concept for the arrangement, training and exercise activities, as well as for
deployment.

This approach involves, among other factors, ensuring adequate education and training, as
well as implementing the necessary training sequences to maintain the capacity for
deployment in the Arctic region. This measure should be considered in conjunction with the
increased focus on joint services initiatives.

_Analysis of future tasks and surveillance tests in the Arctic_
During the agreement period, a comprehensive analysis of the future tasks of the defence in
the Arctic will be carried out. Additionally, surveillance tests in the Arctic area will be
conducted through 2013 and 2014, including testing of unmanned aircraft vehicles (UAV),
see the Appendix.

The above analyses and tests will form the basis of a future dimensioning of the capacities
of the defence in the Arctic within the reduced economic framework.


-----

To finance analyses and tests, up to DKK 40 million will be earmarked annually in the period
2013-2014, followed by DKK 20 million in 2015. In order to be able to follow up and to
implement initiatives as a consequence of the above analyses and tests, the Parties to the
Defence Agreement have agreed to earmark abt. DKK 120 million annually from 2015 to
2017.

_Hydrographical survey in Greenland_
The Parties to the Defence Agreement have agreed to emphasize the importance that
hydrographical survey remains a priority.

_New ocean patrol vessel_
As mentioned in the section on the navy, the ocean patrol cutter TULUGAQ is to be
replaced with an ocean patrol vessel of the KNUD RASMUSSEN class and modified with
maritime environmental protection capability to the extent possible. The planned vessel is
designed so that it can also occasionally be used for research purposes.

_Maritime helicopters_
As mentioned in the section on the air force, the current Lynx helicopters are to be replaced
with nine new maritime helicopters, reinforcing the task solution of the defence in the Arctic.

Missile defence capacity
The Parties to the Defence Agreement note that the NATO summit in Chicago was a
milestone for the development of NATO's missile defence capability. Denmark works for the
widest possible development of the missile defence plans in a close and confident
cooperation with Russia. The Danish attitude to a possible role will be possible, once a
clearer picture of the system design becomes apparent.

Cyber security and defence
With society's increased dependence on a properly functioning ICT infrastructure[3] and an
appropriate level of information security, there is an increased need for higher protection
against cyber attacks. Consequently, the government has already decided to establish a
Centre for Cyber Security under the Ministry of Defence. The Parties to the Defence
Agreement have agreed to further strengthen the centre, and abt. DKK 35 million will be
earmarked annually in addition to the already allocated funding.

Military capacities are dependent on a well-functioning ICT infrastructure, and in the
Defence Agreement 2010-2014 it has already been decided to earmark around DKK 40
million a year for the establishment and operation of a Computer Network Operations (CNO)
capability in order to provide a capacity that can execute defensive and offensive military
operations in cyberspace. In order to strengthen this effort, it has been agreed to provide
additional resources for this capability, so that the total earmarked amount in 2013 is DKK
75 million, DKK 90 million in 2014 and 2015, and DKK 150 million annually in 2016 and
2017.

The organization and affiliation of the military computer network operations capacity is
currently being analysed in a working group under the Ministry of Defence. The analysis will
be presented to the Parties to the Defence Agreement in 2013.

**The civilian tasks of the defence**

3 ICT Infrastructure: Network infrastructure (Telecom network, mobile network, satellite communication and related
hardware, etc.), systems that manage the network and hardware, as well as programs and services.


-----

There is agreement that the Danish defence must continue to execute two types of tasks of
a civilian nature. These are the dimensioning tasks, which are mere regulatory functions
under the area of responsibility of the Ministry of Defence, such as the national maritime
environmental surveillance, the national pollution control at sea, and the occasional tasks
where society’s civilian resources in the relevant area are not sufficient or not as suitable as
the capacities of the defence. It is agreed that in connection with civilian tasks, a further
utilization of home guard resources can be put to further use, for example in relation to
environmental surveillance.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement have agreed, particularly with regard to the support
of the Danish defence to the police, that a Danish collection of experience from Utøya,
among others, may affect the preferred available level of support .

_Maritime capacity_
The combined maritime capacity of the defence and the home guard should continue to be
given priority.

A study of maritime emergency capacity has been conducted earlier. The study uncovered a
need to strengthen the Danish environmental resources in the coastal zone, i.e. in the
shallow water close to shore and on shore. It should further be noted that the four large
environmental ships of the SUPPLY class and SEA TRUCK class are over 30 years old and
ready for replacement. Similarly, the Challenger aircraft of the Danish armed forces is in
demand for the solution of a number of tasks in addition to the maritime environmental
surveillance, including efforts to combat piracy and surveillance in the Arctic.

In the light of this, the maritime capability will be adapted and developed during the period
as follows:

-  The current ship-based maritime capacity to combat pollution, as well as the airborne
maritime surveillance, will be put out for competitive tendering in order to identify
whether outsourcing on the whole is an advantage for the defence. The competitive
tendering process must be completed by June 2015.

-  The possibilities for utilizing the home guard’s airborne units for maritime environment
surveillance will be analysed.

-  The capability to combat oil pollution in shallow water - close to the coast – will be
reinforced by the establishment of a so-called shallow water capacity. This capacity is
established with the involvement of the home guard and the Danish Emergency
Management Agency. In this connection, the home guard will strengthen the maritime
activities in the coastal zone by providing a command and communication structure in
support of the other actors of the emergency service and the effort in general. The home
guard in cooperation with the rescue preparedness will man and operate shallow water
vessels inshore, where environmental ships cannot operate. The air force home guard’s
capacities are also to be used in the overall maritime environmental effort, among other
places in the coastal zone.

The home guard’s equipment management frame is adjusted accordingly.

The Danish Emergency Management Agency will have the capacity to contribute to the
combined pollution preparedness in the coastal zone and - in cooperation with the home
guard - to man and operate shallow water vessels inshore, as per the recently settled
agreement regarding the emergency preparedness area.


-----

**Other Issues**
_Smart Defence_
The Parties to the Agreement have agreed that NATO’s Smart Defence initiative should be
utilized to achieve greater operational effect with the same or fewer resources. This should
be achieved through bilateral and multinational cooperative relations, clearer priorities and
specializations.

The Danish defence is already part of a number of large- and small-scale multinational
collaborations. The purpose of much of this collaboration is to achieve large-scale operation
advantages and joint operational capacities, as has been the case, for example, in
Afghanistan and through the F16 cooperation. The ability to provide substantial capacities
that Denmark would otherwise not have had available on its own, must also be achieved
through multilateral cooperation, in NATO and in the Nordic setting, among others. An
example of this, among others, is Denmark's re-entry into the NATO Alliance Ground
Surveillance (AGS) project, which is based on the use of unmanned aircraft.

Furthermore it is agreed that efforts must be made in order that specialization or division of
labour is carried out in a coordinated and conscious manner, so that tasks are performed
efficiently, the way it is done in the air policing task above the Baltic countries.

Finally, it should be examined whether there should be the option - in accordance with
NATO’s expectations of Denmark - to develop the Multinational Corps North East (MNC NE)
operational capacity to be able to carry out "Smaller Joint Operations", by linking the Air
Force Expeditionary Air Staff and the Naval Task Group closer to the corps, and thus to the
NATO force structure, among others.

Within the next agreement period, assessments will be conducted of the experience from
and potential for bilateral and multinational cooperation on acquisition of equipment, and on
operation and maintenance. In relation to this, any key barriers will be examined. The
Parties to the Agreement will be kept abreast of the assessment results.

_Outsourcing of driving schools_
The Danish armed forces will pursue an outsourcing model for driving schools and in this
way ensure a financially sound operation, while at the same time increasing flexibility for the
defence. Outsourcing will result in revenues of abt. DKK 6 million annually.

_Concentration of the Danish Intelligence Service in one domicile_
In order to implement a reinforcement of intelligence activities, the activities of the service
are to be placed together in one domicile in the Copenhagen area. The current scattered
locations are both unsuitable for performing tasks and costly. Through a more centralized
and concentrated siting, the intelligence service could improve its overall task performance.
This will include the establishment of the new cyber capacities, which will be developed in
the frame of the Defence Intelligence Service. In 2013-14, abt. DKK 40 million a year is
earmarked for this, and in 2015, another DKK 20 million.

_The green area_
Climatic changes and scarce resources is one of the major global challenges. The Danish
defence must lead the way of how modern armed forces can carry out a green transition for
the benefit of climate and environment, as well as defence of economics and operational
activities. In the defence area, awareness of energy and environment not only leads to
resource savings. It may also affect the safety of operations, for example in terms of
reduced hazardous and vulnerable fuel shipments to mission areas.


-----

There is consensus that the resource awareness and focus of the defence on reducing its
overall strain on climate and environment in both Denmark, the Arctic and in international
mission areas has to be strengthened. This will be done through increased cooperation and
exchange of experience with armed forces of other nations, private companies, public
authorities and research institutions, among others, regarding both the operational and
operative challenges in the area of energy and environment.

As a large public sector purchaser with many diverse activities, the defence has a special
obligation to promote green innovation and lead the way for climate and environmentally
friendly solutions. The Ministry of Defence has prepared a Climate and Energy Strategy as
well as an Environment and Nature Strategy 2012-2015.

In addition to this, energy, resource and environmentally optimized establishments are to be
set up in cooperation with relevant companies, foundations, interest groups and educational
institutions. The project will run for two to five years and may provide inspiration for the
environmental and energy effort at the other establishments of the Ministry of Defence.

The Ministry of Defence will also continue its effort to put the Danish defence, environment,
climate and security on the international agenda, including in NATO and the UN.

The Parties to the Agreement agree that climate change and energy efficiency initiatives in
the establishment area as a starting point must be self-financing, based on a calculated
repayment term for each project.

In addition to the resources used for climate and energy optimization in the establishment
area, support of innovation and green solutions are given priority - not least in the area of
operations – with up to DKK 100 million annually for development projects and investments
that combine a reduction of resource consumption, consideration for the environment and
climate, as well as better and more cost-effective operational solutions. In this way, safetyrelated operational advantages can be achieved as well as savings on resources. The
projects are sought out where deemed appropriate, and carried out in cooperation with the
armed forces of other nations, private companies, or public authorities and research
institutions.

**Personnel**
The defence and the home guard must continue to focus on personnel as their key
resource. The defence and the home guard should be a meaningful workplace, where the
necessary operational capabilities are retained, and tasks continue to be performed in a
professional manner. The defence and the home guard should be able to recruit, train and
retain the necessary personnel.

_The HR strategy of the Danish armed forces_
The defence has drawn up a new comprehensive HR strategy. The HR strategy of the
defence shall create an overall strategic coherence in the HR efforts within the defence and
the home guard.

The Danish defence HR strategy encourages innovation and significant changes in the field
of HR, and helps increase the flexibility of the defence and the home guard in relation to
wage, employment and training conditions, among other factors. The defence HR strategy


-----

takes into account the initiatives and streamlining identified and described in the budget
analyses in the area of personnel, and can be implemented within the reduced framework.

In the field of education, the HR strategy aims at greater flexibility in relation to the civilian
educational system. The education of military personnel of the defence should be
approaching the civilian educational options. This will enhance an individual’s ability to
switch between the military and civilian job market and vice versa. In this way, Danish
defence personnel will be able to avoid any educational dead end.

_Full-time equivalent reductions_
Streamlining and development initiatives will affect the defence personnel and the regional
distribution of national workplaces. The location and distribution of national workplaces
requires a collective consolidation due to a large number of mutual dependencies and
prerequisites between the various streamlining and development measures, establishment
restructurings, and changes to the current national service.

In connection with the adjustment of personnel, the defence will be a responsible employer
and take into account all relevant considerations, including launching a series of personnel
policy initiatives that can be allowed within the generally applied national rules.

As mentioned, adjustments of pay and employment conditions to the general national
practice will be implemented. It is also agreed that Annotation No. 101 of the Danish
Finance Act, Section 12, on the allocation of specially beneficial pension conditions upon
redundancies, etc., to a defined group of civil servants, is not to be carried over and
preserved.

It should be noted that a large part of the Danish armed forces military personnel are public
servants. Public servants are obliged to accept a transfer to another appropriate position in
their current employment area, which basically is the whole of Denmark. If it is not possible
to find a suitable position, public servants are made redundant with redundancy pay for up
to three years. The incurred related expenses are kept within the reduced framework of the
defence.

_Reserve personnel_
Reserve officers and other personnel of the reserve represent both an important personnel
reserve of the defence and the home guard - including the international commitment of the
defence - and a valuable capability that can help strengthen the ties between the defence
and the rest of society. The use of reserve officers and other reserve personnel is therefore
to continue in the next agreement period, and it is integrated into the Danish armed forces
HR strategy, see above.

An analysis is to be conducted of the future use of reserve personnel in the Danish defence.
The analysis should incorporate experience from international missions and be based on an
efficient use of resources. Results of the analysis are to be presented to the Parties to the
Defence Agreement in spring 2014.

_Veterans’ policy_
The official Danish veterans’ policy was published in October 2010 and is anchored in the
Ministry of Defence. Relevant ministries, authorities and organizations have been involved in
the preparation of the veterans’ policy and will therefore be involved in the evaluation of the
policy which was initiated in 2012. The purpose of the evaluation is to assess the effect of
the initiatives of the veterans’ policy. Where possible, evaluation findings should be


-----

implemented during the agreement period, and will be financed within the reduced economic
framework. The assessment will be presented to the Parties to the Defence Agreement by
June 2013, at the latest.

A pool totalling DKK 10 million will be earmarked during the agreement period to support
veteran initiatives undertaken by volunteers, etc. The pool is administered and distributed by
the Veterans’ Centre. The existing grants to the Blue Berets (De Blå Baretter) and the
operation of ex-servicemen’s homes of the Danish Ex-servicemen’s Association (Danske
Soldaterforeningers Landsraad)are to continue on the current conditions.

The practice for the acknowledgement of injuries falls under the Ministry of Employment. In
connection with the acknowledgement and support for veterans, it is important also to focus
on the veterans who suffer psychological injuries. The treatment of veterans' work injury
compensation cases, both physical and psychological, must be dealt with on an informed
and medical basis. In this regard it is important to consider the particular difficulties of
documenting traumatic events during service in an international mission, which have taken
place many years earlier.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement note that the minister for employment, on the basis
of the SFI report on "Danish Soldiers Return Home", and other reports and expert
statements, has asked the Danish National Board of Industrial Injuries to provide a report of
the latest research on Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) as soon as possible. If the
study demonstrates medical evidence that symptoms of PTSD can occur more than six
months after a traumatizing influence, the practices will be adjusted accordingly. A changed
policy regarding the acknowledgement of PTSD will lead to the resumption of cases decided
according to the current practice, so that they can be resolved according to the new
practice. In connection with any such new practices, any revised documentation
requirements will also be viewed positively in light of the fact that a number of soldiers despite the fact that they have documented symptoms – have not previously sought medical
help.

By summer 2013, when the report is available, the government will discuss the conditions of
the acknowledgement of veterans' PTSD and other psychological injuries with the Parties to
the Defence Agreement.

The Parties to the Agreement have agreed that the defence must continue to pay
compensation to veterans with permanent injury, among others, in accordance with the
applicable rules of the Danish armed forces special damages and compensation scheme.

**Danish defence equipment**
The economic disposition and payment framework for defence procurement is maintained at
a largely unchanged level. As has been practice up till now, the minister of defence seeks
appropriation powers from the Parliamentary Finance Committee (Folketingets
Finansudvalg) to major defence procurement. In addition to this, materiel maintenance is
carried out as before. This covers maintenance of equipment, procurement of munitions,
weapons, etc. A streamlining of the area of procurement and maintenance will be
implemented, see Appendix.

Abt. DKK 100 million annually will be reprioritized from the procurement of equipment to
green development projects and investments, see above.


-----

Each year – at the latest in October - the Parties to the Defence Agreement are presented
with the defence procurement for the coming year. Furthermore, the Parties to the Defence
Agreement are informed on an ongoing quarterly basis of the development of defence
procurement and operational projects that have already been initiated.

Also see the Appendix concerning Danish armed forces equipment.

_Open for business_
The Parties to the Agreement have agreed to prioritize cooperation between the defence
industry sector and related industry and trade associations, the Trade Council of the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, and the Danish defence, in order to align and communicate initiatives to
support Danish export.

The Parties to the Agreement have agreed to positively encourage business promotion
initiatives for increased cooperation between Danish companies and the defence in order to
ensure utilization of the Danish defence know-how, etc. In this regard it is decided that the
defence can support the establishment of a Danish test centre for unmanned aircraft (UAV)
and the like.

**Financial management and reporting**
_Financial direction_
The Parties to the Defence Agreement consider it essential that the defence retains and
continues to reinforce the positive trend in its financial direction, so that the financial
management becomes even more sound, comprehensive and effective. This will secure the
basis for making clear prioritizations and rationalizing performance on an informed and
transparent basis.

_Financial principles_
Two principles of financial management must still be met:

-  Procurement or other costly initiatives can only be initiated with the assurance of their
funding on a short and long view.

-  For decisions on new procurement or other costly initiatives, the funding must be
indicated, such as in the form of measures to improve efficiency.

For reasons of transparency of the finances of the defence, as of the Danish Finance Act
2014, the defence appropriation structure will be split into abt. sixteen new key accounts.

_Incentive structures_
The financial management of the defence is organized in such a way that also on the
operational levels there are economic incentives to perform the tasks in the most efficient
and cost-conscious way.

_Lean_
The experience with Lean processes in the defence is positive. Lean can be an important
tool in the ongoing streamlining and optimization of workflows. Based on this experience, it
is agreed to further strengthen the Lean expertise and the Lean culture.


-----

_The Danish defence multi-annual budget and planning tool, and the expenditure model_
The Defence Command has prepared a new multi-annual budget and planning tool, and an
expenditure model, thus creating greater transparency in relation to the link between the
capabilities, operations and resource consumption of the defence, including an improved
basis for prioritizing the overall resource spending of the defence.

With the expenditure model it is possible to achieve the objective of being able to quantify
defence expenditure related to force generation, force readiness, etc., including at different
levels of ambition for readiness, deployments, etc.

The above tools were first introduced into service in connection with the Danish armed
forces annual program and budget for 2013.

_General principles of multi-annual agreements_
Like other state institutions, in the agreement period, the Danish defence is subject to
general technical corrections and general cross-organization efficiency initiatives, adopted in
connection with the finance act processes, etc. Each year the spokespersons on defence
and finance of the Parties to the Defence Agreement will receive a report on the
implementation of the efficiency measures.

_Access to carry forward a financial surplus or deficit to the coming fiscal years_
The access of the defence to carry forward a financial surplus or deficit to the coming fiscal
years is aligned with the rest of the government. This entails a limit of two percent of the
budget to carry forward additional expenditure, while the current limit on carrying forward a
decrease of consumption is abolished. Discussions on forfeiture of unspent means will
continue to take place in the usual manner in connection with the annual settlement of
appropriation accounts.

_Analyses_
In the agreement period, a number of major studies and analyses will be carried out
regarding optimization and streamlining opportunities within the area of responsibility of the
Ministry of Defence, see the Appendix. The overall objective of the analyses is to ensure the
ongoing optimization of the ministry's agencies, and to investigate whether further measures
to improve operational efficiency may be identified, including through competitive tendering
of relevant parts of the support structure, on the basis of a prior internal optimization.

_Reporting to the Parties to the Defence Agreement_
Once a year - in May and June - a status meeting is held, where the annual reports of the
defence and the home guard are presented to the defence and finance spokespersons for
the Parties to the Defence Agreement. The annual reports outline the context for both the
operational and the financial results achieved. Further at the status meeting, a separate
annual reporting on the implementation of the efficiency measures in the defence agreement
will also be presented to the defence and finance spokespersons for the Parties to the
Defence Agreement.

The purpose of the status meeting is to inform the Parties to the Defence Agreement about
the implementation of the Defence Agreement and, as needed, discuss possible
adjustments for the remainder of the agreement period. This will ensure that the Parties to
the Defence Agreement have an opportunity to discuss the state of affairs of the defence
and the home guard in relation to current developments in the security policy situation, the
participation of the defence and the home guard in international missions, and the


-----

development in the overall operational activities of the defence and the home guard, as well
as the development of the financial situation of the defence and the home guard.

In addition to this, the defence spokespersons for the Parties to the Defence Agreement will
receive a quarterly briefing on the progress in the currently most important areas regarding
the implementation of the agreement.

**The establishments of the Danish armed forces**
In order to maintain an effective defence, it is important that the defence at all times only
upholds the establishments that are necessary for the execution of tasks, also to reduce
unnecessary resource consumption in operation and maintenance. In preparing the analysis
of the long-term needs of establishments of the defence, the home guard and the national
emergency services, the state of maintenance of the establishments, as well as their
operation and need for future investments, are included in the parameters examined,
together with their applicability.

In order to ensure an appropriate level of maintenance, it is important to assess the use and
purpose of individual establishments and buildings to achieve an appropriate maintenance
standard. The maintenance as such will be given priority in a ten-year plan for the overall
operation and maintenance of the establishment area. The plan will reflect the future needs
and priorities of the defence and the home guard.

The defence will ensure optimal utilization of its building stock, whether owned or rented.

The Danish defence is to think energy and green solutions into the establishment stock as
well. Therefore the possibilities for energy optimization will be included in future operation
and maintenance considerations. In order to gain the necessary experience, two energy
resource and environmentally optimized establishments will be created in cooperation with
relevant companies, foundations, interest groups and educational institutions.

_Sale of property_
The revenue of the defence from the sale of property can only be used according to the socalled one-to-one principle, i.e. that from the revenue, only expenditure related to the sales
can be effected. This includes the acquisition of property for relocation, relocation costs,
alterations, environmental cleanup, etc. In this context, sales which are a consequence of
the effected establishment analysis, are regarded as one-off situations, and at the same
time as being completely extraordinary.

In the agreement period it will be analyzed, whether there will be resource-related or other
benefits by transferring the operation and ownership of the building stock of the defence or
parts thereof to the Danish Building and Property Agency (Bygningsstyrelsen), and possibly
the Danish Agency for Palaces and Cultural Properties (Styrelsen for Slotte og
Kulturejendomme).

_Nyboder_
The Nyboder residential quarter represents an important heritage, while at the same time in
a continuous span of abt. 400 years having served as housing for defence personnel,
including when they are in process of training in the Copenhagen area. The Parties to the
Agreement have agreed that as far as possible, a solution should be sought regarding the
building condition of Nyboder through cooperation with private foundations. In this way it will
be possible to continue the renovation which began with a pilot project, and which could play


-----

a significant role in the further work with the training programs of the defence, in that rental
for students will be given priority. Such a solution would require that Nyboder remains in the
sphere of the Danish armed forces and is used for activities within the defence. The
initiatives etc. regarding Nyboder will be financed within the reduced framework.

**Other areas**
_Annual security policy review and debate in parliament_
The Parties to the Agreement have agreed that the Folketing (parliament) on an ongoing
basis should be discussing the substance of the Danish security policy strategy. For the
purpose of these discussions, the government should continue to work out an annual review
on Danish security policy. In step with the increasing effect of the security policy on Danish
society, such a review should highlight the objectives and resources of the Danish security
policy. Possible themes could be assessments of the long-term challenges Denmark is
facing, and a prioritization of the security policy options and challenges, and not least their
solutions.

_Information on Danish defence historical museums_
The Parties to the Agreement have agreed that the presentation of Denmark’s military
history is important, for the present as well as the future. This presentation is made on a
national, local and private level, so there is a need to provide the public with a
comprehensive view of the combined museum options regarding the Danish defence. In this
connection, the defence will prepare a publication to provide such an overview.

_Multinationality_
Cooperation is to be established with other countries where it serves Danish interests,
including ensures a better use of collective resources. Among other aims, this means that
focus must remain on the multinational and bilateral cooperation.

On an ongoing basis as part of a more efficient use of resources, the defence and the home
guard must actively pursue opportunities for a closer cooperation with other nations. One
way to do this could be by improving existing and establishing new bilateral or multilateral
cooperation within, for example, defence procurement, operation and maintenance, as well
as education and training. An important element in relation to this is NATO's Smart Defence
initiatives.

_The Danish defence and research_
The arrangements of the Ministry of Defence with the Danish Institute for International
Studies (DIIS) and the Centre for Military Studies (CMS) at the University of Copenhagen
will be continued and financed with unaltered annual allocations. Through the Ministry of
Defence, the Parties to the Defence Agreement can continue to request the Centre for
Military Studies to conduct analyses, etc.

_The Peace and Stabilization Fund_
The Ministry of Defence will continue to contribute with DKK 75 million annually to the Peace
and Stabilization Fund and the interministerial concerted planning and action body, with the
participation of the Prime Minister´s Office, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and the Ministry
for Justice as well.

_Competitive tendering and optimization_
The Parties to the Agreement agree that in continuation of the planned streamlining and
optimizations of the support structure, it will be appropriate to consider other models for task


-----

solution. Among other areas, this would be relevant for logistics, health and maintenance,
including maintenance of the fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters of the defence. A first step,
however, will be a preliminary optimization of the tasks internally within the defence, in order
to gain the immediate streamlining benefits and secure the necessary knowledge of the
tasks. When the benefits of the internal optimization have been gained, it must be
considered whether it is possible to gain further economic benefits or increased flexibility in
the structure of the defence. Among other options are competitive tendering of all or part of
the tasks, entering into public-private partnerships, or forming partnerships with other public
institutions, as well as the armed forces of other nations (also see the Appendix on analyses
of the agreement period).

**Adaptation to a reduced framework**
There is a need to streamline the public sector, among other things in order to support a
healthy socio-economic development. The Parties to the Agreement have agreed that the
defence must also contribute to this. It is further essential that the budget reductions are
made in such a way that Denmark still retains effective and usable armed forces, which can
flexibly and speedily solve the tasks determined by the government and the Danish
Parliament.

In order to ensure an appropriate implementation of the measures to improve efficiency, it is
deemed appropriate that these are gradually phased in over a number of years.

The above measures to improve efficiency, adaptation of national service, reprioritization of
the Afghanistan effort, and simultaneous implementation of a number of development
initiatives, etc., contribute to the fact that in 2013-2014, abt. DKK 2.4 billion may be
reprioritized from the defence, and that the defence budget is reduced by DKK 2.5 billion in
2015, with DKK 2.6 billion in 2016, and by DKK 2.7 billion in 2017, when taking into account
a certain postponement of defence procurement, see Table 2

In Table 2 below, an initial estimate has been made of the economic phase-in of the agreed
initiatives. The phase-in of measures to improve efficiency, the change of national service,
as well as developments and initiatives, due to the size and complexity of these projects, are
associated with some uncertainty. The phase-in might therefore deviate from the estimate in
the table below. The described uncertainty does not affect the permanent revenue by full
phase-in, though.

Table 2. The reduction in the financial framework of the defence. DKK million at 2013 price levels.

|Reduction of the financial framework of the defence|2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Measures to improve efficiency corrected for overlap|984 1, 640 2, 071 2, 221 2, 428|||||
|Changes to national service|60 132 132 132 132|||||
|Phasing out of Afghanistan involvement|- - 300 300 300|||||
|New measures and initiatives|-282 -331 -142 -295 -193|||||
|Reprioritization of defence procurement|100 100 100 100 100|||||
|Postponement of acquisitions|- - 107 -107|||||


-----

|Total|862 1,541 2,461 2,.565 2,660|
|---|---|
|Overall appropriation reduction|862 1,541 2,458 2,558 2,658|
|In addition, the security pool in Section 35 is discontinued|- - 104 104 104|


Note: The figures in the table may not add up accurately because of rounding. The appropriation reduction totalling
DKK 2, 658 million in 2017 in Section 12, is made up from the reduction of DKK 2 billion as a result of the 2020 plan
(2012 level), and additional appropriations that no longer apply, totalling DKK 0.6 billion (2010 level) from the Defence
Agreement 2010-2014, at 2013 price levels. It is noted that there will not be an actual, unfunded discontinuation of the
above additional funding of abt. DKK 0.6 billion per year, as the adjustments are accounted for through efficiency
measures, etc. The appropriation levels in 2017 are budgeted for in the Proposal for the Danish Finance Act 2013
(FFL13) in the years 2015-2017, and, with the exception of certain technical corrections, etc., is unchanged compared
to the budget estimates (BO years) of the Danish Finance Act 2012 (FL12). Overall, the agreement means, in relation
to FL13, that the defence budget is reduced by DKK 862 million in 2013, and DKK 1,541 million in 2014. Also in
relation to FL13, DKK 200 million will be added to the defence budget in 2015 and DKK 100 million in 2016. There
may be made technical corrections, etc., of the amounts stated, including a budget transfer to the Danish Finance Act
Section 19 concerning sergeant training transition to SU in the order of DKK 25 million per year. The financial facility
for safety measures (sikkerhedspuljen) is discontinued as of 2013. The already approved measures from the facility
are carried out as planned, see Document No. 5 of 28 September 2012, on the disposal of DKK 63 million in 2013 and
2014 to MRAP. The funds for MRAP are transferred to Section 12. The facility funds earmarked in 2013 and 2014 of
abt. DKK 104 million will also be transferred to Section 12, while any further unused funds will be forfeit.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement have agreed that the funds to be reprioritized in 2013
and 2014, totalling DKK 2.4 billion, will be used according to a separate agreement in the
Ministry of Finance between the Parties to the Defence Agreement. Please see the
Appendix concerning earmarked funds.

**Appendix: Overview of all development initiatives**

|Col1|2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Deployment-ready combat commands|3 3 3 3 3|||||
|Organizing and garrisoning in the centre structure|13 26 39 54 54|||||
|Development of the army in total, see above|16 29 42 57 57|||||
|Strengthening of existing forces|-15 -36 -36 -36 -36|||||
|Strengthening of the effort in the Arctic - new inspection vessel, operation|- -21 -21 -21 -21|||||
|Maritime Surveillance Centre|0 19 27 27 27|||||
|Coastal lookout service|-33 4 11 11 11|||||
|Naval school structure|- 2 2 2 2|||||
|Operation of distress,emergency and safety services|- - -19 -12 -12|||||
|Development of the navy in total, see above|-48 -32 -36 -29 -29|||||
|Combat aircraft, type-selection, etc.|-25 -25 -25 -25 -|||||
|Ship-based helicopters|- - - -40 -40|||||
|Development of the air force in total, see above|-25 -25 -25 -65 -40|||||
|Home guard support for the defence|- - - - 0|||||
|Contributions to the military capacity-building and civilian rebuilding|-36 -36 -36 -36 -36|||||
|Marine and coastal zone|-3 -5 -6 -7 -8|||||
|The restructuring of the home guard|39 41 42 43 44|||||
|Development of the home guard in total, see|- - - - -|||||


-----

|above|Col2|
|---|---|
|Joint services military police|- - 11 11 11|
|Joint services special operations forces|- -15 -20 -40 -50|
|Mergers of authorities and other joint services measures|- - 90 120 140|
|Joint services in total, see above|- -15 81 91 101|
|Establishments|-6 -24 113 5 40|
|Establishments in total, see above|-6 -24 113 5 40|
|Arctic Command|36 37 37 38 39|
|Arctic Response Force|-13 -43 -13 -32 -2|
|Arctic Response Force establishment|- - - - -|
|Enhancing efforts in the Arctic – budget frame|- - -120 -120 -120|
|Analysis and testing with the use of satellites and UAVs|-40 -40 -20 - -|
|Arctic total, see above|-17 -46 -116 -114 -83|
|CNO capability|-35 -50 -50 -110 -110|
|Centre for Cyber Security|-30 -32 -35 -35 -35|
|Cyber in total, see above|-65 -82 -85 -145 -145|
|Green development projects and investments|-100 -100 -100 -100 -100|
|Green initiatives in total, see above|-100 -100 -100 -100 -100|
|Driving schools|3 4 4 5 6|
|Danish defence intelligence services under one roof|-40 -40 -20 - -|
|Others in total, see above|-37 -36 -16 5 6|
|All development measures in total|-282 -331 -142 -295 -193|


-----

**Appendix: the army’s centre structure**
The army’s garrisons are currently geographically dispersed with unused capacity. From a
military, practical and operational point of view, this is undesirable. Therefore the Parties to
the Agreement have agreed that the army’s capacities must be set up and trained in a
number of military professional centres, which will ensure a high-quality professional
education and production environment.

The new army is targeted towards the ability to respond on short notice with robust and
flexible battalion combat commands, as well as smaller contributions with the option of a
transition to longer-term deployments of up to one battalion combat command. In order to
maintain the necessary preparedness to respond at short notice, the level of activity of the
army regarding the operational capacities will be increased. Therefore about DKK 200
million is earmarked of the additional costs currently allocated for the deployment in
Afghanistan, to ensure that military units maintain their professional level and deployment
capability, even if the defence is not deployed in active missions. Training activities will
include national exercises and periods of weapons practice to keep up capacity. In addition
to this, there will be possible participation in bi- or multinational exercises abroad with a view
to cooperating with allies and partners, practicing deployment and redeployment, and to
maintaining the high level of training. The increased costs of this include the costs of
equipment operation.

According to the above, the army's new structure is divided into five centres:

-  Army International Centre

-  Army Combat Centre

-  Army Combat Support Centre

-  Army Support Centre

-  Army Special Centre


-----

**Appendix: the retention of national service with 4,200 persons a year in the Danish**
**defence**

_Introduction_
The total intake of conscripts will be reduced from abt. 5,000 to abt. 4,200 called up to the
defence. In addition to this, there are abt. 400 conscripts a year in the national emergency
preparedness in the period 2013-2014. The National Service Report includes a description
of a number of factors about military service, and also alternatives to the current national
service scheme. This is used as a reference for this appendix.

_Model description_
Below is listed key elements and prerequisites in this model for national service with a
reduced intake to abt. 4,200 called up for the defence:

-  The national service scheme continues - only the intake of conscripts will change.
This means, among other factors (and it is not exhaustive):
`o` There will be no change in laws, regulations, etc. in relation to national service.
`o` The Day of the Defence (medical board) continues unchanged.
`o` The National Service Council[4] is retained.
`o` We will continue to operate with the conscientious objectors’ administration,
although this will be proportionately reduced.
`o` The Total Defence Force will be retained, but reduced. This should be seen in
light of the fact that since its establishment, the force has not been activated,
either fully or partially. Prior to any activation, first of all the police, the Emergency
Management Agency, the defence and the home guard will be brought into
action, according to the situation.
`o` Abt. 100 conscripts are called up to the air force, and abt. 100 conscripts to the
navy.

-  Special services[5] of the defence continue to be manned by conscripts. For this, there
is an intake of abt. 1,000 conscripts.
`o` Abt. 3,200 persons complete basic training in the Danish armed forces.

_Expenditure_
The below listed expenditure by calling up abt. 4,200 persons to the defence is an estimate
based on the following model in the National Service Report: "The retention of national
service by the special services of the defence (and Danish Emergency Management
Agency)". In relation to this model, the impact is estimated of calling up an additional 3,200
conscripts to the defence basic training, including consequences of recruiting directly to
private ranks (the first four months of training - the number is reduced).
The total annual operating costs of calling up abt. 4,200 persons to the Danish defence are
abt. DKK 758 million (2013 level).

_Establishment conditions_
A national service model which calls up 4,600 persons, of these about 400 conscripts to the
national emergency preparedness per year in the period 2013-2014, is estimated to be
within the range studied about establishment factors, and therefore it will not be decisive in
relation to the possible closure of some of the establishments of the defence.

4 Defence Command’s area of authority.
5 Guard Company of the Royal Life Guards and, Horse Squadron of the Guards Hussars Regiment (both at the army),
and the Royal Yacht Dannebrog (the navy) .


-----

_Revenue_
The annual revenue at full phase-in of a model which calls up about 4,200 persons to the
defence is abt. DKK 132 million per year at full phase-in (2013 level), compared to the
current national service scheme.


-----

**Appendix: equipment**
The requirements and options for defence procurement are assessed on a regular basis,
among other authorities by the Defence Investment Committee. The specific acquisitions
are evaluated and scaled in relation to the need for development of defence capabilities to
national and international operations.

The economic disposition and payment framework for defence procurement is kept at a
largely unchanged level. As previously, the minister of defence obtains appropriation
authority from the Parliamentary Finance Committee (Folketingets Finansudvalg) for major
defence procurement projects. In addition to this, running costs are executed as before. This
includes upkeep of equipment and procurement of ammunition and weapons, etc. A
streamlining in the area of procurement and maintenance will be implemented, see
Appendix.

Abt. DKK 100 million a year will be reprioritized from the procurement of equipment to green
development projects and investments, see above.

In relation to future procurement, the defence must take into account whether bilateral or
multilateral cooperation regarding defence acquisition, running costs and maintenance is an
option. As a starting point, cooperation should provide financial savings or strengthen the
operational effect in relation to the task performance of the defence.

The acquisition projects mentioned in the Defence Agreement 2010-2014 are continued in
2013-2017, taking into account the following outline of defence procurement projects. As
mentioned, the specific procurement will be evaluated and scaled regularly, and adapted to
the current need for capabilities in light of national and international operations. Each year –
at the latest in October - the Parties to the Defence Agreement are presented with –the
plans for the defence procurement for the coming year. Furthermore, on an ongoing
quarterly basis, the Parties to the Defence Agreement are informed about the development
of defence procurement and running cost projects that have been initiated.

Acquisitions for the army can include, among other things:

-  Acquisitions of armoured personnel carriers as replacement

-  Fire-support systems, including artillery pieces

-  Engineering equipment, including equipment to counter roadside bombs, engineering
machinery and camp equipment for international operations

-  Radio and communications equipment, including data radios and communication
equipment with very long range and the necessary equipment for network
communication

-  Night vision combat equipment, as well as observation and sensor equipment

-  Electronic maps, GPS, etc.

-  Soldiers’ equipment, including weapons and personal protection equipment

For the navy, a new inspection vessel of the KNUD RASMUSSEN class will be acquired,
and additional procurement can include, among other things:

-  Demining equipment

-  Sonar equipment for the IVER HUITFELDT class (frigates)

-  Communication equipment

-  Smaller vessels and ships, including tugs and mobile shallow water vessels


-----

Maritime helicopters will be acquired for the air force and, in addition to this, procurement
will include:

-  Radars and control systems

-  Communication and identification systems

Among other things, the joint services defence procurement will generally include:

-  Replacement of wheeled vehicles for all the services

-  Equipment for special operations forces

As regards the home guard, procurement may include:

-  Transport equipment and equipment to support surveillance and marine environmental
efforts

-  Soldiers’ kits

-  Other equipment which supports the current and future tasks of the home guard.


-----

**Appendix: efficiency measures**
A series of efficiency measures will be implemented in the Danish defence with an expected
revenue of abt. DKK 2.4 billion a year at full phase-in in 2017. The starting point for the
efficiency measures is the budget analyses of the defence, which are described in the report
from the Committee for Analyses of the Danish Armed Forces. The defence has
subsequently consolidated and elaborated the different measures and corresponding
revenues, including adjustment for the overlap between the different analyses.

Given the volume and complexity of the projects, it is inherently difficult to estimate exactly
how the phase-in will take place over the years. It must therefore be expected that the
phase-in of the individual projects will deviate from the below estimates. The described
uncertainty in the phase-in period does not affect the permanent revenue of abt. DKK 2.4
billion at full phase-in.

The consolidated revenue and the estimated phase-in rate are shown in the below table.

Table - revenue from efficiency initiatives in DKK million at 2013 level.

|Initiative|2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Procurement - category program|94 302 374 457 754|||||
|Stocks - procurement reduction|25 51 76 101 101|||||
|Stocks - disposable revenue|66 81 187 137 35|||||
|Warehousing and logistics|23 88 100 105 105|||||
|Equipment maintenance|63 122 117 185 198|||||
|HR tasks and administration|58 135 199 213 216|||||
|Health benefits|15 45 92 92 92|||||
|Employment and contract forms|18 37 55 74 78|||||
|Remuneration during training|123 254 332 288 290|||||
|Pay increases and fixed allowances|119 142 166 187 187|||||
|Working time and temporary service|258 258 258 258 258|||||
|Specific retention initiatives|132 145 145 164 164|||||
|Efficiency initiatives in total|994 1,660 2,101 2,261 2,478|||||
|Revenue, corrected for overlap, etc.|984 1,640 2,071 2,221 2,428|||||



Efficiency measures concerning the support structure of the defence is to a large extent
aiming at consolidating the structure by merging functions into fewer locations and
improving capability utilization in each area.

When a higher degree of utilization is needed, it will also entail personnel reductions.
Furthermore, the consolidation of, for example, the depot, infirmary, and maintenance
structure will lead to geographical relocation for certain parts of the defence personnel.

The main elements of the efficiency measures are discussed below.

_The Danish defence appropriation structure_
With a view to contributing to increased transparency and creating greater coherence
between the appropriation of the Danish Finance Act for the defence and the internal
management of the defence, the Defence Command’s appropriation is divided into sixteen
new key accounts. The division is based on the organization of the defence, in that the
largest Level-II agencies under the Defence Command are each assigned individual key


-----

accounts. In addition to this, key accounts are created for the largest remaining frameworks,
i.e. defence procurement, equipment maintenance, facility management, etc.

Access to free transfer between the operating appropriations of the Ministry of Defence is
retained as a starting point. However, the following adjustments will be implemented that are
aimed at the investments of the defence:

-  Transfer access between acquisitions appropriations and other key accounts is
abolished.

-  Free transfer access remains internally between acquisitions appropriations, in that
transfer access between the newly created account for major defence procurement and
other acquisitions accounts is abolished, though.

The model will have the effect of a greater degree of separation between the operation
expenditures and investments of the defence, also according to the practice of other
ministries.

The future transfer access between the key accounts in the Finance Act will be in
accordance with the Budget Act of 12 June 2012, and the forthcoming introduction of
expenditure limits, etc.

_Procurement_
Today, the Danish defence has great potential for ensuring better and cheaper procurement
through expanded use of framework agreements, concentration of the supplier base,
centralization of purchases into significantly fewer functions, as well as the establishment of
a strengthened and more coordinated organization for handling the defence procurement.

The defence will implement an organizational change in procurement, which will bring
together the main procurement functions in one central location. The core will be a strategic
procurement function with a clear top-level focus.
In addition to this, the defence will initiate a comprehensive procurement category program.

_Storage and logistics_
Significant economic benefits can be gained by reducing the surplus stocks of the defence
and consolidating the depot and distribution system.

In order to optimize the stockpile of the defence, it is agreed to launch the following three
initiatives:

-  The defence will permanently reduce procurement of stocks, where stockpiling expands
beyond an appropriate level, among other things due to the procurement volume exceeding
the consumption volume.

-  The defence uses existing stocks, where stockholdings are relatively large compared to
the current consumption needs. At the same time, a procurement stop is initiated on these
product types for a temporary period of time.

-  The defence sells off its excess stockholdings in areas, where it is deemed unrealistic that
the defence itself will use the stockholding within an appropriate timeframe.

In addition to this, the defence must optimize the operation and logistics of its depot and
distribution system, partly by consolidating the main depot structure, partly by increasing
capacity utilization in the distribution system.


-----

Furthermore, it is assessed whether further efficiency options can be identified in the
logistics activities of the defence, for example through competitive tendering of all or part of
the activities.

_Equipment maintenance_
It is possible for the defence to achieve a better utilization of workshop capacity through
consolidation of the maintenance structure.

It is therefore agreed that during the agreement period, the defence will undertake a
comprehensive streamlining of the maintenance structure in order to improve capacity
utilization.

It is further assessed whether further efficiency opportunities can be identified in the
equipment maintenance of the defence, for example through outsourcing of parts of the
activities.

_Healthcare_
The budget analyses of the defence have demonstrated that it is possible to achieve
improved efficiency in its offered health services. It is against this background that there is
consensus among the Parties to the Defence Agreement to implement the following two
initiatives:

Firstly, a targeting of the healthcare of the defence will be implemented. The targeting
entails that all health measures for personnel in direct operational activities are retained,
including assignment, deployment and redeployment in connection with operations.

Secondly, steps are being taken to ensure better capacity utilization through consolidation of
the infirmary structure of the defence, hereby reducing the number of infirmaries and
concentrating the capacity on a small number of core units.

After completion of these initiatives, it is assessed whether further efficiency opportunities
can be identified in the healthcare area, for example by outsourcing all or part of the
activities. This should be viewed in conjunction with other structural changes in the defence,
which would make this possible.

_HR administration_
The budget analyses of the defence have demonstrated that through targeting of services
and internal optimization, it will be possible to reduce the expenses that the defence applies
to HR management. Subsequently, in line with the recommendations of the efficiency
analyses, the defence has developed a specific model for the organization of the HR area,
which will form the basis for a comprehensive reorganization and streamlining of the HR
administration of the defence.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement have agreed that during the agreement period a
reorganization of the HR area will be initiated, including, among other things:

-  Targeting of efforts/services in the area of recruitment and advising.

-  Optimization of the HR administration in the area of wages and data processing.

-  More effective administration of the HR area.

_Employment and contract forms_


-----

In order to strengthen the flexibility and cost-effectiveness of the defence, it will
prospectively use either fixed-duration short-term contracts, where the duration is
determined on the basis of an individual assessment of the needs of the defence, or
permanent employment, which is characterized by the fact that employment is terminated by
voluntary or compulsory retirement, and not at a particular age.

The defence will, as far as possible, eliminate future use of public servant appointments for
both officers and regulars.

The initiative will strengthen the flexibility and cost-effectiveness of the defence in relation to
ensuring a personnel composition that matches the tasks of the defence, including
participation in international operations.

_Remuneration during training and education_
The Parties to the Defence Agreement agree that compensation packages for the defence
training programs shall be aligned with education in the civilian educational system. The
military trainees of the defence will henceforth be employed as craftsmen apprentices, which
will be equivalent to trainee employment in the rest of the national public and the private
sector. Students in the basic sergeant-level training programs will be remunerated with state
education grants.

Officers’ educations are organized according to an accreditation model, which implies that
the educations are targeted at obtaining military competences. The educations are sought to
be accredited at diploma level, meaning that the defence can pay regular wages during the
education. In the future, a prior bachelor degree or its equivalent will be a prerequisite for
admission to the officers’ educations. Alternatively, admission to the officers’ educations
could be accepted on the basis of an advanced sergeant training program accredited as a
business academy program. In the future, the defence will develop and adapt the current
program for further education of officers in accordance with the principles of the
accreditation model. The model does not imply that students on the training programs of the
defence will receive loss of pay compensation and value-added grant funding, etc., from the
mainstream education system.

Furthermore, the students of the defence will no longer be appointed to a higher position
level before the completion of the education program which allows for this position level. The
revenue of the initiatives in 2013-2017 is shown in the table below.

Table - revenue remuneration during education in DKK million at 2013 level

|Initiative|2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Accreditation model for officers’ education Sergeants’ training with state education grant Military trainees on apprentice pay Changed appointment practices|86 170 211 159 161 15 44 59 59 59 4 13 26 35 35 18 27 35 35 35|||||
|Total remuneration during education|123 254 332 288 290|||||



_Wage growth and composition_
The development of wages in the defence has been greater than in the rest of the state from
2005-2010. The relatively high wage increases in the defence have been substantiated by


-----

recruitment and retention challenges, but these recruitment challenges are no longer judged
to be present.

The defence has a number of options available to target labour costs in relation to the
current situation. The targeting could be achieved through a more focused and restrictive
use of locally negotiated wage components in the context of personnel leaving service and
contract expiry, as well as alteration of the number and size of one-off payments to match
the average in the rest of the state.

_Working hours and temporary service_
During the agreement period, the defence will reduce costs of wages regarding working
hours components (overtime, etc.), with the aim of reducing the current wage level to the
level of 2005, adjusted for the increased payout percentage for overtime.

Furthermore, to a greater extent than up to now, the defence will work out reductions by
applying the compensation scheme which is most economically desirable for the defence in
relation to changed place of employment for defence personnel.

_Special retention initiatives_
In 2008, the Danish defence introduced a series of personnel retention and recruitment
efforts. During the period 2005-2010, personnel turnover in the defence has remained below
the national level in general. At the same time, the number of military full-time equivalent
positions has increased by abt. 1,000.

There is consensus that during the agreement period, the defence must phase out the
specific retention initiatives, thus reducing the costs related to these initiatives.

Furthermore, a review will be carried out of whether the existing outfit obligation of the
defence in relation to military personnel is still up-to-date.

_Implementation_
The Ministry of Defence will establish an implementation organization to ensure a focused
implementation of the agreed initiatives, which will be anchored at a high organizational
level.

To support the ongoing follow-up on the Defence Agreement, the Ministry of Defence will set
up an advisory group with participation from, among others, the Ministry of Finance, which
will receive a bi-annual status of the implementation of the agreed initiatives.

In addition to this, the advisory group will prepare the annual reporting on the
implementation of the efficiency measures to the defence and financial spokespersons for
the Parties to the Defence Agreement.


-----

**Appendix: merger of authorities**
In the Danish defence there is currently a number of so-called Level II agencies of varying
size, with the Army Operational Command as the largest, and the Danish Defence
Occupational Health Centre as the smallest.

In an extensive streamlining process, such as has been initiated, the option of a further
organizational merger of some Level II agencies should be analysed with the objective of
exploiting synergies between the existing authorities, carrying out streamlining on an
operative level, and creating a more transparent management structure to effectively
support the organizational model. This could furthermore contribute to a coordinated and
efficient use of resources and cross-combine task performance.

In order to facilitate the process, the analysis must be carried out with the assistance of
external consultants with relevant experience.

Mergers can be effectuated in one of two ways:

-  Organizational merger in the same geographical location, which will entail streamlining
potential within management, administrative functions, and operational savings.

-  Organizational merger without the same geographical location, where the primary
streamlining potential will be within management and administrative functions.

Based on this, the below model solutions for implementing organizational changes should
be examined:

-  Merging the three services operational commands into one joint operational command,
as the task portfolios of the three operational commands have a number of common
characteristics, including force generation and force deployment.

-  Merging the Danish Defence Acquisition and Logistics Organization and the Danish
Defence Group Joint Informatics Service.

-  Merging the Danish Defence Personnel Service, the Danish Defence Health Service, the
Veterans’ Centre and the Danish Defence Occupational Health Centre, in order that all
Danish defence personnel-related tasks are placed together in one organization. The
Veterans’ Centre will remain in Ringsted. There will be an organizational merger of the
three services military academies under the Defence Academy as of mid-2014. If there is
sufficient basis for doing so, including a sufficiently attractive economic basis, it may
subsequently be decided to have the military academies placed in one location. The
Danish Defence Centre for Digital Management and Education will merge with the
Defence Academy, which will place all higher education and training programs of the
defence together under one management.

_Economic potential_
The actual implementation of streamlining in this area has to be analysed in depth and
detail, including drawing on the necessary expertise, before the implementation of any
mergers. Based on evidence and the current resource consumption, it is estimated that the
combined area should be able to realize a streamlining revenue of between 10% and 20%,
at a minimum. This also depends on the extent to which it will not merely be an
organizational merger, but also a geographical one. The total reduction is estimated to be of
at least between DKK 75 and 150 million annually.

The Parties to the Defence Agreement will present the results of the analyses in 2014.


-----

**Appendix: evaluation of new officers’ education**
_The education_
An accreditation model will be introduced to replace the current basic officers’ training
program. The model seeks to obtain accreditation of basic officers’ training programs at
diploma level and the Danish defence can pay wages during education. It sets the target
that one third of those admitted henceforth will be admitted on the basis of a civilian
education at bachelor level. Two thirds will be recruited to the new officers’ education from
among the specially skilled personnel of the regulars group.

This is a significant change to officers´ training, and it will therefore initially be a trial scheme
to be evaluated as described below.

The accreditation model is sought to be offered by the Danish defence as a diploma degree.
The program's total length is stipulated to be abt. 28 months. This is a reduction in education
time compared to the current officers´ training programs, ranging from 47-65 months,
depending on the service and branch of study. The program content of the proposed
officers´ education will be targeted to the core business of the military – operations, strategy
and management. This is made possible by building the program on previously acquired
skills in either a civilian or military educational system.

The diagram below shows the expected composition of the program elements, in that the
top row of numbers shows the total education time in months for civilian academics.

Military academy


The diagram illustrates the elements of the combined education for permanent defence
personnel with associated exit options. This type of modular structure allows for
considerable flexibility, as the duration of service rank determines the acceleration of the
individual program. Furthermore, the modular structure enables personnel with no prior
plans for an officer´s career to initiate their preliminary training whenever they wish to.
Finally, the modular structure supports the objective that the educations or parts thereof
should be accredited and applicable in civilian life, if the personnel should wish to
discontinue their employment in the armed forces.

As point of departure, those sergeants who do not seek admission to the officers´ education
will not have to go through the supplementary module either.

_Evaluation_
On a general basis, the program will be continuously evaluated in relation to content,
implementation, quality, etc.

Given that this is a trial scheme, a specific evaluation will be carried out for the first two
years in relation to recruitment and selection. For the civilian academics there will be an
evaluation after completion of the basic program and practice period, and finally, for both


-----

graduates (bachelors) and personnel recruited from defence, there will be an evaluation
after completion of the officers´ education.

In the case of personnel recruited from the defence, an additional evaluation will be carried
out after completion of the supplementary module.

The evaluations conducted - which will include evaluations of both process and content - will
be reported successively to the Parties to the Defence Agreement.

_Conclusion_
It should finally be noted that the above program, in connection with the final planning,
organization and implementation, must be adapted to the specific needs of the three
services. A final composition of the education and clarification regarding accreditation is
pending.


-----

**Appendix: the analyses**
During the agreement period, the following major studies and analyses will be conducted
within the Ministry of Defence in cooperation with, among others, the Ministry of Finance
and possibly external consultancy support. The overall objective of the analyses, among
other aims, is to ensure continuous optimization of the agencies of the combine, and to
investigate whether there will be potential for identifiable additional operational streamlining
in the defence and the home guard, among others. Below please find analyses of these
areas:

-  A budget analysis will be conducted of the activities and organization of the home
guard.

-  A budget analysis will be conducted of the Defence Construction Service. The
analysis will include consideration of the perspectives in the possibility of transfer of
operation and ownership of the defence building stock or parts thereof to the Danish
Building and Property Agency, and possibly to the Danish Agency for Palaces and
Cultural Properties.

-  A budget analysis will be conducted of the operational area with the aim of efficient
utilization of resources and task performance.

In addition to this, the option will be analysed of merging authorities in the Danish defence,
as described in a separate Appendix. Furthermore, as is customary, further budget analyses
etc. can be initiated.

Finally, an analysis will be executed to identify the options of more openness and
transparency in defence matters.

The results will be presented to the Parties to the Defence Agreement.


-----

**Appendix: analysis of future task solution and tests with Arctic surveillance**
During the agreement period, a comprehensive analysis will be conducted of the future
tasks of the defence in the Arctic, including the possible advantages to engaging in closer
cooperation with other Arctic nations. A good starting-point would be not only the already
established relations to the other Nordic countries, but also to Canada, USA and Russia.
Similarly the analysis will identify opportunities for closer cooperation between military and
civilian actors, such as the maritime industry. In addition to this, the comprehensive analysis
will include, among other things, an actual risk analysis for the maritime environment in and
around Greenland, as well as the mapping out of infrastructural and logistical needs as a
result of identified initiatives.

As part of the study of closer cooperation with other nations, the possibilities of exchanging
surveillance data related to maritime and airspace surveillance with other nations are
highlighted, in order to strengthen the Danish overview of maritime and airspace activities in
the Arctic.

Prospectively during the agreement period, there will be an influx of modern capabilities in
the Arctic which could significantly optimize the surveillance of the area. This applies to new
maritime helicopters and possibly the use of satellites, aircraft, including unmanned aircraft,
etc. Cooperation with other nations could provide access to large amounts of surveillance
data. A common factor of these new capabilities is that they will generate surveillance data
to an extent that the defence has not yet had the need to handle on its own. In order to
ensure that this huge amount of information can be prospectively handled for appropriate
use, an analysis is to be conducted of the future needs of the defence to receive, process
and transmit surveillance data in the Arctic with the aim of a subsequent establishment of a
capability for this. The analysis is to be held within the defence budget.

In the period 2013-2015, tests of surveillance technologies will be conducted in the Arctic.
The tests are to include the provision or possible acquisition for a test period of satellite
capacity from partner nations or private providers. In addition to this, the tests will include
the acquisition of surveillance with unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) from private providers
or from partner nations. Also, the use of combat aircraft to quickly initiate surveillance
relating to emergencies and disasters is to be examined.

To finance the analyses and tests, up to DKK 40 million a year will be earmarked during the
period 2013-2014, and DKK 20 million in 2015. These investments are expected to be used
for these purposes, among others:

-  An analysis of the future tasks of the defence in the Arctic.

-  A risk analysis of the maritime environment in and around Greenland.

-  A mapping out of the infrastructural and logistical needs of the defence as a result of
identified initiatives.

-  Experience retrieval from partners and other Arctic actors, including the Nordic
countries, USA, Canada and Russia.

-  Testing of satellite surveillance and satellite communications capacities, as well as
UAV and related data handling capabilities.

-  Testing of existing capacities for the implementation of the prospective task solutions
of the defence in the Arctic, etc.

The results will be presented to the Parties to the Defence Agreement in 2014. The above
analyses and tests will be part of the basis of a determination of the future tasks in the
Arctic of the defence within the reduced economic framework.


-----

With a view to be able to follow up and launch initiatives, as a consequence of the above
analyses and tests, the Parties to the Defence Agreement have agreed to earmark abt. DKK
120 million annually from 2015 to 2017. Among potential initiatives are permanent measures
for surveillance via satellites and UAVs, increase in crew numbers, and crew composition on
existing patrol vessels and ships with a view to increasing utilization and achieving more
sailing days, intensification and expansion of exercise activity in and around Greenland, and
capabilities associated with the marine environment, etc.


-----

**Appendix: examples of force generation of a combat command**


-----

**Appendix: released funds**
The gradual phasing-in of the efficiency and development measures entails that for 2013 and
2014, a total of abt. DKK 2.4 billion will be released for other uses, thus reducing the defence
budget correspondingly.

Furthermore, at the end of 2012, the Danish defence expects a significant accumulation. Out of
the saving in the area of the defence according to Section 12, based on current consumption
estimates, a total of abt. DKK 1.2 billion will be carried over to a new agreement. The funds are
carried over as per Section 12. the Ministry of Defence, and use of these funds will be in
accordance with the provisions regarding expenditure limits, etc.

In addition to this, a further accumulation is expected, which will be discontinued as per Section
12. Based on current consumption estimates, this amount is expected to be of abt. DKK 1,0
billion, but will not be finally determined until the settlement of appropriation accounts.

The distribution of released funds is shown in the table below:

|Released funds Surplus that is not carried over Budget reduction in 2013 Budget reduction in 2014|Amount Abt. DKK 1.0 billion Abt. DKK 0.9 billion Abt. DKK 1.5 billion|
|---|---|
|Total reserved funds for future allocation by the Parties to the Defence Agreement|Abt. DKK 3.4 billion|



In total, abt. DKK 3.4 billion will thus be released, according to current consumption estimates.

An amount will be reserved, corresponding to the budget reductions in 2013 and 2014,
respectively, as well as to the actual discontinuation of the savings at the end of 2012.

The future application of the earmarked amount will be settled in the Ministry of Finance by
mutual agreement between the Parties to the Defence Agreement.

46


-----

10 April 2014

## Organisation of the management of the Danish defence and addition
 to Defence Agreement 2013-2017

A reorganisation of the senior management will contribute to the further efficiency improvement

of the Danish defence according to the political Defence Agreement 2013-2017.

At the same time, this will provide an opportunity for simplifying the current organisation and

reducing the number of levels and authorities within the Danish defence.

An organisational change will also provide an opportunity for adjusting the organisation of the

management of the Danish defence to meet future requirements in relation to a co-ordinated

and efficient use of resources and handling of tasks.

In connection with the amendment of the Danish Defence Act, the government indicated its

willingness to discuss a specific proposal for an organisational change of the management of the

Danish defence with the parties of the ‘Folketing’ (Danish parliament), as the current defence

agreement states that the area of the joint forces within the Danish defence is to be

strengthened.

In relation to the authority contained within the Danish Defence Act, stating that the minister of

defence may administratively determine the more detailed organisation of the management of

the Danish defence, the parties to the agreement note that it is the government’s responsibility

to determine the more detailed organisation and limitation of the department of the Ministry of

Defence. Also, the parties to the agreement note that the overall structural organisation of the

Danish defence is bound by conditions stipulated in the agreement.

On the basis of this, and after discussions between the government (the Social Democrats and

the Social-Liberal Party), the Liberal Party (‘Venstre’), The Socialist People’s Party, the Danish

People’s Party, the Liberal Alliance and the Conservatives, in addition to the political Defence

Agreement 2013-2017, the following has been agreed on:

There is a consensus to change the organisation of the management of the Danish defence in

order to significantly simplify the structure, and to achieve a further efficiency improvement.

The operational parts of Defence Command Denmark will be merged with the three operational

commands into a new joint services military command (The Joint Defence Command) under the


-----

management of the chief of defence. The chief of defence remains the senior military advisor to

the minister of defence.

The chief of defence will be placed together with part of his staff (expected up to abt. 125 full
time employees) at the department of the Ministry of Defence. The majority of the remaining

part of the Joint Defence Command will be placed in Karup.

The Joint Defence Command is to be organised in such a manner that the joint services area will

be strengthened without weakening the professional environments and identities of the special

services.

The Arctic Command and the Special Operations Command will enter as authorities into the Joint

Defence Command, referring directly to the chief of defence, but with the necessary

independent profile and structure defined by the nature of the assignments and the

geographical locations of the commands. This is done with a view to the chief of defence

ensuring an increased focus on the Arctic and the special operations forces with regard to

planning and force production, thus also ensuring the necessary support. In accordance with the

political Defence Agreement 2013-2017, the parties to the agreement find it of vital importance

that these areas should be prioritized. The Arctic Command will remain in Nuuk. The Special

Operations Command will be placed in Aalborg.

Overall planning, resource allocation, and fiscal management will be integrated and joined at the

department of the Ministry of Defence. Personnel strategy will also be placed at the department.

The chief of defence will be in charge of the military consultancy, which will form the basis of

the overall planning and resource management, including of the support services. The chief of

defence will thus be able to influence decisions regarding investments in and maintenance of

equipment. The chief of defence will be in charge of the maintenance of the equipment of the

defence, cf. below. The chief of defence will be responsible for the budget pertaining to the

operational area.

In connection with the establishment of the Joint Defence Command as a new independent

authority, which in part will be placed together with the department of the Ministry of Defence,

the ‘Folketing’ and the public are ensured the same access to the military recommendations and

assessments of the chief of defence, as has been the case so far.


-----

The role and responsibility of the chief of defence with regard to the equipment area and in

relation to fiscal management, etc., are described in more detail in appendix 1 and 2,

respectively.

Appendix 3 shows the new overall structure for the organisation of the Ministry of Defence.

Appendix 4 is a tentative rendition of the Joint Defence Command, as the chief of defence will

determine its organisation in more detail within the framework of this agreement.

An annual yield of DKK 170 million is to be achieved by the full implementation of the

reorganised management of the Danish defence, which will contribute to securing the fiscal

aspect of the political Defence Agreement 2013-2017.

The Defence Health Service will be assigned to the Joint Defence Command and will be moved

from Skalstrup to Aarhus. The Aviation Medical Clinic is expected to be moved to Skrydstrup.

Skalstrup will be sold.

The maritime surveillance centres will be joined in Frederikshavn.

The parties to the agreement concur that the number of defence workplaces in Bornholm should

be maintained despite the closing of the Maritime Surveillance Centre in Bornholm. The defence

is tasked with drafting a model for this. The model will be presented to the parties to the

agreement in the middle of 2014, at the latest.

The military units, staffs, and schools, incl. the Defence Academy, of the defence are to be

assigned to the Joint Defence Command.

The equipment area will be reorganised with a view to strengthening the strategic control, and

supporting the operational and military responsibility of the chief of defence.

The Danish Defence Acquisition and Logistics Organization (DALO) will thus become an

independent agency under the Ministry of Defence (the Ministry of Defence Equipment and

Procurement Agency).

With the general purpose of strengthening the overall management of the equipment area and

ensuring a strong supervision with this new agency, the department will be allocated further

resources.

In this connection, the department will also handle the overall management of the project

organisations being set up in connection with major and/or strategic defence equipment


-----

projects/procurements, cf. appendix 5, with a view to in this manner establish the best possible

foundation for the inclusion of the relevant parties to the agreement.

The management of Danish Defence Supply will be moved from Ballerup to Aarhus. A timetable

for this will be presented to the parties to the agreement in the middle of 2014.

The Danish Maintenance Agencies, which at present form part of the Danish Defence

Acquisition and Logistics Organization, will be merged with the maintenance structure of the

services in a new maintenance organisation under the Joint Defence Command. The

management of the new maintenance organisation will be placed in Aarhus.

An analysis will be carried out of the implementation of the merger. The ongoing work on

further optimization and efficiency improvements of the overall maintenance area will be

continued. It will be the guiding force behind the proposal for a more detailed organisation

which is to result from the analysis. The analysis will be presented to the parties to the

agreement in the middle of 2014, at the latest.

The other functional services will be joined and thus reduced in number, as stipulated in the

political Defence Agreement 2013-2017. In the future, they will be independent agencies under

the department of the Ministry of Defence.

This entails the merger of the Danish Defence Informatics Service and the future Equipment and

Procurement Agency under the department of the Ministry of Defence.

The Danish Defence Personnel Service, the Danish Defence Centre for Working Environment,

and the Veteran Centre will be joined with the Ministry of Defence Personnel Agency, though the

Veteran Centre will remain in Ringsted.

With respect to the development of the task performance of the Danish Defence Building and

Establishment Service relating to the operation of establishments, the largest possible part of the

management will be joined in Hjørring.

The parties to the agreement note that it is a prerequisite for this that a further annual yield of

DKK 30 million can be obtained by making driving schools, the Navy's technical courses, and

guard services subject to competition. In addition to this, the marine environment surveillance

will also be made subject to competition. The parties to the agreement agree to set up an

objective for a further annual yield of DKK 46 million by the complete phase-in of the following

areas being made subject to competition:

-  The workshop area, as the realization of assets should form part of the considerations


-----

-  The informatics area, as the sale of this enterprise should be considered, too

-  Further parts of the building and establishment area

-  Certain tasks within the personnel area

-  Certain tasks within the accounting area.

The Home Guard Command will be placed in Vordingborg.

DKK 25 million is allocated annually with the purpose of strengthening the effort with regard to

the veterans.

Furthermore, the parties to the agreement concur to accede to the plan drafted by the Danish

defence for covering the identified remaining requirement for financing in connection with the

implementation of the agreement. See appendix 6.

The expected effects on the number of senior military positions within the management of the

Danish defence can be seen in appendix 7.

An analysis concerning the Danish Defence Judge Advocate Corps is being conducted. See

appendix 8.


-----

**Appendix 1**

**The role and responsibilities of the chief of defence in relation to equipment**
**planning**

The chief of defence is responsible for and approves the so-called priority directive in the
equipment area, prioritizing replacement procurement and procurement of new capacities.
The directive is drafted on the basis of the political defence agreements and – for subsequent
years – the development activities of the defence.

The chief of defence also approves the more detailed planning of procurement and operation
of equipment on the basis of the priority directive.

The chief of defence is responsible for the military requirements for new equipment and,
therefore, influences decisions concerning equipment procurement.

The chief of defence is responsible for the performance of equipment maintenance in the
Danish defence.


-----

**Appendix 2**

**The role and responsibilities of the chief of defence in relation to financial**
**management, etc.**

The chief of defence is responsible for the budget for the Joint Defence Command with
assigned authorities, units, staffs, schools, etc. (including production and troop deployment).

The staff support of the joint services and the special services, needed to formulate military
advice, must be available to the chief of defence. This advice will be the basis of the overall
planning and fiscal management, including the support production, among other things. In
addition to this is the staff support in the fiscal area, necessary to the handling of the budget
responsibility.

Due to his function as senior military advisor, the chief of defence will be included and thus
have a direct influence on the part of the support function, on which the operational area
relies. The military advice of the chief of defence will, therefore, be an important factor in the
planning and resource allocation for the support function of, among other things, the deployed
forces of the Danish defence, as well as the coordination of plans and their subsequent
implementation in the operational area and the support function.

The overall planning and resource allocation will be carried out at the department within the
framework of the political defence agreements and their implementation in the finance act,
etc. On the basis of this, the department will work out a draft for the more detailed planning
in the form of a multi-annual budget and plan/yearly programme, as well as the annual result
contracts, negotiated and entered into with the heads of the agencies of the organisation,
including the chief of defence.

Aided by his staff, the chief of defence will convert his fiscal framework into action
programmes which will be indicative for the assigned units, staffs, and schools.

Consequently, the chief of defence will be responsible for the overall budget of the Joint
Defence Command and its task solution. In this connection, he will need to ensure that the
pertaining authorities, units, staffs, schools, etc., will solve the tasks assigned to them within
the resource framework, and that they will contribute continuously to streamlining the task
performance and the use of resources.


-----

|OTHER AUTHORITIES|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
||OTHER AUTHORITIES|||
|||||
|||||

|The minister of defence The chief of defence THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE THE JOINT DEFFEoNrCsEva CrOscMhMeAf ND THE MINISTRY OF Viceforsvarschef THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE EQUIPMENT DEFENCE PERSONNEL OTHER AUTHORITIES AND PROCUREMENT SERVICE AGENCY THE MINISTRY OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE ACCOUNTING DEFENCE BUILDING AND AGENCY ESTABLISHMENT AGENCY|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||The chief|of defence|
||||
||THE JOINT DEFFEoNrCsEva CrOscMhMeAf ND Viceforsvarschef||
|THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE ACCOUNTING AGENCY|||


THE DANISH DEFENCE

HEALTH SERVICE

THE DANISH DEFENCE

WORKSHOPS AND

MAINTENANCE


THE DANISH DEFENCE

COLLEGE


MILITARY

UNITS/STAFFS AND

SCHOOLS


-----

**The Joint Services Defence Command**

Chief of Defence

MANAGEMENT Deputy Chief of
SECRETARIAT Defence

DEVELOPMENT ”SERVICES ” SERVICES ” SERVICES SPECIAL

ARCTIC

OPERATIONS AND STAFF” STAFF” STAFF” OPERATIONS

COMMAND

MANAGEMENT ARMY NAVY AIR FORCE COMMAND

Advice on

Planning of capacities,

operations, etc. priorities,

equipment, etc.

Fiscal

Operations management,
centre, etc. production

planning, etc.


THE DANISH DEFENCE

WORKSHOPS AND

MAINTENANCE


THE DANISH DEFENCE

COLLEGE


THE DANISH DEFENCE

HEALTH SERVICE


MILITARY

UNITS/STAFFS AND

SCHOOLS


-----

**Appendix 5**

**Strategic equipment projects**

Strategic equipment projects can be both replacement procurement and new procurement.

This will typically be projects whose scope (in relation to the overall capacities and/or finances
of the Danish defence), risk, or other significance is of such a nature that there is reason to
ensure close management and connection to the political level, including to ensure the
relevant involvement of the parties to the agreement.

Among other things, the department of the Ministry of Defence will ensure its control by
handling the chairmanship of the steering committees for the project organisations in
question. A separate organisation may also be established, as is currently the case with the
programme “Nyt Kampfly” (‘New Fighter Jet’) which is a part of the department. This will be
based on a specific assessment in each case.

The parties to the agreement will be continuously informed about which project organisations
are being established in connection with strategic equipment projects.


-----

**Appendix 6**

**Coverage of economic fallout**

|Initiative Contents, etc. Status|Col2|Col3|Estimate of yield 2017 (PL2013)|
|---|---|---|---|
|Additional yield by - The Danish defence expects an additional yield besides outsourcing the those originally determined by outsourcing the establishment operation establishment operation||The establishment operation in West Denmark is transferred to external supplier 1st February 2014.|DKK 40 million|
|Overhead reduction on the basis of personnel reductions|- Adjustment of the overhead costs of the Danish defence on the basis of the personnel reductions across the Danish defence mandated by the agreement|To be commenced at DKK 20 million the beginning of 2014||
|Development of the further education of the Danish defence (master level)|- More flexible education divided into modules - Further education takes place at the same time as normal service - Further education takes place by means of remote education, among other things|Is expected to be DKK 80 million implemented as of the middle of 2014||
|Discontinuation of the Combat Support Wing|- Closure of the Combat Support Wing - Transfer of the relevant parts to the capacities at the Army Operational Command and the Danish Defence Acquisition and Logistics Organization|DKK 30 million||
|Joint services engineering - Consolidation of combat engineers, munitions clearing, capacity construction and infrastructure capacities, geo-spatial capacities and CBRN defence under the Army Operational Command||The parties to the agreement have been briefed in October. Implementation basis being drafted with a view to 2014 implementation.|DKK 5 million|
|Additional yield from joint services initiatives covered by the agreement|- From the Defence Agreement 2013-2017 appears a yield from joint services initiatives of DKK 151 million, including the set-up of joint services military police. Currently, the Danish defence expects an overall yield of DKK 188 million from the joint services initiatives determined in the agreement.|See the following lines DKK 35 million||
|Joint services military police|- Set-up of joint services military police embedded in Army Operational Command|Implementation basis being . drafted||
|Joint services logistics support|- Set-up of joint services logistics support capacity covering communication, informatics and headquarters support capacities|Analysis commenced at the beginning of 2013|.|


|Joint Services Operational Command|- Set-up of joint services operational command including the army, navy, and the air force - Provided that a speedy decision is reached, the complete yield of DKK 96 million will be phased-in by 2018, while the yield for 2017 will be DKK 84 million|Waiting on political decision DKK|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|Joining of FPT, FSU, VETC, FCA|- Consolidation of the personnel-related authorities of the Danish defence (the Danish Defence Personnel Service, Health Service, Veterans’ Centre and Centre for Working Environment)|Analysis commenced DKK September 2013||
|Joining of FMT and FKIT|- Consolidation of the Danish defence authorities in the equipment and IT area (the Danish Defence Acquisition and Logistics Organization and its Informatics Service)|Analysis commenced DKK September 2013||
|Joining of FAK and FCDFU|- Consolidation of the Danish defence authorities in the educational area (the Defence College and the Danish Defence Centre for Digital Administration and Education)|Has been completed by the DKK middle of 2013||
|Additional yield by means of - Further yield as a result of subjection to competition, subjection to competition including driving schools, the Navy’s technical courses, and guard services||Analyses of driving schools and the Navy’s technical courses are ongoing|DKK 30 million|
|Phase 2 of the Danish Defence Supply Agency and of the Danish Defence Maintenance Agency|Achievement of the agreement yield within depot, distribution, and equipment maintenance - Further optimization of depot and distribution structure - Further optimization of the workshop structure|To be commenced in DKK 40 million the second half of 2013||
|Analysis of the administrative functions of|- Analysis of the administrative functions of the Danish defence with a view to optimizing the HR, finance and|To be commenced in the autumn of 2013|DKK 30 million|


-----

|Initiative Contents, etc. Status|Col2|Col3|Estimate of yield 2017 (PL2013)|
|---|---|---|---|
|the Danish defence|communication functions - Covers economic fallout from the HR administration of the Danish defence|||
|Changed organisation of the Ministry of Defence and Defence Command Denmark|- Changed organisation of the Ministry of Defence and Waiting on political Min. DKK 40 Defence Command Denmark decision million|||
|Total yield|||DKK 350 million|


-----

**Appendix 7**

**Expected effects on the number of military senior positions in the management of**
**the Danish defence**

It is expected that the senior management will include abt. 9 general’s positions compared to
14 in the current structure (including the chief of the future Special Operations Command).

This is the equivalent of a reduction in the number of positions at general’s level of abt. 35
p.c.

The number of other military positions in the management of the Danish defence will also be
reduced, as it is expected that the reduction of military senior positions will be higher
percentage-wise than the reduction of other military positions. The objective, therefore, is to
reduce the military senior positions by abt. 30 p.c., while the reduction of other military
positions is expected to be between 15 and 20 p.c.

The final determination of the number will depend on the final organisation, just as the
grading of the wage level of each position will need to be settled with the organisation entitled
to negotiate this matter.


-----

**Appendix 8**

**The Danish Defence Judge Advocate Corps**

The military’s prosecuting authority, the Danish Defence Judge Advocate Corps, consists of
two authorities where the judge advocates are the equivalent of the public prosecutors and
the police commissioners, and the judge advocate general is the equivalent of the public
prosecutor. In co-operation with the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Defence will carry out
an analysis of the options for strengthening independence regarding the processing of military
criminal cases, including through a transfer of tasks to the civil prosecution. The analysis is to
describe the derived consequences of this, including, among other things, organisational,
employment-related, legislative, and financial consequences. Furthermore, the analysis is to
assess the future geographical location of the Danish Defence Judge Advocate Corps.

The analysis will be presented to the parties to the agreement in June 2014 for a political
decision.


-----

