# Foreign and Security Policy Strategy

### 2019-2020


###### NOVEMBER 2018


-----

-----

# Content

**Preface .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .** **5**

**Introduction** .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . **6**

**Rules-based international order** .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . **8**

**Security .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .** **11**

**Europe – a strong, streamlined and ­effective EU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .** **15**

**Refugees, migration and development .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .** **18**

**Economic diplomacy, strategic partnerships and the new digital world order** .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . **21**

**The Arctic . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .** **25**


-----

#### Increased trade, communication, technology and transportation around the world are bringing more and better opportunities for people everywhere. We are progressing towards living conditions that our grandparents and those before them never could have imagined.


-----

# Preface

The world today is in a much better place than
ever before.

Life expectancy is rising, infant mortality is declin­
ing, and fewer and fewer people live in abject
poverty.

Increased trade, communication, technology and
transportation around the world are bringing
more and better opportunities for people every­
where. We are progressing towards living condi­
tions that our grandparents and those before them
never could have imagined.

This also goes for Denmark, which is one of the
most free, prosperous and safe societies in the
world.

Danish foreign policy aims to maintain this pro­
gress while upholding Denmark’s security, pros­
perity and values in a rapidly changing world.

But this progress will not happen on its own, and
we face many challenges along the way.

The world is becoming increasingly unpredictable.
Global power relations are shifting. The value of
rules-based international cooperation – which
guarantees Denmark’s security, prosperity
and values – is increasingly being brought into
question.

With this Foreign and Security Policy Strategy
2019-2020, the Government presents its plans for
protecting Denmark and pursuing Danish interests
in a changing world order.


The Government wants Denmark to maintain
its European and global engagement. We must
uphold the principle that binding international
cooperation is in the interest of Denmark and
­provides the best conditions for peace, prosperity
and sustainable development. We must lead the
fight against man-made climate change with
national climate and energy initiatives, ambitious
EU goals, and international efforts. At the same
time, we must contribute to achieving the 17
Sustainable Development Goals.

We must fight for our liberal values and pro­
tect principles of freedom: a world with more
­democracy and freedom, including more freedom
of expression, freedom of assembly, freedom of
religion and more public order. We must take
measures to counteract external influences and
insist on the right of countries to self-determi­
nation. We must ensure that globalisation and
technological advances benefit as many people as
possible. And we must create the best framework
for Danish businesses to seize the opportunities
arising from international changes.

The framework for Danish foreign and security
policy requires constant prioritisation. However,
foreign and security policy results also require
sustained efforts and strong continuity. The
Government’s Foreign and Security Policy Strategy
2019-2020 does not propose a change of course,
but instead comprises a series of concrete initia­
tives and focus areas that align with the guiding
principles and aims of the Government’s Foreign
and Security Policy Strategy 2017-2018.


-----

# Introduction

Now and in the years to come, Denmark will have
to navigate in an increasingly challenging foreign
and security policy environment. The world
around us is changing faster and is becoming more
unpredictable. Russia is threatening its neigh­
bouring countries and employing various means
to undermine the European security architecture
and our democratic processes. China is stepping
forward on the global scene with ever greater self-­
confidence, economic strength and demands for
more influence. The United States of America (US)
is putting “America First”, raising doubts about its
global leadership and its willingness to defend the
world order that it was instrumental in building.
The crises in Europe’s neighbouring regions have
taken a firm hold. The destabilising conduct of
regional actors, including Iran, continues, and
recent events clearly demonstrate its impact within
Europe and directly on Danish soil. Thanks to
targeted efforts, fewer asylum seekers and irregular
migrants are coming to Europe and Denmark.
Still, we need to take measures to address the root
causes of irregular migration; otherwise, migration
pressures – particularly from Africa and the Middle
East – will increase in the coming decades.

These developments place great demands on
Denmark’s foreign and security policy. Small,
highly developed countries like Denmark stand to
lose the most if the strongest countries make deci­
sions without consulting or considering others. The
international order that has shaped the world in
recent decades can no longer be taken for granted.
The common idea that human rights and democ­
racy must prevail because they are noble and good
is being challenged. Denmark is deeply dependent
on other countries when it comes to our economy
and security. We must strengthen the international
rules that protect our country and ensure that we
can pursue Danish interests. And we must fight to


uphold and promote our liberal values. Therefore,
we will engage even more in binding international
cooperation and work to reform the international
institutions to bolster their strength and legitimacy.

Our EU membership represents Denmark’s best
opportunity to influence the world around us and
thus the framework conditions of importance for
pursuing Danish interests in Europe and globally.
The EU’s Free Trade Agreements create opportu­
nities for Danish companies that we would not be
able to create on our own. At the same time, the EU
is a community of countries that share the same
fundamental values, thereby giving Denmark a
voice when it comes to addressing major interna­
tional challenges. With Brexit, Denmark loses an
important ally in the EU. Denmark and The United
Kingdom (UK) share many of the same interests
and values. The Government wants an agreement
that will enable us to compete on equal condi­
tions, and ensure as close and effective cooperation
with the UK as possible after their exit. However,
we must also ensure that an exit agreement and
an agreement on the future relationship do not
undermine the single market and thereby Danish
interests.

The Government will continue targeted efforts to
reform the EU from within and ensure a strong,
streamlined and effective EU that delivers tangible
results for the benefit of citizens, and which creates
growth, ensures free trade, fights climate change,
increases citizens’ security, and effectively tackles
the challenges of migration. External pressures
are causing the EU member states to draw closer
together. Many aspects of the cooperation are rap­
idly developing, including in the areas of defence,
law and the EMU. Due to the Danish opt-outs,
Denmark is not participating in the development
of cooperation in these areas.


-----

#### The international order that has shaped the world in recent decades can no longer be taken for granted.

NATO and the strong transatlantic ties between
Denmark and the US are crucial for our security.
We must therefore work actively to maintain
American engagement in Europe through NATO.
This requires that we intensify our cooperation
across Europe and that we invest more in our
common security. Strengthening the EU’s ability
to handle security challenges in Europe’s neigh­
bouring region will be a significant contribution
to transatlantic burden-sharing. In this respect,
Denmark’s opt-out concerning the Common
Security and Defence Policy is a significant obstacle
to our contribution. With the ambitious Danish
Defence Agreement, we increase our defence
expenditures by 20%. Among other measures,
we will strengthen our contribution to NATO’s
collective deterrence of Russia, we will establish a
division headquarters in the Baltics, we will inten­
sify our international efforts, and we will provide
offensive cyber capabilities for use by NATO. Given
the continuously changing landscape of threats,
we must expect sustained pressure to further
increase defence expenditures.

The Government has implemented a strict immi­
gration policy, which, combined with measures
through the EU and other bodies, has reduced
refugee and migration pressures. Based on a quid
pro quo principle, the Government will prioritise
additional resources for efforts in the countries
of transit and origin that strengthen their border
management and increase return and readmission
of irregular migrants. Concurrent efforts will be
made to address the root causes of irregular migra­
tion. To diminish the desire of a growing popula­
tion of young Africans to move towards Europe,
concrete opportunities and hope for the future is
needed in their own countries. These opportuni­
ties can only be created through economic growth
and jobs, free trade, liberty and political influence.
Denmark is a significant player in the field of
international development cooperation, and is
one of just five countries in the world that meet


the UN’s target of 0.7% of GNI in annual official
development assistance. We take care of Denmark
when we take care of the world, and we can help
many more people when we help them in their
local regions.

Man-made climate change is one of the greatest
challenges facing the world. But it is a challenge
that we can manage – not by stopping growth and
development, but by ensuring more sustainable
growth and development, including through new
technologies and innovation.

The Sustainable Development Goals are key
to Denmark’s foreign and development policy,
providing an ambitious and global framework
between now and 2030. If the goals are not met,
many young people in developing countries will
become part of the challenge rather than part of
the solution. Meeting these goals will require inno­
vative efforts, new partnerships, and an engaged
business community. Therefore, Denmark has
taken the lead with the new global initiative, P4G
– “Partnering for Green Growth and the Global
Goals 2030”. Denmark has also made significant
contributions towards reforming the UN’s devel­
opment system.

Global development offers many opportunities
that we should seize. Important tools in this
respect include execution of the Government’s
strategy for economic diplomacy, continued
strengthening and development of strategic part­
nerships, and strategic sector cooperation.

The new digital world order is rapidly developing.
Denmark has a strong foundation for becoming
one of the most innovative societies in the world.
The Danish innovation centres and TechPlomacy
initiative provide Denmark with a unique basis for
participating in defining the norms of the digital
world order.

A key priority for the Kingdom of Denmark is
ensuring peaceful and sustainable economic
development in the Arctic. Climate change and
melting sea ice present serious challenges but also
introduce economic opportunities. The situation
entails security policy risks as well. We must con­
tinue to develop the international cooperation in
the Arctic based on the Danish Realm, the Arctic
Council, and the cooperation between the Arctic
coastal states. Both Greenland and the Faroe
Islands desire greater insight into and involvement
in the foreign and security policy. This places new
demands on our cooperation within the Danish
Realm, and the Government emphasises the
importance of good dialogue with Greenland and
the Faroe Islands in this respect.


-----

# Rules-based international order


##### The Government believes that it is clearly in Denmark’s national interest to strengthen rules-based international cooperation. Therefore, Denmark must continue to engage in international efforts and fight for human rights, the basic rule of law, and international solutions.

The Government believes that as a small, open
and globally-oriented democracy, Denmark has
an obvious self-interest in further developing and
strengthening the rules-based international order
and multilateral cooperation. The international
rules of the game ensure that small and large
countries can peacefully co-exist – and that each
country is free to choose its own future. These
rules create a better framework for international
trade, and they oblige countries to respect human
rights and democratic principles.

Binding cooperation in international organisa­
tions, such as the EU, NATO, the UN, the WTO, the
Council of Europe, the OECD and the OSCE, is cru­
cial to the world’s ability to find common answers
to international challenges like migration, climate
change and terrorism. The Government wants to
further develop this cooperation, for example by
reforming the organisations where necessary, in
order for us to continue to solve global challenges
together. Therefore, Denmark is also significantly
involved in the current process of reforming the
UN system.

But the rules-based international order is under
pressure.


Global leadership
The US is increasingly questioning the value of the
international organisations and agreements that it
has been instrumental in establishing since World
War II. The US is withdrawing from its position of
global leadership in more and more respects. This
includes withdrawals from the Paris Agreement,
the Iran Nuclear Agreement, and the UN Human
Rights Council, the introduction of US tariffs on
steel and aluminium from the EU, and the termi­
nation of funding to international ­organisations
that provide information about or work directly
with abortion (the Global Gag Rule).

The Government has expressed Denmark’s dis­
agreement with these decisions. But at the same
time, the Government fully supports continued US
leadership in a number of other areas, including in
the fight against ISIL.

American global leadership is in Denmark’s
national interest and crucial to rules-based inter­
national cooperation. We must therefore intensify
our commitment to maintaining US global leader­
ship and to promoting an American understand­
ing that the international rules-based order is also
in the interest of the US. In the vital area of trade,
the Government will initiate a process, primarily
driven by the private sector and with the involve­
ment of transatlantic stakeholders, to explore the
possibility of drafting an international set of rules
specifically governing e-commerce.

China’s power, economic strength and ambitions
are growing. The country is gaining ever greater
influence on global norms and values, and it
will make a major impact on the future of the
world. On the one hand, Denmark and Danish
companies have an interest in engaging with the
growing Chinese market. On the other hand, we


-----

#### Binding cooperation in international organisations is crucial to the world’s ability to find common answers to international challenges like migration, climate change and terrorism.


must remain aware that our societal models and
approaches to international cooperation and free
trade are very different, and that we must continue
the dialogue on human rights and other issues.

While Russia has maintained its aggressive con­
duct, we have witnessed a divided UN Security
Council that has proven unable to take action as
the conflicts in Syria and Yemen continue with
massive humanitarian consequences. Prioritising
efforts to ensure that Denmark lifts its share of
the responsibility, the Government will increase
support for the UN’s security policy and conflict
prevention efforts.

Defence of liberal values
Democratic principles are being challenged
around the world, and in many countries, the
divide between democracy and dictatorship is
moving in the wrong direction. Human rights,
civil society, religious minorities, journalists and
human rights advocates are under increasing pres­
sure. Women’s rights are being suppressed, and
people are being persecuted for their sexuality.
A growing number of countries are questioning
whether basic human rights are universal or
simply a “western project”. The fundamental rule
of law is also being challenged within the EU.
We must fight to protect and advance our liberal
values. Therefore, the Government will strengthen
efforts to secure Danish influence in international
organisations by improving efforts on behalf of
Danish candidatures. Denmark’s membership of
the UN Human Rights Council during the period
2019-2021 will be used to actively promote our
values. The Council does not always function opti­
mally. However, the Government wants Denmark
to enter the Council with the clear ambition of
influencing, changing and reforming the Council
in order to strengthen its legitimacy, credibility


and popular support, giving it a clearer line for the
defence of human rights.

Green multilateralism
Fighting climate change requires clear interna­
tional frameworks and common solutions. The
Government firmly supports the implementation
of the Paris Agreement. And we are doing even
more. In October 2018, Denmark hosted the first
P4G Summit – “Partnering for Green Growth and
the Global Goals 2030”. The P4G initiative brings
together representatives from the public sector, the
business community, international organisations
and civil society to discuss and adopt innovative,
market-driven solutions within circular economy,
water, energy, and food and agriculture. We must
continue to catalyse the sustainable development
of the global economy through technology and
innovative solutions. Therefore, the Government
will appoint a special envoy for climate and energy
to support Denmark’s efforts in connection with
the UN Secretary-General’s Climate Summit in
September 2019 by showcasing Danish solutions,
public-private partnerships and Denmark’s high
profile on the investment agenda. This special
envoy will also perform a similar role in con­
nection with follow-up activities relating to the
Climate Summit and P4G.


-----

## Initiatives and areas of focus
 in 2019-2020



- The Government will establish a process driven
primarily by the private sector, including trans­
atlantic stakeholders, to explore the potential
for drafting an international set of rules for
­e-commerce. This initiative will be marked with
an international conference.

- The Government will strengthen the interna­
tional community’s capacity to respond to
armed conflicts by increasing the Danish
­contribution to the UN’s peacekeeping and
­conflict prevention efforts.

- The Government will achieve greater Danish
influence in international organisations through
a coordinated effort for Danish candidatures,
including the establishment of a clearinghouse
and a digital platform that support inter-­
ministerial coordination and targeted efforts.

- Based on Denmark’s membership of the UN
Human Rights Council, the Government will
defend liberal values – such as basic rule of law,
freedom of religion and beliefs, women’s rights,
and freedom of expression – and promote
­political freedoms for human rights advocates.



- The Government will increase the spread of
sustainable solutions through the P4G initiative,
including the allocation of DKK 55 million annu­
ally in the 2019 Finance Bill to promote concrete
public-private partnerships and contribute to a
gradual expansion of the group of P4G partners.

- The Government also allocates an additional
DKK 60 million in the 2019 Finance Bill to
­promote reforms proposed by UN Secretary-­
General Guterres to strengthen and improve
the efficiency of the UN.

- The Government will appoint a special envoy
for climate and energy, who will support
­Denmark’s engagement in connection with
the UN Secretary-­General’s Climate Summit in
­September 2019 and related follow-up activities.


-----

# Security

##### The Government is deeply concerned about the increasing threats posed by an aggressive Russia, the ongoing threat of terror, instability in the Middle East, and recent cyber-attacks. Therefore, the Government intends to strengthen security policy engagement with Denmark’s close allies across the Atlantic and in Europe.

The complex threats have taken root. In our
neighbourhood region, Russia continues its
aggressive behaviour. Terror and instability
continue to spring from large parts of the Middle
East, Afghanistan, North Africa and the Sahel. Iran
remains a destabilising regional actor, exhibiting
unacceptable conduct in Europa and Denmark.
Meanwhile, the cyber threat remains extremely
high, and as one of the world’s most digitised
countries, Denmark is particularly vulnerable.
These extensive threats place great demands
on Denmark.

We cannot solve the challenges alone, and we
cannot expect assistance without also contribut­
ing and taking responsibility in NATO, the UN,
or international coalitions – be it in the Baltics,
Iraq, Afghanistan or Mali. We must do our part to
ensure that NATO remains the strongest defence
alliance in the world, as unity and solidarity across
the Atlantic remains essential to our security.

NATO and the transatlantic cooperation
The US is Denmark’s most important security
policy ally, and the guarantor of our security
through NATO. The transatlantic ties form
the cornerstone of efforts to protect Danish


security interests, and it is essential to maintain
the American engagement in Europe through
NATO. This requires that Europeans invest more
in their own security and intensify cooperation
across Europe, and we must reach out to the US
to create a closer dialogue on matters relating
to Danish and European security policy. NATO
contributions from European allies are increasing.
So is Denmark’s contribution. Our actions show
that we are prepared to defend ourselves and our
allies. The ambitious Defence Agreement increases
defence spending by 20%.

The Wales Declaration from the 2014 NATO
Summit obliges member states to work towards
allocating 2% of GDP to defence by 2024. A large
number of allies will do so by 2024. Furthermore,
like-minded countries, whose spending has
been similar to Danish levels, will increase their
defence spending. Therefore, we should expect
that pressure to increase our defence spending
will continue.

The security situation in the Baltic Sea region
and in the North Atlantic plays a central role in
the security of Denmark. The Danish Defence
Agreement provides for the establishment of a
deployable brigade, regional air defence, and
anti-submarine weapons, all of which serve to
establish credible deterrence. The Government has
resolved to send a renewed Danish contribution in
2020 to NATO’s Enhanced Forward Presence in the
Baltics, and we will collaborate with close allies
to establish a new NATO Division Headquarters
in Latvia. The Government also supports NATO’s
intensified focus on the North Atlantic.


-----

#### The transatlantic ties form the cornerstone of efforts to protect Danish security interests, and it is essential to maintain the American engagement in Europe through NATO. This requires that Europeans invest more in their own security and intensify cooperation across Europe.


New challenges require a strong
European commitment
NATO is not alone in reacting to the intensified
threats. In response to the more unpredictable
security situation in and around Europe, the EU
has significantly strengthened its security and
defence cooperation in recent years. The EU plays
an important role when it comes to preventive
and stabilising efforts in regions such as the Middle
East and Africa. Denmark’s opt-out concerning the
Common Security and Defence Policy prevents us
from contributing to the EU’s military stabilisation
efforts, and, as a general rule, efforts involving
military and civilian elements within the same
framework. This complicates Denmark’s ability
to make effective contributions to long-term
stabilisation efforts in areas of great importance to
Denmark’s security. Denmark participates in the
EU’s new Defence Fund, which ensures funding
for research and development, enabling Europe
to keep up with technological developments and
to get more from these investments. However,
Denmark is outside of the more binding PESCO
cooperation, in which a number of EU countries
jointly develop and trade defence equipment –
this is not in Denmark’s interests.

In Europe and across the Atlantic, strengthening
the EU’s ability to handle the security challenges


in Europe’s neighbouring regions is seen as a
significant contribution towards transatlantic
burden-sharing. The Government supports this
ambition. We must be prepared to participate in
the debate on the challenges caused by our opt-out
concerning the Common Security and Defence
Policy, and about how we can ensure Danish influ­
ence and benefit from the ongoing developments.
This debate should be conducted on an informed
basis. Therefore, the Government will commission
an external report on developments in the EU’s
security and defence policy cooperation and what
these developments mean for Denmark. We must
also strengthen the alliances across Europe, such as
through our active participation in the French-led
European Intervention Initiative (EI2).

Our neighbouring region to the east
The assessment continues to be that Russia has no
interest in risking a military confrontation with
NATO, but more than four years after the illegal
annexation of Crimea, the country continues
its aggression in eastern Ukraine. Russia has not
changed its aggressive conduct in the Baltic Sea
region, and it is clear that the political leadership
in Russia wants a different Europe than the Europe
built through cooperation after the fall of the
Berlin Wall.


-----

The list of unacceptable actions is long: the ille­
gal annexation of Crimea, aggression in eastern
Ukraine, the nerve agent attack in Salisbury,
cyber-attacks against public authorities and com­
panies, threatening rhetoric and military ­exercises,
resistance to arms control, interference in elec­
tions and campaigns of influence that threaten
our democratic processes. All means are being
deployed to undermine the European security
architecture and the democratic principles. This
is a serious situation.

At the global level, Russia stands in opposition
to the rules-based world order. Multilateral
organisations and bodies are used by Russia more
for obstructive purposes than for constructive
cooperation. The questionable Russian compli­
ance with the ban on land-based intermediate
missiles (the INF Treaty) is a matter of significant
concern. The potential collapse of this treaty can
have far-reaching consequences for European and
thereby Danish security. Therefore, all options
must be pursued to ensure Russia’s compliance
and the survival of the treaty. At the same time,
the Government understands that it can be
difficult for the US to be part of a treaty that
is not respected by the counterparty. In Syria,
Russia supports a regime that has rejected the
laws of war and uses chemical weapons against
its own population.

Russia must not succeed in splitting the interna­
tional unity in Europe and across the Atlantic.
The EU and NATO must continue to play an
important role in this respect. We maintain
Denmark’s strong support for the EU’s economic
sanctions against Russia, which are tied to a
peaceful resolution of the conflict in Ukraine in
accordance with the Minsk Protocol. At the same
time, the Government maintains its dual-track
approach to Russia, on the one hand building
a credible capacity to deter and defend against
unacceptable actions, and on the other hand
advocating dialogue when it is in our interests –
for instance, in relation to maintaining the Arctic
as a low-tension area.

Cyber security
The cyber threat is very high and constantly
evolving. The threat derives especially from for­
eign states, but also stems from criminal groups
and other non-state actors with growing access
to advanced hacking tools. Many countries seek
to achieve political objectives through the use of
cyber tools, such as cyber attacks, disinformation
and cyber espionage. According to the Danish
Defence Intelligence Service, Russia, China, Iran
and North Korea are among the most active
states. There is a lack of common understanding


regarding responsible state behaviour in cyber­
space. This increases the risk of misunderstandings
and escalation.

As one of the world’s most digitised countries,
Denmark is particularly vulnerable. We have a
clear interest in a secure, free and open global
IT infrastructure based on common rules and
cooperation, with the involvement of both states
and tech companies. Therefore, in connection with
the Danish Defence Agreement and the Danish
Cyber and Information Security Strategy, the
Government has allocated approximately DKK 1.5
billion to a wide range of initiatives. Key elements
of this effort include improving the ability of the
Centre for Cyber Security to monitor threats and
advise on countermeasures, and to strengthen
Denmark’s involvement in the international
cooperation for cyber security. There will be a
continuous focus on threat assessments in order
to determine the need for new measures.

Terrorism and instability
Despite significant progress in recent years, the
threat of terror against Denmark and Europe
remains serious. This threat is especially associated
with ISIL in Syria and Iraq, but it also has ties to
conflict and instability in the Middle East, North
Africa, the Horn of Africa, the Sahel, Afghanistan
and parts of Southeast Asia. Thanks to the effective
efforts of the Coalition, including extensive civilian
and military contributions from Denmark, ISIL
has lost almost all physical control of areas in Syria
and Iraq. But ISIL and other terrorist organisations
maintain the ability to inspire, support and plan
terrorist attacks. Therefore, the Government will
continue its efforts against terrorism and the insta­
bility that provides fertile ground for terrorists,
including military contributions, as well as inte­
grated and preventive initiatives under the aus­
pices of NATO, the UN or international coalitions.

Investment screening
Denmark is dependent on both exports and
investments. Therefore, we welcome foreign
investments. But we must not be naive. In certain
cases, foreign investments may be problematic
in terms of security and public order. Examples
include investments in critical infrastructure by an
investor with close ties to a foreign state. We need
to make sure we have the tools in place to handle
these situations. Within the EU, we are involved in
the work to establish a joint framework for screen­
ing of foreign direct investments (FDI) that may
constitute a risk. The Government is also further
exploring the possibilities for national screening of
foreign investments in Denmark. The Faroe Islands
and Greenland are taking part in these efforts.


-----

## Initiatives and areas of focus
 in 2019-2020



- The Government will commission an external
report on developments in EU security and
defence policy, and what these developments
mean for Denmark.

- The Government will, in accordance with the
Danish Defence Agreement, promote security
policy cooperation with the countries around
the Baltic Sea, and strengthen Denmark’s focus
on security in the Baltic Sea region through
increased contributions to collective defence
in NATO.

- The Government will, through the Danish
Defence Agreement, improve Denmark’s ability
to participate in international operations with
new and strengthened capacities, as well as
a 50% increase in funding for international
operations.

- The Government will, through the Peace and
Stabilisation Fund, allocate an additional DKK
118 million to strengthen peace and stabili­
sation efforts, including measures to prevent
radicalisation, terrorism and irregular migration.
Furthermore, the Government will launch new
peace and stabilisation programmes for SyriaIraq, the Sahel, Ukraine, Afghanistan, the Horn of
Africa, and the Gulf of Guinea.



- The Government will, based on the Danish
Defence Agreement and the Danish Cyber and
Information Security Strategy, significantly
strengthen Denmark’s digital security and
increase Denmark’s engagement in the interna­
tional cooperation for cyber security.

- The Government will strengthen efforts against
foreign influence campaigns that threaten
Danish values and interests through the
implementation of the Inter-ministerial Action
Plan, Danish membership of the NATO Strategic
Communications Centre of Excellence, and
­collaboration with tech companies.

- The Government will establish a defence policy
advisory group that will contribute to advancing
Denmark’s commercial and research interests
relating to the EU’s new Defence Fund.

- The Government will investigate the possibility
of establishing a screening mechanism for
strengthening controls on foreign investments
that may pose a risk to national security and
public order.


-----

# Europe – a strong, streamlined and ­effective EU


##### The Government wants a strong, streamlined, and effective EU that delivers tangible results for the benefit of its citizens. A modern EU budget must focus on the areas where the EU provides the greatest added value, e.g. migration, research, climate and energy. We must further develop the single market and maintain an ambitious free trade agenda. At the same time, there must be fairness in the access to welfare benefits.

A secure and stable Europe is crucial for a secure
and prosperous Denmark. For better and for worse,
our situation is closely tied to developments in the
other European countries around us. EU member­
ship remains the best opportunity for Denmark
to pursue Danish interests internationally – not
least in a time when the global order is changing.
Therefore, Denmark has a clear self-interest in
actively contributing to ensuring a dynamic EU
with global clout and the ability to deliver credible
solutions to migration challenges and trade con­
flicts, and which can form a common front when
foreign powers attempt to exert influence on our
democracies. And although we do not always agree
with every EU member state on everything, it is
within the EU and the Nordic region that Denmark
finds its closest community of shared values.

The EU is the world’s largest economy, and the
single market is the world’s most advanced free
trade area, where goods and services are freely
exchanged according to one set of rules instead
of 28. We benefit greatly from this market – more
than a half-million Danish jobs are directly linked
to it, and Denmark’s GDP is estimated to be up to


DKK 100 billion higher than if we were not part
of the single market. Through the EU’s free trade
agreements, Denmark has privileged access to a
wide range of markets around the world.

Denmark benefits greatly from the European coop­
eration. But in some areas, EU rules, interpretation
of conventions, and court practices go too far. For
instance, when the freedom of movement is abused,
and when access to Danish welfare benefits seems
unfairly easy. This risks undermining support of the
European cooperation among the Danish people.

The Government will continue the focused efforts
to ensure a strong, streamlined and effective EU that
delivers tangible results for the benefit of citizens
and businesses. We must maintain that the EU’s
core task is to deal with cross-border matters that
the member states cannot solve on their own. The
Government will work for fairness in the rules and
to prevent abuse of the freedom of movement.
We must strengthen the cooperation in areas that
provide added value, e.g. by further developing the
single market – not least in areas where future jobs
are created – such as the green and digital economy.

We must secure Europe’s external borders to
prevent a new migrant crisis. And we must take
the lead as a united EU to protect and advance
liberal values in a time of uncertainty about global
leadership. The EU is the best way to ensure that
Denmark and Europe have a voice when challenges
to free trade and human rights arise, or when global
answers to major international challenges such
as air and climate issues and circular economy are
formulated. These are areas of strong Danish exper­
tise, and where a common EU approach and a level
playing field form the foundation for Denmark’s
ability to realise our own ambitious goals and to
attain the UN’s 17 Sustainable Development Goals.


-----

#### EU membership remains the best opportunity for Denmark to pursue Danish interests internationally – not least in a time when the global order is changing.

The EU must continue to serve as a global
example, e.g. by continuing the successful efforts
of recent years to reach ambitious free trade
agreements with countries from all parts of the
world. This creates growth and jobs in Europe and
Denmark – and it increases our influence globally.
But the EU must also avoid naivety and ensure an
appropriate balance between open markets and
equal trade conditions. This also applies in relation
to the negotiations on the UK’s future relations
to the EU, where the Government will continue
its dedicated efforts to ensure a fair and balanced
solution that best serves Danish interests.

European unity
Europe is under pressure on many fronts. There is
continued pressure at the southern borders. Our
neighbouring regions are marked by instability,
and the actions of Russia in particular are cause
for growing concern. Recently, the EU has also
faced challenges relating to the waning support
of the US for multilateral organisations and free
trade. Meanwhile, the EU is experiencing a range
of internal disagreements on important issues
such as migration, economic policy and basic rule
of law. And although Brexit has not resulted in
the collapse of the EU that many had feared, it has
demonstrated that we cannot take EU cooperation
for granted. We must work to keep the EU united
and to avoid harmful tensions so that we are able
to deal with cross-border issues.

It is important that we protect and uphold the EU’s
cohesion. The EU has made important and positive
contributions to stability in Europe by admitting
new members. However, we do not want further
expansions if they risk undermining the Union.
There must be no doubt that democracy, the rule of
law, fundamental freedoms and a well-functioning
market economy are essential prerequisites for
membership. Therefore, the Government has clearly
stated that there are no grounds for continuing
accession negotiations with Turkey. This does not
change the fact that Turkey remains an important


partner in dealing with migration challenges, a key
regional player, and a member of NATO.

The Government will also increase the political
focus on ensuring that the EU does not create
expectations of admitting new member states
before they and the EU are ready for such
admission. At the same time, we will stand with
like-minded countries in insisting that basic
­democratic rule of law must be respected and
upheld by all member states.

The future of the EU
To future-proof the EU cooperation and to
meet our common goals, the EU budget must
be modernised and more focused. This must be
achieved within a responsible fiscal framework
with fair burden sharing between Member States.
Therefore, spending in traditional policy areas
must be reduced so resources can be used where
they make a real difference, and where the EU
offers the greatest added value, e.g. on areas such
as migration, research, climate and energy. The
Government will strengthen its efforts to ensure a
responsible and fair EU budget for 2021-2027.

As a follow-up to the most recent financial crisis,
the EU has implemented stronger financial
regulation to prevent and be better prepared for
future crises. Stricter requirements have been put
in place in relation to capital and liquidity, and
financial businesses are now subject to increased
supervision. These stricter policies apply for all EU
countries. At the same time, a stronger bank coop­
eration (the banking union) has been established.
Only Eurozone countries are presently members
of this cooperation, but non-Eurozone countries
are also able to participate. The Government has
appointed a working group and intends to make a
decision in the autumn of 2019 regarding Danish
participation in the stronger bank cooperation.

Denmark’s voice is heard in Europe, but not
without effort. Therefore, we must do more to
actively seek influence and move the cooperation
in our direction. With the exit of the UK, we lose
a close political ally. Therefore, the Government
will intensify active efforts to build new alliances.
This applies in relation to the other member states,
where the Government has already strengthened
a number of key embassies. It will also apply
in relation to the representatives elected to the
European Parliament in May 2019, and among the
new commissioners in the European Commission.
At the same time, based on the Government’s
action plan of December 2017, we will strengthen
efforts to increase the number of Danes employed
in EU institutions.


-----

## Initiatives and areas of focus
 in 2019-2020



- The Government will continue the strength­
ened efforts to protect and pursue Denmark’s
interests in the decisive phase of negotiations
with the UK on its exit from the EU, and in the
negotiations on the future relations between
the EU and the UK.

- The Government will strengthen its efforts to
ensure a responsible expenditure level of the
EU budget, with a fair burden-sharing between
member states, and in which cross-border
issues such as migration, climate and growth-­
generating initiatives are prioritised within a
frugal framework. The Government will work
actively to increase the number of Danes
employed in EU institutions to ensure Danish
insight and influence.



- The Government will continue to make it a high
priority to ensure fairness in the EU’s rules on
social benefits.

- Through targeted efforts, the Government
will work to maintain the ambitious free trade
agenda in the EU, with the aim of achieving new
free trade agreements and ensuring open and
equal trading conditions.


-----

# Refugees, migration and development


##### The Government wants to help more refugees in their local regions and minimise the number of irregular migrants to Europe as much as possible. We will do this with national initiatives, cooperation within the EU to secure external borders and develop a new asylum system, and with an intensified effort to address the root causes of irregular migration.

Refugees and migration
Irregular migration and the challenge of providing
sustainable solutions for the world’s refugees serve
as a reminder that no country is isolated from
developments in the surrounding world. We saw
this first-hand in the autumn of 2015, when the
world was on our doorstep.

Since the Government’s first Foreign and Security
Policy Strategy, great progress has been made in
reducing the influx of asylum seekers and irregular
migrants to Denmark. This was achieved through
a combination of national efforts and joint EU
initiatives focusing on increased border controls,
and through stronger cooperation with the EU’s
neighbouring countries and regions close to
conflict and crisis including cooperation relating
to the return and readmission of rejected asylum
seekers and irregular migrants. The reduced influx
has also resulted in lower expenses relating to
in-donor refugee costs. This has freed up funding
for initiatives in developing countries, enabling us
to further strengthen our efforts in areas and coun­
tries neighbouring conflict and crisis, where these
resources can benefit far more people.

Alongside national initiatives, the Government will
actively utilise the cooperation in the EU and UN.
Two new UN compacts – the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration and the Global
Compact on Refugees – are expected to be adopted
in 2018 and will strengthen the basis for interna­
tional cooperation in these areas. Issues addressed


include the readmission of countries’ own citizens,
which with the migration compact is now interna­
tionally recognised as an obligation of the state.

Refugees must be helped in their local regions
We are able to help considerably more refugees
and displaced persons when we assist in the areas
and countries neighbouring conflict and crisis.
And we can avoid secondary refugee flows, as
those in 2015 from Syria’s neighbouring countries,
by ensuring that refugees and internally displaced
persons can live safe and dignified lives in the
areas and countries neighbouring the conflict or
crisis, based on a combination of humanitarian
assistance, peacebuilding, and more long-term
development initiatives. With the Finance Bill for
2019, the Government proposes a historically high
level of humanitarian assistance, putting Denmark
at the global forefront.

Organised human trafficking must be combated
Organised human trafficking plays a significant
role in the number of irregular migrants that make
their way towards Europe. Therefore, and in the
context of the new Global Compact on Migration,
the Government will make targeted contributions
to strengthen the ability of countries of origin and
transit – particularly in Africa – to control their
own borders and combat the trafficking and trade
of human beings.

Return and readmission
The Government has adopted a quid pro quo
approach. This approach – combined with the
appointment of an ambassador for migration
with a special focus on promoting cooperation
on return and reintegration, development funds
dedicated to facilitating cooperation on return
and readmission, and migration counsellors at
Danish embassies – has contributed to an increase
in return and readmission of rejected asylum
seekers to a number of countries. The Government
will intensify these efforts and increase funding to
facilitate cooperation on return and readmission
to ensure that all countries of origin comply with
their obligation to readmit their own citizens,
enabling the return of irregular migrants.


-----

#### The Government has a vision  of an Africa where young women and men are able to  see opportunities for a future  in their home countries.

The EU’s external borders must be strength­
ened and the asylum system must be updated
When the refugee and migration wave of 2015
swept through Europe, it became clear that the EU’s
external borders were not sufficiently enforced.
In that context, Denmark and other countries
chose to introduce temporary border controls.
Since then, the EU and member states have
launched a number of initiatives that have reduced
arrivals to the level before 2015. But the work does
not stop here. We must continue to explore new
approaches based on the efforts that have proven
effective, e.g. the EU-Turkey agreement and the
ongoing focus on stronger border control. The
Government will maintain focus on new ways of
reducing arrivals and increasing EU funding for
this purpose. In recognition of the important role
of the European Border and Coast Guard Agency
(Frontex), the Government has announced a
­significant increase in Denmark’s contribution to
the Agency, including both staff and capacities.

The Government wants a new asylum system in
Europe – a system that eliminates the basis for
human trafficking and reduces the pressure on
Europe’s external borders. Denmark will work
with like-minded countries to develop new paths
to a more effective European asylum processing
system, including continued efforts by the
Government to explore options for establishing
a joint return centre outside of the EU.

The root causes of irregular migration must
be addressed with sustainable development
A number of countries in Africa enjoy high
economic growth rates and improved living
­standards, while many other countries, particu­
larly in the sub-Saharan region, are struggling to
ensure that economic and social development
keep pace with population growth.

Africa remains the continent with the highest
birth rates, and by 2050 the continent’s population
is expected to double to 2.5 billion. Population
growth on the African continent, combined with
an absence of economic development, is expected
to fuel irregular migration in the coming decades.


The Government has a vision of an Africa where
young women and men are able to see opportu­
nities for a future in their home countries. Danish
development assistance will contribute to realising
this vision. The youth of Africa have enormous
potential. However, a failure to create better
opportunities for education, employment and
political influence may result in increased instabil­
ity, radicalisation and irregular migration towards
Europe. Development assistance in itself cannot
solve the immediate migration challenges, but it
is an essential part of the medium and long-term
efforts to mitigate irregular migration.

Therefore, in the coming years, the Government
will dedicate additional resources to long-term
efforts that address the root causes of irregular
migration and promote sustainable development.
This is especially the case for some of the poor and
fragile priority countries in Africa, with a particu­
lar focus on the Sahel and the Horn of Africa. These
efforts are not just about creating better economic
opportunities, but political and social oppor­
tunities and rights as well. This can be achieved
through support for education, stabilisation,
reduced vulnerability to climate change, ensuring
legal rights, anti-corruption efforts, gender equal­
ity and women’s right to control their own bodies.

Global gender equality and the rights of girls
and women are central to realising the Sustainable
Development Goals. Lack of access to education,
health services, contraceptives and sex education
undermines women’s fundamental right to decide
whether, with whom, when and how many
children they want to have. The Government
will intensify its efforts for the rights of girls and
women in developing countries, in humanitarian
crises and conflict situations, and in international
negotiations, where countries that previously
shared Danish views are now pushing strongly in
the opposite direction.

With the contribution of Denmark and the other
member states, the EU is the world’s largest
provider of development ­assistance. We must
leverage this position even more effectively. The
Government wants to significantly strengthen the
EU’s external efforts on issues such as irregular
migration from Africa. We will also seek to reform
the EU’s development policy toolbox, inspired in
part by Danish experiences with innovative financ­
ing. Danish development assistance is increasingly
used as a catalyst for new types of partnerships,
particularly with private sector stakeholders, and
through innovative financing instruments such as
the Danish SDG Investment Fund.


-----

## Initiatives and areas of focus
 in 2019-2020



- The Government will intensify its efforts to
promote return and readmission of foreigners
without legal residence in Denmark. In the
2019 Finance Bill, the Government proposes to
increase funding for efforts that promote quid
pro quo cooperation with countries of origin
on the return and readmission of their own
citizens, bringing total funding in this area to
DKK 110 million.

- The Government will continue to work for a new
asylum system in Europe, including stronger
efforts to eradicate the foundation of the busi­
ness model of human traffickers, and to combat
existing pull factors in cooperation with coun­
tries of origin and transit along migration routes.
The Government will also work with like-minded
countries to develop new paths to a more
­effective European asylum processing system.

- The Government will strengthen the EU’s
external borders and asylum processing in
frontline states through continued contributions
to the EU’s asylum processing office, EASO,
and increased contributions to the EU’s border
agency, Frontex.

- In the 2019 Finance Bill, the Government
­proposes an increase in humanitarian assistance
from already historic levels to DKK 2.6 billion,
with objectives including the promotion of
­long-term solutions in regions of conflict
and disaster.

- The Government will prioritise international
cooperation on migration management as part
of its follow-up on the UN Global Compact on
Migration, including stronger involvement in the
EU’s Trust Fund for Africa.

- The Government will give greater priority to the
long-term bilateral efforts to combat poverty,
irregular migration, forced displacement and
instability, with a focus on the poorest and most
fragile priority countries and host societies for
large refugee populations, particularly in Africa,
including the Horn of Africa and the Sahel, where
Denmark will work with France and others in
relation to youth and gender equality.



- The Government will work bilaterally and
through larger actors, such as the World Bank,
to strengthen efforts to promote the right of
women to control their own bodies – these
efforts include the allocation of funding and
secondment of experts.

- The Government will strengthen efforts to
generate economic growth, employment and
entrepreneurial opportunities for the many
young people in Africa, with a focus on creating
opportunities for the largest generation of young
people in history, and thereby establish alterna­
tives to irregular migration.

- In the 2019 Finance Bill, the Government has
allocated DKK 540 million in development aid
funding to the Climate Envelope for efforts
to promote sustainable growth and reduce
the impacts of climate change in developing
countries.

- With a new regional stabilisation programme
for Syria and Iraq, the Government will address
immediate stabilisation needs in both countries,
thereby improving regional security, which in
turn will reduce migration pressures and the
number of displaced persons, while also counter­
acting radicalisation and terrorism.

- The Government will explore the possibilities
of contributing to innovative financing mecha­
nisms in education, e.g. the International Finance
Facility for Education (IFFEd).


-----

# Economic
 diplomacy, strategic partnerships and
 the new digital
 world order


##### The Government wants to strengthen opportunities for Danish businesses around the world and increase foreign investment in Denmark. This will be achieved through economic diplomacy, strategic partnerships, and a strengthening of Denmark’s position in terms of innovation and digital transition.

Economic diplomacy and strategic partnerships
The global economy is growing and millions
around the world have been lifted out of poverty
and into the middle class. This opens the door to
new opportunities for Denmark and Danish busi­
nesses. The Government’s economic diplomacy
constitutes a key area of focus of Danish foreign
policy, and serves as our foundation for seizing
the opportunities presented by global growth and
development.

In recent years, Denmark has successfully culti­
vated a closer dialogue with public authorities in
developing countries in selected sectors by posting
growth advisors. This strategic initiative has


increased the awareness of and opened the door
for Danish solutions, knowledge and skills. The
closer dialogue has also enabled improvements in
local framework conditions.

In the coming years, the Government will
strengthen the cooperation with local public
authorities and expand these efforts to include
high-income countries, such as the US and Japan,
where there is significant potential for selling
Danish solutions in life sciences, energy, environ­
ment and so on. We will post additional growth
advisors, strengthen the capacity in Denmark to
develop cooperation with local public authorities,
and establish a closer dialogue with the Danish
business community on export opportunities and
cooperation with local public authorities.

The Government will further develop Denmark’s
five existing strategic partnerships with China,
South Korea, Japan, Mexico and Indonesia – five
countries that are increasingly decisive in global
affairs. We will use these partnerships to promote
Danish interests, and to influence international
development in our direction. The Government
will also explore opportunities to enter into new
strategic partnerships.


-----

#### In the coming years, the Government will strengthen the cooperation with local public authorities and expand these efforts to include high-income countries, such as the US and Japan, where there is significant potential for selling Danish solutions in life sciences, energy, environment and so on.


The economic centre of gravity is shifting to the
east. Many of the world’s fastest-growing econo­
mies are in Asia. China’s economic development
offers Denmark a number of opportunities, but
it also requires a proactive effort. Therefore, the
Government has appointed a panel of Danish
business leaders and experts to develop recom­
mendations on how Danish businesses can best
benefit from growth opportunities in the Chinese
economy. This panel will explore opportunities in
the Chinese market and ways of ensuring a level
playing field for foreign companies in China.

Danes residing abroad are a resource that can play
a more active role in supporting Danish growth
and development. The Government supports the
appointment of a task force that in January 2019
will make recommendations on how Denmark
can better engage Danes residing abroad.

The new digital world order
Technological breakthroughs and the digital
­transformation of our societies are happening
at a pace which creates difficulties for states,
businesses and individuals to keep up. These
developments bring great opportunities, but also
new challenges.


Technology is increasingly becoming a geopolitical
factor. Denmark has a clear interest in a secure,
free and open global IT infrastructure based on
common norms and rules. We have already made
a strong impact internationally in regards to
this agenda, and we are in a favourable position
to continue shaping developments – not least
through the Government’s TechPlomacy initiative,
which has established a direct and open dialogue
with global tech players.

Going forward, part of these efforts will be within
the frameworks of the EU and the UN. Europe
has an excellent opportunity to be a leader in the
establishment of a normative global framework
for the new digital world order. This is due in part
to the fact that neither the US nor China currently
have as strong a focus as the EU on the protection
of the rights for individuals e.g. in relation to the
processing of personal data. We have seen serious
examples of how data about our preferences
and behaviour can be abused. Therefore, the
Government will explore the opportunities for
establishing an international coalition of tech
companies, civil society organisations, and states
to – among other things – develop international
norms and principles on data ethics.


-----

The Government will also focus on the ability
of developing countries to exploit the potential
and tackle the challenges of technology. This will
be done through the TechPlomacy initiative’s
development policy track (TechVelopment),
including through the establishment of a regional
TechVelopment advisor based in Nairobi
from 2019.

Research and innovation
As one of the world’s leading research nations
and one of the most digitised countries in the
world, Denmark has a strong starting point for
becoming one of the most innovative societies in
the world. We have a highly educated population
and research of the highest international standard.
But digital developments are taking place just as
fast in the rest of the world. These developments
give Danish businesses the opportunity to sell
their solutions to a much larger share of the
world’s population. However, they also bring
intensified competition.

With the Strategy for Denmark’s Digital Growth,
the Government has presented an ambitious vision
for maintaining and strengthening Denmark’s
position as a digital frontrunner and to ensure
that Danish companies seize the potential of the
new technologies. This requires targeted efforts in
Denmark and beyond our borders.

Attracting more knowledge- and technology-­
intensive foreign investment is an important
part of maintaining Denmark’s leading position.
Foreign companies bring new knowledge,
­technology, talent and business models, and
they create better opportunities for innovative
­partnerships between companies.


Another key element is the eight Danish inno­
vation centres located in the world’s leading
innovation environments, from Silicon Valley to
Seoul. The innovation centres make a significant
contribution to Denmark’s overall efforts to culti­
vate knowledge, technologies and business models
for the benefit of Danish research, education and
business. The Government opened a new inno­
vation centre in Boston in the autumn of 2018 to
strengthen these efforts.

A third important component is a further strength­
ening of Danish science diplomacy, which already
benefits from the active contributions of Danish
universities and other research and development
stakeholders. These efforts serve to strengthen
international scientific cooperation, as well as
generally promoting international cooperation
and supporting Denmark’s foreign policy goals.
The research cooperation agreement of May 2018
between Denmark and India is a good example of
this diplomacy in action.

A fourth component is intensified efforts to help
Danish companies with an appetite for the global
e-commerce markets. Digitisation offers excellent
conditions for selling goods and services in distant
markets. E-commerce is growing globally at a
rate of approximately 20% annually, but only a
small share of Denmark’s small and medium-sized
enterprises engage in e-commerce outside of
Denmark. The Government is therefore estab­
lishing an e-commerce centre that will provide
advisory services to businesses. We will also post
e-commerce staff in a number of foreign markets
to help improve access for Danish goods to leading
international e-marketplaces.


-----

## Initiatives and areas of focus
 in 2019-2020



- With the new innovation centre in Boston, the
Government will strengthen opportunities for
Danish companies and researchers to establish
partnerships in one of the world’s leading
research environments, particularly in the field
of life science.

- Building on the TechPlomacy initiative, the
Government will prioritise efforts to strengthen
governance and the formation of global alliances
relating to the tech agenda. This includes efforts
in the UN in connection with the SecretaryGeneral’s new tech initiatives, and the explo­
ration of opportunities to establish strategic
partnerships with key global players on the
tech agenda. Furthermore, the Government will
explore the possibility of Danish membership
of Digital 7. Lastly, the Government will work to
ensure international support for the new Danish
data ethics initiative and prioritise continued
efforts to promote the EU’s united approach
and global position.

- The Government will promote the technology
and digitisation agendas in its development
cooperation activities, including through the
posting of a TechVelopment advisor to Nairobi
from 2019.

- The Government will strengthen science
diplomacy efforts to promote Denmark and
partnerships in the international research and
innovation community.



- The Government will strengthen cooperation
with foreign public authorities by posting
new growth advisors in health and energy at
Danish missions in high-income countries, and
increase capacities in the Ministry of Health and
the Ministry of Energy, Utilities and Climate to
­support and further develop this cooperation.
The Government has also established a new
dialogue forum for life science to strengthen
­dialogue between public authorities, trade
associations and companies in the health
sector. Lastly, the Government has allocated
additional funding in the 2019 Finance Bill
to initiate five or six new collaborations with
developing countries.

- The Government has appointed representatives
of selected Danish companies to an expert
panel on global growth centres, which will make
­recommendations as to how Danish businesses
can best benefit from growth opportunities in
global growth centres, beginning with China.

- Based on the recommendations of the Task
Force for the Danish Diaspora, the Government
will strengthen the collaboration with Danes
abroad to support growth and development
in Denmark, including further engagement of
Danes abroad in partnership with new and
­existing private sector stakeholders.


-----

# The Arctic

##### The Government will continue its efforts for a peaceful Arctic and to promote sustainable economic development for the benefit of the local population.

The Government is committed to ensuring that
the Kingdom of Denmark, as a strong partner in the
Arctic cooperation, continues its efforts to ensure
that the Arctic remains a low-tension area. This is
an increasingly important focal point in the light
of the continued Russian military build-up, which
is being followed closely by the Government. The
Government will also work to ensure the best
framework conditions for sustainable economic
development in the region. This development is
not least important for the opportunities of young
people in the region to build a life based on good
living conditions. Through a focus on research,
innovation and economic development, we will
engage the young generation through initiatives
that promote creativity and entrepreneurship
across the Arctic region. Denmark, the Faroe
Islands and Greenland will collectively and indi­
vidually contribute to these efforts.

Climate change in the Arctic
There are few places where the consequences of
global climate change are as extensive as in the
Arctic. It is crucial that we take the fragile Arctic
environment into account, while also supporting
sustainable economic growth.

Climate change increases the geographic acces­
sibility of the Arctic. This has attracted greater
attention to the extraction of natural resources,
and has increased commercial, scientific, and


­military activity in the area. As a result, the
geopolitical importance of the Arctic continues
to grow – as does the need for a presence and
monitoring.

The melting of the Arctic ice opens opportunities
for maritime transport, extraction of natural
resources, new forms of commercial fishing
and increased tourism. With the expectations
of increased maritime traffic in the Arctic,
the Kingdom of Denmark will work for the
adoption of common rules for maritime traffic
and thereby equal competitive conditions.
The Government will also explore the possibil­
ities for a ­modernisation and expansion of Ice
Services in Greenland.

The Government will increase its focus on
sustainable economic development and work
to strengthen cooperation to this effect in the
Arctic Council and Arctic Economic Council.
The Sustainable Development Goals also pro­
vide a useful framework for these efforts in the
Arctic between now and 2030.

Research and innovation in the Arctic
Research and innovation are critical elements of
future development in the Arctic. The Kingdom
of Denmark participates actively in the work of
the Arctic Council and in the Arctic Economic
Council to improve digital infrastructure in the
region. Young people will be the future users of
new digital opportunities that will contribute to a
more diversified business structure. The Kingdom
of Denmark will work to increase focus on young
people and entrepreneurship in the Arctic, not
least among indigenous peoples.


-----

#### There are few places where the consequences of global climate change are as extensive as in the Arctic. It is crucial that we take the fragile Arctic environment into account, while also supporting sustainable economic growth.


The Kingdom of Denmark will also work to
ensure full realisation of the potential in the Arctic
Council’s research agreement. The Government’s
goal is to strengthen cooperation between
researchers in the Arctic states, and to work for
greater involvement of researchers from other
countries with significant Arctic interests.

In cooperation with Greenlandic authorities,
the Government will establish an international
Arctic hub in Greenland. This will further
strengthen the Kingdom of Denmark’s already
strong profile in Arctic research and education.
A hub will also make a beneficial local impact on
­education, the local economy and employment.

The Government will strengthen research and
innovation cooperation with Asian states, which
are showing increased interest in the Arctic. For
example, in January 2018 China published a white
paper on its Arctic policy, which calls for intensify­
ing efforts in a broad range of areas. The interest of
distant and resourceful nations in the Arctic brings
many positive opportunities, but may also entail
geopolitical challenges.


Defence in the Arctic
The Defence Agreement (2018-2023) further
strengthens the Ministry of Defence’s presence
in the Arctic through initiatives that support
assertion of sovereignty, surveillance, protection
of the marine environment, and search and rescue
services. The Government is closely following
developments in the significant and growing geo­
political interests in the region, and the continued
Russian military build-up, which according to the
Danish Defence Intelligence Service includes the
rebuilding and expansion of forward bases on the
Russian Arctic Islands as well as ongoing prepara­
tions for the deployment of tactical fighter aircraft.
These developments are being followed with a
view to the Government’s goal of maintaining the
Arctic as a low-tension area. NATO has an inten­
sified focus on the North Atlantic, and we must
consider and address developments in the Arctic
and the North Atlantic together with our partners
and allies.


-----

## Initiatives and areas of focus
 in 2019-2020



- In close collaboration with Greenland, the
Faroe Islands and international partners, the
Government will maintain a focus on economic
development in the Arctic region. Based on a
review of experiences, including a forthcoming
report on business financing in the Arctic, the
Government will work actively for this agenda
in relevant Arctic contexts.

- The Government will strengthen its efforts for
young people in the Arctic, including an initiative
in collaboration with relevant forums to con­
duct an innovation competition that will bring
together young entrepreneurs from across the
Arctic region.

- In close cooperation with Greenland, the
Government will explore the opportunities
for expanding the existing Danish Ice Services
to cover all of Greenland. An expansion of the
Danish Ice Services will support continued
­economic development in Greenland through
new maritime routes and opportunities for
increased tourism.



- In close cooperation with Greenland, the
Government will establish an international
Arctic hub in Greenland to strengthen research
in the Arctic region and research cooperation in
the Danish Realm.

- The Government will give young Greenlanders
the opportunity for voluntary conscription
tests in Greenland (without having to travel
to Denmark), and strengthen assertion of
­sovereignty, surveillance, protection of the
marine environment, as well as search and
rescue services.


-----

2018/19:6

November 2018

**Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark**
Asiatisk Plads 2
DK-1448 København K
Tel. : +45 33 92 00 00

ISBN 978-87-93635-99-9 (digital version)

Design: e-Types

The publication can be downloaded from
um.dk / regeringen.dk


-----

