## Foreign and Security Policy Strategy

### 2017-2018

###### JUNE 2017


-----

-----

# Contents

Preface **5**

Introduction **6**

Migration, instability and terrorism **10**

Security in the neighbourhood region **14**

Brexit and the future of the EU **17**

Globalisation – economic and technological diplomacy **20**

The Arctic **24**


-----

-----

# Preface

#### As the world grows smaller, Denmark is impacted  positively and negatively by events unfolding  beyond its borders. With this foreign and security policy strategy – following up on the May 2016 review of Danish foreign and security policy – the government presents answers to the most impor- tant external challenges facing Denmark today.


The government wants Denmark to maintain
a strong international engagement. We must
influence international cooperation for a secure,
peaceful and prosperous world. We must insist
on international cooperation based on rules and
norms that apply for all countries. We must fight
for the values and freedoms on which our society
is built. We want a world with more democracy
and freedom, including more freedom of expression, freedom of assembly, freedom of religion
and more public order. We must also give Danish
companies good opportunities to succeed in the
international markets and stay at the forefront of
the technological development.
Prioritisation and coordination are keywords
when it comes to promotion of Denmark’s foreign and security policy interests. In light of this,
the government points to five themes deserving


particular focus in Denmark’s foreign and security
policy in the coming year: Migration, instability
and terrorism; Security in the neighbourhood
region; Brexit and the future of the EU; Globalisation – economic and technological diplomacy; and
The Arctic. These are not the only topics demanding our attention, however. The complete list is
longer, and the spectrum of Denmark’s efforts is
broader.
Based on these five prioritised focus areas, we
wish to extend our hand and strengthen Denmark
in cooperation with civil society organisations, the
business community, universities and think tanks.
Denmark is strongest when we stand together.


-----

# Introduction


##### The framework for promoting Denmark’s foreign and security policy interests is challenged.  The geopolitical tectonic plates on which Danish foreign policy has rested for many years are now in motion. Major changes  in the world are impacting the global system and creating new frameworks – not only for Denmark, but also for the largest and most influential powers.  The unpredictability of inter­- national politics has not been greater for a long time.

The Western model of society – democracy, an
open, liberal market-based economy, and binding,
rules-based international cooperation – is being
challenged by increasingly authoritarian trends,
which also appear to be gaining ground in Europe.
The saying that democracy and rights are not
inherent rules of nature – but rather a battle that
each generation must win anew – appears to be
more relevant now than it has been in a long while.
The government believes that it is in our interest as a small country to have strong multilateral
organisations whose joint decisions are also considered legitimate and binding by the strongest
countries. Organisations that are crucial to Denmark’s foreign and security policy – the EU, NATO,


the UN and the WTO – are all under pressure. This
complicates efforts to build international consensus and tackle global challenges together. Thus, it
is all the more important to work hard to maintain
and strengthen the international cooperation and
the organisations comprising the framework for
this cooperation.
The EU membership represents Denmark’s best
opportunity to influence the world around us and
therefore the framework conditions of importance
to Danish citizens and businesses. Our prosperity
and our jobs are closely linked to the European
Single Market – and our ability to solve international and common problems requires close European cooperation. The cohesion of the EU has been
challenged in recent years. The EU cooperation has
faced difficulties in delivering quick solutions to
the issues of importance to European citizens. For
example on issues such as the handling of migration and low economic growth – and Brexit, which
came as a surprise and has shaken the very foundation of the EU.
At the same time, we see indications that
these major challenges are leading a majority
of EU Member States to move closer together.
In the coming years we will most likely see new
initiatives for stronger cooperation in areas of
importance to the citizens of the EU. This includes
growth and employment, climate and energy, borders and asylum policy, and security and defence.
A multi-speed EU has thus become a more likely
scenario. Denmark can therefore anticipate challenges arising from our opt-outs in several specific
areas where cooperation will grow stronger.
In all significant foreign and security policy
contexts, Denmark and the USA have a long tradition of being close allies. It is still too early to assess
how US foreign policy will evolve in the coming
years. For Denmark, it will be of great importance


-----

that the US maintains a strong international commitment, not least in terms of security policy, free
trade and multilateral cooperation in general. In
light of this, the announcement that the US will
withdraw from the Paris Climate Agreement is
highly regrettable. We are prepared to fight to
safeguard and promote international cooperation
in order to ensure the best future conditions for
coming generations.
The global balance of power in security policy
and economically is shifting these years, in part
as a result of strong growth in some of the world’s
most populous nations. In the coming decades,
the US and China in particular will have to adjust
to a situation where they, increasingly, are actors
of equal importance in the international system,
which may lead to tense situations.
The government looks with great concern
upon Russia’s threatening statements, military
build-up and increased military exercises in the
vicinity of Denmark. This is a clear challenge for
Denmark and for our allies, despite the assessment
that Russia is not willing to risk direct military
confrontation with NATO. The illegal annexation
of Crimea and destabilisation of eastern Ukraine
has exposed Russia’s willingness and ability to
use military means to achieve strategic goals,
while violating fundamental international rules
and norms. Overall, this contributes to increased
uncertainty, including in the Baltic Sea region – an
uncertainty exacerbated by hostile information
influencing and the threat of hybrid warfare.
Russia is also leading the charge in a number of
international contexts against what is considered
Western values and freedoms.
The government believes that the shifting security landscape increases the need to strengthen
NATO’s role as a credible deterrent and territorial
protector of the alliance, as well as the need to
maintain Denmark’s prioritisation of military
contributions to international operations, including those outside of NATO’s territory, such as
the battle against Da’esh and UN peacekeeping
missions. Furthermore, national activities and
increased capacity to enforce the Kingdom of Denmark’s sovereignty in the Arctic are also crucial.
The changing security policy dynamics also
have a defining impact on the general framework
for the Danish Defence in the years to come. This
will be evident in the forthcoming defence agreement, where the government will allocate more
funds to provide a substantial improvement of the
Danish Defence. The ability of the Danish Defence
to perform tasks relating to collective deterrence
and the defence of NATO must be strengthened.
The Danish Defence must also maintain the
capacity to participate in international operations,
including efforts to fight terrorism, manage refugee
flows and help strengthen national security.


The threat deriving from non-state actors in the
form of terrorism, violent extremism and organised crime means that we must anticipate a need
to deal with more unannounced and unexpected
incidents. The terror threat against Denmark and
other western countries is continuously evolving,
while instability in parts of the Middle East, Africa
and Asia is lending support to terrorist groups
such as Da’esh and al-Qaida. Despite the progress
in the military campaign against Da’esh in Iraq and
Syria, the terror threat will remain present, and
there is a need for continued military and civilian
efforts.
Conflict and instability in Europe’s southern
and south-eastern neighbourhoods, as well as in
parts of Africa, are forcing millions of people to
seek refuge. Meanwhile, a lack of prospects for
the future is contributing to irregular migration
towards Europe. Migration is not a new phenomenon. However, demographic developments in
Africa in combination with global climate change
create a situation where Europe will face a massive
challenge unless new opportunities are created for
millions of young people in Africa. In this sense,
globalisation has reduced the distance between
continents and turned distant lands into neighbouring areas. The government finds it crucial to
reduce the pressures of migration towards Europe
and Denmark. This can only be achieved through
multifaceted efforts, including strengthened efforts
in neighbouring areas to conflict and crisis, and
better securing of Europe’s borders.
We are taking care of Denmark when we take
care of the world. Hence, Denmark’s development
cooperation is an important foreign policy instrument. Denmark is one of just five or six countries
in the world that meet the UN’s goal of 0.7% of
GNI in annual development assistance. We can
rightly be proud of this fact. But we must also
encourage other prosperous nations to deliver
their share. The UN’s 17 Sustainable Development
Goals represent an ambitious political framework
for sustainable development and global cooperation from now until 2030. Denmark is among the
countries best equipped to support global efforts
to reach these goals, which provide the basis for
a strong international engagement in terms of
foreign policy and development cooperation.
The government will take its share of the international responsibility to promote sustainable
development, peace and security, human rights,
and gender equality, and for combating poverty
globally in accordance with Denmark’s strategy
for development cooperation and humanitarian
action. The Sustainable Development Goals also
present an opportunity for Danish companies,
as the goals are strongly aligned with traditional
strengths and strongholds of Danish business, such
as energy and climate.


-----

In a time of great uncertainty in international
relations, the government finds it essential to seize
the positive global trends and rapid technological
development that are creating new opportunities
for citizens and companies. We have an open economy, a well-trained workforce, a flexible labour
market, an efficient public sector and a highly
developed digital infrastructure. It will take constant innovation to ensure that Denmark seizes
these opportunities to its benefit. Therefore, we
are reaching out to new players, including in the
field of technology. Technological development
and free trade have been the key factors driving
improvements in living conditions over the last
many years in both developed and developing
countries. Free trade makes us richer and helps
to fund our welfare. We must not lose sight of
this fact. We must also be aware of the scepticism
towards globalisation that exists in many parts
of the western world. We therefore need a public
discussion about how the fruits of globalisation
benefit everyone. In this context, Denmark’s experiences can serve as a proactive and positive contribution to this discussion.
The Kingdom of Denmark has a fundamental
interest in a peaceful and stable Arctic, which
enables economically and environmentally sustainable development in the region, in close collaboration with Greenland and the Faroe Islands.
The government wants the Arctic to remain an
area of low tension. Russia has so far acted constructively in this respect, and there has been a
pragmatic international cooperation, including
under the auspices of the Arctic Council.


In the light of global developments, the government has chosen to prioritise the following areas
in 2017-2018:

- Migration, instability and terrorism

- Security in the neighbourhood region

- Brexit and the future of the EU

- Globalisation – economic and technological
diplomacy

- The Arctic


-----

-----

## Migration,  instability  and terrorism


##### The government will work to  limit the number of irregular migrants and refugees, as well  as to reduce the terror threat against Europe and Denmark. This requires stronger efforts  in neighbouring areas to conflict and crisis, growth and develop- ment in the Middle East and Africa, and more effective securing of Europe’s borders.

Addressing and handling the issues relating to
migration is an important priority of the Danish
government. Greater focus on return and readmission of rejected asylum seekers is needed. A combination of domestic initiatives and efforts through
the EU has succeeded so far in bringing the large
influx of asylum seekers and irregular migrants
to Denmark under control. But the EU’s external
borders remain under great pressure, which we
need to address e.g. by focusing on the underlying
root-causes.
With more than 65 million displaced persons,
the world is in the midst of a humanitarian crisis
unprecedented in scope. Despite the continued
influx of displaced persons to Europe, 8 out of 10
of the world’s refugees reside in their local region,
primarily in Africa and the Middle East. This places
a significant strain on fragile and poor societies,
and can lead to new refugee flows – including
towards Europe. Therefore, we must create better


living conditions and prospects for the future in
refugees’ own local regions.
There are no signs of a diminishing migration
pressure on the horizon. In the coming decades,
Africa will see a doubling of its population, from
1.2 billion today to 2.5 billion in 2050. This population growth will place great demands on job creation and economic growth, particularly in Africa
and the Middle East. We already have the largest
generation of youth in world history, three quarters of whom reside in developing countries. This
presents great opportunities – if the demographic
potential can be converted into innovation,
growth and development. The bleak alternative,
however, is instability, conflict and future migratory flows of unprecedented dimensions.
The government believes that Denmark has
significant interests in effective European and
international cooperation on migration, and in
contributing to stability and sustainable development in the Middle East and Africa. We must
prevent new refugee and migrant flows by creating peace, security and improved prospects for
the future for people in their home regions. We
must fight the factors that feed extremism, terrorism and organised crime. To achieve these aims,
the government will employ all relevant foreign
policy tools at its disposal: civilian and military,
trade, European policies and migration policies.
These efforts will be built on extensive cooperation between all relevant authorities and broad
involvement of all societal actors.
We must reduce the pressure on Europe’s borders. The EU cooperation has a very important role
to play in this respect. The closure of the Western
Balkan route, the EU/Turkey agreement and the
establishment of the European Border and Coast
Guard Agency have all contributed to slowing the
influx. The government will push for progress in


-----

the EU’s efforts to establish migration partnerships with selected countries in the neighbouring
regions. The partnerships will aim to counter irregular migration and promote the return and readmission of rejected asylum seekers and irregular
migrations without legal stay in the EU, based on a
quid pro quo principle.
The government will also work to ensure that
the goals and principles of these partnerships are
integrated into other relevant external instruments and policies in the EU, including development and trade tools, as well as visa policy. A key
component of these efforts will be the concrete
implementation of the EU’s new development
cooperation strategy, “The European Consensus
on Development”. The EU and its Member States
are collectively the world’s largest provider of
official development assistance. We must put this
strength to use. In cooperation with like-minded
European partners, the government will work for a
new and better asylum system that dismantles the
business model of human smugglers and eases the
pressures on Europe’s external borders. Ideally, refugee reception would take place in camps located
in the vicinity of conflict and crisis regions.
We must also use development cooperation as
leverage to promote the return and readmission
of rejected asylum seekers. The government will
reward countries that fulfil their obligation to
readmit their own citizens. Meanwhile, we will
increase the pressure on countries that do not fulfil
their obligations. This is quid pro quo. The cooperation on return and readmission must also play a
greater role in the EU’s development cooperation,
keeping in line with the new European Consensus
on Development, which more directly links migration and development.
There is also a need to support countries in their
efforts to build the capacity to deal with migration
challenges – and to assume greater responsibility
for ensuring that irregular migrants and refugees
do not embark on a long and dangerous journey
towards Europe. Therefore, the government will
allocate 75 million DKK of development assistance
funds to such initiatives. These initiatives can be
implemented flexibly as an integrated part of the
dialogue with countries of origin on return and
readmission of rejected asylum seekers, and in
connection with efforts to promote voluntary
return. In the dialogue with countries of origin on
forced return and readmission, the approach will
be based on a “more for more” principle. Through
initiatives in selected countries, Denmark will
support the willingness and ability of these countries to accept the return of their own citizens, e.g.
through reception and reintegration programmes,
education projects and building the capacity of
migration authorities.


Development cooperation must not least contribute to addressing the root causes of migration. The
long-term solutions are to promote sustainable
growth, development and innovation, peace and
stability, human rights and democratic practices. The government, with broad support in
the Danish Parliament, recently adopted a new
strategy for development cooperation and humanitarian action as the overarching framework for
Denmark’s development cooperation over the
next five years. For the first time, migration constitutes one of the strategic aims of Denmark’s
development policy. Another important area is
addressing rapid population growth that is contributing to ever-increasing migratory pressures.
Growth and development in and of themselves
contribute to lower birth rates. We must also promote women’s right to decide by themselves the
number of children they want and with whom,
as well as girls’ access to and opportunities for
completing education. Through its own initiatives
and through the EU and UN, the government will
strengthen efforts to promote gender equality and
the rights of women and girls.
The readjusted asylum estimate for 2017, from
10,000 to 5,000, combined with changes in the
composition of these asylum seekers, has freed up
funds previously earmarked for in-donor refugee
costs in Denmark. The government will channel
these funds towards a stronger effort to counter
secondary refugee and migratory flows by addressing the root causes and consequences of migration,
long-term crises, drought and population growth.
These funds can be more effectively utilised in
conflict and crisis regions than in Denmark. Efforts
in these conflict and crisis regions can create new
opportunities and hope for refugees and migrants,
thereby reducing the flows towards Europe and
Denmark.
At the global level, the government will support
initiatives by the UN, the World Bank and other
organisations to promote global solutions to the
migration challenge, with the aim of achieving
a better global distribution of responsibility and
more effective cooperation to address the causes of
irregular migration and to deal with international
migration. A key element of these activities will
relate to the return and readmission of countries’
own citizens without legal residence.
The crises in the Middle East and North Africa
have also created a breeding ground for extremism
and organised crime in these regions. The greatest terrorist threat against Europe and Denmark
currently stems from militant Islamism, with its
centre of gravity in Syria and Iraq, combined with
significant presence in fragile and conflict-ridden
states – from Afghanistan and Pakistan, to the
Middle East, the Horn of Africa, North Africa, the


-----

Sahel and Southeast Asia. Da’esh will continue to
be a source of terrorism with direct impacts on
Europe and Denmark. We are contributing to the
military campaign against Da’esh with training
units, radar capacity and special operations forces.
We are also continuing Denmark’s contributions
to NATO’s military efforts in Afghanistan. These
efforts contribute to the important task of putting
military pressure on the terrorist movements in
these countries. Denmark is among the countries
who have taken the lead in the fight against Da’esh.
And we will continue to be so.
A comprehensive approach to stabilisation
efforts are essential in addressing the issues of
migration, instability and terrorism. Denmark
has a range of instruments at its disposal. With
the Peace and Stabilisation Fund, we focus on key
conflicts and security challenges that directly or
indirectly impact stability, irregular migration
flows, violent extremism and the maritime security of Denmark and Europe. Financed through
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark and
the Ministry of Defence, the fund comprises both
development aid and non-development aid activities, while drawing on expertise from a range of
authorities to deliver primarily regional efforts.
Through the Peace and Stability Fund, the government will continue to respond to sudden crises
and the need for peace and stabilisation efforts
in regions such as the Middle East. Through the
Danish Arab Partnership Programme 2017-21,
the government will focus on the root causes of
radicalisation and migration, including women’s
rights, by supporting reform-oriented forces in
selected Middle Eastern and North African countries who are working for stability, democracy and
economic growth.


The government will also continue to fight terror­
ism with civilian means, including efforts to build
the capacity of local authorities to prevent radicalisation and stop funding to terrorist groups.
Compliance with international human rights and
the rule of law are also essential building blocks in
the efforts against terrorism and violent extremism. Combatting the terror threat in the Middle
East and elsewhere also strengthens the security of
Europe and Denmark.
Denmark has a clear interest in a strong international legal system, including respect for human
rights. Meanwhile, there is a need to critically
examine how the dynamic interpretation by the
European Court of Human Rights has expanded
the scope of some parts of the European Convention on Human Rights. This will be an important
area of focus when Denmark assumes the chairmanship of the Council of Europe this autumn.


-----

## Initiatives

#### In 2017-2018, the Danish government  will take the following initiatives:



- The government will continue its contributions to the fight against terrorist organisations through coordinated military and
civilian efforts.

- The government will allocate unused funds
previously earmarked for refugee reception in
Denmark to strengthen its efforts relating to
long-term crises, drought, migration and population growth.

- With its 2018 Finance Act proposal, the
government will earmark 75 million DKK
in development aid for initiatives relating
to dialogue with countries of origin on the
readmission of rejected asylum seekers, and
to strengthen efforts to promote voluntary
return.

- The government will address the root causes
of migration, including by supporting young
people – particularly in Africa – and by promoting women’s access to health services, economic opportunities and the right to decide
over their own bodies.

- With a new Danish-Arab Partnership Programme, the government will promote better
governance and economic opportunities in
the Middle East and North Africa, thereby
contributing to creating alternatives to radicalisation, violent extremism and migration.

- The government will strengthen the further
development of the EU’s work on migration
partnerships based on a quid pro quo prin­
ciple.



- The government will post regional migration
and neighbourhood experts at embassies in
the Middle East and Africa, who will be tasked
with targeting and coordinating efforts to deal
with long-term refugee crises and to quickly
identify new migratory flows.

- The government will appoint an ambassador
at large for Migration Issues and post attachés
for Migration Issues at the embassies in Kabul
and Nairobi.

- The government wishes to strengthen the
contribution to the EU Border Assistance Mission in Libya (EUBAM), with a focus on capacity building of the police and judicial sectors,
as well as border management and combating
illegal migration.

- The government will appoint a special representative to Sahel/Maghreb. Based on the
increasingly intertwined threat assessment in
these two regions, the special representative
will work to improve the coordination of
efforts relating to migration, terrorism and
other issues.

- The government will strengthen its EU mission in Brussels to promote Danish interests
by e.g. keeping the external aspects of migration high on the EU agenda.

- Given that the dynamic interpretation by
the European Court of Human Rights has
expanded the scope of some parts of the
European Convention on Human Rights, the
government will host an international conference on the convention in connection with
the forthcoming Danish Chairmanship of the
Council of Europe.


-----

# Security in the neighbourhood region


##### The government will work to strengthen security in our neighbourhood region, both  for Denmark and our allies.  This will be achieved through  security policy efforts in NATO,  a principled stance on Russian aggression, as well as through dialogue – including efforts to ensure that the Arctic remains a low-tension area. The government will also strengthen Denmark’s security in cyberspace.

The threat against Denmark and Europe is significantly different and more serious than at any other
time following the fall of the Berlin Wall. Russia’s
illegal annexation of Crimea and destabilising
behaviour in Ukraine, the Baltic Sea Region and
the Caucasus illustrate the need for European and
transatlantic solidarity and unity.
The NATO cooperation and transatlantic ties
represent the primary guarantor of Denmark’s and
Europe’s security. Therefore, it is a vital Danish
interest to fully and completely support the solidarity of NATO. The demand for Europe and


Canada to contribute more and meet the goal of
moving towards defence spending of 2% of gross
domestic product is not new. The imbalance and
need for a more equitable distribution of the
burden are also clear. Denmark makes significant contributions – not least when it comes to
operations. This is reflected in decisions such as
the military contributions to NATO’s enhanced
forward presence in our eastern neighbourhood.
We are also one of the front nations in the coalition
against Da’esh. We continue to participate in the
efforts to stabilise Afghanistan. We have made a
major contribution to the UN’s peacekeeping mission in Mali. And we are contributing to the reassurance activities in the Baltic Sea Region. But we
must allocate more funds to defence for purposes
including the maintenance of a credible deterrent
and defence in NATO – for the sake of the alliance
and for the sake of Denmark.
The government is concerned by Russia’s
increasingly self-assertive behaviour in Europe.
But Russia is also a neighbour with whom Denmark must maintain ties. Denmark and the EU
seek dialogue with Russia. But we will stand firm
on the current balance of our relations with Russia,
which also enjoys broad support among our allies.
In NATO, the government will work to ensure
the clear signalling of alliance solidarity with our
allies to the east, as part of the generally strengthened deterrence profile of the Alliance. Through
the EU, we will continue to seek European unity
and continuation of the robust line of sanctions
and pressure on Russia to implement the Minsk


-----

Agreement. At the same time, we will maintain a
dialogue and promote common understanding
with Russia on issues such as maintaining Arctic
as a low-tension area. It is important to counteract
Russian isolation.
Russian hostile information influencing
directed toward decision makers and the public
in western countries constitute an increasing
challenge. The government will direct attention
to these measures, which can potentially threaten
open democracies and divide the international
cooperation. This issue also illustrates how elements of domestic and foreign policy are inextricably linked and require close cooperation across
various Danish authorities. Therefore, the government will coordinate the efforts of relevant authorities to strengthen Denmark’s ability to resist and
counter hostile information influencing.
Developments in the Baltic Sea Region and
the Baltic countries are of critical importance to
Denmark’s security. Historically, Denmark has
had close relations with the Baltic countries. The
government wishes to continue and develop this
cooperation. The NATO countries around the
Baltic Sea, as well as Sweden and Finland, share a
common interest in the security and stability of
the Baltic Sea Region. In view of Denmark’s geopolitical position and the changing conditions, the
government wants to expand Denmark’s active
security policy role. This will be achieved through
strengthened Nordic cooperation and cooperation with our other allies in the Baltic Sea Region,
including the planned contribution to NATO’s
enhanced forward presence in the Baltic countries.
The eastern partnership – particularly the
cooperation with Ukraine – is also a key component of Europe’s and Denmark’s foreign policy
orientation. Through this partnership, we support reform processes and make our local region
more resilient to crises and hostile influences.
The government supports bilateral reform efforts


in Ukraine through the Neighbourhood Programme, and has taken a leading role in the EU’s
anti-corruption programme in Ukraine, which has
become an agenda-setting factor in EU-Ukraine
cooperation. These ongoing efforts represent an
integral part of our insistence on a rules-based
international society that supports the inviolable
sovereignty of Ukraine, and an acknowledgment
that the most effective Ukrainian response to Russia’s aggression is to build a stable and reformed
society. Ukraine must prove by example that it is
possible to undergo a successful transition from
post-Soviet heritage to a societal model based on
European values. We can help them succeed in this
endeavour.
Denmark has a fundamental interest in an
open, secure and global IT infrastructure, and
thus in the cyber-related issues that increasingly
demand both international and national solutions.
This includes the building of cyber capacities and
strengthening internet and information security,
cyber-defence, fighting cybercrime and terrorists’
abuse of the internet, and protecting human rights
on the internet. It is vital in this respect that Danish
authorities coordinate their efforts across organisations and bodies. We must pursue a comprehensive approach across domestic and foreign policy
aspects. Therefore, the government will present a
new national strategy for cyber and information
security. Internationally, Denmark will promote
cyber cooperation via the EU, UN and NATO.
Given the increasing importance of this issue, the
government will further strengthen these efforts.
We must improve our ability to protect ourselves
from those who would use the internet to steal
information and compromise the interests of
public authorities and private companies.


-----

## Initiatives

#### In 2017-2018, the Danish government  will take the following initiatives:

                  - The government will ensure a substantial
improvement by allocating more funding
to the Danish Defence in the forthcoming
defence agreement covering the period
after 2017.

                  - The government will strengthen the embassy
in Moscow to ensure stronger representation
of Danish interests in dealings with Russia,
particularly as regards security policy and the
Arctic.

                  - The government will strengthen its efforts
relating to foreign hostile information influencing designed to threaten Danish interests
and democratic values; an inter-ministerial
effort has been initiated in this area.

                  - The government will continue to assign high
priority to security policy-related cooperation
with the countries surrounding the Baltic Sea,
including through the planned contribution
to NATO’s enhanced forward presence in the
Baltic countries.

                  - The government will maintain a major bilateral engagement in the EU’s eastern neighbourhood, including through the establishment of
a new Danish five-year neighbourhood programme for Ukraine and Georgia.

                  - The government will present a new national
strategy for cyber and information security to
strengthen Denmark’s digital security.


-----

# Brexit and the  future of the EU


##### The government will work to ensure a strong basis for European cooperation, which  is the best way to influence the world around us and ensure the prosperity of Danish citizens.  The government will work to safeguard European cooperation by reforming it from within and by ensuring a strong, lean and efficient EU. The government will work to ensure the best possible agreement for Denmark in the Brexit negotiations.

Denmark is closely linked – historically, politically and economically – with the EU. EU membership represents Denmark’s best opportunity
to influence the world around us and thus the
framework conditions of importance for Danish
citizens and businesses. Our prosperity and our
jobs are closely linked with the European Single
Market. Two-thirds of our exports go to our European neighbours. Our ability to solve cross-border
and common problems requires close European
cooperation. Therefore, it is very encouraging that
Danes strongly support the membership of the EU.
However, the EU is challenged by competition
from strong emerging economies in other parts
of the world and shifts in the global balance of
power. Europe has been hit by many crises and
challenges in recent years, including a serious


financial and debt crisis, combined with a major
wave of migration and increasing threats to our
security – from terrorism in Europe, and from
instability and aggression in our local and neighbouring regions.
The EU cooperation has had difficulty in delivering quick solutions. It took some time to get
both the financial crisis and the migration crisis
under control, and the problems have not yet been
fully resolved. Many countries continue to struggle
with low growth and high unemployment. These
factors have generated scepticism, thereby challenging the unity of the EU.
This dissatisfaction is understandable. But there
are no easy or quick solutions to Europe’s challenges. The EU Member States are independent
nations who cooperate closely. Joint decisions
often take shape as compromises reached with
respect for different national interests and traditions, and the decisions therefore take time. It will
require dedicated, ongoing efforts to create growth
and jobs, curb illegal migration and strengthen
Europe’s internal and external security.
The government wants the EU cooperation to
dedicate even more of its resources to finding concrete solutions to these major cross-border challenges – and fewer resources to regulate in areas
where the Member States themselves can better
achieve the same objectives. The government
will work for a strong, lean and efficient EU that
respects the principle of subsidiarity and focuses
on the challenges which Member States can best
address collectively.
The single market with free movement of
goods, services, capital and labour is a fundamental prerequisite for growth and prosperity
in Denmark and throughout the EU. Therefore,
Denmark will continue its efforts in support of a
well-functioning single market, which must be


-----

further developed in the digital area and energy,
among others. The government will also prioritise
ambitious research and innovation cooperation
to support competitiveness and the creation of
new jobs. The creation of jobs is an essential social
policy tool for getting more people to be an active
part of the community. Improving the framework
for job creation will thereby also strengthen the
social dimension of the EU cooperation. The government wants a socially responsible Europe that
pursues inclusive growth while learning from each
other’s experiences. Denmark has much to offer in
this respect.
The United Kingdom has chosen to leave the
European Union. Denmark is thereby losing an
important partner in the EU. We will have to dedicate extensive resources and efforts to untangling
the UK from the EU in the coming years. This will
largely be a matter of limiting the damage for both
the EU and the UK.
Denmark has extensive interests at stake in the
forthcoming negotiations. It may prove expensive for Danish taxpayers if the financial balance
between the UK and the EU is not settled in a fair
manner. And it may have significant negative consequences for trade between Denmark and the
UK if the process fails to result in a balanced agreement on the future trade relations between the
EU and the UK. The government finds it of great
importance that an agreement with the UK settles
the estate fairly, ensures a continued well-functioning single market and establishes a future relationship between the EU and the UK based on a
balance between rights and duties. In the negotiations, the government will work hard to represent
the interests of Danish citizens and companies,
and to ensure the continued unity of the EU.
When the UK leaves the EU, the political balance will shift in some areas. Likely areas to be
impacted include trade, the EU budget, structural
reforms, state aid and competition policy, climate
and energy, and relations between Member States
in and outside of the Euro cooperation. In all of the
above areas, Denmark has a clear interest in ensuring that the EU cooperation maintains a liberal
and economically responsible direction, with a
strong focus on measures to promote the EU’s
competitiveness and global role. Without the UK,
it will take even greater efforts to influence the EU
cooperation in the direction of Danish interests.
Therefore, the government will strengthen the
cooperation with Denmark’s traditional partners
in the EU as well as actively seek new alliances.
One of the first and most concrete examples of
the challenges arising from Brexit in the future EU
cooperation is the coming round of negotiations
on the EU’s next multiannual financial framework,
where it will be necessary to reduce EU expenses


to reflect the new economic situation in EU27.
Within this adjusted framework, the government
will also promote modernisation of the EU budget
so that areas generating the greatest added value
for the EU are prioritised.
Developments are already underway in terms
of security and defence policy, where a group of
countries are joining together to strengthen cooperation relating to military capacities. The consequences of the defence opt-out for Denmark will
become even clearer, reflecting the fact that developments in this area are very different from those
in 1992 when Denmark chose to opt out.
The overall challenge in relation to the future
of the EU will be ensuring that Denmark is not
decoupled from the cooperation and decisions of
great importance to Danish citizens and companies. For a small country with an open economy
like Denmark, the EU will remain an important
part of the answer to the challenges associated
with globalisation.
To effectively advance Danish interests in the
EU, it is also important to ensure that Danes and
Danish perspectives are present in the EU’s institutions. Within a few years, Denmark is expected
to become underrepresented in EU institutions, as
many of the Danes hired by EU institutions when
Denmark became a member in 1973 are now
approaching retirement. New appointments of
Danes in the EU institutions in recent years have
been insufficient to offset the pending departure
of Danish retirees. Having fewer Danes in the
EU’s institutions weakens Denmark’s access to
insight and influence in the EU. The government
will therefore strengthen its efforts to increase the
number of Danes employed in EU institutions.


-----

## Initiatives

#### In 2017-2018, the Danish government  will take the following initiatives:

                  - The government will continue to highly prioritise efforts to ensure a lean and efficient
EU, with a focus on concrete solutions to
cross-border challenges, particularly migration, security and growth.

                  - The government will strengthen efforts to
secure Denmark’s combined interests in the
forthcoming negotiations with the United
Kingdom. This includes an expansion of
Denmark’s permanent representation to the
EU and ensuring that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark has the necessary
resources to perform the secretariat function
for the Brexit Task Force.

                  - The government will strengthen the embassies in key European decision-making centres
(Berlin, Paris and London) in order to promote
Danish interests in the Brexit negotiations,
both in regards to specific sectors and the new
situation arising in the wake of Brexit.

                  - In the light of Brexit, the government will
actively expand its cooperation with traditional partners and seek new alliance partners
that share interests and values with Denmark.

                  - The government will intensify cooperation
with other budget restrictive EU Member
States, thereby ensuring that the EU’s financial framework and annual budgets reflect
the new economic situation in an EU of 27
Member States.

                  - The government will present an action plan
during the second half of 2017 with concrete
initiatives to increase the number of Danes
employed in EU institutions.


-----

## Globalisation – economic and techno­ logical diplomacy


##### The government will work to ensure that as many Danes as possible enjoy the maximum benefits of globalisation and  the technological development. This will be pursued through international engagement,  trade and cooperation. The specific tools are free trade, strengthened international presence, economic diplomacy, strategic partnerships, and last but not least, a targeted effort  to position Denmark pro- actively in the technological  and digital development.

In recent decades, globalisation has increased the
prosperity and improved the living conditions of
people around the world – including in Denmark.
But at the global level, not everyone has reaped
the benefits of these developments. Meanwhile,
technological development, digitisation and exponential growth in data and computing power – the
so-called fourth industrial revolution – is extensively impacting our economy, labour market and
society. The government wants to maximise the
benefits of globalisation and the technological
development for as many people as possible – in
Denmark and around the world. This is one of
the many reasons that the new UN Sustainable


Development Goals are so important. Most Danes
have a positive view of both globalisation and new
technologies. This is a good starting point. The
government’s ambition is also clear: We must reap
the full benefits of globalisation’s many possibilities. We must make full use of Denmark’s positions
of strength. Our societal model and companies
possess many of the solutions sought by others:
We have energy-efficient and green solutions. We
have strong export industries in a range of sectors,
including food and agriculture, cleantech, life
sciences and shipping. And we have one of the
most adaptable societies in Europe when it comes
to advances in digital technology. In terms of foreign policy this represents Danish “soft power”. We
have the capacity to influence more than our size
in itself would justify.
The international free trade agenda is of crucial interest to a small, open and export-oriented
economy such as the Danish. The government will
actively support EU free trade agreements with
third countries. The ratification of the EU’s free
trade agreement with Canada (CETA) plays an
important role, as it can provide renewed momentum for other free trade agreements with trade partners in Asia and the Americas. The government has
a special focus on completing an agreement with
Japan and resuming negotiations with the United
States when the basis for an ambitious and balanced agreement exists. Free trade creates growth
and jobs in Denmark. But free trade also contributes
to improving global standards in consumer protection, the environment and labour rights.
Danish exports and foreign investments provide the foundation for growth and employment
in Denmark. Therefore, Denmark must maintain
a strong international presence, pursuing bilateral
export and investment promotion activities in
support of Danish companies. The government


-----

will strengthen Denmark’s presence in the United
States at the state level, with a focus on California and Texas, which alone constitute two of the
world’s largest economies, and both of which
show significant interest in a range of Danish solutions, including green technologies. The United
States is Denmark’s second largest export market
and continues to grow in importance for our economy. Preliminary 2016 figures indicate that the
US is also the second largest investor in Denmark.
The government will also open a Danish embassy
in Africa’s largest country and fourth largest economy, Algeria. The potential of a strengthened presence in North Africa is great. The opening of an
embassy will significantly advance the conditions
of Danish companies in the region, and Algeria is
likewise a key regional player in the political and
economic spheres.
The government will increase its overall focus
on internationalisation of Danish businesses, in
recognition of the importance for Danish companies of international value chains, the rapid
technological developments, and increasing
international competition. Economic diplomacy has demonstrated its strength in terms of
opening doors to markets and concrete business
opportunities for Danish companies. This has
been achieved through strategic prioritisation of
markets and strong partnerships between public
and private players dedicated to influencing local
framework conditions and attracting investment
through targeted dialogue with foreign decision
makers. Meanwhile, a number of public-private
partnerships have effectively drawn international
attention to Danish business competencies and
solutions.
The opportunities for Danish companies in
export markets are also supported by investments from the Investment Fund for Developing


Countries and export guarantees from Denmark’s
Export Credit Agency. The government would like
to see further expansion of the activities by Denmark’s Export Credit Agency relating to high risk
markets with great potential. In cooperation with
the Investment Fund for Developing Countries
and a number of institutional investors, the government will establish a Sustainable Development
Goals Fund whose activities will include the use
of innovative new financing models. The government thus wishes to use the UN’s Sustainable
Development Goals as a platform for integrating
Danish export competencies with the global development agenda – for the benefit of both.
Great potential can be realised by a general
strengthening of efforts to promote Danish commercial strengths and attracting the necessary
knowledge, technology and investment. Therefore, the government intends to strengthen Denmark’s economic diplomacy through initiatives
targeting new emerging economies in i.e. Asia,
Latin America and other regions. These economic
diplomacy efforts will also target traditional
export markets such as the EU’s internal market,
not least Germany, as well as the UK, US and Japan.
The government will ensure that the travel activities of ministers also provide increasingly strong
support of these efforts.
Denmark’s engagement in emerging economies has been an important area of attention for
several years. In particular, Denmark has a strong
and broad-based engagement involving a range
of authorities and a so-called “comprehensive
strategic partnership” with China. The experiences
from these efforts have been extremely positive.
Denmark has also entered into high level strategic
partnerships with Japan, South Korea and Mexico.
The government sees promising potential in building and expanding upon the experiences gathered


-----

while promoting Denmark’s foreign and commercial interests through these agreements, which
draw on a broad spectrum of Danish experiences
and mutually supportive instruments.
Finally, Denmark has also positioned itself
pro-actively with the launch of tech diplomacy
(the “TechPlomacy” initiative) and the appointment of the world’s first tech ambassador. Leading
global technology companies and other digital
actors are influencing every aspect of Danish society and its citizens’ everyday lives, social as well as
work wise – including our security – to a vast and
growing extent that may even surpass the influence of many countries on Denmark. Therefore,
the government has designated digitisation and
technological development as a strategic priority
in Danish foreign policy.
The new initiative builds on the successful
efforts of Denmark’s Innovation Centres in seven
countries. The centres assist Danish companies
and research institutions with access to foreign
knowledge, networks, technology, capital and
markets. One of the latest steps was launched
with the new DenmarkBridge network under the
auspices of the Danish Growth Fund, focusing on
cooperation between companies in Denmark and
Silicon Valley. Denmark has also had success in
attracting investments from large tech companies
that have decided to establish new facilities in
Denmark. And Denmark has actively worked for
several years to shape the global framework for
the digital economy. Also at the domestic level, the
subject is a strong focus area, with new initiatives
such as the digital growth panel and the government’s “Partnership for Denmark’s Future”.
With the TechPlomacy initiative, the government will elevate Denmark’s broad-based international approach to the technology agenda to a
coordinated foreign policy priority that extends


beyond purely commercial considerations. Both
tech actors and countries have welcomed the new
initiative and point to the need for more international cooperation and norms relating to the
development and application of new technologies.
Tech diplomacy and the Innovation Centres
will serve as Denmark’s international “eyes and
ears” for the entire government, contributing to
collection of knowledge and information, policy
formulation and helping Danish society to adapt
to the digital realities of the 21st century. The government also wants to ensure a stronger Danish
voice that can contribute to promoting Danish
interests in the international tech community
and establish partnerships between Danish and
international stakeholders. The tech diplomacy
activities will entail foreign and security policy,
development policy, export and investment
promotion, and a range of sector policies. The
opportunities and challenges of the technology
agenda will also be pursued and addressed in
bilateral relations with other countries and in
relevant international fora. Moreover, Danish
digital strengths will be promoted, as well as the
positioning of Denmark as an attractive global hub
of knowledge and business.


-----

## Initiatives

#### In 2017-2018, the Danish government  will take the following initiatives:



- The government will strengthen Denmark’s
presence in the United States by opening two
new Consulates General in Silicon Valley and
Houston, respectively. The objective of these
new missions is to strengthen political and
commercial relations with the two most populous states in the US.

- The government will open an embassy in
Algiers. The embassy will help Danish businesses seize the commercial opportunities in
Algeria, while also playing an important role
in relation to the focus on instability, migration and terrorism in the Middle East and
North Africa.

- The government will work with institutional
investors to establish a Sustainable Development Goals Fund, linking Danish business
strengths with the UN Sustainable Development Goals.

- The government will launch a new strategic
framework for economic diplomacy, further
strengthening the efforts to internationalise
Danish business. Areas of focus in this respect
include access to new technologies and business models for Danish businesses, targeted
efforts to increase global sales of small and
medium-sized companies, and attraction of
knowledge- and technology-intensive investments.

- The government will identify high-value commercial projects abroad of particular interest
to Danish companies, and for which the
active support of the government and Danish
authorities is needed.



- The government will strengthen the coordination of ministers’ international travel activities
to further support the foreign policy and commercial interests of Denmark. Focus will be on
countries and sectors which the government
should pay particular attention to.

- The government will allocate resources to
launch a new effort to strengthen existing –
and build new – strategic partnerships with
emerging economies where Denmark has
clear political and economic interests at stake.

- The government will draw inspiration from
the existing Partnering with Denmark Initiative and post sector specialists in high-income
countries with significant export potential,
thereby promoting Danish positions of
strength in specific sectors.

- The government will build closer relations
with the global tech community, in an effort
spearheaded by the new tech ambassador.
Technological diplomacy will be prioritised
as a new key focus area in Denmark’s foreign
policy. The tech ambassador will be based
in Silicon Valley, but will be tasked with
promoting this agenda globally. The tech
ambassador’s work will be supported by
staffs in Silicon Valley and Copenhagen, as
well as close cooperation with Denmark’s
seven international innovation centres and
a number of digitisation advisors in selected
countries.


-----

# The Arctic

##### The government will work for  a peaceful and stable Arctic.  This will be promoted through dialogue with the other Arctic states, strengthening research opportunities and protecting  the environment, which must go hand in hand with the develop- ment of economic opportunities for the peoples of the region.

The Kingdom of Denmark has a fundamental
interest in a peaceful and stable Arctic, which
enables sustainable development in the region.
The melting of the sea ice opens new economic opportunities in the form of efficient sea
transport, extraction of natural resources and
increased tourism. The global climate challenges
are also leading to increased international focus
on climate research in the Arctic. The perspectives in the Arctic are just now beginning to come
into view.
With opportunities follow new challenges.
There is a need for increased monitoring – for purposes including stronger enforcement of sovereignty and better search and rescue services in the
area. Thus, in continuation of the 2016 analysis of
the Ministry of Defence’s future tasks in the Arctic,
the Danish Defence is in the process of strengthening its efforts in the Arctic. It is also important
that developments in the region are based on
effective protection of the fragile environment,
sustainable regulation of fishing and a transition
of commercial activities. The global threat picture


also applies to the Arctic region. It is crucial to the
government that solutions are found through a
close and equal cooperation within the Kingdom
of Denmark.
The government intends to launch a threetiered effort for economic development. The first
tier will involve strengthening multinational
efforts, particularly under the auspices of the
Arctic Council. Through close cooperation with
Finland, which holds the council chairmanship
for the period 2017-2019, we will put economic
development high on the agenda of the Arctic
Council and explore the opportunities for better
coordination with the Arctic Economic Council.
We will also work to ensure that economic development is a central element when defining the
Arctic Council’s strategic priorities for the next
10 years. Secondly, the government will take the
initiative to explore the possibilities of establishing an Arctic financing facility. Additionally, the
government will work for a more proactive utilisation of existing international financing tools in
the Arctic. Thirdly, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
will, in close cooperation with the authorities in
Greenland and the Faroe Islands, focus on market
opportunities for Greenlandic and Faroese businesses and opportunities for export promotion
campaigns in the most interesting markets. At
the same time, we will support efforts to promote
Greenland and the Faroe Islands as attractive
tourist destinations.
In addition to economic diplomacy, the government will work to give the Kingdom of Denmark a
stronger profile and better opportunities for international cooperation in the Arctic research community, based on the Arctic research agreement
adopted by the eight Arctic States in May 2017.
Furthermore, the Danish Ministry of Higher Education and Science and Greenlandic authorities


-----

will jointly explore the possibilities for establishing an international “research hub” in Greenland,
which can benefit Arctic research and education,
and potentially have positive effects on the local
economy and employment. Research is also part
of broader political dialogue with the EU and
Arctic Council observer states. The government
will work to ensure that the Arctic agenda is better
reflected in EU research.
By adopting the Ilulissat Declaration in 2008,
the five Arctic Coastal States – the Kingdom of
Denmark, the United States, Canada, Russia and
Norway – have committed to peaceful cooperation and dialogue when it comes to future
development in and around the Arctic Ocean,
and to resolve disputes and overlapping territorial claims through negotiations and on the basis
of the Law of the Sea and international law. In a
situation with increased tensions between the
West and Russia, strategic competition may arise
in the region. The Kingdom of Denmark will
continue to have a significant interest in avoiding
a military build-up in the Arctic. A region characterised by low tension is a fundamental requirement for economic development, which is in the
interests of all the Arctic States. This particularly
applies to Russia, which likely has the biggest
economic interests in the region. The government
will therefore work to ensure that the 10-year
anniversary of the Ilulissat Declaration in 2018
is utilised by the states to highlight and reaffirm
these obligations.
The government will strengthen the Kingdom
of Denmark’s Arctic profile and capacity for exercising stronger and more consistent influence over
developments in the Arctic. This will be pursued
through a stronger dialogue among the relevant
entities within the Kingdom of Denmark. The
framework will be the Kingdom of Denmark’s


Arctic Strategy and the dialogue will be based on
the Arctic Council’s strategic work. The purpose
will be to define and establish a comprehensive
proposal as to which strategic priorities the Arctic
Council should adopt. The results of this process
are to be converted into significant influence for
the Kingdom of Denmark.


-----

## Initiatives

#### In 2017-2018, the Danish government  will take the following initiatives:

                  - The government will collaborate closely with
Greenland, the Faroe Islands and international partners to ensure that the fundamental right of the Arctic region’s four million
inhabitants to sustainable economic development – in line with the UN’s Sustainable
Development Goals – remains high on the
Arctic Council’s agenda. In connection with
these efforts, the government will also explore
the possibilities for mobilising international
financing and strengthening the cooperation
with Greenland and the Faroe Islands to promote export and tourism opportunities.

                  - The government and Greenlandic authorities will jointly explore the possibilities for
establishing an international research hub in
Greenland.

                  - The government will – in close cooperation
with Greenland and the Faroe Islands –
address the security policy challenges associated with the extensive new opportunities for
development in the Arctic region.

                  - The government will use the 10th anniversary
of the Ilulissat Declaration to draw attention
to the political obligations and expand the
practical collaboration for shared interests,
based on a desire to ensure that the Arctic
remains a region characterized by low tension
and constructive cooperation.

                  - The government will take the initiative to
establish an annual Arctic Dialogue on the
Kingdom of Denmark’s strategic efforts in the
Arctic, thereby strengthening cooperation
between public authorities within the Kingdom of Denmark.


-----

June 2017

2016/17:27

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark
Asiatisk Plads 2
1448 Copenhagen K
Tel: +45 33 92 00 00

ISBN 978-87-93422-79-7 (digital version)

Design, cover: e-Types
Design, content: e-Types Daily

The publication is available for download at
um.dk / regeringen.dk


-----

-----

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark
Asiatisk Plads 2
1448 Copenhagen K
Tel: +45 33 92 00 00


-----

