INTERNATIONAL SECURITY

AND ESTONIA
# 2021


-----

Translation by Margus Elings, Refiner Translations OÜ

Editing by Scott Abel, Tekstikoda OÜ

Design: Taivo Org

Illustrations: Joosep Maripuu, Taivo Org, Bigstock, Shutterstock, Scanpix

ISSN 2613-3261 (print)

ISSN 2613-327X (online)


-----

#### CONTENTS


Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

Russia’s foreign policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

From crisis to crisis:

30 years of Russian policy in its ‘Near Abroad’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

The standoff between the Belarusian government

and its people . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10

Lukashenka’s departure is a prerequisite for

economic reforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

Russia in search of a new head of state for Belarus . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14

Russia continues its aggression against Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16

Violent upheaval in the Caucasus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

Russia in Africa: ambitions and reality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24

Russia’s domestic politics and economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

2020 constitutional amendments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

Increasing domestic tensions and the Kremlin’s response . . . . 35

Russia’s socio-economic downturn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

The Russian Armed Forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45

‘New type’ of airborne assault units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50

The ‘Belarus military district’ – military cooperation

between Russia and Belarus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53

Russian special services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59

GRU psychological operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  60

Russian special services’ influence operations in cyberspace . . . 65

Growing pressure from China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69

Chinese influence operations move to the West . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73

Sinicising Chinese technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76

China and Russia – a practical partnership 78


-----

#### FOREWORD

his is the Estonian Foreign
Intelligence Service’s sixth
annual report. The reason why

## T

we continue with this tradition remains
the same – to offer the public both
in Estonia and abroad an expert view
of the security environment and the
threats our service deals with. Considering Estonia’s geopolitical situation,
the range of topics should not come as
a surprise.

The year 2020 was a good lesson for
anyone making predictions. Like everyone else, when finalising last year’s
report in January, we failed to predict
how strong an impact the pandemic
would have on global developments.
Although we have lived in a changed
world for the last 12 months in many
ways, the security environment around
us has largely remained the same.
National interests and patterns of behaviour do not change overnight. Still,
the coronavirus crisis offered new opportunities for authoritarian regimes to
exert influence and accelerated already
existing trends. We could say that in a
time of universal mask-wearing, some
masks also fell off.

In this report, we take a closer look
at Moscow’s view of international
trends. Despite the Kremlin’s carefully


**MIKK MARRAN**
Director General of the Estonian
Foreign Intelligence Service

cultivated image of derzhava (a great
power), both at home and abroad, the
past year once again showed us the
fragility and controversy of Russia’s
influence in its neighbouring region. It
is clear that the dictatorship in Belarus, nurtured by its eastern neighbour,
has no long-term perspective, and we
must be prepared for another year of
unexpected developments. The events
in the South Caucasus have significantly increased Russia’s influence in
the region, but have also cast doubt
on Russia’s ability – and motivation
– to guarantee stability. A disparity
between image building and actual
influence is also visible in Russia’s
activities in Africa.


-----

THE CORONAVIRUS

CRISIS OFFERED NEW

OPPORTUNITIES FOR

AUTHORITARIAN REGIMES

TO EXERT INFLUENCE. IN A

TIME OF UNIVERSAL MASK
WEARING, SOME MASKS

ALSO FELL OFF.

but a topical issue. We also take a look
at the Russian special services’ “best
practices” in cyberwarfare against
democracies.

As always in recent years, we cannot
ignore China, whose activities raise
new security issues every year. We talk
about China’s increasingly confrontational foreign policy, as well as its
influence operations and the threats
of ‘sinicising’ Chinese technology. Like
our partners, we, too, keep a close eye
on China’s tightening co-operation
with Russia, a relationship mostly
dominated by Beijing.

While we live in a complex security environment, I remain confident that the
Estonian Foreign Intelligence Service,
with its domestic and international
partners, will be able to provide decision-makers with the necessary awareness and sufficient early warning.

_Bonne lecture!_


Over the last year, Russia’s most significant domestic developments alongside the coronavirus crisis included
constitutional amendments introduced
by executing a mediocre maskirovka,
as well as growing tensions in the regions and an assassination attempt on
the opposition leader Alexei Navalny.
Dramatic fluctuations in oil prices in
the first half of the year and ongoing
international sanctions have in turn
raised questions about the sustainability of Russia’s economic model. In
a situation where the average Russian
has experienced falling living standards
for years, widespread protests should
not be ruled out. At any rate, we are
seeing increasing signs of disapproval.

This report also delves into the military
exercise Zapad, where the Russian and
Belarusian armed forces train for largescale war against NATO in the Baltic
and Far North region. We also look at
key developments within the Russian
armed forces, such as efforts to modernise the airborne forces. The crisis in
Belarus led us to analyse the co-operation between the Russian and Belarusian Union State’s armed forces – the
area where Minsk and Moscow have
achieved the greatest level of integration over the decades. As concerns the
Russian special services, this time we
focus on GRU psychological operations – well-forgotten old practices,
rather than anything completely new,


-----

### RUSSIA’S FOREIGN POLICY


_Foreign policy during the pandemic: the Eurasian_
_Economic Union Summit in May 2020_


SOURCE: KREMLIN.RU, CC BY 4.0


**Russia expects the COVID-19 pandemic to weaken Western**

**unity.**


espite creating some limitations, the COVID-19 pandemic
has not changed Russia’s long
## D

term strategic goals. On the contrary,
the Kremlin believes that the pandemic
will accelerate two trends that Russia
itself is working to promote: a transition towards multipolarity in international relations and declining Western
influence on the global stage.


Russia acknowledges that the trend
towards multipolarity leads to a greater risk of conflict, as the major powers
increasingly compete for resources and
spheres of influence.

Regardless, Russia expects to benefit
from this trend, as it sees multipolarity as an opportunity to increase its
room for geopolitical manoeuvring,


-----

 _An example of the Russian-initiated_



_smear campaign on social media_
_against the Oxford-AstraZeneca_
_vaccine_

especially at the expense of Western
powers.

The Russian leadership believes that
the global epidemic will force the
West to focus on domestic policy and
economic problems, cause populist and
extremist movements to emerge, and
ultimately undermine the values-based
and institutional unity of Western societies. For its part, Russia is prepared
to add fuel to the flames to encourage
these trends. Therefore, 2021 will
again see Russian influence operations
designed to create and deepen divides
within and between Western societies, including at the EU level. This will
include attempts to discredit Western-produced COVID-19 vaccines, as
with the Oxford–AstraZeneca vaccine,
which Russian propaganda labelled
as a “monkey vaccine”, followed by
attempts to spread this information in
Western media. With these smear campaigns, Russia hopes, on the one hand,
to create a more favourable position for
its own vaccines on the world market
and, on the other hand, to promote
its strategic ambition to show itself as
being the first among the major powers
to provide a solution to the COVID-19
crisis.


In the longer term, Russia’s goal with
the EU is to get the sanctions relaxed
or lifted without making any concessions in return. However, Russia’s
behaviour remains cynical, as illustrated
by its response to the poisoning of
Alexei Navalny, the investigation into
the downing of flight MH17, cyberattacks on Western institutions and
assassinations associated with the
Russian special services in European
cities in recent years.

The inauguration of President Joe
­Biden will not significantly change
Russia’s agenda towards the US – it
will remain largely confrontational. Still,
Russia will likely try to take advantage
of arms control negotiations and the
extension of the New START treaty to
appear as a constructive partner while
retaining its massive superiority in
non-strategic nuclear weapons.


-----

###### FROM CRISIS TO CRISIS:  30 YEARS OF RUSSIAN POLICY  IN ITS ‘NEAR ABROAD’

**While Russia seeks to undermine Western influence on the**

**international stage, it is important to keep an eye on Russia’s**

**neighbouring region, where the Kremlin’s policy is aimed at**

**establishing itself as the dominant force.**


The Kremlin’s strategic priority is its
neighbouring region, where Ukraine
and Belarus are the priority countries
in maintaining Russia’s sphere of influence. Since the collapse of the Soviet
Union, Russia has strived to secure
economic and military dominance in
the region and deflect any interference
by competing international powers. At
the same time, the Nagorno-Karabakh
conflict, which escalated in September
2020 and claimed thousands of lives,
showed that multipolarity will inevitably reach Russia’s own backyard, as it
has happened in the South Caucasus
with Turkey firmly asserting itself in
the region’s balance of power. Also,
China has stepped up its political influence in Central Asia, as a side effect of
economic investment.


A major power’s desire to establish
itself as a leader in its neighbouring
region is understandable, especially if
aimed at promoting stability and economic development. However, looking
at the regional situation in Russia’s
neighbourhood 30 years after the
collapse of the Soviet Union – except
for the Baltic States – a legitimate
question arises: Where are the stability
and economic development? Almost all
the countries in the region are weighed
down by territorial conflict or internal
crisis (see map on pages 8-9). Whence
this drastic difference from the Eastern
European and Baltic countries now
integrated into the EU and NATO?

A proverb perfectly characterises
Russia’s activities in its immediate


THE SIDE EFFECTS OF MULTIPOLARITY: RUSSIA MUST

ACKNOWLEDGE GROWING TURKISH AND CHINESE

INFLUENCE IN ITS NEIGHBOURING REGION.


-----

_South Ossetia is separated from Georgia by Russian-installed_
_barbed wire fences_


SOURCE: SERGEI BOBYLEV / TASS


neighbourhood – you reap what you
sow. Russia has consistently sought to
use its political, economic and military
leverage to impede these countries’ integrating and developing relations with
Euro-Atlantic organisations. To this
end, Russia works against establishing
the rule of law, civil society and free
elections in its neighbouring countries,
fearing that democratic ideas might
also catch on among the Russian population. Russia’s ruling elite sees these
ideas as an existential threat to the
survival of its “power vertical”.

As a result, much of Russia’s neighbouring region is still plagued by


territorial disputes, ethnic confrontations and domestic crises, posing a
major obstacle to socio-economic and
political development. And this trend
appears to be deteriorating – in 2020
alone, we saw the Nagorno-Karabakh
conflict as well as the domestic crises
in Belarus and Kyrgyzstan escalate.
Considering that Russia’s policies
in the neighbouring region remain
unchanged and do not contribute to
establishing democratic principles and
free elections, the coming years will
highly likely bring new crises in the
region, creating both direct and indirect
security threats for Estonia and more
broadly for Europe.


-----

#### TERRITORIAL CONFLICTS AND CRISES IN RUSSIA’S


#### NEIGHBOURING REGION

**ValgeveneBelarus**

Ulatuslikud protestid ja Widespread protests and a
riigisisene kriis jõhkralt domestic crisis following the
Aleksander Lukašenka flagrantly fraudulent presidential
kasuks võltsitud election rigged in favour of
presidendivalimiste järel. Alyaksandr Lukashenka.

**DonbassDonbass**

Ukraina territoorium, mis on Vene Ukrainian territory under the
okupatsioonijõudude kontrolli all. control of Russian occupying
Territooriumil Venemaa varjatud forces. Covert Russian military
sõjaline kohalolek.presence in the territory.

**Transnistria** **Crimea**

**Transnistria** **Krimm**

Moldovan territory under de Ukrainian territory occupied

Moldova territoorium, mis on Venemaa poolt annekteeritud

facto Russian control. Overt by Russia and used as a

de facto Venemaa kontrolli all. Ukraina territoorium, mida

Russian military presence in military bridgehead in the

Territooriumil Venemaa avalik Venemaa kasutab sõjalise

the territory. Black Sea.

sõjaline kohalolek. sillapeana Mustal merel.


-----

‘CONTROLLED INSTABILITY’

It is in Russia’s interests to keep its neighbouring
region in a state of fragile balance. Therefore,
Russia wants to see the following features in its
neighbouring countries and seeks to maintain or
help instigate them:

» limited development of the rule of law

» absence of free elections

» repressed civil society

**AbkhaziaAbhaasia**

Georgian territory under de Georgia territoorium, mis on
facto Russian control. Overt de facto Venemaa kontrolli all.
Russian military presence in the Territooriumil Venemaa avalik
territory.sõjaline kohalolek.


» limited relations with the West

» territorial conflict, with Russia as the kingpin

» Russian troop presence in the form of a
military base or otherwise

These conditions allow Russia to manipulate the
regional level of escalation as it deems necessary
but consequently create a permanent risk of
conflict in the region.



**Lõuna-Osseetia**

**Kyrgyzstan**

Georgian territory under de **Kõrgõzstan**

Georgia territoorium, mis on

facto Russian control. Overt Domestic crisis following the 4 October

de facto Venemaa kontrolli Riigisisene kriis 4. oktoobril 2020

Russian military presence in 2020 presidential election leading to

all. Territooriumil Venemaa toimunud presidendivalimiste järel,

the territory.avalik sõjaline kohalolek. allegations of extensive vote-buying by võimuerakondi süüdistati

the political parties in power.ulatuslikus häälte ostmises.

**Nagorno-Karabakh**

**Mägi-Karabahh**

Territorial dispute between Armenia

Armeenia ja Aserbaidžaani vaidlusalune

and Azerbaijan. Russian military

territoorium, lahendamata territoriaalse

presence since November 2020,

staatusega. Alates november 2020

under the auspices of a peacekeeping

Venemaa sõjaline kohalolek rahuvalve

mission.

egiidi all.

SOURCE: ESTONIAN FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SERVICE


-----

###### THE STANDOFF BETWEEN THE BELARUSIAN GOVERNMENT AND ITS PEOPLE

**Unprecedented protests in Belarus are eroding the regime’s**

**foundations.**


In 2020, Alyaksandr Lukashenka’s
plans for a smooth transition to his
sixth presidency failed. Already unhappy
with the low standard of living, Belarusians had grown weary with Lukashenka after his 26 years in office. In the
spring, the president’s indifference towards the COVID-19 crisis caused public
dissatisfaction to escalate further.

The presidential election saw Lukashenka’s hitherto seemingly unshakable position threatened by the emergence of
three main rivals: Viktar Babaryka, the
former head of Belgazprombank, Valery
Tsapkala, a former diplomat and leader
of the Belarus High Tech Park, and
Siarhei Tsikhanouski, a popular blogger.
They gave people hope that change was
possible in Belarus, despite the country
having remained in Lukashenka’s iron
grip for over two decades. This was underlined by the fact that both Babaryka
and Tsapkala belong in the country’s
elite and represent dissatisfaction within Lukashenka’s own camp.

Lukashenka’s decision to eliminate
the three rivals from the competition
before the election betrayed a fear for
his dictatorship’s survival. Tsikhanouski,
who became popular with Lukashenka’s


voters mainly in the rural areas, was the
first to be arrested. Next was Babaryka,
the preferred candidate among voters in
the cities, who managed to gather four
times the required 100,000 support
signatures, which is the registration
threshold for a presidential candidate.
Tsapkala left the country, realising that
his arrest was imminent.

Representatives of the regime assumed that eliminating the competition
would pave the way for Lukashenka’s
re-election. They did not expect that
the nomination of Tsikhanouski’s wife,
Sviatlana Tsikhanouskaya, would cause
a large portion of the support for the
ousted candidates to unite behind her
candidacy. The authorities’ repressive
actions against the people involved in
her campaign, her supporters, and the
journalists who covered their activities
had the unexpected effect of boosting
Tsikhanouskaya’s popularity.

The politically heated summer culminated in the presidential election on 9
August, as Lukashenka declared himself the winner with 80.2% of the votes.
Due to massive vote-rigging at the
polling stations, even the Central Election Commission could not know the


-----

_Belarusian women play a_
_key role in anti-government_
_protests_

SOURCE: EPA / STRINGER

actual support figures for Lukashenka
and Tsikhanouskaya. Belarusians, who
had attended or seen footage from
Tsikhanouskaya’s crowded campaign
events, felt more clearly than ever that
their votes had not counted. They came
to the streets in numbers unseen in
the country’s recent history. Protests
became a new daily reality in Belarus.

The irresponsible behaviour of the
authorities towards human health
during the first wave of the coronavirus
outbreak intensified the politicisation of
the population. While the demonstrations seen in recent years have tended
to avoid politics, this time there was a
clear demand for Lukashenka’s resignation and a new election.

The election events showed that
Belarusian society is changing, and the
authorities are unable to adapt. The
regime is struggling to find the means
to quell dissent, save for NKVD-style
intimidation, brutal violence and mass
arrests. Such methods create more
dissatisfaction, even in the “power vertical”; officials have distanced


themselves from the elite and power
structures to join the protesters. There
have been strikes in state-owned enterprises. Indeed, more than the protests,
Lukashenka feared workers’ strikes, as
these would hit the regime’s reputation
as well as the country’s economy.

Lukashenka is not one to relinquish
power voluntarily. He quickly recovers
after each setback. His competitors are
behind bars. The well-financed power
structures received generous bonuses
for suppressing the protests. The civil
service does not want to risk uncertainty and therefore, remain loyal to
Lukashenka.

The People’s Assembly in February
2021 was Lukashenka’s attempt to put
on a spectacle of a social dialogue on
the country’s future and to bide his time
to regain control. However, in the eyes
of a significant part of the population,
Lukashenka has lost his legitimacy
as president and Belarus has turned
towards change. Even if the protests
subside, Belarusians will not calm down
until Lukashenka has left office.


-----

###### LUKASHENKA’S DEPARTURE  IS A PREREQUISITE FOR  ECONOMIC REFORMS

**Improving living standards in Belarus would require economic**

**reforms, which would inevitably cause a social crisis.**


The root cause of Belarus’s low standard of living is its failure to carry out
economic reforms following the breakup of the Soviet Union. Belarus has an
externally subsidised state economy
based on socialist planning principles,
which has reached the end of its life.
As social modernisation has been
artificially delayed for decades, reforms
would cause a shock.

The Belarusian economy is heavily
dependent on Russia. All but a few
economic sectors are under Russian
influence, either in terms of export
output, import input or credit. Such
dependence can only be shed through
long-term purposeful action, which
requires political will.

As well as the overall dependence on
foreign trade with Russia, it is important to recognise that the single largest
area of activity in the Belarusian economy is the combination of the food
industry and related agriculture, whose
exports are aimed solely at the Russian
market.


There are no good options available for
a sharp reorientation of Belarusian agricultural exports; the close proximity
of EU markets means that selling food
outside the Russian market would require adapting to a highly competitive
environment and improving production
efficiency, which takes time. Without
the Russian market, structural reform
in this sector would force 5-6% of the
electorate to change jobs, a painful
process for many, which would likely
turn them against the new power after
such an upheaval. Other industries
would have better prospects of finding
new export markets (including subcontracting for industrial producers), and
the negative social impact of reforms
would be smaller for them.

Belarus’s oil and IT sectors, which
have received a lot of media attention,
do not face as formidable a reform
challenge as the agriculture and food
industry, nor do they share the same
socio-political significance because
their contributions to employment and
GDP are modest.


-----

THE STRUCTURE OF BELARUS'S ECONOMY

16%


14%

12%


10%

8%


6%

4%


|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||W|Summary o holesale and|f agricultur retail trade, s|e and food ervices|industry|
||||||Construction|||||
|||Real esta|te services Tr|ansport and c|ommunicatio|ns||||
|||||||Agricult|ure and fores|try||
|Financial se|Chemical i rvices|ndustry F|ood industry Pro|duction of m|achinery and|equipment||||
|Produc building|tion of materials|Electricit O|y, gas and wa ther manufa|ter supply ctured article|s|||||
|Production nd petroleum|P M P of coke P products|ublic utility an etals industr aper, cellulose roduction of t|d social servi y timber and ransport veh|ces wood product icles|s|||||


0% 2% 4% 6% 8% 10% 12% 14% 16% 18% 20%

Share of the labour force


The agriculture and food industries form Belarus’s largest group of industries in terms of
their combined impact on both employment and GDP.

SOURCE: ESTONIAN FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SERVICE


A key economic issue concerning
Belarus’s political process is the speed
at which the country will manage to
reform its labour market. Whether and
where new employment will be found


for the labour force released as a result
of structural reforms will depend on
the choices of Belarusian voters in the
next elections.


UNLOCKING BELARUS’S FUTURE WILL REQUIRE A MAJOR

OVERHAUL OF ITS LABOUR MARKET – HUNDREDS OF

THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE WILL NEED NEW EMPLOYMENT.


-----

###### RUSSIA IN SEARCH OF A NEW HEAD OF STATE FOR BELARUS

**Russia is unsure about how to keep Belarus in its sphere of**

**influence after a controlled transfer of power.**


The tried-and-tested relationship
between the Kremlin and Alyaksandr
Lukashenka spanning the past 26
years shows that Russia has always
supported Lukashenka in elections,
despite occasional tensions. Lukashenka has kept the strategically important
neighbour under control, ensuring
that it remains in Russia’s sphere of
influence and preventing its integration
with the West.

The scale and duration of the protests
following the presidential election in
Belarus came as an unpleasant surprise
to the Russian leadership. After initial
confusion, the Kremlin decided to continue to publicly support Lukashenka as
the legitimate president, at least in the
short term. Over the years, Lukashenka
has monopolised relations with Russia
in Belarus, which means that Russia
is unable to find another candidate to
replace him quickly. At the height of the


protests, Russia’s leadership decided
to take control of the media conversation about the events in Belarus. RT
(formerly Russia Today) propagandists
were sent to Belarus to spin a narrative of a Western attack on Belarusian
sovereignty. Russian security operatives were also placed on the ground
to curb the protests and disrupt their
organization.

Russia’s political and financial assistance to Belarus comes with special
conditions attached. Russia conducted
a thorough audit of Belarus’s public finances before granting the loan assistance agreed in September 2020; one
of the major criticisms was unjustified
internal security spending.

While it extends a helping hand, Russia
is simultaneously using the political
crisis in Belarus and Lukashenka’s
weakened domestic and foreign policy


THE LONGER THE KREMLIN BACKS ALYAKSANDR

LUKASHENKA, THE MORE IT RISKS BELARUSIANS’

ALIENATION FROM RUSSIA.


-----

_After initial confusion, the_
_Kremlin decided to continue_
_to support Lukashenka, at_
_least in the short term_

SOURCE: VALERY SHARIFULIN /

TASS


position to expand its interests and
strengthen its influence in Belarus.
The country is being pressured to draft
constitutional amendments that Russia
believes would calm the street protests
and allow for a controlled change of
power. It would be in Russia’s interests
to have a weak president and several
centres of power vying for the Kremlin’s
attention, forming a pool from which to
find people loyal to the Kremlin.

The Kremlin knows that continued
support for Lukashenka jeopardises


the attitude of Belarusians towards
Russia, which has so far been positive. But Russia also wants to avoid
Lukashenka being ousted by protesters
at all costs, which could encourage the
people in Russia to follow suit. Russia
would like to see Lukashenka’s successor to be predictable and loyal to the
Kremlin. However, there are no easy
solutions for Russia to ensure that
the successor is aligned with Russia’s
interests, while also preventing the
strengthening of Western influence in
Belarus.


-----

###### RUSSIA CONTINUES ITS AGGRESSION AGAINST UKRAINE

**Russia is pressuring Ukraine to recognise the representatives**

**of the occupying forces as legitimate negotiating partners.**


Russia’s occupation of Crimea continues, and no progress has been made
towards a settlement of the conflict
in eastern Ukraine, despite Ukraine’s
efforts. Although armed clashes along
the Donbass “contact line” are significantly fewer after another ceasefire,
in force from 27 July 2020, there is no
political solution in sight.

The reintegration of the occupied Donbass into Ukraine under the conditions
demanded by Russia is unacceptable
to the Ukrainian authorities. However,
Russia is playing for time, expecting
that an unresolved conflict will sooner
or later force the Ukrainian leadership
to make concessions.

The Normandy Summit on 9 December 2019 has not been followed up,
and many of the agreements reached
there have not been implemented. In
the negotiations to resolve the conflict


in the Trilateral Contact Group, Russia is putting pressure on Ukraine
to recognise the occupying forces’
representatives as legitimate partners,
which is obviously unacceptable to
Ukraine.

The Russian side is increasingly
blaming Ukraine for withdrawing from
the Minsk agreements, most recently finding a pretext during the local
elections in Ukraine, criticising the
Ukrainian parliament’s decision to rule
out elections in the occupied Donbass.
Although Ukraine would have been
prepared to consider holding elections
in the eastern occupied territories, this
is not conceivable under conditions
that make it impossible to comply with
Ukrainian law.

The reality in the occupied territories of
eastern Ukraine is determined by the
occupying powers, which can restore


RUSSIA IS PLAYING FOR TIME, EXPECTING THAT AN

UNRESOLVED CONFLICT WILL SOONER OR LATER FORCE

THE UKRAINIAN LEADERSHIP TO MAKE CONCESSIONS.


-----

RUSSIAN FORCES IN EASTERN UKRAINE
– 1st AND 2nd ARMY CORPS

**Kramatorsk**

**Lugansk**

**xxx**

**Debaltseve** **2nd Army Corps**

**Gorlivka**

**UKRAINE**

**Donetsk**

**xxx**

**1st Army Corps**

Personnel:
35 000

Tanks:
481

**RUSSIA**

Armoured
vehicles:
914

Artillery:

**Taganrog**

720

**Mariupol**

MRLs:

The occupying forces are equipped with tanks, armoured

202

vehicles, artillery and multiple rocket launchers in


quantities that only a few European nations can match.

SOURCE: MINISTRY OF DEFENCE OF UKRAINE


-----

military pressure on Ukraine at any
time with the help of Russian-led and
equipped armed forces. The occupying
forces have tanks, armoured vehicles,
artillery and multiple rocket launchers
(MRLs) in quantities that only a few
European nations can match (see map
and table). The presence of such a
threat in the occupied part of Ukraine,
a European nation, is a clear sign of
Russia’s unwillingness to renounce
aggression.

The situation in eastern Ukraine and
the search for a solution to the conflict
have unjustifiably sidelined the issue
of the occupation of Crimea. Russia
feels confident and has not made the
slightest concessions on Crimea. On
the contrary, using the difficulties with
freshwater supply to Crimea, Russia
is seeking to present the victim as the
perpetrator, condemning Ukraine for
shutting off the water canal supplying
Crimea in 2014. Russia is attempting
to turn the Crimean water supply issue
into a domestic policy divide in Ukraine,
creating the illusion that Russia could
make concessions in the Donbass if
Ukraine restored the water supply.

Russia fully supports pro-Russian forces in Ukrainian politics, who are willing


to accept Russia’s occupation of Crimea
and the resolution of the conflict in
eastern Ukraine on the terms dictated
by Russia. In Belarus’s case, Russia has
warned Western powers against interfering in the country’s internal affairs
while imposing no such restriction on
itself when it comes to Ukraine.

In the run-up to elections in Ukraine,
the Russian leadership has extended
particular hospitality to the politicians
of the Ukrainian Opposition Platform
– For Life. President Putin’s longtime
acquaintance, Ukrainian oligarch and
member of parliament Viktor Medvedchuk, is a frequent visitor with the
Russian head of state. Before the 25


-----

 _Ukrainian opposition politician_



_Viktor Medvedchuk in a meeting_
_with Russian President Vladimir_
_Putin on 6 October 2020_

SOURCE: ALEXEI DRUZHININ / TASS

that Ukrainians should look to Russia
for security and development. Medvedchuk also promoted the Russian
coronavirus vaccine, claiming he had
achieved immunity with the help of
the excellent Russian formula while on
holiday in Crimea and asked Putin to
allocate vaccine to Ukraine. This way
Medvedchuk became a part of Russia’s
massive vaccine campaign and put
pressure on the Ukrainian government,
as a vaccine procurement from Russia
would come with political strings
attached. Medvedchuk also managed
to negotiate a promise to loosen the
sanctions against Ukraine from the
Russian president; indeed, only a week
later, Russia exempted three Ukrainian
companies from restrictions.

With such unabashed influence activities, Russia hopes to help Ukrainian
political forces that would prefer to
gravitate towards Moscow and oppose
Ukraine’s chosen European path.


October 2020 local elections in Ukraine,
Medvedchuk was one of the few to be
granted an audience with Putin, otherwise wary of face-to-face meetings due
to the coronavirus threat. After such
meetings, the main message sent to
the public is a declaration of the inseparable destinies and close ties between
Ukraine and Russia.

The visit by Medvedchuk, who controls an extensive media network in
Ukraine, was intended to influence the
Ukrainian electorate, convincing them


RUSSIA SUPPORTS UKRAINIAN POLITICAL FORCES

THAT GRAVITATE TOWARDS MOSCOW.


-----

###### VIOLENT UPHEAVAL IN THE CAUCASUS

**The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict resulted in a significantly**

**increased Russian military presence in the South Caucasus.**


THE REASONS AND
PRECONDITIONS FOR
GOING TO WAR

The accepted view is that war breaks
out when there are the readiness,
capability and opportunity to start
military action. This means that one
side of the conflict is prepared to
use military force, deems its military
capabilities sufficient to succeed on
the battlefield and sees a favourable
window of opportunity.

Before starting hostilities in Nagorno-Karabakh, the Azerbaijani
leadership was convinced that the
conflict would not be resolved through
negotiations, at least not in a way it
considered acceptable. At the same
time, Azerbaijan had been purposefully
investing in developing its military capabilities for years. Arms and defence
procurements had been accompanied
by large-scale military exercises and
Turkish-backed training, which together had significantly improved the


On Sunday morning, 27 September
2020, the Azerbaijani Armed Forces
launched an offensive in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict zone. Armenian and Nagorno-Karabakh units were
hit by massive indirect artillery fire
along the entire contact line, followed
by an armour offensive. The defenders
were initially able to hold their positions, but the outcome of the conflict,
which lasted almost six weeks, was
clear – Armenia suffered a military
defeat. With a ceasefire agreement
that came into force in the early hours
of 10 November 2020, Azerbaijan
regained control of a large part of
Nagorno-Karabakh itself and seven
districts surrounding the separatist
region. These are areas that the central
government of Azerbaijan lost to Armenia in the First Nagorno-Karabakh
War ending in 1994. A status quo lasting more than a quarter of a century
had been broken with a major political
upheaval for the South Caucasus more
broadly.


-----

NAGORNO-KARABAKH AFTER THE CEASEFIRE

RUSSIA
GEORGIA


AZERBAIJAN

Yerevan

ARMENIA

TURKEY
Stepanakert

IRAN

areas under Armenian control and secured by Russian peacekeepers following the ceasefre agreement

areas once again controlled by Azerbaijan following the ceasefre agreement

the administrative boundaries of the Nagorno-Karabakh autonomous oblast under the Soviet Union

SOURCE: ESTONIAN FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SERVICE


-----

_Alongside reconnaissance and attack drones,_ SOURCE: ARMENIAN MINISTRY OF
_traditional indirect fire played an important role in the_ DEFENCE VIA REUTERS
_Nagorno-Karabakh war. The photograph shows an_
_Armenian fighter operating a D-30 howitzer_


Azerbaijani Armed Forces’ military
capabilities.

The last necessary condition – a favourable opportunity – was presented
by a combination of several factors.
The most important of these was the
Turkish political leadership’s readiness
to support Azerbaijan both politically
and militarily, at a time when Armenia
and its strategic ally Russia had been
hit hard by the coronavirus pandemic. The Western powers, too, were
preoccupied with the fight against
the coronavirus, economic issues and
domestic policy.


Two other factors probably played a
role in Azerbaijani long-term thinking. First, Armenia’s growing defence
budget and rearmament efforts – in
another five years, Azerbaijan might
not have enjoyed the military superiority it did in autumn 2020.

Second, the COVID-19 pandemic and
the accompanying economic crisis
would have likely affected Azerbaijan’s
domestic political stability – growing
dissatisfaction in society might have
called into question President Ilham
Aliyev’s holding on to power. A military
victory in Nagorno-Karabakh, on the


-----

THE SECOND NAGORNO
KARABAKH WAR WAS

ALSO A DEFEAT

FOR INTERNATIONAL

ORGANISATIONS AND THE

POST-COLD WAR SECURITY

ARCHITECTURE IN GENERAL.

by both Armenia itself and the wider
international community. Nevertheless, Armenia lost the war. This could
jeopardise Russia’s credibility as a
guarantor of the security of its allies in
the future.

Turkey, in turn, has emerged as a
regional powerhouse shaping the political situation in the South Caucasus.
And in addition to a Russian presence,
there is now a permanent Turkish military presence on Azerbaijani territory.

As well as Armenia, the Second Nagorno-Karabakh War was also a defeat
for international organisations and the
post-Cold War security architecture in
general, because two major regional
powers essentially decided the outcome of the war. The content and style
of this agreement are reminiscent
of the spheres-of-influence thinking
and power politics that characterised
international relations in the 19th and
20th centuries.


other hand, represented a historic
achievement for Azerbaijanis and will
continue to legitimise the country’s
current political system for years to
come.

POLITICAL
CONSEQUENCES

The main consequence of the Second Nagorno-Karabakh War is the
strengthening of Russian and Turkish influence in the South Caucasus.
Russia’s military presence in the
region has grown significantly. Within
Azerbaijan’s territory, who won the
conflict on the battlefield, there now is
an enclave secured by Russian peacekeepers, a solution that both Armenia
and Azerbaijan had previously opposed
for years. Furthermore, Armenia will be
increasingly dependent on Russia, with
the safety of the Armenians remaining
in Nagorno-Karabakh and the military
security of Armenia itself now directly
dependent on Russia’s goodwill. This
will affect Armenia’s domestic and
foreign policy in the future. On the
other hand, the course and outcome of
the war also involve risks for Russia.
Armenia’s alliance with Russia was
seen as a strategic security guarantee


-----

###### RUSSIA IN AFRICA:  AMBITIONS AND REALITY

_President of Egypt Abdel Fattah el-Sisi and Vladimir_
_Putin at the Russia-Africa Summit in Sochi_


SOURCE: KREMLIN.RU /

CC BY 4.0


**Leaning on Africa, Russia projects itself as a great power,**

**its geopolitical worldview firmly set on demonstrating the**

**nation’s influence.**


In recent years, the Kremlin has
increasingly focused on Africa, which
offers opportunities for both strategic
and tactical advances – achievements
to show off Russia’s prominence and
importance.


Russia’s growing interest in Africa
was illustrated by the first Russia-­
Africa Summit in Sochi in 2019, which
received wide media coverage, making
promises to double Russia’s trade with
Africa in the next five years. Vladimir


-----

RUSSIA’S TOP TRADING PARTNERS VS ITS MAIN
TRADING PARTNERS IN AFRICA (2019)


China

Germany

Belarus

...

Egypt

Algeria

Morocco

South Africa

Senegal

Tunisia

Nigeria

Togo

Sudan

Côte d'Ivoire

...


110 919

53 161

33 346

6246

3394

1277

1108

715

657

421

400

275

275


20 000 40 000 60 000 80 000 100 000 120 000

million USD

SOURCE: INTERNATIONAL TRADE CENTRE


Putin and Egypt’s President Abdel
Fattah el-Sisi, then Chairperson of the
African Union, opened the emphatically grand affair. All African nations were
represented, most of them at the level
of head of state. According to official
announcements, more than 50 trade
agreements worth about 12.5 billion
US dollars were signed in Sochi. As a
symbolic step, 20 billion US dollars of


African debts to Russia were written
off.

Having advertised its campaign to
expand influence in Africa at the Sochi
Summit, Russia has since lost momentum in its advance towards these
objectives.

Russia’s trade volumes in Africa
remain modest compared to several


-----

_Russian military conglomerate Rostec representative_
_Dmitry Shugaev in a meeting with Algeria’s National Army_
_Chief of Staff Saïd Chengriha in Algeria, September 2020_


SOURCE: ALGERIAN

NATIONAL TELEVISION


major powers, which enjoy a significant
lead on the continent. Although Russia
increased its exports to Africa by 18%
and imports by 11% in 2018, trade
flows have since been on a downward trend. The already much smaller
volume of African trade compared to
China and Western countries dropped
from $20 billion to $17 billion in 2019
and reached only $5.8 billion in the
first half of 2020.

Due to limited resources and strategic
interests, Russia’s focus is on cooperation with the North African countries
along the EU’s southern border.


According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI),
Africa accounts for 17% of Russia’s
arms exports. The biggest recipient of
Russian arms in Africa is Algeria, with
which Russia has a strategic partnership agreement, covering three key
areas - military, energy and politics.
Another important partner is Egypt
due to its strategic position between
Africa and the Middle East. Russia has
successfully built a well-established
and multi-layered relationship with
Egypt in both military cooperation and
energy. However, Russia’s trade flows
with Egypt are on a downward trend,


-----

as with other North African countries.
Rosatom’s construction of Egypt’s
first nuclear power plant in El Dabaa
has stalled, as Egypt postponed the
issuance of a construction licence until
2021. Progress on the 525-hectare
Russian Industrial Zone within the
Suez Canal Economic Zone, part of
President el-Sisi’s large-scale Suez
Canal expansion project, is also slow.
The project involves tax advantages
promised by Egypt and would be an
export platform to Africa for Russian
automotive, oil and gas industries.

Another strategically important location for Russia is Libya, which would
offer Russia the opportunity to deploy
units on NATO’s southern flank and
provide greater flexibility for operations
in the Mediterranean. Libya’s situation
is volatile, and Russia aspires to be a
key player in the peace negotiations
and the country’s political process.
As in Syria, Russia hopes to establish
itself in Libya’s most lucrative sectors
(e.g. infrastructure and energy) once
the conflict is resolved.

Sub-Saharan Africa is less important
to Russia. It focuses on arms exports
and economic relations there, especially in the mining, energy and agricultural sectors. Russia often acts under


the guise of offering assistance to
conflict-affected countries or fighting
piracy and terrorism.

The region also interests Russia from
a long-term strategic perspective,
the objective being to counteract the
West’s political, military and economic
influence. Russia is engaging local
circles active in civil society in order
to increase its influence and carry out
activities opposed to the West. For
example, in Mali, several organisations
actively disseminate pro-Russian
messages and conduct information
campaigns against France and the
West more broadly. One of these is the
Groupe Des Patriotes Du Mali, which
has publicly declared its goal of developing close ties with Russia. However,
the impact of such organisations
remains insignificant, and Russia does
not really have the ability to mobilise
large numbers of people in Mali with
the support of local activists.

Seeking to gain better control over the
region, Russia is making the most of
the opportunities available to expand
its activities, increase its influence over
decision-making processes and “manage” conflicts. As in Libya, Russia is
actively “resolving” the conflict in the
Central African Republic (CAR), where


-----

_BRDM-2 armoured personnel carriers, a gift from_
_Russia to CAR, on show in Bangui in October 2020_


SOURCE: CAMILLE LAFFONT / AFP


favourable conditions are being created
for expanding business opportunities with the support of the Russian
authorities. Under the guise of defending the interests of the CAR, Russia is
reaping the benefits from getting UN
sanctions eased, thus cultivating an
image of a great power that assists
African countries and pushes through
vital decisions for their populations.
In reality, Russia’s activities in the
CAR are driven mainly by its business
interests.


Companies associated with oligarch
Yevgeny Prigozhin have been operating
in the CAR since 2017. The Russian
leadership has provided him with
the opportunity to enter into lucrative business agreements regarding
minerals and other raw materials. In
return, Prigozhin is expanding Russia’s influence in the CAR. Since 2017,
under pressure from Russia, the UN
has gradually eased the sanctions
imposed on the CAR in 2013, and
with the approval of the UN Sanctions


OVERESTIMATING ITS INFLUENCE IN THE REGION,

RUSSIA HAS FAILED TO REACH ITS

OBJECTIVES IN AFRICA.


-----

EXPANDING ITS SUPPORT AT THE UN


Another reason Russia is stepping
up cooperation with African countries
is to secure their support at the UN
on issues that are important to Russia. African nations represent over a
quarter of the vote in the UN General
Assembly. They are a useful ally to
help swing the vote Russia’s way on
decisions concerning, for example,
Syria or Ukraine. In 2014, 58 countries,
including Egypt, Algeria, South Africa,
Rwanda and Gabon, abstained from
voting in the General Assembly on a
resolution condemning the annexation


of Crimea (UNGAR 68/262). Only 19 of
the 54 African countries voted in favour
of the resolution; Sudan and Zimbabwe
voted against it. In the past, Russia
has secured a favourable outcome for
Zimbabwe and Sudan by vetoing sanctions against them. In 2018, when the
resolution calling for the withdrawal of
Russian troops from Crimea (UNGAR
73/194) was voted on, even more African countries were absent or abstained.
Among them were 18 countries that
had supported UNGAR 68/262, including the CAR and Libya.


Committee and based on cooperation
agreements with the CAR, Russia has
begun supporting the Central African
Armed Forces (FACA) with weapons
and training. Enhancing defence cooperation with the CAR, increasing arms
exports and providing security services
has also enabled a Prigozhin-affiliated
company to benefit from the easing
of restrictions on mining operations,
and extract diamonds more safely and
export them more easily.

It is convenient for Russia to rely on
private corporations to expand its
influence in Africa; financed by the


private sector, the expansion requires
no significant investment or resources from the state. Private operators
allow for flexible administrative
­arrangements and have no formal ties
to their country. This allows Russia
to deny its involvement altogether if
necessary. If the situation in the host
country deteriorates and Russia is
­unable to contribute effectively to conflict resolution, it can withdraw without
much difficulty, leaving the situation
for others to sort out, and thereby
adding to instability throughout the
region.


-----

### RUSSIA’S DOMESTIC 


### POLITICS AND ECONOMY

**A regime that is closely tied to an ageing autocrat is**

**showing growing signs of fatigue. The system seems to**

**lack ideas as well as energy and opportunities for elegant**

**political manoeuvring.**

SOURCE: ALEXEI DRUZHININ / AP


-----

###### 2020 CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS

**By changing the constitution, the Kremlin legitimised the**

**current president remaining in power after the 2024 election.**


Questions and speculation concerning
the future of Vladimir Putin and, more
broadly, Russia’s power structures
after 2024 have been around for
some time. The solution arrived with
constitutional amendments. It proved
a disappointment for policy observers expecting some brilliant political
manoeuvre worthy of the momentousness of this “2024 problem”. A
day before the State Duma was due
to finish considering the draft amendments a simple addition was made:
a presidential candidate’s previous
terms in office before the amendments
entered into force would be discounted, removing this formal obstacle to
Putin’s running for another presidency.
Most political analysts had expected
that Putin would continue to hold on
to his de facto powers after 2024,
but the simple resetting of previous
presidential terms had been considered
unlikely due to its lack of sophistication and questionable legitimacy. The
most widely held expectation was that
a new position would be created for
the current president employing some
cosmetic reshuffling of the power


structures. The resetting, or “zeroing”,
of Putin’s presidential terms to date
also came as a surprise to the majority
of Russian society; quite a few people,
especially among the middle classes in
large cities, had hoped that the end of
Putin’s presidency in 2024 would usher in at least some positive changes in
the country’s political system.

The constitutional amendments’
main goal was to give the incumbent
president the right to run again in
2024. The rest of the amendments
and proposals made during the
discussions were above all a cover to
disguise the initiative’s real purpose,
which was kept from the public for as
long as possible. The constitutional
amendments also included clauses
aimed solely at increasing the reform’s
popularity, such as the indexation of
pensions and social benefits. However,
these were worked out in a way that
did nothing to actually reinforce social
guarantees. Alongside this hollow
rhetoric, several amendments were
made to strengthen the president’s
power; these did not add anything to


-----

Putin’s existing powers but simply
enshrined in the constitution some de
facto presidential powers already in
place. A case in point is the weakening
of the institution of the prime minister;
in the future, the president can remove
the prime minister separately from
the cabinet. Moreover, the president
will appoint the foreign minister and
ministers in charge of security and law
enforcement, subject only to consultation with the Federation Council.

The public narrative concerning the
constitutional amendments repeatedly
underwent carefully deliberated changes of direction to avoid people’s attention focusing on inconvenient issues
for the ruling elite; the main objective
was to conceal the restructuring’s
ultimate goal for as long as possible.
For example, when first introducing
the idea of constitutional changes in
a speech to the Federal Assembly in
January, President Putin referred to
the need to increase the parliament’s
role, although the proposals in the
president’s first package of amendments only concerned increasing the
presidential powers. The first package
also included a proposal to expand the
State Council’s role, which led to speculation about Putin’s intention to step
in as head of the State Council from
2024, and diverted attention away
from the proposals to strengthen the


presidential powers. However, leading
up to the second reading, a number of
proposed amendments were publicised
through a State Duma committee and
a special working group; the bulk of
these was of questionable legal value
but conveyed generally accessible
ideological statements. By continually
keeping these in the media, an attempt
was made to create the illusion of a
broad-based discussion, once again
muddying the waters. By the time the
issue of “zeroing” Putin’s previous
terms was put on the table, many had
already forgotten that amendments
announced at the first reading had increased presidential powers. The leadership’s desire to hide until the very
last minute Putin’s intention to stay
in power also showed that the ruling
elite is distinctly aware of the society’s
growing weariness with the regime.

Although the current legislation did
not require a referendum on these
specific constitutional amendments,
the Russian leadership was determined
to hold one anyway – to legitimise
Putin’s continuing as president after
the 2024 elections. Therefore it was
important to gain majority support
for the amendments in an official
vote. Despite the official success story
– 77.92% of voters supported the
amendments – many regions reportedly experienced serious problems


-----

PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN’S APPROVAL
RATING UNTIL NOVEMBER 2020

The rating is based on VTsIOM’s surveys in which respondents were asked an open-ended
question to name politicians whom they trust to make important government decisions.

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

2006-2008 2009-2011 2012-2013 2014-2015 2016-2020

0

SOURCE: RUSSIAN PUBLIC OPINION RESEARCH CENTRE (VTsIOM)


achieving a satisfactory result in the
referendum, as well as witnessing
the population’s growing weariness
with the ruling elite and Vladimir
Putin. Some hitherto pro-regime
voter groups showed their dissatisfaction in the form of an unusually
large protest vote. The protest voters
were mainly opposed to the zeroing of
previous presidential terms. They also
cited opposition to Putin personally,
dissatisfaction with the principle that
one person should remain in power for
so long, and the fact that the existing


unjust system of power would last
indefinitely as a result of the zeroing.
It is also worth noting that the most
important background factor inciting
the protest vote was the influence of
the new media. Published sociological
research also points to a significant
decline in Putin’s support in recent
years. Examples include the approval ratings published by the Russian
­Public Opinion Research Center
­(VTsIOM), an organisation with an
above-­average relationship with the
Russian authorities.


-----

Vladimir Putin very likely intends to
start a new term as president in 2024.
He could only be forced to abandon
this plan by a sudden serious health
issue or growing popular opposition
beyond a critical level that the authorities can no longer control. The events
of 2020 represent a guarantee for
the continuation of the status quo for
Russia’s ruling elite. For most of them,
the news of Putin’s plan to continue
was positive, as this would ensure the
continuation of the current system
of power and way of life beyond the
2024 election. Any fundamental
changes could affect the balance of
power within the elite, which the more
conservative among them would probably want to avoid. By resolving the
2024 problem well in time, Putin also


avoided a swell of internal tensions
among the elite due to the changes. However, given Putin’s age, the
solution is strictly temporary; in the
longer term, the question of what the
regime’s operational logic and the hierarchy of power will be like after Putin’s
departure will still build tensions within
the elite. Increasing tensions among
the ruling elite are, of course, only
one of the threats that Putin’s regime
was hoping to alleviate by resolving
the “2024 problem” early. Given the
population’s growing weariness with
the current power elite and deepening
critical moods, it was safer for the
authorities to address the key aspects
of Putin’s continuation in office – a
possible cause for protest – as early
and unexpectedly as possible.


THE MAIN PURPOSE OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL

AMENDMENTS WAS TO ALLOW VLADIMIR PUTIN TO

RUN FOR REELECTION IN 2024. THE REST

WAS MOSTLY A COVER TO DISGUISE THE REAL

PURPOSE OF THE INITIATIVE.


-----

###### INCREASING DOMESTIC TENSIONS AND THE KREMLIN’S RESPONSE

**Increasing tensions combined with the regime’s rigidity and**

**limited methods create preconditions for domestic political**

**crises. The stagnant regime’s ability to respond and adapt will**

**only deteriorate over the next decade, further complicating**

**the situation.**


Growing domestic political tensions
have characterised life in Russia
throughout recent years, and 2020 was
no exception, as general dissatisfaction and moods critical of the regime
were exacerbated by the effects of the
COVID-19 epidemic and the accompanying restrictions. In addition to the
socio-economic effects, the outbreak
of the virus brought the shortcomings
of the Russian medical system to the
public’s attention more than usual (see
graph on page 39); the weaknesses
and questionable leadership skills of
the political elite also became more
visible in the time of crisis. From the
very beginning of the first major wave
of infections, the president was clearly
reluctant to act decisively and take responsibility. During both the spring and
autumn outbreak, President Putin underlined the regional leaders’ responsibility, conveniently reserving for himself
the role of an overseer. The president’s
apparent personal fear of the virus also


shook his image as a strong leader. In
this context, it is especially important
to consider the changes in the Russian
media space over the last decade: the
share of online media in Russians’ media consumption has steadily increased,
while television watching and the
viewers’ trust in this hitherto important
pillar of the regime has been steadily
declining. It is increasingly difficult for
the Kremlin to assert its own interpretation of events in the much more diverse
online media. It is worth noting that,
according to a Levada Centre survey,
the number of respondents who place
more trust in TV as a news source has
consistently declined, while trust in
online sources and social media has
been going up.

The methods and rationale of the
Russian power elite in controlling domestic political tensions have remained
unchanged – the main emphasis is
on intimidating and, if necessary,
directly subduing the regime’s critics


-----

THE MAIN INFORMATION CHANNELS AND MOST TRUSTED
NEWS SOURCES AMONG THE RUSSIAN POPULATION

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
2009 2013 2014 2015 2016 2018 2018 2020 2020
March August January August

Television is the main information channel The internet and social media are the main

Television is the most trusted information information channel
channel The internet and social media are the most trusted

information channel


SOURCE: LEVADA CENTRE

to all voters: becoming more popular
than Kremlin-backed candidates and
deviating from the central government’s
agenda will sooner or later bring grave
consequences. Unfortunately for the
Kremlin, it turned out the conditions
on the ground had been misjudged,
resulting in several months of sharp
confrontation with the region’s population, which attracted unwanted attention across the nation.

Another overreaction by the Russian
power elite – the poisoning of Alexei


and opposition activists; the pressure
applied by the authorities has increased
with each year. The central government
is also looking more and more on edge,
in many cases overreacting in ways
that have been counterproductive. For
example, replacing the governor of
the Khabarovsk Krai was intended to
create a more favourable setting for
the central government in the autumn
2020 regional elections; the forced
removal on murder charges of the top
official elected on the back of protest
votes was expected to send a message


-----

Navalny by the FSB – had much more
serious and far-reaching consequences. The very strong pressure from the
Russian authorities on Navalny’s organisations, which intensified significantly
from the summer of 2019, left no doubt
that the Kremlin perceived him as a
serious threat. With increased domestic
tensions, the Kremlin decided to use
even more radical solutions than before.
The assassination attempt on a leading
opposition politician demonstrated the
Kremlin’s deteriorating environmental
perception – it clearly failed to fully
predict the impact of such an event on
Russia’s international position. When
the events came to light, Russia’s
behaviour, especially the chosen PR
strategy, at times gave the impression
that the decision-makers had simply
lost the plot. This was also the case
with the Kremlin’s justifications for
jailing Navalny on his return to Russia.

In 2020, yet more legislative amendments further restricting the already
very limited opportunities for opposition
activities and expressing civic opinions
were introduced. Notable examples
include extending the scope of the
“foreign agents” law and the amendments concerning the rules for public
gatherings.

The growing domestic political dissatisfaction of recent years raises the
question whether a situation similar to
that in Belarus in autumn 2020 might


also arise in Russia in the near future, or
how much time and room for manoeuvring the central government has left. It
is important to note here that the accumulation of dissatisfaction leading up to
a regime change is not a linear process.
On the contrary, political activities and
the social situation can either slow it
down or escalate it. However, it is safe
to say that the changed attitude in society and growing moods critical of the
government have already significantly
altered the face and logic of the Russian
regime. Repressive measures have now
become the primary tool for maintaining and defending power.

In 2021, the main challenge for Russia’s
ruling elite will be to achieve a suitable
result in the State Duma election amidst
heightened political tensions in the
country. The upcoming election will also
show the extent to which Navalny’s poisoning helped to make the domestic political environment more convenient for
the Kremlin and keep opposition activity
in check. The undoubted goal of those
in power is to achieve a State Duma
majority for United Russia, ideally a
constitutional majority. It is possible that
new players will be added to the list of
systemic, or controlled, opposition parties that are allowed to run for the State
Duma; several new systemic opposition
parties were established in 2020, three
of which also made it to regional parliaments in the autumn elections, paving


-----

NEW PLAYERS ON THE KREMLINCURATED POLITICAL SCENE

In the autumn 2020 regional elections, three new systemic opposition parties –
New People, For the Truth and the Green Alternative – were elected to regional parliaments, paving the way for them to run in the forthcoming State Duma election.
In addition to these three, other new parties were formed at the Kremlin’s initiative
in the first months of 2020, but have so far remained less active. In early 2021,
For the Truth announced plans to join A Just Russia, another systemic opposition
party.


the way for them to run in the State
Duma election. By introducing new political parties to elections, the Kremlin’s
political technologists hope, on the one
hand, to renew the systemic opposition,
and on the other hand, to divide the
protest votes against United Russia
between different parties within the systemic opposition. Moreover, many of the
new systemic opposition parties have
been set up to channel the mood of this
or that specific group of voters critical of
the regime; examples include the Green


Alternative party, which focuses on environmental issues. However, given that
recasting the protagonist’s role in this
national democracy spectacle is not an
option; the essential condition for selecting groups or individuals for supporting
roles is that they must not be or become
too attractive to the electorate and
threaten to overshadow the protagonist. With these requirements in place,
any attempt to renew the ruling elite’s
political landscape is bound to have only
a limited impact.


-----

HEALTHY LIFE EXPECTANCY AND
PUBLIC HEALTH EXPENDITURE

Healthy life expectancy

75

59

55

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||C|Spai yprus|n Italy|Japan France||||Swit|zerland|
||South Greece|Korea Isr Portugal|ael U|Finland nited|Aus Austria Germany|tralia Sweden Denmark||Nor|way|
|Czech China|Slo Republic|venia|K|ingdom||||||
|Pol|and Qa Slovakia Estonia Hungary|tar||||||U|SA|
|||||||||||
|L|atvia Lithuania|||||||Baltic stat|es’ average|
|Kyrg|yzstan||||||Ca|ucasus stat|es’ average|
|Geor Uzbe Ukrain|gia kistan e|||||||||
|Ru Kazakh|ssia stan||||||Centr|al Asian stat|es’ average|
|Indonesi Turk|a menistan|Russ high|ia’s health er public he|care syste alth expen|m is glaring diture, heal|ly inefficie thy life exp|nt: despite ectancy re|a 2 or 3 ti mains at th|mes e|
|Egypt India||same A viv situa|level with id account tion emerg|Central As of the Rus es from a|ian countri sian health Russian Ac|es. care syste counts Cha|m’s extrem mber repo|ely backw rt’s section|ard on|
|Iraq Pakistan||medi » »|cal institut 30% of me 52% of me|ions provid dical instit dical institu|ing paedia utions com tions lack|tric primar pletely lack a hot wate|y care: a water su r supply;|pply;||
|Congo Angola Haiti||» »|35% of me 41% of med|dical institu ical institu|tions lack tions lack c|a sewerage entral heat|connectio ing.|n;||


0 $ 1000 $ 2000 $ 3000 $ 4000 $ 5000 $ 6000 $ 7000 $ 8000 $ 9000 $ 10 000 $

Health expenditure per capita per year

SOURCE: HEALTH EXPENDITURE 2012-16 AVERAGE, WHO DATA FOR 2016


-----

###### RUSSIA’S SOCIO-ECONOMIC DOWNTURN

**In 2020, the economic crisis was accompanied by the Russian**

**population’s rapid income loss.**


The 2020 COVID-19 pandemic has
sharply highlighted the Russian
economy’s structural weaknesses, the
main factors being over-reliance on the
export of energy carriers, an uncertain
investment climate and the public
sector’s excessive involvement in the
economy. For Russia, the situation is
further complicated because the country’s economy had not yet recovered
from the previous crisis in 2014-15.

The plunging oil prices on the world
market caused by the pandemic
reduced Russia’s export volumes by
almost a third in the first half of 2020.
Revenues from the oil and gas sector to the Russian state budget also
decreased by a third compared to the
first half of 2019, significantly hampering the country’s ability to implement
effective economic measures to fight
the crisis. The ongoing economic crisis
hit all sectors of the Russian economy
hard. In addition to declining export
earnings, domestic consumption also
contracted against the background of
rising unemployment and falling real
income.


Due to the rapid spread of the coronavirus, the Kremlin was forced to impose
a “non-working period” from 30 March
to 12 May on the vast majority of companies and institutions, combined with
an obligation to maintain staff salaries.
However, this proved overwhelming for
many businesses, as state aid measures provided only partial relief.

According to Russia’s federal statistics
service, Rosstat, the country’s GDP fell
by 8% in the second quarter of 2020.
During the second wave of COVID-19,
the Kremlin has sought to avoid imposing severe quarantine measures so as
not to repeat the second quarter’s dark
scenario. In 2020 as a whole, Russia’s
economy is predicted to shrink by about
4%. While growth may be restored from
the second half of 2021, as the virus
recedes, it is likely to be relatively slow,
given the build-up of systemic economic problems.

One of the main goals of the Russian
government’s economic policy during
the crisis has been to maintain the
country’s foreign currency reserves as


-----

AVERAGE GROSS MONTHLY WAGES

2006-2020, USD

Average gross monthly wages 2006-20 (USD)

2000

1500

1000

500


Estonia

Russia


2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

SOURCES: ROSSTAT, STATISTICS ESTONIA


much as possible, not to spend them
on economic stimulus or social benefits. To cover the state budget deficit
and public investment needs, the tax
burden on business has been stepped
up, and government internal borrowing
has been significantly increased. This
policy will certainly not contribute to
economic recovery.

The Russian population’s socio-­
economic situation has deteriorated


sharply due to rising unemployment
and wage cuts. According to Rosstat,
Russians’ real incomes decreased
by 4.3% year on year in the first
nine months of 2020. According to
forecasts, the population’s annual
real ­income in 2020 will be 10% lower
than in 2013. Therefore, Russia’s
living standards have essentially
­stagnated for a whole decade (see
figure).


RUSSIA’S LIVING STANDARDS HAVE

STAGNATED FOR A DECADE.


-----

RUSSIAN POPULATION’S RAPID LOSS OF
INCOME DURING THE CRISIS

Russia’s population groups by monthly income, February-June 2020, RUB

Russia’s population groups by monthly income, February-June 2020, RUB


40

30


20

10


February

June


Up to 5,000 5,000-15,000 15,000-25,000 25,000-35,000 35,000-50,000 50,000-100,000

SOURCE: ROSGOSSTRAKH ZHIZN


In February 2020, the Russian insurance
provider Rosgosstrakh Zhizn, with the help of
the Perspektiva research centre, conducted a
sociological survey on people’s income, asking
the respondents to state their average monthly
income per household member. The survey
was repeated in June to assess the impact of
the COVID-19 epidemic on people’s income.

The results showed that in June almost 73%
of the population placed themselves in the
low-income bracket of up to 25,000 roubles;
the share of people in this income group had
increased by 9.1 percentage points since February. Only 3.5% of the respondents reported


earning a salary corresponding to a middle-class living standard of 50,000–100,000
roubles per month, and their share had decreased by 4% compared to February. In June
2020, 8.1% of respondents had to cope with
extreme poverty, i.e. up to 5,000 roubles per
month, and their share had increased by 1.2 per
cent. Although this study is unlikely to coincide
with the official wage statistics and does not
take into account income earned in the shadow
economy, it does show a clear trend – the
current economic crisis has rapidly reduced the
income of Russia’s middle class and pushed
more families to the brink of poverty.


-----

According to Russia’s official statistics,
as of the end of June 2020, 19.9 million people, or 13.5% of the country’s
population, lived below the subsistence
minimum (11,468 roubles or about 128
euros per month). Year on year, this
number had increased by 1.3 million.
These statistics also took into account
the emergency social benefits paid in
connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, mainly to families with children. According to the government’s
socio-economic development forecast,
the real income of the population
should return to the 3% growth path in
2021 and maintain positive dynamics
in the following years as well. However, this may be an overly optimistic
projection based on the expectation
that COVID-19 will be a short-term
phenomenon. In addition, Russians are
facing accelerating inflation caused by
the weakening rouble. In addition to
Western sanctions and oil prices, the
rouble is also negatively affected by


other economic and political tensions
entangling Russia, and the massive
money printing by the Russian central
bank. If the economic crisis drags on,
Russia’s financial sector may also face
major difficulties.

Russia’s stagnated economic performance is mainly due to the government’s unwillingness to reform the
existing state-capitalist model. This
has been accompanied by reduced
competition in the economy, inefficient governance and corruption, as
well as a decline in investment activity.
The West’s economic sanctions in
response to the Kremlin’s aggressive
foreign policy and the changes taking
place in the global energy market also
have a significant negative impact
on Russia’s economic performance.
President Putin’s "national projects"
investment programme, outlined in
his 2018 ‘May Decrees’, is unlikely to
meet the expectations placed on it


RUSSIA’S STAGNATED ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE IS

CAUSED BY THE GOVERNMENT’S UNWILLINGNESS TO

REFORM THE EXISTING STATE-CAPITALIST MODEL.


-----

RUSSIA’S GDP COMPARED WITH
DEVELOPED ECONOMIES AND SELECTED
NEIGHBOURING COUNTRIES

70 000


120

100


60 000

50 000


80

60


40 000

30 000


40

20


20 000

10 000

|Oil price Developed economies|IMF forecast|
|---|---|
|Estonia Russia||
|Kazakhstan Turkmenistan||
|||
|||
|||
|||


1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2025

According to the IMF’s forecast published in October 2020, Russia’s economic development will continue to be almost twice as slow as the world economy average after the
pandemic, causing Russia’s nominal GDP per capita to fall below Kazakhstan’s by 2025,
ending up on a par with Turkmenistan.


SOURCE: IMF

is likely to befall Russia’s plan for its
socio-economic development goals, the
deadlines for which the government
was forced to postpone from 2024 to
2030 due to the COVID-19 crisis.


regarding accelerating the economy,
as it does not seize the real opportunities or address the actual needs of
the Russian market. According to IMF
forecasts (see figure), the same fate


-----

### THE RUSSIAN ARMED FORCES

**Despite the pandemic, Russia**

**will continue to focus on**

**its military advantages in**

**Europe, including testing**

**them in the Zapad 2021**

**military exercise.**


Without the public being made aware
of this, the Russian Armed Forces
also experienced an extensive spread
of COVID-19 in 2020. The training for
spring conscripts was delayed due
to the procedures employed against
the spread of the virus. The reported
cases and deaths also included senior
officers, generals and admirals. Whole
units and crews were quarantined.

However, the Russian Armed Forces’
long term development and key capabilities cannot be said to have suffered
significantly due to the virus. The usual
number of conscripts was recruited
and the annual major military exercise
– this time Kavkaz 2020 – took place
on the typical scale. The customary
strategic nuclear exercise was postponed by two months primarily due
to the coronavirus restrictions, but did
take place in December.


_The Russian Minister of Defence_
_presents measures against_
_COVID-19 to the ministry’s_
_leadership on 27 November 2020_

Moreover, Russia shows no sign of
having revised its long-term strategy for
the armed forces, which is to increase
readiness for a full-scale confrontation
with NATO. Regional superiority is still
clearly a top priority for Russia, in terms
of the establishing of new military units
and the modernisation and deployment
of missile techologies.

Examples include a new tank regiment
(2019) and motor rifle division (2020)
created in the Kaliningrad Oblast. The


SOURCE: MIL.RU /

CC BY 4.0


-----

motor rifle division is the sixth consecutive new division established by the
Russian Armed Forces in the western
direction within the past seven years.
Russia is also deploying the 120 km
range Bal coastal defence missile systems along the Gulf of Finland’s coast.

While strengthening its conventional
military capabilities, Russia is also
increasing the versatility of its forces,
such as reforming the Airborne Forces
(VDV) described below, as an emerging
new trend. In the future, VDV units are
expected to be able to carry out tasks
across the entire spectrum of military
engagement, from local conflict to
large-scale conventional warfare.

Until now, the Russian Armed Forces
have taken it for granted that regional
superiority in terms of short- and medium-range missile systems and complete superiority in terms of tactical nuclear warheads are the cornerstones of
their military power in Europe. However,
with the termination of the INF Treaty,
the Russian national defence leadership
has begun to worry about maintaining this superiority. Russia is trying to
prevent the deployment of US missile


systems in Europe and the resulting
change in the balance of power. The
Russian leadership remains concerned
about US missile defence system Aegis
Ashore facilities in Europe, which in
Russia’s view would prevent it from
being able to threaten NATO with a
nuclear attack.

To this end, Russian foreign policy
resorts to influence activities and
deception. In September 2019, Russian President Vladimir Putin sent a
letter to several countries’ leaders,
including NATO member states and
China, proposing a moratorium on the
deployment of INF intermediate-range
missiles in Europe. Moreover, Putin
declared that Russia would be willing to
do this unilaterally. At the same time,
since 2017, three battalions equipped
with the new medium-range missile
system 9M729 (the reason for the clash
over the INF Treaty) have been deployed
in the European portion of Russia.
Imposing a formal moratorium to set an
example would therefore not require any
real concessions from Russia but would
perpetuate its complete missile superiority in Europe, where NATO countries
currently have no surface-to-surface


THE MOTOR RIFLE DIVISION IN THE KALININGRAD OBLAST

IS THE SIXTH NEW DIVISION ESTABLISHED ON RUSSIA’S

WESTERN BORDER WITHIN THE PAST SEVEN YEARS.


-----

 _An amphibious landing on the island_



_of Hogland in August 2020_

SOURCE: MIL.RU / CC BY 4.0

short-range missile systems, let alone
medium-range ones. Once again,
Russia is presenting itself as being open
to cooperation by offering concessions
that only appear as such.

Russia also continues to apply deception in its foreign policy against NATO
as a whole to weaken the alliance
and transatlantic relations. In May
2020, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei
Lavrov sent a letter to NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg calling
for the suspension of major military
exercises along the “line of contact”
and suggesting that transponders on
military flights be switched on. Similar
calls from Russian high-ranking military
personnel followed. In reality, there was
no significant change, only reduced
press coverage of the exercises. Despite
its apparent foreign policy initiative,
Russia continued military exercises in
its Western Military District on a more
or less ordinary scale. At the end of
August 2020, the Russian 6th Combined Arms Army and the Baltic Fleet
conducted their first joint exercise in the
Gulf of Finland, in the immediate vicinity
of Estonia’s northeastern border, which
included an amphibious landing on the
island of Hogland. Russian military
aircraft also continue flying with their


transponders switched off, and reconnaissance flights have not ceased.

In 2021, another major exercise in
the European direction, Zapad 2021,
traditionally a rehearsal for a conflict
with NATO in the Baltic Sea region, is
expected. The exercise cannot be ignored by Estonia and NATO, as Russia
will deploy tens of thousands of troops
along the borders of the Baltic states.
The Russian Air Force flight activity
over the Baltic Sea will increase significantly, and Russia is likely to move
additional warships from the Black Sea
and Northern Fleets to the region. As
in the previous exercise, Zapad 2017,
Russia’s 1st Guards Tank Army is likely
to deploy some of its forces to Belarus
as part of the Regional Grouping of
Forces of Belarus and Russia.

However, this year’s exercise, Zapad
2021, may be unprecedented in more


-----

##### THE LOCATIONS OF MISSILE BRIGADES AND


ways than one. First, the structure
of the exercise may be affected by
the course of events in Belarus. The
Belarusian Armed Forces and the
Regional Grouping of Forces of Belarus
and Russia have traditionally played
a critical role in Russia’s operational
plans for the western direction. Due
to their close integration with the
Russian armed forces, the Belarusian
forces may be currently called Russia’s
“Belarus Military District”. However, in
the event of a significant deepening of
the domestic political crisis, or political
reforms, in Belarus, adjustments to
Russia’s military exercise scenarios or
military planning in relation to NATO
may prove necessary.

Another interesting aspect to look
out for in the Zapad 2021 exercise is
China’s possible participation in the
Zapad series for the first time. China
has taken part in Russia’s annual strategic exercises since Vostok 2018. If
China also confirms its participation in
Zapad 2021, it will be intriguing to see
how the Chinese armed forces define
their role in a military operation against
NATO in Europe. However, a military
alliance between Russia and China will
not materialise anytime soon, due to a
lack of interest on China’s part.


##### RANGES OF THE ISKANDER-M MISSILES ON RUSSIA’S WESTERN BORDER


**"Iskander-M"**


-----

**SSC-7 "Iskander-K"**

SOURCE: ESTONIAN FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SERVICE


-----

_Airmobile units of the Russian_
_Airborne Forces in training_

SOURCE: MIKHAIL KLIMENTYEV / TASS


###### ‘NEW TYPE’ OF AIRBORNE ASSAULT UNITS

**By the middle of the decade, Russia will form airmobile**

**brigades in four strategic directions to be better prepared for**

**‘grey zone’ conflicts.**


A critical fact about airmobile brigades is that Russia can use them
for pre-emptive strikes, such as
the destruction of critical targets or
capture of strategic objectives. The
ability to fight in so-called grey zones
will become crucial in the future. The
concept of grey zones does not only


apply to geographical areas; it also has
a temporal dimension.

In the future, it will be increasingly
difficult to pinpoint the exact starting
point of hostilities, define the boundaries of an area of operations, or identify
the enemy. Airmobile brigades, whose


-----

tasks include supporting units that
act separately from the main forces or
partisan combat behind enemy lines,
fit well into this pattern.

The formation of airmobile, or “new
type”, assault units in the Airborne
Forces is a major objective of the Russian armed forces during this decade.
The army brigades and naval infantry
already have a small number of airmobile units, but these are predominantly
intended for reconnaissance operations
and “small tactical episodes”.

In contrast to the existing units, which
do not have organic subunits with
their own aircraft, the new airmobile
units are more independent and, most
importantly, are equipped with helicopters and do not depend on the support
of other units for relocation.

Russia developed its concept of airmobile units in 2018, building on the
experience of the US, China and other
countries. Since 2018, airmobile units
have been tested in all major exercises
(Vostok 2018, Tsentr 2019 and Kavkaz
2020). The 31st Guards Air Assault
Brigade based in Ulyanovsk is an experimental unit.


The plan is to replace the existing
units of the Airborne Forces with four
airmobile brigades – one for each
strategic direction. The 31st Airmobile Brigade in Ulyanovsk will cover
the western strategic direction, while
the brigade to be established in the
Orenburg Oblast will cover the Central
Asia strategic direction. The units to
be set up based on the 56th and 83rd
Guards Air Assault Brigades will cover
the southwestern and eastern strategic
directions, respectively.

Public sources are flooded with
distorted information concerning the
formation of airmobile units – from the
deadlines for forming the new brigades
to speculation about their composition
and weapons. The formation of the
airmobile brigades is unlikely to occur
before 2025.

Establishing new brigades is not easy.
Currently, Mi-28N attack helicopters are
used to perform fire support functions
for airmobile units. Helicopters specifically designed for airmobile units
should be introduced by the middle of
the decade. The aim is also to replace
the existing fleet of vehicles by adding
amphibious capabilities and stronger


THE FORMATION OF AIRMOBILE ASSAULT UNITS IN

THE AIRBORNE FORCES IS A MAJOR OBJECTIVE OF THE

RUSSIAN ARMED FORCES DURING THIS DECADE.


-----

AIRMOBILE BRIGADES TO BE FORMED AS PART

OF THE RUSSIAN AIRBORNE FORCES

**Orenburg Oblast**

**Ulyanovsk**

**Kamyshin (Volgograd Oblast)**
**Ussuriysk**


SOURCE: ESTONIAN FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SERVICE


armour and upgrading the weaponry on
the vehicles. However, several parts of
the Russian armaments programmes
have been stalled or suspended recently
(partially due to sanctions). Russia’s
ability to fully implement the armaments programme for the airmobile
brigades is therefore uncertain.

Another problem is the scarcity of
human resources. Many units in the
Russian armed forces, including critical
units, are still understaffed. They are
trying to conceal this fact. Each new
airmobile brigade is likely to be 4,000
to 4,500 strong.

While there are currently around
10,000 troops in the existing four


guards air assault brigades, the new
brigades are to have between 16,000
and 17,000. Even if the existing
helicopter squadrons are included, it
is clear that more people need to be
found for the new brigades. The cost
of forming the airmobile brigades may
be the liquidation of the 11th Guards Air
Assault Brigade.

This shortage of people is aggravated by the outflow and bad quality of
human resources, as well as a low
motivation to serve. Competition for admission to Russian military academies
(including the most prestigious ones)
remains at a low level and will affect the
officer corps’ quality in the future.


-----

_Exercise Union Shield 2019. Seated in the middle are Alexander Zhuravlyov,_
_Commander of the Western Military District of Russia, and Oleg Belokonev,_
_Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Belarus from 2014 to 2019_

###### THE ‘BELARUS MILITARY DISTRICT’ – MILITARY COOPERATION  BETWEEN RUSSIA AND BELARUS

**Despite political and economic differences, the Union State of**

**Russia and Belarus has had success in military integration.**


SOURCE:

MIL.RU /

CC BY 4.0


Belarus remains Russia’s most important military ally. With its geographical
location and territorial scope, Belarus
is a necessary buffer for Russia on its
western border and adds depth to the
western strategic direction. In times of
crisis or war, Russia can use Belarus


as a bridgehead and deploy its troops
there, blocking NATO’s access to the
Suwalki Corridor, influencing air traffic
in neighbouring countries’ airspace
and establishing a land link with the
Kaliningrad Oblast.


-----

THE LEVEL OF INTEGRATION OF RUSSIAN AND
BELARUSIAN ARMED
FORCES

The Russian and Belarusian armed
forces are very similar in terms of
organisation and command structure.
Military cooperation between the two
is based on the Regional Grouping of
Forces of Belarus and Russia (RGF)
and the Unified Regional Air Defence
System.

In a 1997 agreement, Russia undertook
to protect Belarus with a combined
arms formation equivalent in size to
an army (10,000 to 30,000 troops).
In the event of a conflict, the RGF
will be formed, comprising the entire
Belarusian armed forces and the 1st
Tank Army of the Russian Western
Military District. The formation of the
RGF, cooperation, and Russian units’
deployment to Belarus are regularly
practised in the Union Shield (Shchit
Soyuza) joint exercise and the Russian
strategic exercise Zapad.

The Belarus and Russian air defences are connected into a regional air
defence system. Since November
2016, joint combat alert duty has been
organised. In the event of a conflict,


the Russian Armed Forces will assume
command over Belarusian air defence
systems and units under the Unified
Regional Air Defence System.

THE OFFICER CORPS AND
MILITARY EDUCATION

The Belarusian Armed Forces were established based on the Belarus Military
District of the Soviet Armed Forces,
which coincided with the territory of the
Belarusian SSR. A significant number
of senior Belarusian officers were born
outside Belarus and ended up in the
Belarusian army because they served in
the Belarus Military District during the
collapse of the Soviet Union. Members
of the Belarusian officer corps were
educated in Soviet and Russian military
educational institutions, according to
the Russian training system, curricula
and traditions (see table). Therefore,
they share a similar threat perception
and fundamental understanding of
warfare and operational art with Russian officers. Many Belarusian officers
see Russia as a role model. Cadets of
Belarusian military educational institutions study in Russia, which further
encourages similar thinking. The two
countries’ military elites also have close
personal contacts.


-----

SENIOR BELARUSIAN OFFICERS WHO STUDIED IN SOVIET
AND RUSSIAN MILITARY EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS

NAME POSITION EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION

**Viktor Khrenin Minister of Defence** Omsk Higher Combined Arms Command School (1992)

**Alexander** Chief of the General Staff of the Moscow Higher Combined Arms Command School (1988)
**Volfovich** Armed Forces (until 26 January 2021) Russian General Staff Military Academy (2008)

**Sergei** Deputy Minister of Defence Ulyanovsk Guards Higher Tank Command School (1982),
**Potapenko** Malinovsky Military Armoured Forces Academy (1992)

**Sergei** Deputy Minister of Defence for Moscow Higher Combined Arms Command School (1989)
**Simonenko** Armament

**Andrei** Deputy Minister of Defence for Volga Higher School of Logistics (1994), Military Academy of
**Burdyko** Logistics Logistics and Transport of the Russian Ministry of Defence

(2003), Russian General Staff Military Academy (2012)

**Alexander** First Deputy of the Deputy Minister of Novosibirsk Higher Military-Political Combined Arms
**Panfyorov** Defence for Logistics School (1989)

**Leonid** Head of the Main Ideology Directorate Yekaterinburg Higher Artillery Command School (1992)
**Kasinski** of the Ministry of Defence

**Igor** Head of the Main Directorate of Military Department of the Financial University under the
**Mozhilovski** Economy and Finance of the Ministry Government of the Russian Federation (2002)

of Defence

**Oleg Voinov** Head of the Department for Novosibirsk Higher Military-Political Combined Arms
International Military Cooperation of School (late 1980s)
the Ministry of Defence

**Pavel** Chief of the Main Operations Russian General Staff Military Academy (2008)
**Muraveiko** Directorate of the General Staff

**Valeri** Deputy Chief of Military Command of Chelyabinsk Higher Tank Command School (N/A)
**Gnilozub** the General Staff

**Vyacheslav** Chief of the NBC Defence Directorate Tambov Higher Military Command School of Chemical
**Starkov** of the General Staff Defence (1988)

**Igor** Chief of the Electronic Warfare Pushkin Higher School of Air Defence Radio Electronics
**Danilchik** Directorate of the General Staff (1991), Russian Air Force Academy (N/A)

**Andrei** 1st Deputy Commander of the Air Orenburg Higher School of Anti-aircraft Missile Command
**Gurtsevich** Force and Air Defence (1992)

**Andrei Zhuk** Commander of the Northwestern Moscow Higher Combined Arms Command School (1990)
Operational Command

**Igor** 1st Deputy Commander of the St Petersburg Higher Combined Arms Command School
**Demidenko** Northwestern Operational Command (1992)

**Alexander** Deputy Commander of the Western Chelyabinsk Higher Tank Command School (1992)
**Bass** Operational Command

**Sergei** Deputy Commander of the Western Volga Higher School of Logistics (1992)
**Grinyuk** Operational Command for Logistics

**Vadim** Commander of the Special Operations Leningrad Higher Combined Arms Command School
**Demidenko** Forces (1988), Russian General Staff Military Academy (2008)

SOURCE: ESTONIAN FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SERVICE


-----

COMBINED OPERATIONAL
CAPACITY AND TRAINING

Both Russia and Belarus have compulsory military service; enlistment for
active and reserve duty follows similar
time frames in both countries.

The training cycles are compatible; that
is, the Russian and Belarusian armed
forces are able to act together in operational and strategic exercises.

Union Shield is a regular joint exercise
whereby the Russian and Belarusian
armed forces practise forming the RGF
and using it in the interest of the Union
State. To date, four exercises have
taken place: one in Belarus (2006) and
three in Russia (2011, 2015 and 2019).

Belarusian units also participate in the
Russian Armed Forces’ Zapad strategic
exercises. Zapad 2017 tested Belarus’
support capabilities as a host country,
as the Russian Armed Forces deployed
nearly 3,000 troops, 98 tanks, 104
armoured vehicles, 32 artillery and 27
aircraft there.

The Union State’s budget provides
military technological cooperation
funds to refurbish military facilities
and infrastructure shared by the RGF.
It also finances a programme for
the technological development and
modernisation of regional railways.


The infrastructure’s maintenance and
operational reliability enable the rapid
deployment of troops from Russia to
Belarus in crisis or war and ensures
their smooth movement within and/or
passing through Belarusian territory.

In addition to operational and strategic
exercises, the Russian and Belarusian
armed forces also cooperate closely on
combined tactical exercises of different
service arms. The airborne forces enjoy
the closest cooperative relationship,
usually holding several dozen joint
exercises a year, alternately in each
country. Among its various service
arms, Belarus’s air defence units, in
particular, frequently train in Russia,
carrying out combat shooting field
exercises in the Astrakhan Oblast.

WEAPONS AND
EQUIPMENT

The Belarusian Armed Forces mainly
use Soviet-made weapons, vehicles
and equipment, to a lesser extent
also modern or modernised Russian
military equipment (Su-30SM fighter
aircraft, T-72B3 tanks). At the time
of the collapse of the Soviet Union,
the Belarus Military District was well
equipped, but now the technology is
obsolete, and Belarus lacks the means
to modernise.


-----

MILITARY COOPERATION BETWEEN
RUSSIA AND BELARUS

**MILITARY TRAINING AND COMBINED**
**OPERATIONAL CAPACITY TRAINING**

Union Shield exercises

**ARMY ORGANISATION**

Russia’s strategic exercise Zapad

Unifed Regional Air Defence System

Various service arms’ tactical exercises

Regional Grouping of Forces

Developing and testing Belarus’s
capabilities as a host country

**The nature of the**
**military cooperation**
**between Russia and**

**THE OFFICER CORPS AND** **Belarus**
**MILITARY EDUCATION**

Nationality

Mindset

**RUSSIAN MILITARY**

Military education **FACILITIES IN BELARUS**

Close professional contacts Hantsavichy Radar Station

43rd Communications Centre of
the Russian Navy

**MILITARY-TECHNICAL**
**COOPERATION**


Belarusian armed forces rely on Russian weapons and equipment

The Russian military industry uses Belarusian MAZ heavy trucks

SOURCE: ESTONIAN FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SERVICE


-----

The Belarusian military industry supplies the Russian army with MAZ heavy
trucks, which are used as a platform
for ballistic missiles (Iskander-M) and
anti-aircraft missile systems (S-400).

THE ISSUE OF
ESTABLISHING A
MILITARY BASE

Russia has two permanent military
installations in Belarus: the 43rd
Communications Centre of the Russian
Navy, used to communicate with submarines cruising the world’s oceans,
and a Russian Aerospace Forces radar
station in Hantsavichy for ballistic missile monitoring (the 474th Independent
Radio Technical Unit). These sites are
not classified as military bases.

For more than a decade, there has
been talk of establishing a Russian
airbase in Belarus, but the idea has not
materialised. Between 2013 and 2016,
Russian Su-27 fighters were located in
Belarusian airbases, but this had to do
with the obsolescence of the Belarusian Air Force’s fleet – some aircraft
were no longer fit for service, while
others required modernisation. This


created a capability gap in Belarus’s
air defences and thus in the Unified
Regional Air Defence System, which
Russia had to fulfil temporarily. Under
a 2017 agreement, Belarus will purchase 12 modern Su-30SM multi-purpose fighter aircraft from Russia, some
of which have already arrived.

From a military point of view, the continuation of the existing cooperation
and the maintenance and modernisation of weapons and infrastructure are
more important than establishing an
airbase. These circumstances are not
expected to change in the near future.
As the exercises Zapad 2017 and Slavic
Brotherhood 2020 demonstrated,
Russia is able to deploy its units to
Belarus quickly if necessary. The establishment of a Russian military base
would require a change of heart among
the Belarusian leadership. As negative
political developments and the possible
withdrawal of Belarus from Russia’s
sphere of influence may make it more
difficult to support the Kaliningrad
Oblast from Belarusian territory in a
military conflict, the peacetime deployment of Russian troops to Belarus
cannot be completely ruled out.


-----

SOURCE: BEEBRIGHT / ISTOCKPHOTO

### RUSSIAN SPECIAL SERVICES

**One of the main tasks of the Russian special services, apart**

**from intelligence gathering in other countries, is to influence**

**foreign populations in the Kremlin’s strategic interests.**


-----

###### GRU PSYCHOLOGICAL OPERATIONS

**Russia sees psychological warfare as part of a comprehensive**

**informational confrontation with the enemy (mainly Western**

**countries). All three Russian special services – the FSB, SVR**

**and GRU – are involved in covert influence operations, each**

**with a different focus.**


According to the Russian Armed Forces’
doctrine, psychological warfare is one of
the three main components of ‘informational confrontation’ – the other two
being information-technical influencing of foreign countries (e.g. through
cyberattacks) and protecting Russia
against foreign information operations.
For Russia, psychological warfare is the
information-psychological influencing
of foreign audiences to change their
views and behaviour in Russia’s national
interest, including achieving the Russian
Armed Forces’ objectives. Russia sees
psychological warfare as part of a
comprehensive informational confrontation with the enemy (mainly Western
countries), and it is ongoing both during
conflict and in peacetime.

According to Russian doctrine, the
targets of psychological warfare include
the political leadership, military personnel and their families, the civilian
population, and certain specific target


_Emblem of GRU_
_psychological operations'_
_units_

groups, such as ethnic and religious
minorities, opposition groups and
businesspeople – in friendly, neutral
and hostile foreign countries alike. This
means that the entire world population
outside Russia is a potential target.

Within the Russian Armed Forces,
psychological operations are the


-----

responsibility of the Main Intelligence
Directorate of the General Staff (GRU);
the GRU develops the plan for psychological warfare, which is then approved
by the Chief of the General Staff. The
GRU’s chief psychological operations
division is military unit 54777.

Both unit 54777 and the regional GRU
psy-ops units subordinated to it study,
analyse and assess the military-political
situation in foreign countries, and the
morale and psychology of their military
and civilian population. They prepare
psychological influence materials and
participate in the armed forces’ deception activities, or maskirovka, and
counter-­propaganda. Working undercover, they establish international contacts while concealing their connection
with the GRU. They also study Russian
and foreign experience in carrying out
psychological operations.

Psy-ops units monitor foreign media
on a daily basis to keep abreast of the
coverage of issues relevant to the GRU,
current events and Russia’s role in
them. Regular media monitoring reports
identify, among other things, influential
Western publications’ articles that are


in line with Russian interests; these
are boosted through fake social media
accounts and GRU-controlled online
portals. The choice of topics depends
on the GRU’s priorities, which may
change in time. In online propaganda,
GRU focuses on popular social media
platforms such as Facebook, Twitter,
Reddit and VK (VKontakte). The work
is measured quantitatively: in addition
to the number of items produced in
each category (e.g. opinion pieces, news
stories and comments), the spread of
these materials (e.g. the number of likes
or shares) is also monitored.

In 2020, GRU-controlled English-language online portals (such as inforos.ru,
infobrics.org and oneworld.press) disseminated false information about the
COVID-19 pandemic, undermining the
Western countries’ efforts to curb the
spread of the virus and praising Russia’s actions. For example, they spread
the statement that the US is taking
advantage of the pandemic to assert its
worldview and the coronavirus is in fact
an American bioweapon. The GRU uses
these portals to plant disinformation in
the public sphere of foreign countries,


GRU-CONTROLLED ONLINE PORTALS DISSEMINATED

FALSE INFORMATION ABOUT THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

TO UNDERMINE WESTERN EFFORTS TO CONTROL

THE SPREAD OF THE VIRUS.


-----

GRU FRONT ORGANISATIONS FOR
PSYCHOLOGICAL OPERATIONS

Aleksandr Starunski Denis Tyurin
Former commander of unit 54777 Ofcer of unit 54777

Aleksandr Kostyukhin
Former commander Sergei Panteleyev
of unit 54777 Witting co-optee
of unit 54777

Location

Informational Civilization – 13 Krzhizhanovsky St,
21st Century building 2, Moscow

Institute of the Russian Diaspora
InfoRos

Website creator Website creator
Website creator


The common denominators of online portals created with the participation of military unit 54777 ofcers:
creating a positive image of Russia and disseminating information aligned with Russia’s interests to

Russian diaspora around the world.

The GRU often uses front organisations and online portals created by them to conduct
psychological operations in the public sphere. Above are some examples of projects
set up by GRU unit 54777 officers and their associates.

SOURCE: ESTONIAN FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SERVICE


-----

in the hope that it will spread and the
original source will go unnoticed.

One of the avenues pursued by the GRU
psy-ops units is to influence Russians
living abroad. To carry out this task, the
psy-ops units have set up organisations
and media outlets to gather and provide
Russians residing abroad solely with
information that aligns with Russia’s
interests (and is therefore often biased).

GRU-ORGANISED SECURITY
CONFERENCE IN GREECE

In October 2014, about six months after
the occupation of Crimea, a conference
entitled "The Security of Europe: A New
Geopolitical Dimension" was held in _Source: Parlamentskaya Gazeta No 39,_
Athens without much international at- _7–13 Nov 2014_
tention. At the event, organised by the
Institute of Geopolitical Studies, a local

the unit, publicly described the prepara-

think tank, Greek and Russian present-

tions for the event in the Russian state

ers criticised the EU’s sanctions against

media outlet Parlamentskaya Gazeta

Russia and expressed outrage that the

in November 2014, using the title of

Greek government, under pressure from

Deputy Director of the Institute of the

the US and the EU, had behaved so

Russian Diaspora (Institut Russkogo

badly towards its ‘traditional friend’.

Zarubezhya), a GRU front: ‘What is

What has so far remained hidden from happening at this conference right now
the public is the fact that the conference is breaking through the information
was organised by military unit 54777, blockade that has surrounded our coun-
the GRU’s chief psy-ops division. Alex- try [since the occupation of Crimea]. We
ander Shchedrin, then commander of have no outlet to foreign information


-----

_A GRU-organised round_
_table on Greek elections_
_in Moscow in 2015. GRU_
_officer Denis Tyurin (far_
_left) next to future Greek_
_Defence Minister Panos_
_Kammenos_


SOURCE: PRESSMIA.RU

from Klintsevich in the front row. The
Independent Greeks political party, led
by Kammenos, made it to the Greek
government three months later, and
Kammenos served as defence minister until 2019. Just before the 2015
parliamentary election, Kammenos
visited Moscow, where he participated
in a round table on the Greek election,
organised by the news agency InfoRos,
another front for unit 54777. Alongside
Kammenos, InfoRos director Denis
Tyurin, an officer of unit 54777, gave
comments to the media.

This case shows how easy it was for
the GRU to present its messages to
receptive Western audiences and establish high-level contacts. It is noteworthy
that the intelligence officers used the
cover of an independent journalist or
NGO representative.


space. No one else in the world knows
anything about the most significant
conferences held in Russia. The task
was to make sure that Europeans knew
what was really threatening them.
Member of the State Duma Franz Adamovich Klintsevich came to our organisation, and considering our experience,
put forward an idea and a scheme that
could be realised; he provided the necessary contacts. We identified a weak
link in the West – Greece – which itself
suffers from sanctions. We found an
organisation [in Greece] that is friendly
to Russia, and together we organised
this conference.’

At the Athens event, politician Panos
Kammenos, co-founder of the Institute of Geopolitical Studies, which
co-organised the event with the GRU
front, was seated just a few metres


-----

###### RUSSIAN SPECIAL SERVICES’ INFLUENCE OPERATIONS IN CYBERSPACE

**Russia continues to be the primary security threat to Western**

**democracies also in cyberspace. In addition to espionage,**

**Russian special services are actively using cyberspace in their**

**influence operations to create divisions in Western societies,**

**transnational relations and NATO.**


The types of cyber attack described
in our previous annual reports are
still used by the Russian services
to carry out their intelligence tasks,
which threaten the security of Estonia
and our allies. For example, malicious
emails infected with malware are sent
to targets; these are designed to lure

_Headquarters of Russian_
_special services: FSB, GRU, SVR_
_(clockwise from top)_

SOURCES: BOSHKAREV; MOREORLESS /

WIKIMAPIA.ORG / CC BY 3.0; ALEXANDER

BELENKIY / MACOS.LIVEJOURNAL.COM


the target, taking into account their
field of work and interests (known as
spear phishing). Cyber attacks abusing vulnerable websites also continue;
in order to infect the target’s device,
spyware is added to sites frequently
visited by the target (known as watering hole attacks).


-----

 _Deepfake technology enables the_



_use of false personas to increase the_
_credibility of influence operations_

SOURCE: LINKEDIN.COM VIA WALORSKA, A.

DEEPFAKES & DISINFORMATION. FRIEDRICH

NAUMANN FOUNDATION / CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

high once technological development
reaches a level where deepfakes are
convincing enough to be unrecognisable to the human eye. This would
make it more difficult for the public to
distinguish false information from the
truth. As a countermeasure to Russian
influence activities, we have put together a selection of Russian services’
methods in cyberspace based on real
events (see figure).

Cyber operations originating in Russia
and the abuse of cyberspace for the
purpose of influencing will very likely
continue in 2021. These are effective,
inexpensive and well-established
measures for the Russian services.
Moreover, influence operations can
be a way to achieve long-term effects
without always requiring intervention in the target country’s domestic
politics.


However, the abuse of cyberspace for
influence operations has increased.
Russian services have adapted “active
measures” from the Soviet period to
new circumstances, taking into account the development of the internet
and other technology. For example,
hacking an information system to steal
and leak sensitive information (known
as hack-and-leak operations) is similar
to an “active measure” familiar from
the KGB’s arsenal: the KGB used to
disseminate genuine or doctored
documents to spark anti-government
discussions among the public. The adaptation of such “active measures” is
an ongoing process. In the future, the
Russian services are likely to exploit
deepfake technology, among other
things. This threat will be particularly


RUSSIAN INFLUENCE OPERATIONS CAN BE A WAY

TO ACHIEVE LONG-TERM EFFECTS WITHOUT HAVING TO

INTERVENE IN THE TARGET COUNTRY’S

DOMESTIC POLITICS.


-----

EXAMPLES OF METHODS USED BY RUSSIAN
SPECIAL SERVICES IN CYBERSPACE

|SPACE|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|SITE NATO PAHA! NATO PAHA! NATO PNAAHTAO! IS BAD NATO PAHA! NATO IS BAD|||
||||
|||NATO PAH|
||||
|||NATO IS BAD|


EXPLOIT OF A MEDIA WEBSITE

NATO IS BAD

NATO IS BAD


Russian cyber attackers exploit vulnerable media websites as part of their influence operations. A
website is hacked, and a news story with narratives suitable for Russia is planted; a link to the fake
news story is then distributed on other platforms, subsequently also in Russian-language media,
blogs, forums and elsewhere. In 2020, Lithuanian and Polish media websites were hacked on
several occasions, planting fake news that denigrated NATO and its troops.

HACK AND LEAK

**TION** **SENSITIVE**

**TION** **SENSITIVE**

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|aling comp the Russia||


**SENSITIVE**
**INFORMA-**
**TION**

to media

**SENSITIVE**
**INFORMA-**
**TION**

to media

www.meedia.ee

**SENSITIVE**
**INFORMATION**

www.meedia.ee

**SENSITIVE**
**INFORMATION**

**SENSITIVE**
**INFOR-**
**MATION**

**SENSITIVE**
**INFOR-**
**MATION**

Stealing compromising and sensitive information through hacking and then leaking it is one
of the Russian services’ most common influencing methods. Out-of-context information is
disseminated, which can deepen disagreements in society on already sensitive issues and thus create


dissatisfaction with the government.
In 2019, documents from UK-US trade talks were stolen by breaking into the former UK trade
secretary’s email account and leaked on social media. One of the topics of the negotiations at the
time was the National Health Service (NHS); its possible privatisation was hotly debated in the UK
during the election period.


ww

**Mary w**
**elec**

www

**Mary w**
**elect**


-----

|www.valitsus.ee THE WEBSITE IS NOT AVAILABLE www.meedia.ee www.valitsus.ee THE WEBSITE IS NOT THE WEBSITE AVAILABLE IS NOT AVAILABLE www.meedia.ee ent (e.g. an electioTnH)E, WthEeBS RITuEssia media and governmISe nNtO Ts ector, AVAILABLE ch cyber attacks, Russia seeks|Col2|
|---|---|
|THE WEBSITE IS NOT AVAILABLE www.va TH THE WEBS A IS NOT AVAILAB ent (e.g. an elec media and gove ch cyber attack||
||LE www.meedia.ee tioTnH)E, WthEeBS RITuEssia rnmISe nNtO Ts ector, AVAILABLE s, Russia seeks|


favourable decisions for Russia. On the day of the Montenegrin parliamentary election in 2016,

DENIAL-OF-SERVICE (DOS) ATTACK

To influence another country during a key political event (e.g. an election), the Russian services
organise Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks against the media and government sector, impeding
official information flow among other things. With such cyber attacks, Russia seeks to present
itself as a force to be reckoned with, sowing fear and pressuring the target country to make more

www.valimised.ee

**Mary won the**
**election!**

www.valimised.ee

**Mary won the**
**election!**

DoS attacks were launched against the websites of the country’s government and media. The www.valimised.ee
attacks were repeated the following year after Montenegro announced its accession to NATO.John won the

**election!**

WEBSITE DEFACEMENT WITH INTIMIDATING CONTENT

www.valimised.ee

**John won the**
**election!**


In order to disrupt the exchange of accurate information, create fear and deepen internal tensions
in society, or damage the credibility of government agencies, Russian services have organised
cyber attacks against websites and the information systems of internet service providers.
Websites are hacked, planting images, text, video or audio with intimidating, threatening or
otherwise disturbing content. Targeting an internet service provider makes it possible to attack a
large number of websites simultaneously.
In 2019, operatives of the GRU Main Centre for Special Technologies hacked a Georgian internet
service provider’s system. Through it, the operatives defaced thousands of websites with an image
of former Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili accompanied by the text “I’ll be back”.

SOURCE: ESTONIAN FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SERVICE


NATO PAHA!

NATO PAHA!

NATO IS BAD

NATO PAHA!

NATO PAHA!

NATO IS BAD

www.meedia.ee

**NSITIVE**
**ORMATION**

www.meedia.ee

**NSITIVE**
**RMATION**


-----

### GROWING PRESSURE FROM CHINA


_The image of "Xi Jinping – the people’s leader" is_
_heavily promoted in China_


SOURCE: CHINA CENTRAL TELEVISION


**Implementing China’s foreign policy doctrine, or creating**

**a "community of common destiny", will lead to a silenced world**

**dominated by Beijing. Faced with growing confrontation with**

**the West, China’s main goal is to create a division between the**

**United States and Europe.**


The Chinese leadership understands
that a united West is an insurmountable
obstacle for China that must be broken.
Using various topics, such as Iran, the
climate or health care, China wants to
find as much common ground with
Europe as possible and make European
leaders believe that China is a reliable


partner contrary to what the US claims.
China understands very well that a
fragmented Europe is a weak adversary,
and its opposition to China is unlikely
ever to be as fierce as that of the United
States. However, despite its calls for
closer cooperation, China has no intention of changing itself but instead wants


-----

to use its size and influence to muffle
any critical voices from Europe.

Due to its tense relations with the US,
it is important for China to bring as
many countries as possible into its
sphere of influence. Putting President
Xi Jinping’s ideology at the centre of
party and state politics clearly indicates
that Xi Jinping’s leadership is meant to
make China the most powerful country
in the world by 2035. However, current
events also show that, far from moving
towards liberalism, China is becoming
an increasingly authoritarian regime
centred around the growing personality
cult of Xi Jinping.

The concept of a “community of
common destiny” was first introduced
at the 2012 National Congress of the
Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and
has since appeared with growing frequency in the vocabulary of top Chinese


politicians and diplomats. The phrase
remains characteristic of China’s strategic thinking in foreign policy. Important
foreign policy speeches and statements
by Chinese politicians and diplomats are
packed with references to the inevitability of creating a community of countries with a common destiny. While in
previous years, there was talk of climate
change as a force for global unity, the
keywords in 2020 were health care and
the coronavirus crisis.

Personal relations play a significant role
in the Chinese strategy for expanding
the community of common destiny.
There are several European forums in
various formats where China sends its
high-level diplomats, politicians and
entrepreneurs, with the clear objective
of establishing personal relations to
influence the target countries’ policies
towards China.


-----

 _The coronavirus crisis in_



_Taiwan in May 2020_

SOURCE: TSAIINGWEN /

YOUTUBE

 _The coronavirus crisis in_



_mainland China in May_
_2020_

SOURCE: CCTV 4 / YOUTUBE

This desire to increase its influence
was also patently evident during the
coronavirus crisis in the spring, as China
was actively trying to brand itself as a
“saviour”. The emphasis was put on the
need to put politics aside and confront
the virus devastating humankind.
Simultaneously in China, the media,
heavily controlled by the Communist
Party, was actively defaming, demonising and ridiculing Western democracy, saying that only an authoritarian
system like China could successfully
defeat the virus. They failed to mention
that the democratic and self-governing island of Taiwan was much more
successful in managing the epidemic.
During large ceremonies on both sides
of the Taiwan Strait in May, events in
Taipei could be held without masks, because the spread of the virus was under
control. It is worth noting that Taiwan’s
population density is twice as high as in


Hubei Province, where the first cases of
coronavirus infection were recorded.

In addition to smearing the West,
Chinese media praised the obedience of
China’s people and their willingness to
cooperate with the authorities during
the spread of the virus. At the same
time, thousands of Chinese citizens
worldwide were on the brink of mental
breakdown, having been barred from
returning home. Following border
closures, at first only the privileged
few – diplomats, certain specialists, the
odd delegation and students sent by
the state to study abroad – could buy
a ticket for the special flights run by a
Chinese airline once a week. Ordinary
students received nothing but health
packs with face masks, gloves and
other personal protective equipment
distributed at the embassies, along
with uncertainty about how to extend


-----

their visas and accommodation in the
dormitory. Chartered flights to China
were primarily run for Chinese people in
Western countries because the central
government wanted to demonstrate to
the West how it cared about its citizens.

Criticism of the Chinese authorities and
foreign missions, which began to spread
within the Chinese diaspora, was quickly
suppressed. Chinese educators were instructed to delete all social media posts
critical of the Chinese authorities and to
spread this spirit of censorship through
as many channels as possible.

The CCP holds Chinese citizens living
abroad under ideological control and
surveillance through cells created by
party members, including employees
of state-owned enterprises, journalists,
diplomats and students. The cells’
indoctrinating ideological manipulation
takes the form of regular, intensive
meetings on party politics. The aim is
to keep party members living abroad,
including in Estonia, firmly under the
CCP’s ideological control. Higher levels
of the party hierarchy expect regular
reports on participation in these political
meetings. People are disciplined by the


fact that random top-down individual
checks are made that include questions
about a particular person’s behaviour
during these meetings. This amounts to
complete ideological control. The rare,
brave journalists who have criticised the
Chinese authorities’ actions or covered
the real situation have been arrested,
some even imprisoned.

Journalists also play a part in creating
a silenced world controlled by Beijing.
Foreigners invited as guests on Chinese
TV programmes mostly have a track
record of expressing views acceptable to
China. TV reports by Chinese journalists
must be approved by a laoshi (teacher) before being broadcast, but the
content of an interview with a foreigner
is usually not coordinated in detail
beforehand. Behind this seemingly open
mindset, however, is a widely followed
formula whereby criticism of China is
acceptable, but only to a certain extent,
beyond which there must be a “but”
– “but we cannot go around China; we
simply must adapt to the new world
order”. This seeming criticism of China
is spreading in Europe and is obscuring
and undermining the perception of the
security threat posed by China.


AN INCREASINGLY AUTHORITARIAN CHINA FORCES ITS

MODEL OF GOVERNMENT ON OTHER COUNTRIES.


-----

###### CHINESE INFLUENCE OPERATIONS MOVE TO THE WEST

**The Chinese propaganda machine uses Western information**

**channels to spread its narrative. Since the coronavirus**

**pandemic outbreak, the amount of biased and fake news**

**produced in China has increased, and its content has become**

**more aggressive.**


The global coronavirus crisis is creating
favourable conditions for ideological
expansion, and through it, opportunities
for wider international recognition of
China’s power ambitions. During the
pandemic, the main objectives of Chinese foreign influence operations have
been to improve China’s image, spread
the message of the CCP and shape the
discourse around it, as well as to sway
the political decisions of countries and
international organisations in China’s
favour.

The introduction of new technologies will help the CCP to intensify and
expand its agitation and propaganda
work. To spread its ideology more vigorously, China has turned its focus on
the social media channels popular in the
West, having opened numerous official
and fake accounts in the last year to
spread its message. Chinese officials
are actively engaged in creating and
disseminating disinformation. Leading diplomats and media figures use


Twitter and Facebook, which are banned
in China, and write their posts in English, enabling a large amount of biased
and false information created in China
to end up in the global information
space. Such a plurality of opinions is
not allowed on Chinese territory, where
user accounts critical of the regime are
quickly disabled.

The Chinese authorities have begun
to recruit Chinese people living abroad
as well as Westerners and Western
information channels to disseminate
its message. There are a number of
bloggers on video hosting platforms
whose content praising China and justifying Chinese policy uses a style and
vocabulary that clearly points to CCP
propaganda. Besides content intended
for regular internet users, pro-Chinese
think tanks and scholars in Western
countries also publish opinion pieces
and research papers aimed at the intelligentsia. At first glance, these seem to
be critical of China and point out some


-----

_Common examples of Chinese fake news_
_on Western social media_


SOURCE: REDDIT.COM





problems. Still, in most cases, the main
message is a call to adapt to China’s
presence and the rules it has established, even if this means abandoning
the values of a democratic society.

In 2020, this new approach to soft
power also reached the Confucius
Institute, whose funding, management,
reputation and activities began to be
re-evaluated. Changes were also made
in the institute operating in Estonia.

The criticism aimed at Confucius
Institutes, known to be instruments
of soft power, is taken seriously by
China. It wants to reduce the negative
publicity by rebranding the institute,
without actually abandoning its primary


goals. It is likely that the renaming of
the Confucius Institute headquarters as
the Centre for Language Exchange and
Cooperation, along with any accompanying structural changes, is a mere
formality, and the institutes’ activities,
as well as the related problems and
threats, will remain largely unchanged.
It cannot be ruled out that alongside
the Confucius Institutes, which have
begun to lose their importance, the
Chinese authorities will, in the future,
want to employ other Chinese cultural
centres as instruments of influence, as
these have not received criticism and
have a “clean” reputation for the time
being, allowing for easier information
gathering as well as to establishing


-----

and maintaining networks in foreign
countries.

Foreign think tanks with informal links
to the Chinese government seek to
adapt the CCP’s message to Western
pluralism. However, topics such as
personal freedom, the status of Hong
Kong and Taiwan, and the situation of
the Uyghurs and Tibetans are addressed strictly within the limits acceptable to the Chinese authorities. In these
cases, the Chinese propaganda machine
benefits from the lack of local experts
on China who could offer alternative
perspectives. This means that the
Chinese version of the truth may begin
to dominate the opinion space.


Tactically, China follows Russia’s
example in spreading propaganda and
disinformation. However, this points
more to conformity resulting from
shared objectives rather than any coordinated cooperation, as do the good
relations between Chinese and Russian
representatives on social media and
the sharing of each other’s posts. At
present, China does not use disinformation as actively and as professionally as
Russia, but it is likely that it will expand
and intensify its activities in this area in
the near future. China’s influence operations aim to weaken Europe’s open
society by promoting its own propaganda messages.


-----

###### SINICISING CHINESE TECHNOLOGY

**China’s ambition to**

**become the world leader**

**in technology poses major**

**security threats.**

Following Xi Jinping’s strategic guidelines, China is devoting all its resources to technological development to
become a world leader in the field and
make other countries dependent on
Chinese technology. China faces sanctions and obstacles, which is giving rise
to the sinicisation of its technology –
increasing reliance on domestic producers. If Chinese technology becomes
entirely domestic, the technology and
software’s working principles will be
even more opaque than before.

China’s message last year about opening up further to the world also seemed
opaque. For example, in the field of
technology, this actually means looking
for opportunities to access world-class
technology. China wants to buy up
talent from all over the world, get them
to come to China, or invest in them, to
gain access to the knowledge that China
is lacking. The purpose is not to engage
in mutually beneficial cooperation but to
develop China’s capabilities to a level no


longer dependent on foreign suppliers.
China has set itself the goal of becoming fully independent in technology.

Cyber espionage has also been one of
China’s traditional means of getting
hold of foreign high technology. To
justify its actions, China is ostensibly
working to break the Western monopoly
and considers it acceptable to use any
means necessary to achieve this.

Various legally sound schemes are being purposefully used to gain access to
projects all over the world. For example,
joint ventures with local companies are
being set up in foreign countries with
the obvious aim of obscuring China’s
involvement.


-----

 _These are the areas in which China_



_wants to become the world leader;_
汉化 means ‘sinicisation’

SOURCE: ESTONIAN FOREIGN

INTELLIGENCE SERVICE

Chinese technology may initially use
GPS and the BeiDou system in parallel.
Still, the ultimate goal is to make it
exclusively reliant on BeiDou, claiming
that the BeiDou system has much more
accurate positioning capabilities than
GPS. Integrating Estonia into China’s
autonomous technology ecosystem
makes Estonia vulnerable and dependent on China.

The CCP and Chinese private enterprises are often linked either directly or
indirectly. For example, Huawei emphasises that the company is owned by its
employees, led by Huawei’s trade union
committee. However, all Chinese trade
unions belong to the All-China Federation of Trade Unions, the chairman of
which is also the CCP’s party secretary.
The current party secretary is also a
vice-chairperson of the National People’s Congress, China’s parliament. The
trade unions follow the same vertical
chain of command as the provinces –
they are actually headed by the party
secretary and not by the provincial
governor, whose responsibilities are
administrative.


HIGH-SPEED TRAINS


The country’s leadership has a clear
objective of making the world dependent on Chinese technology. Chinese
media and analysts have made no
secret of the long-term goal of employing the Chinese BeiDou satellite
navigation system in all Chinese technology and exporting the system to
countries that have joined the Belt and
Road Initiative. In other words, China
is establishing an autonomous global
ecosystem where in the era of the Internet of Things, artificial intelligence,
cloud services and ultra-high-speed
networks (5G today, 6G in the future),
integrated Chinese technologies will
play a key role.


-----

###### CHINA AND RUSSIA –  A PRACTICAL PARTNERSHIP

**Cooperation between China and Russia has an important**

**demonstrative aspect, which is meant to deter the West and**

**contribute to achieving the two countries’ strategic goals.**


Relations between China and Russia
are receiving increasing public attention. It is important to monitor whether China and Russia will move from
coordinated military action – such
as joint exercises, joint patrols with
strategic bombers, joint development
of technology – towards a real alliance
in the coming years. At present, there
seems to be no such trend, as both
have reservations about the other and
China adheres to its official foreign
policy doctrine – not to establish
allied relations with anyone. However,
the strained relations between China and the West may bring the two
closer together. So far in their collaboration, both seem to be working
from a position of pragmatism and
demonstrativeness.

However, in addition to demonstrating
their relations, what stands out is the
Kremlin’s inability to defend its interests when China ignores them. For example, the Kremlin has failed to stand
up for the interests of Vietnam or
Rosneft in the South China Sea. China


is increasing its influence in Tajikistan,
and Russia is unable to prevent it. It
is also noteworthy that the Russian
media refrained from criticising China
when the COVID-19 epidemic began to
spread.

If Russia and China get too close to
each other, Western countries may
be tempted to lure Russia away. The
Kremlin would take advantage of a
situation like this and set conditions to
leave itself more room for negotiation.
Given Russia’s ambitions in the Baltic
Sea region, Estonia must stand firmly
against any scenario to lure Russia at
the expense of Estonia’s security.

The Russian business community
has become cautious when trading
with the Chinese since many Russian
entrepreneurs have been deceived, and
China’s payments are delayed. What
stands out in Russia-China trade and
investment is a purposeful avoidance
of dollar transactions. This is in line
with China’s goal of using the US
dollar as little as possible. China has


-----

_Russia must increasingly accept China’s role as big brother_


SOURCE: ALEXANDER VILF /

POOL / TASS


repeatedly proposed to Russia to start
using the Chinese yuan, but Russia has
mostly turned this proposal down.

In the context of military relations,
China wants Russia to share its combat
experience. There is frequent talk in the
Chinese media about Chinese soldiers
having the opportunity to learn from
Russia’s military experience in Syria


during joint exercises. The Russians
may indeed start to share their war
experiences with the Chinese from Syria
or other conflict zones. Russia may also
share its experience of building and
deploying private military companies,
as China has developed a new need to
ensure the security of increasingly large
global investment projects.


CHINA’S STRAINED RELATIONS WITH THE WEST

MAY PUSH RUSSIA AND CHINA

SIGNIFICANTLY CLOSER.


-----

-----

