# National Security Concept
 of the
 Republic of Estonia

## (2004)


-----

### CONTENTS

**Introduction**
1. **The National Security Policy goal, basic guidelines and security threats**
1.1.  The National Security Policy goal and basic guidelines
1.2.  Security policy developments in the world and Estonia’s position in the
international security environment
1.3.  Threats to national security

2.     Foreign policy in ensuring national security
2.1.   NATO
2.2.   European Union
2.3.   Other international organisations
2.4.   Bilateral and multilateral security relations
2.4.1. Transatlantic relations
2.4.2. Security relations in the Baltic Sea region
2.5.   Participation in international peace and security efforts
2.5.1. International crisis management
2.5.2. International fight against terrorism
2.5.3. Arms control and confidence building measures

3.     Estonian military defence
3.1.   Military defence in ensuring national security
3.2.   The role of the Defence Forces and Defence League in implementing the
National Defence Policy

4.     Protecting constitutional order and sectors of vital importance;
**ensuring public safety**
4.1.    Consolidating the rule of law
4.2.    Enhancing internal security
4.2.1.   The activities of security agencies
4.2.2.   Maintaining law and order
4.2.3.   Ensuring border security and migration control
4.2.4.   Crisis management and emergency services
4.3.     Strengthening economic, social, and environmental security
4.3.1. Strengthening economic security
4.3.2. Enhancing social safety
4.3.3. Enhancing environmental safety


-----

**INTRODUCTION**

The National Security Concept of the Republic of Estonia (2004) has been drawn up
by the Government. It presents the goal and guidelines of Estonia’s National Security
Policy and a general evaluation of the existing security environment. This document
has been drawn up and adopted on the basis of the Peacetime National Defence Act.

The National Security Concept, adopted in 2001, dealt with the period when Estonia
was heading towards North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) and European
Union (EU) accession. The achievement of these goals has created a need for the
reorganisation of the nation’s activities concerning national security, while
maintaining the nation’s basic course in this sphere.

The National Security Concept is a document with a medium-term perspective. It will
be revised according to changes in the security environment, and as new options
develop for ensuring and enhancing Estonia’s security.

### 1. THE NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY GOAL, BASIC GUIDELINES AND SECURITY THREATS

**1.1._The National Security Policy goal and basic guidelines**

The goal of the Estonian National Security Policy is to preserve Estonia’s
independence and sovereignty, territorial integrity, constitutional order, and public
safety.

Estonia’s security is ensured in accordance with the law by making use of all foreign
and domestic policy means.

Membership in NATO, the EU, and other international organisations, as well as
successful bilateral and multilateral relations, make it possible to defend Estonia’s
interests and to achieve the National Security Policy goal.

The Estonian National Security Policy is based upon the principle that security is
indivisible, upon the need for international security cooperation, and upon the
common defence of democratic values. As a member of NATO and the EU, Estonia
wishes to ensure its national security, and thereby, to also enhance the international
security environment. Membership in alliances with common democratic principles
and goals is the main basis for, and guarantee of Estonia’s national security.

Estonia abides by the principle, that every nation has the right and freedom to choose
its own solutions for its security needs and that every nation is obligated to not
threaten the security of other nations. The Estonian National Security Policy and its
implementation are not directed against any other nation.

Proceeding from its national interests as well as its membership in NATO and the EU,
Estonia abides by the following guidelines in its National Security Policy:


-----

-  to actively participate in the work of both NATO and EU structures as well as to
improve cooperation with other Member States;

-  to participate in the international security system and corresponding cooperative
endeavours, including international crisis management and peace operations, in
accordance with Estonia’s commitments and capabilities;

-  to develop Estonia’s military defence in cooperation with its allies so as to ensure
the nation’s defence capability;

-  to ensure the democratic development of society and to enhance the nation’s
internal security;

-  to enhance social, economic, and environmental stability.

To achieve the National Security Policy goal, Estonia ensures, that the means for
carrying out foreign policy, for defending the nation militarily, for ensuring
constitutional order, for ensuring public safety, and for protecting sectors of vital
importance will all be applied in a mutually coordinated fashion. The risk analysis and
threat assessments drawn up by the ministries and security agencies constitute an
essential basis for formulating the National Security Policy, and also help the
Government to determine the short-term National Security Policy guidelines and the
most important spheres of cooperation between government agencies.

**1.2._International security policy developments and Estonia’s position in the**
**international security environment**

Estonia’s national security is directly connected with developments in the
international security environment. Euro-Atlantic security cooperation and
integration, including the enlargement of both NATO and the EU, have reduced the
threat of large-scale military conflicts in Europe. The globalisation of economic and
social processes and communication is creating close links between nations and
exerting a crucial effect upon the security environment. Despite positive
developments, the international security environment has not reached a state of
stability.

For Estonia, the most significant trend in the international security environment is the
development of Euro-Atlantic cooperation -- NATO and the EU have enlarged, and
the accession of new members is continuing. Ever since they were founded, these two
structures have ensured Europe’s peace, stability of social development, and
economic growth. Membership in both an enlarged NATO and EU gives Estonia a
historically unique opportunity for enhancing its national security. In parallel with
multilateral security cooperation within NATO, a partnership with the United States
and other allies constitutes a major security factor for Estonia.

With the enlargement of both NATO and the EU, there has been a significant increase
in the security and stability of the Euro-Atlantic region. NATO and EU enlargement
have also had a positive effect upon the Baltic Sea region’s security environment. The
vast majority of the region’s states belong to the EU and many of them to NATO. The
logical continuation of this process will make it possible, in the interests of peace and


-----

stability, to intensify security cooperation of the Nordic countries and the Baltic
states, both within the framework of Euro-Atlantic cooperation and regionally.

Within the changed international security environment, there is an increased threat of
an often unpredictable breaking out and evolving of local and regional crises.
Changes in the security environment, and belonging to NATO and the EU, have
significantly expanded Estonia’s security policy interests into regions in which
Estonia previously had no direct interests. These regions affect the security of Estonia
and its allies as well as the international security environment and its stability.
Therefore, special attention should be focused upon them.

The security policy changes taking place in the world have been dealt with in the
NATO Strategic Concept (1999) and in other documents, and also in the European
Security Strategy (2003).

Changes in the international security environment have brought with them new
security threats. The unconventional threats among them are: international terrorism;
the uncontrolled spread of weapons of mass destruction; organised crime; the
smuggling of weapons, narcotics, and people; and the flow of refugees created by
crisis situations. In such conditions, no nation or region of the world is beyond
danger. For Estonia also, many previously non-important threats have become actual.

The extensiveness and coordination of terrorism, and the criminal organisations
associated with it, is ever increasing. This means, that NATO and EU Member States
must employ effective countermeasures, including the capability and readiness to
solve the crises accompanying terrorism.

The need for cooperation between nations on a bilateral and multilateral basis, and
also within the framework of international organisations, is constantly increasing. But
the ability of international organisations to solve certain security problems has, at the
same time, not improved.

Quickly developing international contacts are increasing the further internationalising
of various social and environmental problems. Accordingly, there is also an increased
possibility that Estonia will be threatened by problems, which have originated far
from us.

Due to the nation’s smallness and openness, Estonia’s economy is greatly dependent
upon the development of the world economy. From the national security viewpoint, it
is essential to develop balanced and transparent economic relations with other
countries as well as a stable inflow of foreign investments. Shortcomings in these
spheres could increase the various threats accompanying the development of the
world economy.

**1.3. Threats to national security**

**Uncontrollable developments in the world and international crises**
The increased probability that new many-faceted and often unforeseeable threats will
crop up presents the ensuring of security with new challenges. The most serious


-----

threats to Estonia’s security are possible instability and uncontrollable developments
in the world, as well as international crises.

The security of Estonia and its allies is indivisible -- the international security
environment affects Estonia’s security and vice-versa. The security environment is
threatened by both international crises and their consequences. Participation in
international efforts to prevent and solve crises enables Estonia to contribute to the
ensuring of international security.

With the enlargement of NATO and the EU, the security and stability zone in Europe
has significantly broadened. At the same time, due to the contradictory
democratisation processes and foreign policies of certain neighbours of these
alliances, it is still not possible to rule out threats to Estonia’s security.

**Threat of a military conflict**

The probability of a military conflict breaking out, that would encompass all of
Europe, or the threat of a conflict in the Baltic Sea region has been reduced to a
minimum. Membership in NATO and the EU reduces the threat of war for Estonia
even more.

Estonia’s national security is neither presently, nor will be in the near future,
confronted with a direct military threat. Even in the medium and long-term
perspective, a military attack against any NATO Member State is very unlikely. For
such a threat to re-emerge, a noticeable power shift in the international security
arrangement would have to take place along with a major and long-term worsening of
the security environment. Such a development, however, is unlikely. Nevertheless, in
the long-term perspective, the possibility for the re-occurrence of such a threat cannot
be totally excluded.

Various crises of a military nature are the most likely source of a military threat for
Estonia’s security. A crisis of a military nature, that directly affects Estonia, could be
activity of a military nature, which is aimed at applying pressure to Estonia, or some
other NATO Member, for achieving otherwise unacceptable political decisions or
concessions.

A crisis of a military nature, directly affecting Estonia, could be brought about by:

-  the unexpected increasing or re-deployment of military forces stationed near
Estonia’s border;

-  large-scale military manoeuvres, which are not in compliance with international
arms control treaties, in the direct vicinity of Estonia’s border;

-  the intentional violation of Estonia’s air space, land border, or territorial waters.

A crisis of a military nature directly affecting Estonia could also be caused by a
politically motivated terrorist attack against Estonia, its allies, or neighbouring states.

The further reduction of incidents of armed conflict and other military threats is
dependent upon the development of international relations as well as NATO’s, the
EU’s, and Estonia’s defence capabilities.


-----

**Threat of external coercion**

The threat of direct political or some other coercion being applied with the purpose of
altering Estonia’s basic domestic or foreign policy options is minimal. Such pressure
could be connected with the activities of the special services of other states as well as
politically motivated economic and other measures being applied against Estonia.
Integration into the EU and NATO, as Estonia’s successful political, economic, and
social development plus the consolidation of society on the basis of democratic values
and the successful maintenance of law and order ensure Estonia’s ability to avoid the
application of such coercion, and, if necessary, to effectively counter it.

**Threat of international terrorism**

Although the likelihood of a direct military threat is decreasing, non-conventional
threats, primarily the global nature of international terrorism, and the possibility of the
uncontrolled proliferation of chemical, biological, and radioactive or nuclear weapons
are presenting international cooperation with serious new tasks.

International terrorism and organised crime, the latter providing a hotbed for the
former, are spreading in areas where national security, law and order, as well as rule
of law are failing. The elimination of the threat of terrorism requires quick and
effective international cooperation, in which Estonia participates within the scope of
its commitments and capabilities. In addition to international cooperation, Estonia
also implements domestic counter-terrorism measures.

**Threat deriving from organised crime**

International organised crime could often be extensively intertwined with the
activities of terrorist organisations and be connected with the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. It is therefore a significant threat factor to international stability
and Estonia’s national security.

A noticeable threat to the functioning of the rule of law in Estonia, and thereby, to
national security, is the possible increase in the influence of international organised
crime within society and the accompanying corruption as well as its penetration into
politics, the civil service, and the economy.

**Threats deriving from human activity and natural disasters**

The threats deriving from human activity, which influence Estonia’s national security
are: fires and explosions; transport, radiation, and chemical accidents; and the crossborder effects of these accidents.

Especially dangerous for the Baltic Sea region are older type nuclear power plants.
The threat of immediate catastrophe is primarily associated with large enterprises
handling dangerous chemicals, and with the intensifying tanker traffic in the Baltic
Sea, especially in the Gulf of Finland.

The worsening condition of the environment is a consequence of the worldwide scope
of environmental hazards, and could be connected with climatic changes, the thinning


-----

of the ozone layer, and the depletion of natural resources. The natural disasters
Estonia is basically threatened by are storms and floods, which could cause
emergency situations.

**Threats of a social origin**

Drug addiction, alcoholism, and the spread of HIV/AIDS, along with other dangerous
contagious diseases, pose a threat to Estonia’s economic welfare as well as the
nation’s social and political stability. Emergencies in Estonia’s vicinity could be
accompanied by a large flow of refugees and extensive migration.

**Threats of an economic origin**

Estonia’s economy is, to a great extent, integrated with the world economy, and
therefore, Estonia can be influenced by potential worldwide economic crises, or by
the instability of foreign markets essential for Estonia. A major threat factor is the
great dependence of Estonia’s gas and electrical systems upon foreign monopolistic
energy systems and suppliers.

**Threats in the information technology sphere**

The instability or breakdown of information systems could cause serious threats. The
constantly increasing rate at which electronic information systems are adopted in
Estonia, and their connection with and dependence upon worldwide information
systems, increases the threat of computer crime as well as the vulnerability of
information systems, including spheres of primary importance to national security.
During the last few years, there has been an increase in the number of persons who,
through their activities in the Internet environment, could endanger government
databases and registries.

**2. FOREIGN POLICY IN ENSURING NATIONAL SECURITY**

**2.1. The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation**

Membership in NATO guarantees the nation’s military security, and enables Estonia
to constructively participate in international security cooperation and most efficiently
ensure the nation’s defence.

The Estonian National Security Policy corresponds with the NATO Member
commitments and rights, which are derived from the North Atlantic Treaty. The
Estonian National Security Policy supports the achieving of the goals of these
commitments and rights as well as the goals of NATO as a whole. Estonia’s approach
to the matter of national security is in full accord with the principles of NATO’s
Strategic Concept.

As a NATO Member, Estonia sets aside the necessary funds and other resources for
participating in the Alliance’s activities and for fulfilling its commitments, as well as
participates in NATO’s military structure and joint defence planning. Estonia fulfils


-----

the commitments, derived from the North Atlantic Treaty’s Article 5, for preventing
and repelling military attacks against any NATO Member State.

NATO’s main task is, and will be, the common defence of its Members and the
ensuring of international stability. NATO has ensured Europe’s security. NATO, as
the only effective international defence and security organisation, has managed to act
decisively to solve crises in Europe and elsewhere in the world. NATO must be
capable of responding to threats, irrespective of where in the world they occur, as well
as be capable of responding to such unconventional threats as terrorism. For Estonia it
is essential, that NATO will continue to fulfil its basic task -- the ensuring of a
common defence. Estonia fully supports NATO’s readiness to deal with new threats
as well as to participate in the prevention of international conflicts and in international
crisis management.

As a NATO Member, Estonia’s military defence and defence preparedness, and the
planning of military capabilities, is being completely aligned with NATO’s defence
planning and commitments. Estonia contributes its agreed upon resources and forces
to NATO’s joint forces. Estonia’s contribution is determined on the basis of both
Estonia’s and NATO’s goals, needs, and capabilities. An essential and inseparable
part of Estonia’s national security policy is participation in NATO’s operations.
Estonia continues to develop its relevant capabilities.

NATO Member States have committed themselves to improving their military
capabilities with the aim of developing modern, multi-purpose, re-deployable, mobile,
and sustainable rapid reaction units. In implementing the National Security Policy,
Estonia bases its Defence Policy upon these commitments, which were adopted within
the NATO framework, and participates in the fulfilling of common goals.

Estonia participates in NATO’s cooperation with its Partner States. The cooperation
of states with various national security options as well as NATO’s active role in this,
increase international security and stability.

**2.2. The European Union**

EU accession, alongside NATO membership, has strengthened Estonia’s national
security. EU enlargement has increased security and stability in the Baltic Sea region
and in all of Europe. The activities of the EU to combat the world’s security threats
have become more efficient. Estonia is increasing its capability of participating in the
EU Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) and in the EU decision-making
processes generally.

To help ensure Europe’s security, Estonia contributes to the development of the
CFSP, and to the military and civilian crisis management capabilities of the European
Security and Defence Policy (ESDP). With the development of EU security and
defence cooperation, Member States have committed themselves to improving their
military and civilian capabilities. Estonia is continuing the appropriate development
of its military and civilian capabilities. In implementing its National Security Policy,
Estonia proceeds from the commitments established by the EU goals in this sphere
and participates in the achieving of common goals. Estonia supports the active


-----

exchange and coordination of information within the counter-terrorism cooperation
framework of the EU Member States.

Participation in the EU CFSP and ESDP operations is an essential part of Estonia’s
National Security Policy. In accordance with the European Security Strategy, Estonia
participates actively in EU actions to reduce the world’s security threats as well as to
enlarge and secure the stability zone in the regions directly neighbouring the EU and
further abroad.

The cooperation, which exists within the framework of the EU CFSP and ESDP, and
its further development, must take place in a manner that does not entail the
duplicating of defence cooperation taking place within the NATO framework, and
that supports transatlantic cooperation. Estonia supports steps being taken to increase
the coordination of EU activities in various international organisations, within the
framework of security and trade policies as well as development cooperation.

The foundation of European security is the working NATO and EU partnership. The
EU and NATO agreements for carrying out defence cooperation have established a
firm base for developing a strategic partnership. To increase Europe’s defence and
crisis management capabilities, it is essential to coordinate EU and NATO military
planning processes.

**2.3. Other international organisations**

Within the framework of international organisations, Estonia deals with issues such as
political, economic, and military matters, as well as human rights and democratic
freedoms. Active participation in international organisations offers possibilities for
consolidating both the global and regional security environment, so ensuring
Estonia’s national security. The spread of democratic values and the protection of
fundamental human rights and freedoms are in the Estonia’s interest.

Estonian foreign policy proceeds from the United Nations (UN) Charter, the
principles of protecting human rights and promoting international security, and the
spread of democracy. Estonia’s participation in UN peace operations helps to realize
the aforementioned principles.

Estonia participates in the formulating and implementing of the norms and principles
of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) as well as in the
prevention of conflicts and in crisis management. Estonia also participates in OSCE
missions, and in cooperative endeavours in the spheres of arms control and
confidence building measures.

Estonia participates in the work of the Council of Europe for supporting legislative
reform and the protection of human rights, with the aim of assisting in the
strengthening of democratic stability and the development of Europe’s cultural
identity.

Participation in regional cooperation within the framework of the Council of Baltic
Sea States (CBSS) provides additional opportunities for achieving the Estonian
National Security Policy goal.


-----

The ensuring of Estonia’s national security is also enhanced by participation in
international development cooperation. Estonia’s involvement is directed at ensuring
peace, democracy, and the observance of human rights. Estonia helps to ensure
economic and social stability as well as the reduction of poverty, in accordance with
the principles of sustainable development. Estonia takes part in development
cooperation according to the guidelines ratified by the parliament, on the basis of
international norms and in partnership with the recipient states.

**2.4. Bilateral and multilateral security policy relations**

**2.4.1. Transatlantic relations**

For ensuring Estonia’s national security, the alliance with the United States of
America is of primary importance. Estonia is developing extensive and close
cooperation with the United States in all spheres of major importance. The
cornerstone of European security is the U.S. military presence and consistent
participation in the ensuring of this security.

A strong transatlantic relationship is the basis for Euro-Atlantic stability, economic
growth, and continual development. In transatlantic relations, Estonia seeks
cooperation based on common values aimed at ensuring peace, democracy, and
security. This cooperation, among other things, also encompasses the fight against
terrorism and uncontrolled proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

The strengthening of the transatlantic relationship is being manifested primarily
through cooperation within the NATO framework. Estonia supports the development
of a stronger transatlantic cooperative relationship between the United States and the
EU. The intertwining of the memberships of NATO and the EU strengthens the
cooperation and partnership between Europe and the United States.

For Estonia it is essential, that the United States is actively interested and participates
in ensuring the security of Northern Europe and the Baltic Sea region.

**2.4.2. Security policy relations in the Baltic Sea region**

Stability, the consolidation of democratic values, and the development of international
cooperation in the Baltic Sea region directly influence the achieving of the Estonian
National Security Policy goal. In the Baltic Sea region, cooperation in the national
security sphere is being carried out both within the framework of various international
institutions and bilaterally. The significance of NATO and the EU in Baltic Sea region
security cooperation has increased after enlargement and is continuing to increase
further.

Estonia has good cooperative relations with the Nordic countries (Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway, and Sweden), which, within the framework of ever closer
cooperation with the Baltic states, have helped to strengthen Estonia’s defence
capability and to promote the nation’s economy. Estonia has good cooperation with
**Latvia and** **Lithuania** in all spheres, both on a bilateral basis and within the
frameworks of the Baltic Assembly and the Baltic Council of Ministers. Jointly, a


-----

trilateral defence cooperation agreement has been concluded. Estonia is interested in
the increasing security cooperation between the Nordic countries and the Baltic states
both in the Baltic Sea region and further abroad.

Estonia’s relations with **Germany and** **Poland are multifaceted and developing**
rapidly in regard to bilateral questions and matters concerning development of the
Baltic Sea region, and also the promotion of European security and cooperation.

Estonian and **Russian bilateral relations overlap with NATO and EU multilateral**
efforts to establish mutually beneficial partnership relations with Russia.

NATO and EU relations with Russia are based upon documents reflecting partnership
and cooperation, and upon joint structures dealing with an ever larger range of
questions. Seeking good neighbourly relations with Russia, Estonia, along with other
states, contributes to the implementation of the principles prescribed in the NATO and
EU security strategies and actively participates in the further development of this
cooperation.

The development of democracy and the increasing of prosperity in Russia are
important for the security of the Baltic Sea region as a whole. Estonia is making
efforts to utilize opportunities for cooperating with Russia and its border regions. This
includes the fight against common threats like organized crime, terrorism, and
environmental disasters.

**2.5. Participation in international peace and security efforts**

**2.5.1. International crisis management**

An essential part of Estonia’s National Security Policy is international security
cooperation, an element of which is participation in crisis management and peace
operations. Estonia’s international reputation as a partner in security cooperation is
directly dependent upon the nation’s readiness and ability to contribute to NATO and
EU operations. Estonia is ready to participate in international operations within the
framework of NATO and the EU, as well as of the UN and other international
organisations, to ensure peace and security and solve crises, and to participate in other
crisis management operations along with its NATO and EU allies.

For participation in the solving of international crises, a comprehensive crisis
management system is being established, which encompasses military, legal, and
financial aspects. The need for developing the appropriate capabilities is taken into
consideration in the development plans of the government agencies participating in
crisis management.

**2.5.2. International fight against terrorism**

Estonia condemns all possible forms of terrorism, regarding political violence and
international terrorism as being an essential threat to international security and peace.
Estonia supports all internationally recognized anti-terrorist measures.


-----

Estonia consistently participates in efforts directed against international terrorism and
supports the activities of all international organisations, that are aimed at preventing
terrorism and stopping its spread. Therefore, Estonia is purposefully developing
appropriate international bilateral and multilateral cooperation and exchange of
information.

Estonia is fulfilling the UN Security Council Resolutions directed against terrorism
and is a party to all the essential international anti-terrorist conventions.

Estonia is doing everything possible to prevent weapons of mass destruction from
falling into the possession of terrorists as well as to identify and eliminate
international terrorism’s possible sources of financing.

**2.5.3. Arms control and confidence building measures**

Estonia supports all confidence and security building measures (CSBM) being
implemented in the Euro-Atlantic region. Likewise, Estonia adheres to the norms of
international arms control and confidence and security building measures. Estonia
participates in both international organisations and in bilateral international
cooperation, which have, as their goal, the increasing of security, confidence, and
information exchange.

The Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, the aim of which is to increase
the transparency of military activity through the control of conventional arms,
information exchange, and implementation of a thorough monitoring system, is an
important part of ensuring European security. Estonia is following the development of
the Treaty as well as the fulfilling of Treaty commitments, and is ready to start
accession negotiations after the Treaty, as modified in 1999, becomes effective.
Estonia joins the Treaty only if the conditions are acceptable and in accordance with
Estonia’s other international commitments.

Estonia does not have weapons of mass destruction and has acceded to major
international agreements for preventing their proliferation. Estonia aims to prevent the
illegal transit through its territory, and the possible illegal trading in and smuggling of
components used for the manufacture of weapons of mass destruction. It is just as
essential to prevent the manufacture, in Estonia, of these components or implements,
and the spread of the respective know-how. For this purpose, a state system has been
established by law for the monitoring of strategic goods, the coordination of the
activities of appropriate government agencies, and extensive international
cooperation, including data exchange. Estonia adheres to export control principles and
appropriate EU legislation.

**3. ESTONIAN MILITARY DEFENCE**

**3.1. Military defence in ensuring national security**

The objective of Estonia’s military defence is to contribute to the achieving of the
goal of the National Security Policy by military means. Estonia will defend itself in
any circumstance and against an enemy of any superiority.


-----

Estonia’s defence is primarily based upon membership in NATO, which creates a
sufficient deterrent and restraint for preventing aggression. Estonia’s military defence
is planned as a North Atlantic Treaty Article 5 operation.

Estonia’s military defence is ensured in cooperation with allied forces. As a member
of NATO, Estonia is building up its military defence guided by NATO’s collective
defence principles. The basis for developing Estonia’s military defence is
interoperability with NATO and NATO Member States as well as cooperation within
the framework of the European Security and Defence Policy. Estonia’s military
defence is developed according to the national priorities and objectives that are
presented in the National Military Strategy. This document takes into consideration
the commitments resulting from Estonia’s membership in NATO, the EU, and other
international organisations.

The principle of total defence is important for maintaining the unity of Estonia’s
military defence. Total defence is the permanent readiness of the mental, physical,
economic, and other capabilities of the nation’s civilian structures, local governments,
the Defence Forces (Kaitsevägi) and Defence League (Kaitseliit), as well as the whole
population for solving crises, for carrying out coordinated and united action to prevent
and repulse aggression, and for ensuring the survival of the nation.

Estonia ensures the necessary training,. and maintaining of the perpetual readiness to
defend the nation, of the Defence Forces and Defence League, together with their
supporting agencies and organisations, as well as the rational utilization of all
resources. The two basic purposes of military conscription are: to establish the
necessary pool from which to recruit professional personnel for priority units, and to
ensure the formation of reserve units.

Estonia is maintaining its defence expenditures at the level of 2% of the GDP.

The principles of Estonia’s defence policy are:

-  The indivisibility of security, according to which, changes in the international
security environment abroad influence, to a greater or lesser degree, Estonia’s
national security, and vice versa.

-  Solidarity and bilateral, multilateral, and regional cooperation with allies in
defending common values as well as implementing confidence and security building
measures.

-  A credible military deterrent, according to which, defence activities are primarily
directed at preventing military threats and their escalation. The credibility of Estonia’s
military defence results from collective defence, in which participation is ensured by:
a primary independent defence capability, that corresponds to the requirements of
threat evaluation; the readiness to increase Estonia’s defence capability; and the
ability to provide host nation support.

-  The unity of military defence, and the principle of total defence, which is based
upon the constitutional obligation of citizens to participate in the nation’s defence,
upon the support of society for military defence, and upon the coordinated
cooperation of the civilian and military structures. In the process of increasing
society’s support for military defence, the Defence League and its branch
organisations play an essential role.


-----

-  The collective defence of NATO Member States, and the deterring, and in case of
necessity, repelling of military attacks. According to the North Atlantic Treaty, a
military attack against any Member State is an attack against NATO as a whole. Any
military activity for repelling a military attack directed against Estonia is a collective
defence operation. Estonia is prepared to fulfil its commitments as an ally towards the
other NATO Member States.

-  Support for development of EU military capabilities within the framework of the
European Security and Defence Policy, and participation in the ESDP.

-  Civilian control, which is based upon: the subordination of the military to Estonia’s
constitutional leadership; the high occupational standards of professional military
personnel, in accordance with the recognition of the limits of their authority; and the
requisite competency of the nation’s political leadership and government agencies in
military matters.

**3.2. The role of the Defence Forces and Defence League in implementing the**
**National Defence Policy**

The Defence Forces is a militarily organized and structured institution subordinate to
the Government and under the governance of the Ministry of Defence. The Defence
League is a voluntary defence organisation under the governance of the Ministry of
Defence.

A priority of the Defence Forces and Defence League is the development of modern,
multi-purpose, deployable, mobile, sustainable, rapid response units. Such units are
best able to ensure the protection of national interests, and to make it possible for
Estonia to be an active and dependable NATO and EU Member. As a participant in
NATO’s collective defence, Estonia does not have to independently develop all
military capabilities.

The Defence Forces and Defence League, together with the Ministry of Defence,
ensure the readiness to fulfil the following basic military defence tasks:

-  collective defence and the management of international crises directly threatening
the security of Estonia and/or other NATO Member States;

-  demonstration of national sovereignty for the purpose of ensuring control over
Estonia’s territory, territorial waters, and airspace;

-  participation in international crisis management and peace operations, including EU
operations;

-  international defence cooperation;

-  assistance to civilian structures in the solving of emergency situations.

The National Military Strategy determines Estonia’s Concept of Military Operations
and the Defence Forces structure.


-----

**4. PROTECTING CONSTITUTIONAL ORDER AND SECTORS OF VITAL**
**IMPORTANCE; ENSURING PUBLIC SAFETY**

**4.1. Consolidating the rule of law**

From the standpoint of Estonia’s national security, it is essential to ensure the
functioning of democratic institutions and the rule of law as well as to ensure the
protection of the fundamental rights and freedoms of persons. The administrative, law
enforcement, and judicial system are being strengthened and developed to ensure a
government based upon the rule of law.

The continuous development of the civil society is essential for the functioning of
democratic institutions and the rule of law. The prerequisites for the development of a
civil society are the openness of society, the promotion of citizens’ initiative, and the
availability of quality education.

The consolidation of a balanced and democratic society in Estonia is enhanced by the
implementation of its Integration Policy. Estonia guarantees the rights of persons
belonging to minorities, as well as helps to integrate the various ethnic and social
groups into society. The integration of Estonian society is based upon two parallel
processes: integrating society on the basis of knowledge of the Estonian language and
the acquiring of Estonian citizenship, and, on the other hand, supporting the
preservation of ethnocultural diversity. To ensure the efficient functioning of Estonia
as a nation, it is essential to implement its Population Policy, the goals of which are to
stem demographic decline and the general aging process of Estonian society, and to
achieve, in the future, a positive growth rate of the population.

**4.2. Enhancing internal security**

Estonia’s Internal Security Policy encompasses the functions of the state’s internal
security agencies and the general structure of the system as well as participation in
activities ensuring international security. The main functions of the Internal Security
Policy, for achieving the goal of the National Security Policy, are the ensuring of
domestic stability, and the protecting and saving of human lives.

**4.2.1. The activities of security agencies**

The goal of the activities of the security agencies, the Security Police Board
(Kaitsepolitsei) and Information Board (Teabeamet), is to ensure national security and
maintain constitutional order through non-military preventive measures. To achieve
this goal, and for the outlining of the National Security Policy, the security agencies
collect and process information, on the basis of which the fundamental principles of
the National Security Policy are formulated. The activities of the security agencies are
coordinated through the Government’s Security Commission.

The Security Police Board collects and processes information concerning activities,
which are aimed at the violent breach of constitutional order and territorial integrity of
the state. The Security Police Board’s functions are: to prevent espionage, protect
state secrets, and combat terrorism and corruption. In legislatively stipulated
circumstance, criminal cases are investigated.


-----

The Information Board collects intelligence concerning foreign countries and
developments and events abroad needed for the formulation of Foreign, Economic,
and Defence Policy. The Information Board performs counter-intelligence functions
for the protection of Estonian diplomatic missions, and Defence Forces units stationed
abroad. The Information Board also organizes and monitors the implementing of the
measures adopted for the security of electronically transmitted information.

The Information Board and the Security Police Board participate in the work of
relevant institutions, fulfilling essential counter-intelligence functions and protecting
electronically transmitted information. The system for safeguarding state secrets is
being further developed in the context of classified NATO and EU documents.

It is ever more essential to obtain timely information concerning developments
dangerous for national security. To counter security threats, the security agencies
develop domestic and international cooperation. As Estonia broadens the scope of its
participation in international crisis management and peace operations, the information
collected by the security agencies concerning international crises becomes ever more
significant.

To counter the spread of terrorism, the security agencies are developing, in parallel
with domestic activities, international cooperation, primarily, to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and to identify and eliminate
international terrorism’s possible sources of financing.

The Security Police Board, together with law enforcement agencies, prevents the
infiltration of organised crime into politics, government agencies, and local
administrations. In addition to the substantial legal base, which has been established
for the fight against corruption, there is an important role for the Anti-corruption
Strategy adopted by the Government.

**4.2.2. Maintaining law and order**

The central government agency in the fight against organized crime is the Central
Criminal Police (Keskkriminaalpolitsei). In this sphere, the Central Criminal Police
cooperates closely with other police agencies, the Security Police Board, the Board of
Border Guard (Piirivalveamet), the Tax and Customs Board (Maksu- ja Tolliamet),
and the Prosecutor’s Office (Prokuratuur). The systematic fight against organized
crime must concentrate upon the avoidance and prevention of crimes providing large
illegal profits.

Greater emphasis is being put upon making more efficient use of various
opportunities offered by Interpol and Europol as well as upon cooperation with
neighbouring states. It is also necessary to establish a witness protection system, in
order to participate in international witness protection programs.

Taking into consideration the globalisation process, and the fact that international
events are taking place more frequently in Estonia, it is important to develop
capabilities for ensuring security at public events.


-----

**4.2.3. Ensuring border security and migration control**

The qualified guarding and control of the borders is essential for ensuring Estonia’s
national security. Effective guarding of Estonia’s border, which is the EU’s external
border, helps to ensure the security of Europe as a whole, and is conducted in
compliance with requirements established in the EU.

The Board of Border Guard prevents the illegal crossing of the borders, ensures
efficient processing at checkpoints, and is responsible for maintaining the high
standards of border control. To ensure border security, and in the fight against illegal
migration, organized crime, terrorism, and other forms of crime, it is essential to
establish the integrated border security model. This encompasses all aspects of border
control: measures being implemented both on external borders and inside the country,
appropriate measures being implemented both in the country of origin and in the
transit country, and domestic and international cooperation in the sphere of border
security.

Estonia is establishing an integrated migration control system. Its various measures
and contemporary biometric identification methods must be used to prevent the entry
into Estonia and staying here of those foreigners who might threaten Estonia’s
security.

To prevent any possible negative developments due to the international borders
between Estonia and other EU Member States ceasing to function as a result of
Estonia’s upcoming accession to the Schengen Area, cooperation is being increased
with other Member States in the sphere of investigations and migration control.

**4.2.4. Emergency management and services**

To maintain internal security, it is essential to be prepared for, and to react on time to
emergency situations. For this purpose, a national system of measures for emergency
management has been established by the Emergency Preparedness Act with the goal
of ensuring security and public safety in case of an emergency. In emergencies, it is
also necessary to ensure the functioning of vitally important sectors, to protect the
essential infrastructure, and to secure public information. To keep vitally important
sectors functioning in an emergency, it is necessary to reorganize the system of
strategic reserves and adapt it to the nation’s needs. It is important to ensure, that the
rescue service, law enforcement, energy, transportation, electronic communication,
environment, health, and social service agencies are well supplied and trained. In the
interests of internal security and the management of emergency situations, a national
special purpose radio communications system will be established.

The essential part of emergency management is risk analysis, in the course of which,
the probability of emergency situations and their possible consequences and
preventive measures are formulated and adapted.
The Rescue Board and other providers of emergency services have, in cooperation
with the Border Guard Board, a central role in the saving of people’s lives and
property, and in carrying out essential operations for the protection of the
environment. The Estonian Disaster Relief Team has been created to increase
Estonia’s international emergency capabilities.


-----

**4.3. Strengthening economic, social, and environmental security**

**4.3.1. Strengthening economic security**

The fast, balanced, and sustainable growth of the economy is essential for achieving
the goal of the Estonian National Security Policy. For economic security, it is in
Estonia’s interest to promote the diversification of external economic relations. To
achieve this, it is essential to maintain a stable economic environment, which, among
other things, ensures Estonia’s attractiveness for foreign capital from dependable
sources.

Estonia ensures the reliability of its financial system. For the alleviation of
international crises and their economic consequences, it is necessary to ensure the
existence of essential stabilization and reserve funds within the framework of the
nation’s financial system.

In the context of the development of East-West transit trade, it is possible to be
successful despite increased competition and the political influences being exerted
upon economic processes.

The regulation of the electricity market and the development of the appropriate
infrastructure must ensure a reliable supply of electrical power for consumers so as to
ensure the performing of essential functions of the state. In the gas market, the
activities of gas suppliers must be thoroughly monitored, and opportunities must be
found for diversifying the nation’s gas supply connections. In the heat market,
conditions are being created, which ensure, that the populace would be supplied with
heat even if delivery of the basic fuel should be disrupted. In the liquid fuel market, a
liquid fuel minimum reserve is being created, which would, at the least, meet the EU
quantitative requirement, and the effective utilization of which would be ensured if
the normal supply of liquid fuel should be disrupted. A certain amount of the whole
liquid fuel reserve could be stored in another EU Member State.

In accordance with international standards, Estonia is enforcing the security
requirements of Estonian harbours, ships, airports, and aircraft.

To prevent computer crime and threats to internal security, which could arise from the
vulnerability of IT systems, as well as to ensure the security of national data bases and
registries, necessary organisational, information technology, and physical security
measures are being implemented. Unless this is done, computer crime could develop
into a dangerous form of organized crime on par with illegally trading in arms and
narcotics.

**4.3.2. Enhancing social safety**

To enhance the nation’s social safety, it is essential to solve labour market problems,
establish a sustainable social security system that covers risk groups, and educate and
train a sufficiently large qualified work force to ensure the continuation of economic
growth.


-----

In the case of public health emergencies, there could be large numbers of people
requiring medical care due to the outbreak of contagious diseases, poisonings, or
exposure to radiation. Estonia is establishing its national preparedness for public
health emergencies, basing it upon close cooperation with other EU Member States.

Fighting contagious diseases, including the spread of HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis, is
the state’s responsibility. In Estonia, measures for preventing the spread of
particularly dangerous contagious diseases are implemented in accordance with
international medical regulations. National programs are being implemented to reduce
drug addiction, to limit the spread of HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis.

**4.3.3. Enhancing environmental safety**

Estonia fulfils the obligations deriving from the Convention on the Protection of the
Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea Area and implements measures to prevent the
spread of hazardous substances as well as to control sources of pollution both on land
and at sea. Estonia is increasing preparedness to combat marine pollution.

Estonia’s aim is to ensure, in cooperation with other nations, safer shipping in the
Baltic Sea and, primarily, in the Gulf of Finland. Estonia supports the establishing of
limitations upon single-hulled tankers shipping heavy oil products, and the
establishing of the requirement, that in the winter, only ice-strengthened tankers be
used.

To ensure the safety of Baltic Sea region nuclear power stations, Estonia participates
actively in relevant working groups that have been established by international
organisations. To be properly prepared for dealing with emergencies involving
chemical and radiological pollution, the specific technical equipment and other
necessary supplies of the relevant agencies are being updated, and training exercises
are being carried out on a regular basis.

To prevent the uncontrolled spread of genetically modified organisms (GMO) into the
environment, Estonia has imposed strict requirements concerning the import, risk
analysis, labelling, monitoring, and controlling of GMOs.


-----

