On May 12, 2010
Unofficial translation

# NATIONAL SECURITY CONCEPT OF ESTONIA


-----

**INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................................. 3**

**1.** **OBJECTIVE AND PRINCIPLES OF SECURITY POLICY .............................. 4**

**2.** **SECURITY EVIRONMENT ................................................................................. 5**

**2.1.** **Developments in the global security environment................................................. 5**

**2.2.** **Developments in the Euro-Atlantic security environment .................................... 6**

**2.3.** **Developments in the Estonian security environment ............................................ 7**

**3.** **DIRECTIONS......................................................................................................... 9**

**3.1.** **Foreign Policy ......................................................................................................... 9**

**3.2.** **Defence Policy ....................................................................................................... 13**

**3.3** **Policy of Internal Security.................................................................................... 15**

**3.4.** **Resilience and Cohesion of the Society ................................................................ 17**


-----

**INTRODUCTION**

The National Security Concept of Estonia establishes the objective, principles and directions
of security policy. Submitted by the Government, the National Security Concept is subject to
approval of the _Riigikogu. The National Security Concept will be revised or amended_
depending on changes in the security environment and development of measures for ensuring
Estonia’s security. The National Security Concept constitutes a framework document,
forming the basis for the preparation of specific development and action plans. This
document shall replace the National Security Concept of the Republic of Estonia, adopted by
the Riigikogu in 2004.

Estonia views its national security as an integral part of international security. Estonia seeks
and supports solutions that have a favourable effect both on Estonia and other countries.
Estonia’s approach is based on the conviction that security serves to enforce human rights,
fundamental freedoms and core human values. These are the values that govern our way of
life, and that are pursued in Estonia and beyond. Adherence to democratic principles enables
the persistent development of the society. This strengthens a viable civil society and the will
to defend Estonia, and advances Estonia’s international standing and reputation.

The trends accompanying globalisation confirm the understanding that security is the
objective and outcome of international co-operation. International crises and conflicts, as
well as the need to solve them, are having an increasingly immediate effect on Estonia.
External security threats interlock with internal security threats. A broad security concept
entails the involvement of all sectors of the society, as well as an integrated approach, where
the foreign policy, defence policy and internal security policy, as well as cohesion and
resilience of the society, are employed for the purpose of achieving the security policy goals
for the country as a whole. The security policy thus entails the development of all areas of
national security, as well as extensive co-operation in strengthening international security.


-----

**1.** **OBJECTIVE AND PRINCIPLES OF SECURITY POLICY**

The goal of the Estonian security policy is to safeguard Estonia’s independence and
sovereignty, territorial integrity, constitutional order and public safety. Security policy
provides the basis for sustainable development and welfare.

Security policy entails areas, which safeguard the existence of the state and its people.
Estonia implements security policy by adhering to the fundamental rights and freedoms, and
protecting constitutional values.

Principles

Estonia’s security policy is guided by the principles stipulated in the United Nations Charter,
including the right and freedom of every country to choose their own solutions for security
needs. Estonia’s security policy is not directed against any other country.

Estonia’s security policy is based on a broad concept of security, entailing all trends
affecting security and essential areas required for ensuring security.

Estonia’s security policy is aimed at preventing threats as well as responding to them in a
swift and flexible manner. Estonia’s security is ensured through co-ordinated foreign and
domestic policy measures.

Estonia conducts the ensuring of its security through membership in NATO and the
European Union, as well as close co-operation with its allies and other international partners.
NATO, with its transatlantic nature and the principle of collective defence serves as the
cornerstone of European security and defence.

Estonia regards its security and the security of its allies as indivisible ― the factors affecting
the security of its allies also affect Estonia, and vice versa.

Estonia ensures credible deterrence and military defence through NATO’s collective
defence. Estonia develops national military defence capabilities, which form a part of
NATO’s collective defence.

Estonia’s security is strengthened by its civil society where civic initiative plays an important
role in the enhancement of national security and advancement of the sense of security.


-----

**2.** **SECURITY EVIRONMENT**

Estonia forms a part of the international security environment, and is inseparably bound to its
developments. Membership in NATO and the European Union has reinforced Estonia’s
security. At the same time, developments in the security environment are becoming
increasingly difficult to predict, and are more versatile than ever before. Security policy
interests and competition have extended into new areas. Changes in political, military,
economic, technical, social and environmental development have become entwined,
affecting the security environment. Along with the emergence of new threats, conventional
military threats and the policy of spheres of influence has remained.

**2.1.** **Developments in the global security environment**

Globalisation is intensifying relations between states and people, facilitating the spread of
knowledge, technology and information. Mutual interconnectedness and interdependence is
increasing. As a result, new opportunities and needs for enhancing economic welfare and
ensuring security have emerged. At the same time, the impact of the factors generating
instability and unpredictability is increasing. The impact of political confrontation, economic
disputes, competition for resources, religious and ethnic tensions, failed states and non-state
actors is often global. Globalisation brings along the entwinement and rapid proliferation of
security threats.

Change in forms of co-operation may pose a threat to the standing principles and values,
according to which security solutions are provided in international co-operation, and add to
unpredictability. The United States of America remains the world’s leading political, military
and economic power. However, in addition to developed industrial countries, other countries
that have enhanced their political, economic and military capabilities are increasingly
involved in addressing global issues. The relative impact of Western countries in shaping
global political and economic agenda is decreasing.

The development of information and communication technology and the media allows to
influence more efficiently the information field of various parts of the public. Both states and
non-state actors compete more actively in influencing the international media, public opinion
and political decisions. The scope of the measures used, including the number and extent of
information operations, is expanding. The impact of distorted information may cause
tensions in international relations, radicalisation of certain groups of people and harm social
cohesion, adding to instability.

The security environment is also influenced by the amplification and rapid proliferation of
local or regional crises. Majority of the crises and armed conflicts remain internal, but
tensions and unsolved disputes also cause cross-border military conflicts and crises. Many
conflicts that threaten security are caused by authoritarian countries that disregard human
rights, fundamental freedoms and principles of the rule of law.

With the growth in global population, demand for food, energy and other resources is
increasing. Tensions over natural resources are thus more probable. Conflicts, tensions and
instability may also be caused by the reduction or unequal division of arable land, fresh
water and other natural resources. Deterioration of the environment, especially climate
change, may add to instability, as it is the poorest and most vulnerable areas that are often
affected, and the probability of natural disasters is increasing.


-----

In addition to the security of their own population, failed states threaten regional and wider
international security. Terrorist organisations and organised crime gain a foothold in states
with a weak or non-existent government. Mass emigration often follows.

Fluctuations in the global economic environment complicate the international security
environment, and hamper the countries’ ability to counter threats. Global deterioration of the
economic outlook may result in political instability, protectionism and isolation. Measures
for combating climate change have a diverse effect on developed and developing countries,
creating the need for economic balancing.

In order to gain political and economic power, competition for the control of energy
resources is tightening. States and international organisations endeavour to enhance the
security of energy supply. Countries with extensive energy resources are trying to maximise
their international influence.

Efforts in the field of arms control and disarmament have not sufficiently enhanced
international security. International control mechanisms have not been able to thwart
dangerous developments. The excessive stock of conventional arms and difficulties in
controlling proliferation of conventional arms damage mutual trust and may lead to highcasualty conflicts. Proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery
increases the threat of armed conflicts and the danger of weapons of mass destruction
becoming available to terrorists.

Terrorism is a global problem, threatening human lives, the system of international relations,
security of states and democratic values. Radicalisation affects security even in those
countries which so far have served neither as the breeding ground for terrorists nor as a target
for terrorist acts.

Terrorist organisations may be interlinked with organised crime. Even though the primary
objective of crime is to generate economic gain, national security is affected by the efforts of
criminal groups to increase their influence in the decision making of states.

The dependence of countries’ resilience on the use of cyberspace is growing. Co-ordinated
cyber attacks, the sources of which are difficult to identify, may cause significant damage to
society. Abuse of cyberspace, including by terrorist groups and organised crime, is growing.

**2.2.** **Developments in the Euro-Atlantic security environment**

Pursuing common democratic principles, NATO and the European Union have ensured
peace, stability of the societies and economies and well-being in Europe. Membership in
these organisations has integrated Estonia into the single Euro-Atlantic security area.

NATO forms the basis for Euro-Atlantic security and defence co-operation, and serves as the
main security policy forum for the Allies. The enduring presence of the United States in
Europe, ensured through NATO, serves to guarantee peace, security and stability both within
the region and on a wider scale. NATO reinforces the credible deterrence and collective
defence for successfully repelling any armed aggression. NATO has adapted to the
diversified security environment, actively addressing security risks outside its territory, thus
preventing the realisation of these risks in the Euro-Atlantic area. NATO’s new Strategic
Concept specifies the role of the organisation in the changed security environment.


-----

Co-operation and solidarity of the EU member states, development of the internal market and
adherence to the principle of free movement deepen the integration, cohesion and security of
the European Union. The Treaty of Lisbon stipulates the principle of solidarity and the
obligation of mutual assistance of the member states, which foresee comprehensive support
in case of serious security threats. The European Union increasingly pursues the security of
its member states and the safety of its people. The deepening of integration is increasing the
Union’s attention to issues accompanying globalisation, such as the influx of refugees, illegal
migration and terrorism, as well as to internal co-operation within the Schengen area.

The international political and economic influence of the European Union enhances the
weight and reach of the Common Foreign and Security Policy. Acting as one, the union is
able to respond to complex crises much more effectively than most of other international
actors. Institutional development enhances the coherence of the Common Foreign and
Security Policy of the European Union, and contributes to the improvement of the security of
the Union as a whole, as well as its member states. The Common Security and Defence
Policy has been strengthened, and the number of civilian and military crisis management
operations has grown.

The stability of the neighbouring countries of the European Union and NATO, and the
success of their reforms, is essential to the security of the Euro-Atlantic area. The
enlargement of the European Union and NATO has widened the area based on common
democratic values, thus reinforcing European security. The prospect of accession has
provided applicant countries with the determination to pursue the reforms required for
democratic development. In addition to enlargement, the European Union develops the
Neighbourhood Policy, implementing various co-operation mechanisms with its eastern and
southern neighbours.

The security situation in the Baltic Sea area remains stable. The strategic importance of the
region is growing. The foreign and security policy co-operation between the Baltic States
and Nordic countries is deepening. Co-operation between the Baltic States is based on the
countries’ similar goals and membership in the European Union and NATO. The European
Union is contributing to the development of the region also with its Baltic Sea Strategy.

The European Union and NATO have made consistent efforts to co-operate with Russia in
order to ensure European security and well-being. Relations between the European Union
and Russia are inconsistent, depending on the particular area, yet, mutual interdependence
has grown. Russia has considered NATO’s growing role in security co-operation and
NATO’s enlargement as directed against its interests.

Russia defines its interests departing from restoration of its status as a major global power,
and occasionally does not refrain from contesting other countries. In addition to political and
economic means, Russia is also prepared to use military force to achieve its goals. Russia
also uses its energy resources as political and economic means in different areas of
international relations.

**2.3.** **Developments in the Estonian security environment**

The Estonian security environment is affected by both the international security situation and
domestic developments. Immediate threats to Estonia’s national security depend above all on
the security situation in the Euro-Atlantic area and the relations of the countries in the
immediate vicinity. The gravest threats involve the combined effect of external and internal
factors.


-----

Acts against the unity of NATO and solidarity of the allies threaten both Estonia’s and wider
transatlantic security. A military attack against Estonia is unlikely in the present and near
future. Nevertheless one cannot exclude this possibility in the longer perspective.

External coercion threatening Estonian security may reveal itself in the damaging of
Estonia’s international reputation, creation of internal instability, military pressure, or
coercing Estonia or its allies into adopting political decisions that prejudice Estonia’s
independence and sovereignty. Estonia’s security may be threatened by the activities of the
secret services of foreign states directed against Estonia. Membership in NATO and the
European Union, and close bilateral relations with allies enhance the ability to tackle external
pressure.

The Estonian economy is tightly interlinked with the global economy. Global developments,
including economic crises and the instability of essential external markets, have significant
effect on Estonia. Changes in the structure of energy supply established between the
European Union and Russia may also affect the functioning of the Estonian economy. The
isolation of electricity and gas supply from the European interconnected energy networks
adds to the risks related to the resilience of critical services. Estonia’s potential of pursuing
economic activities in the field of the transport of hydrocarbons, based on by the geographic
location, is sensitive to economic and political pressure. Crisis in the economic and financial
sector may create a favourable environment for social tensions and spread organised crime.

The importance of information and communication systems within society is everincreasing, with the resilience of several other critical services depending on them. As a
result of the interconnectedness of the majority of communication and information systems,
suspension of a critical service may affect the availability of other services critical for the
society. Insufficient protection of information and communication systems or inadequate
response capabilities increases the effect of threats stemming from malfunction or attack. In
addition, cyberspace may be used for inciting tension and conflicts within the society.

Estonia as a democratic, open society may also be affected by the spread of extremist, hostile
or hate-based ideologies. This may weaken social cohesion, reduce tolerance and cause
social tension. In the environment of open and free media, attacks against cohesion of
Estonian society necessitate greater attention to the sense of cohesion and psychological
defence.

The strengthening of civil society and the continuity in integration process reinforces
Estonia’s security. Uneven regional development and poorly adapting social groups may,
however, affect internal stability.

As Estonia guards a part of the external border of the European Union, it plays an important
role in securing the reliability of the Schengen area. Absence of border control within the
Schengen area of the European Union may be used for expanding the reach of international
organised crime, establishing and strengthening connections between terrorist groups, as well
as illegal migration or smuggling.

Organised crime damages the country’s reputation, economy and finance, and may create an
unfavourable social and economic environment, reducing the people’s sense of security.
With the free movement within the European Union, organised crime has become
transboundary and widened its scope, and is often associated with terrorists.


-----

A terrorist act on Estonian territory or against Estonian citizens beyond the country’s borders
would weaken the sense of security and affect national security and economy. A massive
terrorist act against an ally would also affect Estonia’s security. The Estonian territory could
be used for illicit trafficking of components of weapons of mass destruction and other
strategic goods.

Corruption reduces political, social and economic stability, undermines trust in the state and
democratic values, and may threaten the country’s security. Crimes of corruption have
become more complex, entwining with other types of criminal acts.

Estonia’s security may be threatened by emergencies brought about by natural disasters,
catastrophes or infectious diseases both within the country and its immediate vicinity. The
threat of radiation accidents is increased by the dangerous older type nuclear power plants
still in operation in the Baltic Sea area. Intensified ship traffic and the increase in the
transport of oil and oil products in the Baltic Sea area adds to the threat of major marine
disasters or extensive environmental pollution. The spread of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances endangers human health as well as a safe living environment.

**3.** **DIRECTIONS**

In four chapters – foreign policy, defence policy, internal security policy, cohesion and
resilience of society – the main directions are elaborated for ensuring the security of the state
as a whole. The broad concept of security entails enhancement of the mutual co-operation of
state authorities as well as international co-operation, and the involvement of other members
of society in reinforcing security. Civilian-military co-operation and using its added value
are necessary in ensuring security.

In order to better draw on the resources of the state and the society, it is necessary to improve
joint planning for situations which require efficient co-operation between state authorities
and other parties. This requires clarity in management and planning, prompt decisionmaking, specified competencies of state authorities as well as their readiness to draw on the
capabilities and resources regardless of their affiliation.

The precondition for reinforcing security is the functioning of democratic institutions and the
principle of the rule of law, as well as the strength of civil society. For this purpose, the state
supports citizen initiatives and the involvement of people in shaping public policy.

**3.1.** **Foreign Policy**

In foreign policy, Estonia strives for an international environment necessary for ensuring its
security and pursues the most favourable possible position within that environment.
Estonia’s foreign policy objective in reinforcing security is the stability of the security
environment, the functioning and unity of the European Union and NATO, strong
transatlantic co-operation, the promotion of human rights and democratic values as well as
extensive bilateral and multilateral relations.

**NATO**

Membership in NATO reinforces Estonia’s security and allows effective participation in
international security co-operation. Active involvement in NATO remains a priority of
Estonia’s security policy. NATO’s credible deterrence and its wider political authority are


-----

determined to a large extent by the unity of the Alliance and its success in solving security
issues.

As a member of NATO, Estonia stands for NATO’s internal cohesion and solidarity in
ensuring deterrence and collective defence. Estonia deems essential that the Alliance has
necessary military resources and is able to draw on these resources.

Estonia’s activities are directed at ascertaining that NATO continues to serve as the primary
transatlantic security forum for the Allies in solving the main security issues. The political
and military presence of the United States of America in Europe and the political and
military integration of the Allies within NATO are crucial for Estonia.

If needed, NATO must be able to operate outside its territory so as to prevent and manage
any crisis that may directly threaten the security of the Alliance and its members.

Estonia supports the enlargement of NATO which has enhanced security and stability in
Europe as a whole. New members will be invited on the basis of the unanimous decision of
the Allies, taking into account the candidate’s ability to assume the responsibilities and
obligations of membership, and to contribute to security of the Alliance. Estonia supports
NATO candidate countries in carrying out the reforms required for accession.

Estonia values efficient dialogue and co-operation with NATO’s partners, and favours a
flexible approach to partnerships which allows co-operation with all countries in reinforcing
security.

**European Union**

Estonia strives for a strong and unified European Union. Deepening integration within the
European Union strengthens the sense of cohesion and provides better protection against
security threats. An internally integrated European Union is also more capable and
influential in foreign relations. With active performance on the international arena, the
European Union has great potential to strengthen, in co-operation with its global partners, a
rules-and-values-based world order.

The Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union broadens Estonia’s
prospects of achieving its foreign policy goals. Estonia contributes to the enhancement of the
international authority of the European Union by actively participating in shaping and
implementing the Common Foreign and Security Policy. In the interests of the role and
influence of the European Union, Estonia stands for the Common Foreign and Security
Policy, and greater coherence in the external activities of the European Union. To best
protect the European and transatlantic interests, it is crucial to uphold political dialogue
between the European Union and NATO, and intensified co-operation and co-ordination in
the field of crisis management.

As a member of the European Union, Estonia contributes to advancing security and welfare
both in the neighbourhood of the European Union and on a global scale. Estonia supports the
development of the Common Security and Defence Policy as part of the Common Foreign
and Security Policy, as well as efforts to enhance the capabilities of the European Union to
prevent and manage crises.

Estonia supports the further enlargement of the European Union, as this would contribute to
the stability and security of the whole of Europe. The prospect of the European Union


-----

membership depends, above all, on the readiness and capability of the candidate countries to
fulfil the membership criteria. Estonia uses its own experience to support the integration of
candidate countries.

With the aim of supporting democratic and economic development Estonia seeks to further
strengthen the European Neighbourhood Policy. Estonia prefers the Eastern Partnership of
the Neighbourhood Policy to be developed into an efficient policy, which would provide the
partner countries with a reliable and comprehensive tool in integration and co-operation with
the European Union.

**Bilateral and multilateral relations**

Estonia advances, especially with member states of EU and NATO, bilateral relations that
contribute to Estonia’s international standing and promote common activities, thus
enhancing Estonia’s security. Comprehensive co-operation with all the allies forms an
integral part in ensuring Estonia’s security. Estonia strives towards mutually beneficial
relations with all neighbouring countries.

The involvement of the United States in the European security co-operation is a central
element for the security of Estonia, as well as that of Europe. The strong transatlantic
commitment is manifested in the presence of the United States in Europe, co-operation
within NATO, and the relations between the European Union and the United States.

Estonia supports close relations between the European Union and the United States as the
prerequisite for solving global political, economic and environmental problems. Estonia
deems it important to enhance European Union and United States co-operation in
international organisations, to advance economic and trade relations, efficient co-operation in
justice and home affairs as well as in the field of energy security.

Good relations between Estonia and the United States strengthen transatlantic co-operation,
reinforcing the stability and development of the Euro-Atlantic area that is based on common
values. Estonia seeks to to advance extensive bilateral co-operation with the United States in
all areas of importance, enhancing dialogue on different levels.

Estonia prefers comprehensive multilateral co-operation for solving security-related issues.
Estonia deems it important to strengthen rules-based and institution-oriented security
solutions. Solutions provided within the framework of international organisations allow
involving further resources for ensuring security, and add to their legitimacy. Estonia aspires
towards the European Union and NATO conveying their common positions in international
organisations.

Estonia deems it important to enhance the efficiency of the activities of organisations that
serve to ensure global and regional security and stability, emphasising the United Nations’
capability to solve global problems and prevent conflicts. Estonia supports the Organization
for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) as a forum for a wider political dialogue
and confidence-building measures in Europe.

In solving security problems according to the rule of law Estonia contributes to the work of
international organisations – particularly the United Nations and the Council of Europe – for
further development and efficient implementation of international law. Estonia fully supports
the work of international courts in the enforcement of international law.


-----

Estonia’s objective is the stable development of the Baltic Sea area. Estonia seeks the
continuous deepening of the co-operation between the Nordic and Baltic States, allowing the
advancement of both political dialogue and security in the wider Baltic Sea area, including in
matters of national defence, energy, transport infrastructure and environment protection. To
best make use of the region’s potential, Estonia actively participates in the implementation of
the Baltic Sea strategy of the Euorpean Union, focusing on activities contributing to the
development of the region as a whole.

The development of democracy, the principles of the rule of law, and welfare in Russia are in
the interests of Estonia. Estonian-Russian bilateral relations work in parallel with the efforts
made by the EU and NATO to establish mutually beneficial relations with Russia. Estonia
pursues an open dialogue with Russia in all matters and looks for opportunities to advance
practical co-operation, both in bilateral relations and within the framework of the European
Union and NATO. Co-operation based on democratic values is more durable, sustainable and
productive.

**Prevention of international armed conflicts and crisis management**

Estonia deems it important to focus on preventing international conflicts and crises.
Addressing crises where they emerge facilitates the prevention of their negative impact on
Estonia, the allies and the whole world. It is therefore vital that international organisations
and countries have the readiness for preventing conflicts and for crisis management, and
have a common understanding of the division of tasks.

Estonia emphasises the importance of preventive diplomacy, and supports the efforts of
international actors in the prevention of conflicts, by contributing to dialogue between
partners and the exchange of information. Estonia strives for a greater resolve in the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms on all international levels in order to
reinforce international security.

Participation in international military operations and civil missions forms an integral part of
Estonian security policy. It is an opportunity, as well as an obligation to contribute to the
security and stability within the Euro-Atlantic area and globally. In addition to the capability
to participate in military crisis management, Estonia must have the readiness to contribute to
civil crisis management and development aid. Participation in the crisis management
operations of NATO and the European Union as well as in NATO Response Force and EU
battlegroups will remain a priority for Estonia.

**Development Co-operation**

To ensure security and stability, Estonia pursues development co-operation in support of
political, economic and social development of partner countries. Development co-operation
serves to advance also Estonia’s bilateral relations and international standing.

Within the framework of development co-operation, Estonia supports in particular countries
to whose development Estonia can provide added value through its knowledge and
resources, and who are willing to advance a society based on democratic values and
adherence to human rights.

Estonia aspires to greater coherence between various policies related to development cooperation in the European Union, especially between development co-operation and the


-----

Common Foreign and Security Policy. Estonia emphasises the need to increase resources for
development policy and their efficiency, and strives towards the fulfilment of the financing
obligations assumed within the European Union.

The objective of Estonia’s defence outreach policy is to advance the security sector reform in
partner countries. The defence outreach policy contributes to security and stability in regions
significant for NATO and the European Union, promotes democratic values and strengthens
bilateral relations between Estonia and the partner countries.

**Arms Control**

Estonia underscores the importance of arms control in ensuring international security and
building confidence.

Estonia deems it important to limit conventional arms in Europe, and desires to be party to
international agreements which serve to enhance security in Estonia as well as the
international community. We expect other countries to adhere to the same principles.

Estonia makes every effort to prevent illicit trafficking or transit of weapons of mass
destruction, or their components through its territory. In pursuit of non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction as well as conventional arms, Estonia continues its active
participation in the control regimes of strategic goods.

**3.2.** **Defence Policy**

Estonian defence policy is directed at preventing and, if necessary, repelling military threats.
Estonia’s defence policy entails planning, co-ordination and implementation of the whole
national defence system, including preparation for the national military defence as well as
NATO’s collective defence, international defence co-operation, participation in international
military operations (NATO and EU missions in particular), the implementation of the
defence outreach policy, the provision of assistance to civil structures in case of emergencies
and the performance of other peacetime duties.

Estonia’s objective is to reach and maintain defence expenditure at the level of 2% of GDP.
Defence expenditure is defined on the basis of the method established in NATO.

**National defence**

To prevent and repel military action against Estonia all capabilities will be used pursuant to
the principle of total defence, including the efforts of state structures and the population. In
case of military action against Estonia, the national defence system will be implemented
comprehensively, consisting of military defence, civil contribution to military defence,
international activity, ensuring of internal security, securing the resilience of critical services,
and psychological defence.

Estonia is continuously preparing for national defence, and will defend itself in any
circumstance and against an enemy of any superiority. National defence is organised
following the principles of civilian control.

The comprehensive development of national defence ensures the efficiency of Estonia’s
military defence, the confidence of its people and the will to defend Estonia and, in the state
of emergency or war, the availability of elements of civilian support required for military


-----

defence, the functioning of foreign relations, activities of emergency services in ensuring
internal security, and resilience of critical services.

The successful organisation of national defence requires efficient management according to
common national objectives, as well as swift decision-making and internal co-operation. The
reliability and synthesis of information, and similarity of management and areas of
responsibility both during peacetime and war will be ensured. Common threat scenarios are
prepared and integrated planning implemented in order to ensure a purposeful and coordinated development of national defence.

The Defence League (Kaitseliit) – the voluntary national defence organisation – and its suborganisations play an important role in stregthening national security, enhancing the will to
defend the country, and expanding the support of the society to military defence. The
Government promotes voluntary national defence activities.

**Military Defence**

Estonia’s military defence is based on the capability of initial independent defence and
NATO’s collective defence. Estonia’s military defence is planned as a North Atlantic Treaty
Article 5 collective defence operation.

Through a swift response, the initial independent defence capability must ensure Estonia’s
military defence as well as the basic prerequisites for the implementation of collective
defence also in case of an unexpected attack.

The main objectives of Estonia’s defence capability:

-  to ensure control over Estonia’s territory, territorial waters and airspace, and to
demonstrate sovereignty of the state;

-  to develop the capability to provide an early warning;

-  to develop the mobilisation system required for ensuring military defence, as well as
to prepare and set up reserve forces for organised military defence;

-  to develop modern, deployable, mobile, sustainable rapid response units with the
capability to ensure military defence of the whole territory as well as to participate in
operations outside Estonia;

-  to ensure readiness for the launch and execution of collective defence operations, and
host nation support to the allied forces.

The Defence Forces of Estonia are made up of professional members of the armed forces and
members of reserve forces, compulsory military service will remain the main source for
formation of reserve units and recruitment of professionals of the Defence Forces. The
motivation of members of the Defence Forces of Estonia and the Defence League is an
important foundation of national defence. The state creates conditions for adequate training
of the members of the Defence Forces as well as for the successful return of professional
military to civilian life at retirement.

Capabilities which are required for military defence and deterrence but which cannot be
achieved by Estonia on its own will be ensured in co-operation with Allies in NATO.

NATO’s core task is collective defence. Estonia participates actively in its strengthening. In
order to prevent, avert and, if necessary, repel any attack against a NATO Ally, NATO’s
collective defence must be visible, capable and credible. NATO must be able to respond


-----

forcefully and flexibly to attacks of any scale and nature. This requires relevant planning and
training, as well as an efficient early warning system. Estonia deems it important that
capabilities required for collective defence and those required for performing other functions
of NATO complement each other. Estonia participates in NATO’s defence planning process
through the fulfilment of NATO’s force goals.

NATO’s crisis management operations must be efficient to ensure security in the EuroAtlantic area and to prevent threats. Estonia contributes to NATO operations and fulfils
deployability criteria.

Estonia supports NATO’s transformation process, which aims at ensuring adequate military
capabilities for fulfilment of NATO’s tasks so as to respond also to rapidly developing and
new threats. Estonia participates in the NATO Response Force, and supports its further
development into a force which provides credible deterrence and defence.

Estonia participates in the development of NATO’s multinational capabilities, which add to
the interoperability of the armed forces of the Alliance and the ability to carry out joint
operations, and enhance NATO’s cohesion, ensuring extensive military capabilities.

**3.3** **Policy of Internal Security**

The policy of of internal security is aimed to achieve a condition of the society in which the
people are guaranteed a safe living environment, and that is resilient to respond to threats and
mitigate the damage caused by the realisation of potential danger. The state guarantees
comprehensive development of the security of the people and internal security as a whole,
using, where appropriate, new technological solutions. Enhancement of security presumes
common purposeful activities of the civil society, and the involvement of citizens’
associations. Accession to the Schengen Area has increased the importance of co-operation
both within Estonia and in the European Union.

**Protection of Constitutional Order**

The state prevents and impedes any activity that is threatening the constitutional order. This
requires collection and processing of relevant information, prevention of hostile foreign
intelligence and influence activities, including obstruction of information operations, as well
as collaboration at national and international level. The state guarantees continuous
development of security authorities and directs attention to the protection of constitutional
order, including preventive action and increase of social awareness, as well as harmonized
regional development and integration.

**Guarding the External Border**

Efficient protection of the external border helps to restrain illegal migration and cross-border
crime, ensuring the security of Estonia as well as other EU member states. Enhancement of
the efficiency of the external border of the European Union requires improvement of
technical surveillance capacities, implementation of new electronic control measures and
enhancement of the efficiency of co-operation between authorities. Identification of
hazardous substances and dangerous individuals already at the border increases the security
of the entire Schengen area.


-----

Estonia contributes to the exchange of information within the EU, as well as co-operation
with third countries. The surveillance of maritime areas is to be strengthened by the
development of national civilian-military co-operation.

In the absence of permanent border control within the Schengen area, compensation
measures are applied to impede illegal migration and cross-border crime. The efficient
functioning of the common compensation measures averts threats to countries that have
joined the Schengen area. Estonia maintains the ability to restore temporary internal border
control, if necessary.

**Prevention of Emergencies and Managing the Consequences**

The state provides the protection of the population in case of emergencies. Emergencies can
be prevented and their consequences managed with the co-operation of all members of
society – the people, local governments, state authorities and the business and non-profit
sector.

The state enhances the early warning system regarding potential threats and communicates
guidelines through means of public communication in case of emergencies.

In preparation for emergencies, the state organises more training exercises involving all
parties, establishes an up-to-date overview of the capabilities for managing the consequences
of emergencies, and enhances readiness for utilizing national defence resources. The state
endorses voluntary efforts targeted to prevent threats and solve emergency situations.

Estonia’s goal is, in co-operation with other countries, to pursue safety of navigation at the
Baltic Sea, primarily in the Gulf of Finland. Special attention is paid to search and rescue at
sea and the development of capabilities of detecting and response to marine pollution.

In responding to major emergencies, rescue and crisis management co-operation with the
European Union and NATO in the field of civil protection, as well as among the Baltic Sea
countries, is of critical importance. The rescue and crisis management capabilities are also
used in the UN rescue and assistance missions.

**Combating Terrorism**

The threat of terrorism is an acute problem, and acts of terror, regardless of where they are
committed, have significant effect on the sense of security. Estonia contributes to countering
terrorism on national and regional, as well as global level. The basis for efficient counterterrorism action lies in co-operation with domestic and international partners.

The goal is to prevent and suppress terrorism in all its forms. Special attention is paid to
avoid radicalisation, to prevent terrorist financing, to combat terrorism involving chemical,
biological, radiological, nuclear or explosive materials, and to protect high attack risk
individuals and sites.

**Combating International Organised Crime**

Due to internationalisation and free movement within the European Union, greater attention
must be paid to combating organised crime. Estonia endeavours to prevent the influence of
international organised crime, and to impede generation and legalising of illegal income. In
collaboration with other EU member states, Estonia continues to develop new technical


-----

solutions and diversifies international co-operation in combating various forms of organised
crime.

**Combating Cyber Crime**

The dependence of critical information and communication systems and a large part of
everyday services on Information Technology (IT) necessitates special attention to
combating crimes conducted using means of IT. At the same time, preventing cyber crime is
also important for combating terrorism and international organised crime, as well as for
ensuring functioning of information and communication systems and financial security.

In preventing and combating cyber crime, enhanced co-operation between agencies on both
national and international level is sought, as are the development of legislation and
endorsement of public awareness. The state guarantees sustainability in fighting cyber crime,
along with the required technical means and availability of know-how.

**Tackling Corruption**

Tacckling corruption contributes to preventing and averting damage to the state’s reputation,
the spread of organised crime, shadow economy and money laundering. Preventing
corruption involves both public and private sector, paying special attention to raising public
awareness and the development of crime detection and the investigative capacity of law
enforcement authorities.

**3.4.** **Resilience and Cohesion of the Society**

The capability of the state to prevent and avert security threats depends on the readiness to
maintain functions that are vital to the existence of the state and the people. Social cohesion
and the resilience of the critical services that are promoted in the interests of national
development also strengthen national security when threats emerge.

In promoting the resilience and cohesion of the society, the state co-operates with other
members of civil society. Social cohesion is enhanced and social risks prevented through
higher employment rate and greater involvement in social life. The prevention of social risks
is addressed in the national economic and social policy.

**Resilience of Critical Services**

Services that are essential in ensuring the functioning of society and the state are considered
as critical services. In order to ensure the resilience of critical services, the development of
operational capability and the ability to recover interrupted services are conducted, sufficient
reserves are provided and action plans devised.

Risks that may disrupt or cause malfunction in critical services are under continuous
evaluation. In order to ensure the functioning of critical services, the state cooperates with all
members of society by organising the implementation of the required preventive and
alleviating measures.


-----

**Electronic Communication**

A bulk of electronic communication networks, services and critical information systems are
owned by the private sector. Thus, the strengthening of co-operation between the state and
the private sector is vital for ensuring resilience of critical services.

Information systems that support electronical communication and critical services are
protected by organisational, technological and physical safety and security measures. A
regular status review is needed of technical condition of the state’s communication means
and systems, as well as of the options for duplicating and secure functioning in case of crisis.

Ensuring cross-border communication requires enhanced international co-operation in order
to guarantee interoperability of the electronic communications networks and to co-ordinate
the use of resources.

**Cyber Security**

For ensuring cyber security it is essential to reduce the vulnerability of critical information
systems and data communication connections and to contain possible damage from cyber
attacks. Critical service information systems must be held operational throughout the entire
territory and on the basis of domestic resources, including in situations where connections
with foreign countries are temporarily malfunctioning or have failed.

Cyber security requires an effective legal framework, high awareness of information security
and close international co-operation. Cyber security is reinforced through the implementation
of national action plans and the renewal of legal regulation.

**Transport Infrastructure**

The planning and implementation of transport infrastructure development takes into account
the needs of economic and social development, as well as the requirements of national
defence. The priority is to reconstruct or construct the ports, airports, railways and roads
which form part of the Trans-European Transport Networks.

Cooperation between the public and private sector is essential in ensuring a resilient
transport infrastructure. The security and safety requirements set forth in international
standards are followed in ensuring the resilience and protection of the transport system.

**Energy Security**

Energy security is ensured through the security of supply, the security of infrastructure,
interconnection with energy networks of other EU member states, and diversity of sources of
energy. To reduce dependence on the energy imports it is vital for Estonia to enhance energy
efficiency. Estonia’s efforts are supported by strengthening of the EU energy policy.

The EU trend towards maximum use of domestic energy resources add to security of supply.
In case of Estonia this means the rational use of oil shale and the extensive introduction of
renewable energy technologies. Development of the production of liquid fuels from oil shale,
and the measures implemented by the European Union for preserving liquid fuel stocks
ensure sufficient operation of the liquid fuel market.


-----

The state supports production of heat and electricity from renewable sources of energy. In
2015, the share of electricity produced from renewables will amount to at least 15% of the
gross consumption of electrical energy. The construction of additional connections with the
Baltic States, Nordic countries and Poland will diversify the sources of energy for Estonia
and plays crucial role in the maximum utilization of renewable energy options and
enhancement of security of supply. Estonia’s interconnection with the EU electricity and gas
system will reduce dependence on a single supplier or a limited number of suppliers.

As a source of base load electrical energy, nuclear power is an important option to enhance
security of supply without increasing greenhouse gas emissions. Estonia will develop the
necessary know-how and legal framework for introducing nuclear energy.

Heat production will be ensured by a more balanced proportion of the energy sources used.
By 2020, the share of a single source of energy must not exceed 30%. Options must be
introduced for switching major heat producers from natural gas to other fuels.

Mandatory security and safety measures are applied to ensure resilience and protection of
energy systems.

**Environmental Security**

Estonia’s goal is to apply, through international co-operation, the measures required for
tackling climate change and mitigating the risks stemming from it. The business sector and
the non-profit sector will be involved in the development of measures for adapting to climate
change.

The state promotes environment-friendly values and attitude among the public, and directs
the development and implementation of pollution prevention measures and the resuscitation
of the environment through the reduction of generation of waste and pollution. Estonia
applies measures for preventing the spread of environmentally hazardous substances, and the
neutralization of sources of pollution on land and sea.

In order to prevent marine pollution, Estonia is developing in co-operation with other
countries, the vessel traffic regulation and surveillance systems in the Baltic Sea, primarily in
the Gulf of Finland. Remote surveillance of marine pollution is being developed, including
air surveillance aimed at the early detection of pollution and the identification of the causer
of the pollution.

In order to prevent disasters in enterprises prone to be affected by major accident and to
alleviate potential consequences, co-operation between authorities with respect to planning
and inspecting such companies is enhanced.

Estonia has an early radiation warning system aimed to identify and notify of any crossborder radiation accidents at nuclear power plants in the neighbouring countries. Estonia is
engaged in international efforts to enhance radiation protection and radiation safety, as well
as to ensure the safety of nuclear power plants and reduce radioactivity within the Baltic Sea
region.

**Security of the Financial System**

The state ensures the stability, transparency and credibility of its financial system. In order to
prevent and resolve an international or domestic financial crisis and mitigate their economic


-----

consequences, the state ensures the implementation of respective legal and supervisory
measures, as well as necessary financial means appropriate for the normal functioning and of
the stability of the financial system.

The stability of the financial system is ensured by an efficient regulatory and supervision
framework as well as international co-operation in financial crisis prevention, management
and resolution. The stability of the financial system requires the prevention of the solvency
problems of Estonian-based credit and other financial institutions, disturbances in the
payment and settlement systems, as well as the ability to promptly solve any difficulties or
failures.

The availability of sufficient reserves must be ensured in order to solve financial crises. The
implementation of the security policy requires, above all, the availability of liquid financial
resources and their usability for both preventive action and for the alleviation of
consequences.

**Psychological Defence**

Psychological defence, emanating from constitutional values, serves to enforce Estonia’s
security. Psychological defence is the development, preservation and protection of common
values associated with social cohesion and the sense of security. The aim of psychological
defence is to safeguard the security of state and society, to enhance the sense of security, to
avert crisis and to increase trust amongst society and towards the actions taken by the state.

Psychological defence facilitates the strengthening of nation’s self-confidence and the will to
defend Estonia. Psychological defence and the recognition of constitutional values
strengthen the resilience to avert anti-Estonian subversive activity.

Psychological defence is developed in co-operation with all members of civil society.

**Harmonised Regional Development**

National security is influenced by economic, social and environmental security on the entire
territory of Estonia. The Estonian territory as a whole must be inhabitable and safe.
Unfavourable population processes need to be avoided, as well as excessive concentration of
socio-economic, security and safety risks into some regions.

In order to ensure harmonized regional development and habitation, the state provides for the
development of the required infrastructure, supports the enhancement of local government
capacities, and provides for the quality and availability of public safety, education,
healthcare and other public services, as well as a comprehensive management of regional
policy. Regional characteristics will be taken into account in location of state institutions.

**Integration**

The aim of integration is to shape a culturally versatile Estonian society based on a strong
identity and shared values. The state continues to support activities aimed at fostering the
integration of different social groups in order to expand possibilities for active participation
in social life.

The efficiency of integration is supported by harmonized regional development, the
availability of education, the endorsement of official language studies, and the consistent


-----

implementation of the integration process. Integration policy will be supported by the
activities of civil society organizations, local governments and state authorities in pursuit of a
favourable environment.

**Public Health Protection**

Public health protection advances the ability of people to cope with everyday life and
enhances their social and economic contribution, thereby adding to the cohesion of society
and the state’s ability to manage security threats.

Surveillance for the detection of the spread of communicable diseases is conducted at
national level. The immunization plan is applied for limiting the spread of vaccinepreventable communicable diseases, outbreaks and epidemics. State-funded public health
programmes are implemented for impeding the epidemic spread of tuberculosis and
HIV/AIDS. Estonia is actively participating in the activities of the European Union and the
World Health Organization which are aimed at the international prevention and control of
the spread of communicable diseases.

The purpose of drug abuse prevention is to reduce the illicit supply and demand of narcotic
drugs, a phenomenon that weakens the society, as well as to deal with the medical treatment
and rehabilitation of addicts. The efficiency of the Estonian drug policy is supported by
reliable statistics, epidemiological surveys, and continuous drug monitoring and information
exchange with other countries.

Estonia is enhancing national readiness and response to public health emergencies where a
large number of people would require medical care as a result of natural disasters,
catastrophes or outbreaks of communicable diseases.

-  * *

**The Government shall exercise co-ordinated security policy in line with the above**
**National Security Concept of Estonia. The implementation of the security policy and**
**the preparation of relevant plans shall be governed by the principles and directions**
**stipulated in the National Security Concept. The National Security Concept will be**
**renewed upon significant changes in the security environment, conditioning the need to**
**update the security policy.**


-----

