# National Defence Strategy

 Estonia


-----

-----

Estonia’s new National Defence Strategy replaces the previous document from
2005. It stipulates that, although there are no existential threats to the NATO
Member States’ security, the global and regional security environment is becoming more dynamic and more unpredictable. New threats and challenges have
emerged, while traditional security issues have not disappeared.

In this rapidly evolving security environment, the most serious potential threats to
Estonia derive from hybrid and combined challenges and from a combination of
internal and external developments. Therefore, national defence can no longer be
limited to military defence alone. Only a comprehensive approach to defence can
guarantee a country’s security.

Based on this central idea, the 2011 National Defence Strategy stipulates that all
major Estonian state authorities shall participate in national defence, thus combining military forces with non-military capabilities.

Estonia’s defence policy is based on two intertwined pillars: the promotion of
international security, including strong relations with its allies and the credibility
of NATO’s collective defence mechanism; and the strengthening of Estonia’s own
initial defence capability to ensure the sustainability of the State and its institutions in all possible scenarios.

All state authorities related to national defence are responsible for their respective
competence both in peacetime and in case of war. Thus, close interagency coope­
ration and comprehensive yet flexible command and control system shall complement to Estonia’s contribution to collective defence.

The following is a provisional translation of the National Defence Strategy of Estonia.


-----

## National Defence Stragegy

Introduction 5

Security Environment 6

The changing international security environment
Estonia’s position within the international security
environment and the security risks affecting national defence

Estonian Defence Policy 8

National Defence – Main Courses of Action 10

Military defence

Civil sector support to military defence
International efforts
Ensuring internal security
Ensuring sustainability of vital services
Psychological defence

National Defence Planning 24

National Defence Administration 25


-----

## Introduction

The 2011 National Defence Strategy is based on the National Security Concept of
Estonia, which was endorsed by the Riigikogu in 2010, and will serve to replace
the current 2005 version of the National Military Strategy.

The Government of the Republic shall adopt this strategy at the proposal of
the Minister of Defence and it shall be subject to revision every four years. The
strategy will serve as a basis for more elaborate development and action plans,
of which the more essential are outlined in the section on national defence planning. The Government shall make proposals to modify legislation as the need to
do so arises in implementing the strategy.

The most recent National Military Strategy was approved in 2005. Its primary
purpose was to outline Estonia’s military defence development and implementation principles following accession to the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO) and the European Union (EU). Integration into NATO’s collective defence
system became the main priority for national defence development.

The main objectives of the 2005 National Military Strategy have been met. The
main goal of the new strategy is to update the organisation of national defence
in Estonia by taking the changing security environment into consideration, while
extending the strategy beyond a strictly military approach to include other areas
of national defence. The strategy addresses courses of action that are aimed
at deterr­ing any possible military attack against Estonia and is based on the
assumption that an external military threat may express itself in its early stages
as non-military pressure. In addition to the potential risk of military attack, the
government should therefore prepare to counter other deliberate actions targeting Estonia and incorporate planning for these into the implementation of security policy.

For the purposes of this document, the “term military attack” also refers to any
other offensive actions comparable to a military attack that are accompanied by
damage to Estonia’s independence, self-sufficiency, territorial integrity, or constitutional order.


-----

## Security Environment

The changing international security environment

Estonia has become an integral part of the global security environment. The international security environment is in a state of constant change. The concept of
security has expanded, thereby raising security issues in areas where they have
not previously been tackled. Today, both the preparation and active phase of military conflicts involve the extensive use of non-military measures. In such an environment, only a comprehensive approach to national defence that includes nonmilitary activities and rests on strong internal security, can ensure a country’s
national defence.

Propaganda and other non-military leverage can be employed to wound an open
society. Malevolent manipulation can destabilise the internal situation and tarnish a country’s international reputation, as well as weaken its relationships with
allies. The ability to uphold one’s reputation and defend it from hostile undermining efforts is inevitable to maintain functional relationships with allies.

The importance of geographical distances has decreased, while local, regional
and global security has become more interconnected than ever. Distant threats
may influence the security of Estonia and its allies.

Developments in international security are characterised by dynamism; therefore,
the speed of decision-making and the efficacy of implementing the decisions is
becoming increasingly important, particularly for small countries.

Estonia’s position within the international security environment
and the security risks affecting national defence

Today, thanks to NATO and EU membership, Estonia is more secure than ever.
NATO and the EU help to maintain the stability of Estonia’s international status
and its integration into the democratic Western world, and extend credible military deterrence and collective defence.

Despite the generally positive development of European security, conventional
threats and tensions between countries remain. Therefore, small countries must


-----

account for the possibility that an unfavourable concurrence of events may result
in the international community failing to pay attention to their security issues.

Both domestic developments and developments in the Baltic Sea region have an
immediate effect on Estonia’s security. The security policy choices of Baltic Sea
countries affect Estonia’s security, and vice-versa.

All major possible threat scenarios include both internal and external deve­
lopments. A low intensity problem can – if not dealt with in a timely and approp­
riate manner – escalate into a crisis that directly endangers the security of Estonia.

Non-military security threats with an impact on national security may take the
form of attacks to Estonia’s international reputation and hinder relations with its
allies and partners. They may also encompass attacks against energy, information and communication systems, which serve as the basis for ensuring the sustainability of society, thereby weakening the viability of Estonia’s cultural vitality
or social coherence. These threats may appear in the form of co-ordinated external pressure.

Estonian society is stable both in socio-economic and ethnic dimensions. Co-ordinated external pressure may endanger the security of Estonia if it creates internal
tensions within the state.

A direct military attack against Estonia is unlikely; however, such a threat cannot
be ruled out altogether. Both today and in the foreseeable future, NATO’s military
superiority can be regarded as a sufficient defence against any adversary. At the
same time, a miscalculation by a state, group of states or non-state actors arising
from the mistaken belief in the inefficacy of NATO’s collective defence cannot be
fully excluded. Therefore, any action targeted against NATO’s integrity and Allied
solidarity threatens Estonia’s security as well as transatlantic security in general.

The Estonian security environment is also influenced by the internal and foreign
policies of the Russian Federation. The Russian Federation has demonstrated an
increased interest in re-establishing its spheres of influence and strengthening its
influence over Europe’s security environment. The presence of Russian Federation
military forces in close proximity to the Estonian border has increased.


-----

## Estonian Defence Policy

The main task of Estonia’s national defence is to prevent a possible military attack
against Estonia and, should the need arise, to provide for successful de­fence.
The basis of Estonia’s national defence is the Estonian population’s strong will to
defend their country, which is in turn based on national self-awareness, self-confidence and dignity. Estonia will defend itself in all circumstances and against any
adversary, no matter how overwhelming. Should Estonia temporarily lose control
over part of its sovereign territory, Estonian citizens will still resist the adversary
within that territory.

In accordance with the principle of total defence, all means will be employed to
anticipate and prevent any possible military action against Estonia. In order to
prevent a war, prudent action should be taken before the threat of war or threats
of a non-military nature arise.

Both (1) the strength of its relations with allies and the efficacy of the collective
defence system, and (2) Estonia’s independent defence capability, internal stability, sustainability and the reliability of its state institutions play an important
role in ensuring Estonia’s security. State institutions must ensure the continuity
of critical governmental functions and the implementation of government policies
under any circumstances. Broad popular support for Estonia’s constitutional order
is essential to the effective functioning of national defence and the anticipation of
any possible threat of war.

Any international conflict is detrimental to Estonia’s security. In strengthening its
national defence, Estonia shall ensure that its efforts, whether pursued indivi­
dually or in co-operation with its allies, do not endanger any other country. At the
same time, Estonia operates on the assumption that democratic countries’ withdrawal under pressure would prove more dangerous in the long-term than opposing aggression in an unambiguous and confident manner.

Estonia’s security is inseparable from that of its allies. As provided by Article 5 of
the North Atlantic Treaty, Estonia will consider a military attack against any NATO
member as an attack against itself. Additionally, under the Treaty of Lisbon, the
EU Member States are committed to assisting each other with all resources available in the case of an attack.

Estonia’s goal is NATO’s visible, credible and capable collective defence. NATO
must be capable of responding in time, by exercising both strength and flexibility,
to the attacks of even the most extensive and complex nature. A well-functioning


-----

collective defence system requires appropriate planning, training and an effective
early warning system. Therefore, Estonia participates in NATO’s defence planning process and supports developments that ensure an effective structure and
enhanced visibility of NATO across all Allied territory.

The EU’s Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) is an essential factor
alongside NATO’s collective defence that contributes to Estonia’s security. The
CSDP will strengthen the security of Europe and the EU’s capability to fulfil its role
in the international security environment. More efficient co-operation between the
EU and NATO, which entails support for both organisations complementing and
strengthening each other, serves Estonia’s interests.

Estonia’s political weight in NATO and CSDP decision-making processes depends
on our active participation in providing solutions to key NATO and CSDP challenges. Estonia’s relative contribution to NATO and the EU must be active and visible, considering Estonia’s small size.

Activities that increase stability and are aimed at enhancing reliability contribute
to Estonia’s national defence. These include the following: international military
and civil operations (hereafter international operations), arms control, bilateral
and multilateral defence co-operation, and outreach policy, which supports security and defence reforms in countries that have appealed for assistance.

Estonia will contribute to international operations with capabilities developed to
meet its national priorities and requirements. Participation in international operations will be used to intensify co-operation with Estonia’s strategic allies. Estonia
sees NATO and EU operations as a priority, though it does not rule out participation in any other operation led by a coalition of the willing or another organisation.

Arms control improves security and diminishes the risk of military conflict between
countries by virtue of increasing trust. Estonia’s goal is to increase transparency
by making information available that reveals the location and number of armaments in Europe, while improving the efficacy of associated confidence-building
measures. Estonia is eager to actively participate in various European initiatives
related to arms control and is prepared to participate in any arms control confidence-building measures, provided these are based on transparency, reciprocal
restraint and host nation support.

Estonia’s objective is to link itself with the security of its allies as tightly as pos­
sible, exercising effective co-operation and strengthening Estonia’s positive repu­
tation in bilateral and regional co-operation formats. Closer relations with the
Unites States of America form an essential component of Estonia’s bilateral
defence co-operation framework. US presence in Europe, including in the Baltic


-----

Sea region, serves Estonia’s interests. Defence co-operation between the Nordic
and Baltic countries is the most important of various forms of regional cooperation. Estonia’s goal is to integrate Baltic defence co-operation with Nordic countries’ cooperation as closely as possible.

Estonia has set the objective of bringing defence expenditure up to 2% of GDP
and maintaining this level. NATO methodologies are used to determine defence
expenditures.

In order to ensure reliable deterrence and the organisation of effective defence,
Estonia will pursue the following six main courses of action:
a. Military defence;
b. Civilian sector support to military defence;
c. International efforts;
d. Ensuring internal security;
e. Ensuring vital services;
f. Psychological defence.

These six main courses of action, which comprise the structure of national
defence, are closely linked, while the activities conducted within their framework support each other. Civil defence, which involves both the timely notification of the population as well as the application of measures required to protect
the popu­lation, forms an essential part of national defence. Issues that contribute to civil defence are taken into consideration at all levels of national defence.

## National Defence Main Courses of Action

Military defence

Objectives and principles

The objective of military defence is to ensure sufficient capabilities to guarantee
the nation’s sovereignty and repel any military attacks. Estonia’s military defence
relies on NATO’s collective defence and an initial independent defence capability.

Estonia’s military defence is planned as an Article 5 operation of the North Atlantic Treaty. Estonia will assign the units needed for such an operation to NATO’s


-----

chain of command. The plans necessary for executing a collective defence
ope­ration will be drafted in cooperation with Estonia’s allies, and will be regularly
updated and assessed in exercises.

Estonia’s initial independent defence capability is able to ensure the rapid
response that is a pre-requisite for carrying out collective defence under circumstances of an unexpected attack. Regions and objects of strategic importance will
be defended in order to allow for the rapid arrival of allied forces.

Estonia’s initial independent defence capability employs both territorial and nonterritorial units. Territorial units operate within a specified area and are formed on
the basis of the Defence Forces and the Estonian Defence League. Non-territorial
units are able to operate within the entire theatre of operations and are largely
formed on the basis of the Defence Forces.

Estonia relies upon the concept of unified forces, which requires units partaking
in military defence to employ an integrated command, logistics and training system. All such units must be interoperable with allied troops.

Administrative and support duties that are not directly related to military defence
will be removed from the Estonian Defence Forces purview in order to focus
efforts on the development of military capabilities. The Ministry of Defence and
the Defence Forces will cooperate in drafting relevant plans.

Military defence planning will incorporate paramilitary operations, such as guerrilla activity and resistance movements.

Organisation of military defence

The Ministry of Defence and Defence Forces are responsible managing the organi­
sation of military defence; the Estonian Defence League will also be involved in
the process.

The Ministry of Defence shall:
a. Co-ordinate the planning of national defence, involve other relevant
govern­mental authorities, and be responsible for the drafting of the Military Defence Action Plan;
b. Be responsible for drafting legal acts regulating military defence;
c. Participate in the command of military defence;
d. In cooperation with the Ministry of Finance develop a wartime financing
plan for military defence;
e. Co-ordinate the provision of host nation support to allied forces;


-----

f. Ensure that the administrative and support tasks necessary for military
defence are met;
g. Co-ordinate cyber-defence in the area of national defence;
h. Conduct defence-related procurements;
i. Direct the development of the defence industry;
j. Co-ordinate the provision of medical support to military defence.

_Defence Forces_

The Defence Forces are a militarily organized government institution under the
administrative authority of the Ministry of Defence. The Defence Forces shall:
a. Plan and conduct military operations for defending the territory, territorial
waters, and airspace of Estonia and ensuring the sovereignty of the state;
b. Participate in collective defence operations to defend Estonia’s allies;
c. Participate in ensuring host nation support to allied forces;
d. Co-ordinate communication between Estonian civilian authorities and
allied forces participating in the defence of Estonia;
e. Ensure the development of military capabilities;
f. Participate in strengthening the national early warning system and information systems used for notifying the population and international community;
g. Fulfil other legally mandated duties.

The Defence Forces shall consist of professionals and reservists. Mandatory conscription is to remain the primary means for manning reserve units and also as a
source for recruiting regular members to the Defence Forces.

The Defence Force peacetime units’ central task is to prepare for military defence
by training reserve units and, if necessary, managing their formation. Reserve
units are prepared over the course of conscription and reserve exercises employing a unit-based approach.

In order to ensure a flexible response to any potential security risks, the peacetime
command structure of the Defence Forces shall match its wartime equivalent as
closely as possible. Changes to the legal framework for regulating military defence
will aim to reduce the need for large-scale reorganisation in case of war.

Capability-based planning is applied in the Defence Forces with the objective of
achieving the full scale of capabilities needed for Estonia’s initial defence. Capabilities necessary for the defence of Estonia that cannot be acquired independently shall be assured through co-operation with allies.


-----

The Defence Forces primary development priorities are:
a. Strengthening early-warning and command and control capabilities,
which allows for rapid and flexible responses to possible threats, while
retaining coordinated control in case of an unexpected attack by overwhelming forces;
b. Developing an effective readiness and mobilisation system, and the training and formation of reserve units;
c. Developing rapid-response, deployable, mobile, and sustainable all-purpose units capable of operations against any adversary through-out the
territory of Estonia, as well as participation in international operations;
d. Increasing their readiness for launching and executing collective defence
operations and ensuring host nation support to allied forces;
e. Ensuring sustainability in the areas of personnel, supplies and logistics,
in order to foster the steady development of the Defence Forces regardless
of economic conditions.

_Estonian Defence League_

The Estonian Defence League is a voluntary, militarily organized, armed, national
defence organisation that acts within the area of government of the Ministry of
Defence. The Estonian Defence League possesses arms and engages in military
exercises. The Estonian Defence League shall:
a. Prepare territorial units for military defence;
b. Participate in the defence of strategic sites, ensure host nation support
and force protection;
c. Develop a cyber-defence capability;
d. Include the country’s population in functions related to national defence;
e. Fulfil other duties as stipulated by law.

The Estonian Defence League is a nationwide organisation. Its task is to enhance
the readiness and knowledge of the population in order to aid in the defence of
Estonia’s independence, constitutional order and territorial integrity in a crisis
situation. The units of the Estonian Defence League are structured on a territorial basis following Estonia’s administrative subdivisions, which allows for quick
responses to security risks emerging in any part of the country and supports the
implementation of other national defence efforts.

The main task of the Estonian Defence League in organising military defence is
to enhance the population’s will to defend its country and ensure readiness for
national defence by planning military defence activities, including guerrilla activities and resistance movements, and participating in such activities. A stable proportion of the military defence budget will be allocated to the Estonian Defence League.


-----

The Estonian Defence League shall prepare units with defined wartime duties
that shall be deployed as part of the Defence Forces’ structure following a declaration of mobilisation. Defence League members not appointed to positions with
mobilisation restrictions or non-territorial reserve units of the Defence Forces will
be assigned to Defence League units that fulfil wartime duties.

The main development priorities of the Estonian Defence League are as follows:
a. Increasing the motivation of voluntary members of the Estonian Defence
League, greater promotion of initiatives, and strengthening its chain of
command;
b. Developing military capabilities by observing the principle of a balan­

ced and realistic approach and responding to any threats arising from the
development of information technology;
c. Enhancing co-operation with public structures and non-profit organisations in order to increase the efficiency of social support mechanisms;
d. More extensive involvement of young people in the activities of the Estonian Defence League and enhancing the coherence of the organisation
at the county level.

Civil sector support to military defence

Objectives and principles

The Defence Forces require the support of the civilian sector for ensuring the military defence of the state. The objective of civil sector support is to ensure the efficient activation and operability of military defence without causing major damage
to the upkeep of civilian society. Civil sector support to military defence shall be
ensured by mobilisation, the utilisation of state assets, contractual relations and
compulsory encumbrances. Contractual relations and compulsory encumbrances
cover both assets and services.

The Defence Forces shall indigenously develop only those wartime capabilities
that are either impossible or impractical to implement through inter-agency cooperation, contractual relations or compulsory encumbrances.

If necessary, proceedings required for mobilisation shall be initiated in peacetime
by raising the readiness level of the Defence Forces or declaring a mobilisation.

Persons employed in positions that are critical for the continued functioning
of society for the purposes of national defence shall not be mobilised. Ex officio mobilisation restrictions shall be applied to that end. Persons subject to such


-----

restrictions will fulfil their wartime national defence duties by continuing service
in their peacetime positions.

The following principles shall be observed in preparation for and execution of
mobilisation:
a. The mobilisation system must be simple; every task must have a specific
person or institution responsible for its implementation;
b. Mobilised persons and those carrying out mobilisation must have a clear
understanding of their duties in implementing mobilisation and defence
related activities;
c. Primary resources essential for ensuring the operability of the wartime
Defence Forces structure must already be available and usable during
peacetime;
d. Detailed plans will be drafted for the implementation of the Defence
Forces’ mobilisation programme; these shall be subject to regular practice, including during reserve force exercises;
e. Structures required for the formation of reserve units must be trained and
prepared in peacetime to ensure the efficient mobilisation of the Defence
Forces.

Organisation of civil sector support

Preparing and conducting the Defence Forces’ mobilisation and increasing the
Defence Forces’ level of readiness require inter-agency cooperation.

When preparing for and carrying out mobilisation, the Ministry of Defence shall:
a. Co-ordinate preparations for mobilisation;
b. Organise the establishment of ex officio mobilisation restrictions;
c. Take responsibility for the planning and procurement of resources required
for conducting mobilisation;
d. Organise the formation, storage, renewal and use of mobilisation reser­

ves;
e. Ensure the compatibility of the mobilisation system with defence planning
documents.

The Defence Resources Agency shall:
a. Keep account of persons who are able to serve in the Defence Forces and
take responsibility for the functioning of relevant registers;
b. Organise the call-up of persons who are eligible to be drafted to military
service and the recruitment of citizens to contractual service;
c. Keep account of the additional reserves and assets added by establishing
compulsory encumbrances;
d. Prepare the plans for contracts, compulsory encumbrances and the


-----

utili­sa­tion of state assets in accordance with the proposals of the Defence
Forces, and organise their implementation.

The Defence Forces shall:
a. Be responsible for the drafting, renewal and regular practising of the plans
needed for the implementation of mobilisation and the formation of troops;
b. Organise the call-up of reservists for military service. All contemporary
means of communication shall be used for the call-up;
c. Ensure an overview of the total resource requirement of reserve units as
well as the resources available to the Defence Forces. Solutions for the
provision of additional resources in wartime shall be specified in defence
planning documents. The establishment of the additional reserves required
in wartime shall be conducted as an integral part in the development of
new capabilities and units;
d. Take the responsibility for maintaining, storing and delivering the equipment used by the Defence Forces reserve units;
e. Form reserve units in co-operation with the Estonian Defence League.

International efforts

Objective and principles

The objective of international activities is to provide Estonia with favourable conditions that would, if necessary, ensure the rapid and effective application of collective defence and/or international crisis management measures. This can most
reliably be achieved within a stable security environment and by employing all
necessary political and practical preparations.

The principle of consensus is the cornerstone of mechanisms to activate collective defence and NATO and EU crisis management measures. By pursuing international activities, Estonia aims at enhancing solidarity among NATO and EU
member states, common understanding of situations and the shared capabilities
needed for improving the effectiveness of joint operations.

Organisation of international activities

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is responsible for coordinating Estonia’s international efforts in the area of national defence, supported by the Ministry of Defence
and the Defence Forces.


-----

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs shall pursue the following activities in the area
of national defence:
a. Co-ordination of Estonia’s activities as a NATO and EU member by ensuring
that Estonia’s interests are represented in relations with its allies and in
international organisations;
b. Developing the capability to co-ordinate the operation of foreign missions,
including in situations where conventional communication systems have
been attacked;
c. Supporting Estonian citizens, private and non-governmental organisa­tions
and governmental authorities in improving Estonia’s image abroad, while
sustaining a communication network for transmitting Estonia’s message
to the outside world;
d. Co-ordinating Estonia’s participation in international operations, the establishment and contribution of the required civil capabilities and the management of their use;
e. Co-ordinating the development of Estonian’s policies and activities related
to arms control and confidence-building measures;
f. If necessary, ensuring the protection of Estonia’s citizens abroad and providing them with opportunities for a safe return home.

In the field of international activities related to national defence, the Ministry
of Defence shall:
a. Participate in the development and implementation of collective defence
policies and crisis management measures, in the security and defence
policy making processes of NATO and EU, and contribute towards the
functioning of NATO and CSDP institutions;
b. Organise bilateral defence relations with other countries, conduct active
defence diplomacy within the framework of bilateral and multilateral relations, and conduct outreach policies in those countries that are willing to
benefit from Estonia’s experience;
c. Direct Estonia’s participation in the defence planning processes of NATO
as well as in the development of NATO and CSDP military capabilities;
d. Co-ordinate the organisation of international military exercises in Estonia
and the participation of the Defence Forces in military and crisis management exercises that take place outside Estonia;
e. Develop defence policy and military opinions concerning arms control and
confidence-building measures, and ensure Estonia’s capability to participate in arms control verification.

In the field of international activities associated with national defence, the Defence
Forces shall:
a. Participate in the work of NATO and EU military structures and ensuring
integration into NATO and EU military command structures;


-----

b. Participate in NATO’s defence planning processes, meet NATO force goals
and capability criteria, and participate in the CSDP’s capability building
efforts;
c. Organise international military exercises in Estonia and participate in mili­

tary and crisis management exercises that take place outside Estonia;
d. Participate in strengthening NATO’s early warning system;
e. Participate in NATO Response Forces and EU Battle Groups;
f. Participate in operations lead by NATO, the EU, the UN or a coalition
of the willing.

Ensuring internal security

Objective and principles

The objective of ensuring internal security is to ensure a living environment that
is as secure as possible.

In the event of a military attack against Estonia, the institutions responsible for
ensuring its internal security shall continue fulfilling their duties. Any developments that pose a threat to the independence of the state, its territorial integrity,
constitutional order, military defence of Estonia, human lives or any events that
may have a direct effect on the international status of Estonia shall be the main
focus of planning and prioritising the activities of internal security institutions.

In wartime, the same authorities and organisations that have the appropriate competence in peacetime shall handle emergency situations. Wartime criteria for handling emergency situations shall be developed. Regional and local governmental
crisis management committees shall continue their co-ordinating operations.

In order to enhance the efficiency of internal security related international co-operation, Estonia will include NATO and EU Member States’ internal security institutions in exercises organised in Estonia and increase the frequency of such exercises.

Organisation of internal security institutions

The responsibility for ensuring internal security lies with the Ministry of the Interior. Its area of administration includes the following institutions: the Police and
Border Guard Board, the Rescue Board, and the Estonian Security Police. Other
authorities also contribute to the safeguarding of internal security. The Estonian


-----

Academy of Security Sciences shall partake in the immediate provision of internal
security as a reserve unit fulfilling the duties of the abovementioned authorities.

National security institutions shall continue to fulfil their duties in the case of
a military attack against Estonia. The development of national security institutions
is described in more detail in the defence planning documents.

In the area of national defence, the Ministry of the Interior shall:
a. Co-ordinate activities related to ensuring the sustainability of vital services
in co-operation with other ministries;
b. Ensure the awareness of authorities of their wartime duties with regard to
their respective areas of administration;
c. Develop draft legal acts that specify the duties of assistant police officers
and rescue workers in a state of war;
d. Ensure the functioning of an operational radio communication network and
its development as proceeding from the needs of national defence;
e. Draft an evacuation plan for the population and specify the division of
tasks between different authorities;
f. Establish procedures for receiving and transmitting residents’ emergency
requests and information by classifying the potential types of information
and procedure for their transmission to other authorities;
g. Organise training for the employees of internal security authorities in the
Estonian Academy of Security Sciences.

Police and Border Guard Board

The Police and Border Guard Board shall:
a. Anticipate, identify and avert risks that endanger law and order, including
from cyberspace, and remove infractions against public order;
b. Conduct air and sea search and rescue (SAR) activities;
c. Ensure the protection of persons and sites subject to protection according to the law and conduct necessary co-operation with other authorities,
if appropriate;
d. Conduct border checks in areas that are not immediately involved in hostilities;
e. Organise issues of citizenship and migration.

The activities of the Police and Border Guard Board shall be supported by assistant police officers. In a state of war, any assistant police officers that are not
included among reservists, members of the Estonian Defence League, or who
are not assigned to positions that are subject to mobilisation restrictions shall be
responsible for anticipating and controlling risks that endanger public order.


-----

The main development priorities of the Police and Border Guard Board in the
area of national defence are as follows:
a. Increase the effectiveness of riot control capability;
b. Personal protection as specified by law and the development of surveillance systems for monitoring of sites of strategic importance;
c. Establishing a rapid sea and air rescue capability that can be extended
throughout the entire territory of Estonia;
d. Developing an assistant police officers’ network that would contribute to
the extensive use of assistant police officers in the event of a military
attack.

Rescue Board

In the event of a military attack against Estonia, the Rescue Board shall:
a. Co-ordinate the defence of the civilian population;
b. Perform rescue activities, primarily to save human lives;
c. Conduct explosive ordinance disposal in co-operation with the Defence
Forces;
d. Co-ordinate the receipt and resolution of any emergency calls received from
residents;
e. Organise the detection of chemical and biological contamination in cooperation with the Health Board, detection of radiological contamination in co-operation with the Environmental Board and decontamination
efforts in co-operation with the Defence Forces;
f. Ensure the operability of regional crisis management committees, which
have the task of co-ordinating the handling of non-military emergency situations and protection of the population within their region;
g. Organise the evacuation of the population in co-operation with the Police
and Border Guard Board.

Voluntary rescue workers shall support the activities of the Rescue Board.
In a state of war, any voluntary rescue workers who are not included among
reservists, members of the Estonian Defence League or not assigned to any positions that are subject to mobilisation restrictions shall be responsible for anticipating and controlling risks that endanger human lives.

The main development priorities of the Rescue Board in the field of national
defence are as follows:
a. Developing an efficient system for receiving emergency messages, which
would, either independently or after certain additional support inputs, be
usable for receiving and transmitting markedly increased volumes of emergency messages;


-----

b. Strengthening decontamination capabilities required for the elimination of
the consequences of chemical, biological or radiological attacks that affect
civilians and infrastructure;
c. Developing an explosives removal capability that is aimed at clearing
critical civil infrastructure from unexploded ordnance and thereby preventing mass casualties that may result from such eventualities;
d. Developing a network of voluntary rescue workers for use in non-military
emergency situations;
e. Establishing extensive evacuation capabilities, including drafting asso­

ciated plans, and training and informing the population;
f. Developing a system for the protection of the population, including for
operations carried out by regional and local crisis management committees, with the objective of fulfilling duties specified by the Emergency Preparedness Act during an armed attack.

Ensuring the sustainability of vital services

Objective and principles

Vital services shall mean services that are deemed inevitable for main training the
functioning of state and society. The objective of ensuring the sustainability of vital
services is to ensure the functioning of civilian society in any emergency situation.

For the purposes of national defence, the efforts to ensure the sustainability of
vital services in the event of an attack against Estonia differ from similar activities
carried out under regular circumstances.

Organising the sustainability of vital services

In the event of a military attack against Estonia, sustainability of vital services
shall be continued in accordance with the same principles and within the same
organisational frameworks as would be applied under peacetime circumstances.

For the purposes of national defence, certain vital services are of special importance as a result of their inherent nature or the expected operations in case of a
military conflict.

Services vital to national defence that fall under the area of governance of the
Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications are the:
a. Functioning of the power supply;


-----

b. Functioning of the liquid fuel supply;
c. Functioning of the telephone network;
d. Functioning of the data communication network;
e. Functioning of the maritime radio communication network;
f. Functioning of the broadcasting network;
g. Functioning of transport infrastructure (including the functioning of seagoing harbours, airports, railway services, motorways and auxiliary roads
of strategic importance).

Services vital to national defence that fall under the area of governance of the
Ministry of Social Affairs are the:
a. Functioning of stationary specialised medical care;
b. Functioning of emergency medical care;
c. Functioning of blood banks.

Services vital to national defence that fall under the area of governance of the
Ministry of the Environment are the:
a. Functioning of a radiological early warning system;
b. Functioning of the water supply and sanitation systems.

Services vital to national defence that fall under the area of governance of the
Ministry of Agriculture include food safety control.

Services vital to national defence that fall under the area of governance of the
Ministry of Finance comprise the continued functioning of payments and settlements, including national payments.

Services vital to national defence that fall under the area of governance of the Ministry of the Interior and Ministry of Justice include maintaining the registers used
within the respective ministries’ areas of administration as well as safekeeping
associated data. Maintaining the functionality of rescue activities, conveying
emergency messages and ensuring public order are highly important within the
area of governance of the Ministry of the Interior.

The Government of Estonia shall establish criteria for appointing providers of
services that are identified as vital from the standpoint of national defence and
shall make proposals to the Riigikogu for establishing requirements for the provision of such vital services. In the drafting of these plans, which aim at ensuring
the sustainability of vital services for the purposes of national defence, military
threat scenarios shall also be taken into account. The ministries in charge of the
aforementioned services shall draft, alongside from the documents specified in
the Emergency Preparedness Act, additional contingency plans that take military
threat scenarios into consideration, and they shall also carry out any neces­sary


-----

peacetime preparations for safeguarding vital services for the purpose of national
defence. Every four years, the Ministry of the Interior shall consolidate the
above-mentioned plans into an integrated document and then submit these documents for endorsement by the Government of the Republic.

Psychological defence

Objective and principles

The purpose of psychological defence is to prevent panic, the spread of hostile
influences and misinformation, thereby ensuring continued popular support to the
state and its national defence efforts. Psychological defence involves the deve­
lopment, safeguarding and protection of common values that are linked to the
cohesion and security of society. Psychological security is expressed in a society’s
ability to resist hostile influences and in Estonia’s capability to defend its security interests.

Domestic and foreign developments and their effects have become intertwined
within a globalised media space.

For the purposes of developing psychological defence, Estonia shall focus upon
the following main activities:
a. Identifying hostile influences that would weaken Estonia’s national
defence and protecting against them;
b. Ensuring the continuation of public broadcasting services in case of an
attack against the relevant networks;
c. Enhancing the public will to engage in defence and the popularisation of
security-related thinking, including increasing the availability of national
defence training.

Aspects of psychological defence shall be taken into account when developing
the following fields:
a. Notifying the population of the risks that may endanger society and deve­

loping its knowledge and skills for coping in a crisis situation;
b. Solving emergency situations and organising the dissemination of information among the population in a crisis situation;
c. Improving Estonia’s international image.

Legal frameworks shall be developed for the purposes of blocking hostile inf­luences
that may pose a threat to the constitutional order and for ensuring opera­tional security.


-----

Organisation of psychological defence

The Government of Estonia shall organise psychological defence on the basis of
the Psychological Defence Plan. The development of such a plan shall be co-ordinated by the State Chancellery, with appropriate contributions from the Ministry
of Defence, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry
of Economic Affairs and Communications, the Ministry of Culture, the Ministry
of Education and Research, the Ministry of the Interior, the Rescue Board, the
Defence Forces and national security institutions.

The integrity of government communication is an essential precondition for maintaining efficient psychological defence.

Society (the public) shall be involved in the development of psychological defence.

## National Defence Planning

National defence planning involves identifying priorities for capability deve­
lopment. Due to the changing security environment, national defence planning
must extend beyond the scope of military defence. For this purpose, all fields that
are important for national defence shall be integrated and a development plan
for national defence shall be drafted to replace the current Military Defence
Development Plan. The Ministry of Defence shall be responsible for drafting the
National Defence Development Plan through the involvement of all authorities
that fulfil duties of national defence.

The National Defence Development Plan shall include possible threat scenarios
that could cause either partial or complete loss of Estonian independence, territorial integrity or constitutional order. Based on such risk scenarios, the military and
non-military capabilities needed for the mitigating such threats shall be identified.
During the course of drafting the National Defence Development Plan, the possibilities for preventing unnecessary inter-agency duplication shall be analysed,
accompanied by the submission of relevant proposals.

Based on the National Defence Development Plan, more detailed action plans
shall be drafted by separate ministries that specify activities and necessary funding required for covering capability gaps in a four-year outlook. The military
defence action plan is the relevant action plan for military defence. The action
plan for psychological defence is a plan for psychological defence that is to be
adopted on the basis of the Emergency Preparedness Act.


-----

Activities to mitigate threatening situations that rely on existing capabilities shall
be described in operational plans, including plans for resolving emergency situations. The Military Defence Operation Plan is the operational plans for defence
efforts. All operational and emergency plans shall be mutually co-ordinated and
revised on an annual basis.

## National Defence Administration

The successful organisation of national defence presumes effective national goaloriented management, along with a prompt decision-making process and internal
co-operation. To ensure effective deterrence and defence, national defence mea­sures
must also be able to be swiftly enacted in situations where a state of emergency or
war has not yet been declared. The harmonisation of various aspects of national
defence shall be ensured by an integrated national defence command system.

The following basic requirements must be met when organising the management
of Estonian national defence:
a. National co-ordination and the subordination of command to a uniform,
well-defined level of decision-making;
b. As much overlap as possible in the structures of wartime and peacetime
command systems, the management structures of authorities concerned
and their respective wartime and peacetime fields of responsibility;
c. A clear distribution of duties and responsibilities related to national
defence;
d. A prompt and efficient national defence decision-making process;
e. The continuity of governmental administration in the form of legislative,
executive and judicial power.

The organisation of the national defence command system is based on the prin­
ciple that every institution be responsible for performing the same duties in peacetime as in wartime. Both military and non-military crises shall be prepared for
and solved according to the principle of unified command. This requires the prevention of situations whereby parallel committees or mechanisms co-ordinating
similar activities.

Governmental structures must be capable of responding in a flexible and
prompt way to the escalation of crises. To this end, the authority of responsible
institutions will be increased in states of emergency or war, without fundamentally
altering the organisation of government.


-----

In order to ensure Estonia’s resilience, a plan for organising the functioning of
national command and control and guaranteeing continuity of government in the
event of risk scenarios shall be drafted under the co-ordination of the Ministry of
Defence.

Estonia’s communication systems must assure inter-agency communication
capabilities in every situation. In order to guarantee uninterrupted communication, it is essential to secure an integrated system of communication channels,
including existing as well as future communication channels in landline, radio
and satellite communication networks, and that would also ensure rapid transition to other channels in the event that regular channels are interrupted. A plan
for establishing an integrated system of communication channels shall be drafted
under the co-ordination of the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications.

Effective national defence requires that decision-makers be sufficiently, timely,
precisely and continuously informed. National security institutions and the
Defence Forces are responsible for providing early warning, including the collection, processing and transmission of information. The co-ordinated development
of early warning capabilities shall be outlined in defence planning documents.

Command systems governing the various areas of national defence activity must
be interrelated. The command of military defence consists of three levels: strategic, operational and tactical.

Domestic and international exercises shall be carried out for the purposes of
manag­ing and implementing national defence. Domestic exercises shall involve
as many institutions entrusted with national defence duties as possible.


-----

www.mod.gov.ee

All rights reserved. Any mechanical, electronic or other reproduction of this handbook
including photocopies or promotional copies for business purposes is prohibited.
Produced by the Public Affairs Department of the Ministry of Defence.
Design: PULT
Printing: Aktaprint

02.2011


-----

-----

