# TABLE OF CONTENTS

**INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................................................... 2**

**1. THE OBJECTIVE OF SECURITY POLICY AND THE PRINCIPLES FOR ITS**
**REALISATION........................................................................................................................................... 2**

**2. SECURITY ENVIRONMENT .............................................................................................................. 3**

**3. GOALS AND GUIDELINES ................................................................................................................ 6**

**3.1 Diplomacy .......................................................................................................................................... 8**

**3.2 Military Defence .............................................................................................................................. 11**

**3.3 Protection of Constitutional Order and Law Enforcement ........................................................ 12**

**3.4 Conflict prevention and crisis management ................................................................................. 14**

**3.5 Economic Security and the Supporting Infrastructure ............................................................... 15**

**3.6. Cyber Security ................................................................................................................................ 16**

**3.7 Protection of People ........................................................................................................................ 17**

**3.8 Resilience and Cohesion of Society ................................................................................................ 19**

**3.9 The Distant Future .......................................................................................................................... 20**


-----

**INTRODUCTION**
National Security Concept 2017 (hereinafter “the Concept) defines the objective, principles and
course of action of Estonian security policy. This document has been prepared by the
Government of the Republic and approved by the Parliament (Riigikogu). As a framework
document it provides guidance for drafting national development and action plans. This
document replaces the National Security Concept approved by the Riigikogu in 2010.

The Concept is amended or reviewed pursuant to changes in the security environment and
developments of the Estonian national security system, but each composition of the _Riigikogu_
shall update the Concept at least every four years. At least twice during the four-year cycle the
Prime Minister shall inform the Riigikogu about achieving the goals set in the concept.

Estonia addresses its security as a part of a wider international security. Trends connected to
globalisation and the impact of international crises and conflicts affect Estonia with increasing
immediacy. In maintaining its security, Estonia seeks and supports ways and means that have a
positive impact on Estonia as well as on other states.

Estonia’s approach is based on the conviction that security is generated to protect human rights,
fundamental freedoms and basic human values. These values determine our way of life and
Estonia represents them in general. When we honour democratic principles, our society can last
and develop in a constant and sustainable manner.[1] In this way, a viable civil society and the
people’s will to defend Estonia will grow stronger and Estonia’s position and reputation in the
world will improve.

**1. THE OBJECTIVE OF SECURITY POLICY AND THE PRINCIPLES FOR ITS**
**REALISATION**
_The objective of Estonian security policy is to secure the Nation’s independence and sovereignty,_
_the survival of the people and the state, territorial integrity, constitutional order and the safety of_
_the population. In pursuing of its security policy, Estonia respects fundamental rights and_
_freedoms and protects constitutional values._

Estonia’s security policy proceeds from principles listed in the Charter of the United Nations
(UN), including the right and freedom of every country to choose its own security solutions.
Estonia’s security policy is not directed against any other state. Estonia maintains its security
through actively coordinated measures in foreign and domestic policy.

1 Sustainable development—developing the social, economic and natural environment holistically and
harmoniously, which will guarantee a sustainably good quality of life for people and a clean living environment,
both now and in the future.


-----

Estonia’s security policy is based on a broad security concept,[2] which includes all trends and
fields relevant to maintaining security. Estonia implements the broad security concept following
the principles of society as a whole and government as whole.

To maintain national sovereignty and its continuity, the goal of Estonian security policy is to
prevent and pre-empt threats, as well as counter them quickly and flexibly, should the need arise.
Estonia will defend itself in any case, no matter how overwhelming the opponent might be. If the
state temporarily loses control over a part of its territory, Estonian citizens will engage in
organised resistance in that area.

Estonia controls and defends its territory, territorial sea, peripheral bodies of water, air space and
cyber space and is responsible for their safety.

Estonian security is guaranteed by the membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) and the European Union, as well as close cooperation with allies and other international
partners. Estonia regards its own security and that of its allies as indivisible: the factors that
influence the security of allies also affect Estonia and vice versa. Estonia contributes to NATO
and the EU, in order to strengthen the solidarity of member states, counter the security threats in
different regions, and improve the defence capability of member states.

NATO’s collective defence provides credible deterrence and defence for Estonia. Being a part of
the European Union’s common political, legal and economic space, which is based on member
states’ trust, cooperation and shared values, strengthens Estonia’s security.

Estonia follows comprehensive national defence concept,[3] which involves both military and nonmilitary capabilities, activities and resources from the public and private sectors and civil
society. To facilitate consistent and effective functioning of national defence Estonia develops
six pillars: military defence, the civilian support for military defence, international action,
domestic and internal security, maintenance of the continuous operation of the state and society,
and psychological defence. Estonia’s defence is based on initial individual defence system and
NATO’s collective defence.

Estonian security is strengthened by a cohesive civil society, in which its citizens’ awareness and
activity plays an important role in promoting security and safety. Estonia’s security is strongest
in a tolerant, caring and participatory society.

**2. SECURITY ENVIRONMENT**
The international security environment is tense. Threats and risks that emerged in connection
with globalisation still exist and their influence has somewhat sharpened. The number of
conflicts has not decreased; there are several conflict zones in Europe and its vicinity; a number

2 Broad security concept—Security is understood as the ability of a state and its people to defend its intrinsic values
and objectives from various external political, military, economic and social threats and risks and their combined
impact, as well as the capability to neutralise those threats and risks. In order to achieve this, national and non-state
bodies and resources that have participated in shaping and maintaining a stable and peaceful environment are
employed in a coordinated manner.

3 Comprehensive national defence concept (riigikaitse lai käsitus in Estonian)—This term is used instead of the
earlier Estonian term laiapindne riigikaitse as proposed by the Committee on Security and Defence Policy
Terminology created upon the initiative of the Estonian Ministry of Defence. Comprehensive national defence is a
part of the broad security concept.


-----

of disputes that had earlier been frozen have still not been resolved. Europe’s security is
influenced by migration flows—a problem that has been exacerbated by the slow and inefficient
resolution of international conflicts. Ideological and religious extremism have taken greater hold
globally and are increasingly attacking the democratic world and its foundations. Humanitarian
crises are more common in today’s world than before and it is increasingly difficult for the
international community to counter them. The state of the global economy is still uncertain; the
impact of climate change and inequality impinges on everyday life and development.

The global influence of the Western value space – based on democracy, the market economy,
the rule of law and human rights – is decreasing, and ideological opposition to it is increasing all
over the world. The United States is still the leading political, military and economic power but,
in addition to developed industrial states, other nations have been developing their political,
economic and military capabilities and are gaining more prominent role in resolving global
issues. Several world regions contain states that would like to develop and function according to
beliefs that diverge from universal principles.

Immediate threats to Estonia’s security primarily depend on the security situation in the EuroAtlantic region and the relations between its neighbouring countries. European security is
affected by Russia’s increased military activity and aggressive behaviour. Russia is interested in
restoring its position as a great power and for that purpose will not refrain from coming into a
sharp opposition with the West and the Euro-Atlantic collective security system. In addition to
political, diplomatic, informational and economic means, Russia has used military power to
achieve its objectives. Russia has strengthened its armed forces and increased its military
presence on the borders of NATO member states, including in the Baltic Sea region and on
Estonia’s border. Russia’s unpredictable, aggressive and provocative activity, e.g. airspace
violations, offensive military exercises, and nuclear threats, is generating instability. Sanctions
and other countermeasures applied to Russia have had a restraining effect, but the restoration of
trust and cooperation depends on alleviating tensions and resolving the conflicts in which Russia
is involved.

NATO is the foundation of security and defence cooperation in the Euro-Atlantic region and the
cornerstone of collective defence. Actions intended to weaken NATO and the solidarity of allies,
jeopardise Estonia and transatlantic security. The possibility of a military attack on Estonia
cannot be ruled out if NATO’s collective deterrence is not credible. Military coercion and the
probability of military deployment against Estonia or another state in the Baltic Sea region have
increased. At the same time, NATO’s military predominance is sufficient to repel adversaries an
attack now and in the near future. The visibility of NATO and the international security and
defence cooperation, as well as the level of activity, has increased in the region; Baltic and
Nordic states are engaging in more active cooperation.

The European Union and its fundamental freedoms have come under pressure and their cohesion
has decreased. Global recession, the economic difficulties of some member states and subsequent
political instability, increasing pressures on European borders from migration, the grown threat
from terrorism, and one member state’s decision to leave the Union are all testing its foundations
and eroding its political impact and resilience,[4] and may weaken the ties that bind the EU
together. Signs of political radicalisation and the polarisation of politics are clearly evident in

4 A society’s resilience is its ability to recover quickly from the impact of negative phenomena, and restore its
strength, flexibility and success.


-----

some democracies thus reinforcing other negative phenomena that create instability. In these
conditions, the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) and its coherence become more
important than ever. The weakening of the ties that keep the European Union together may bring
Russia to understanding that its aggressive policies are working and encourage it to proceed with
its power politics.

Threats have become more complex and their sources more varied in recent decades.
Asymmetric threats that know no state borders and whose sources are difficult to detect have
emerged and their impact on security is comparable to traditional security threats. Today it is
increasingly clear that security is influenced by economic instability; developments in the
cyberspace; technology-related threats; radicalisation and terrorism; organised crime and
corruption; migration flows; and variety of other emergencies.

The instability of the global economy makes the international security environment more
complicated and reduces the ability of states and international organisations to react. The
Estonian economy is closely connected to the worlds’. Estonia is therefore significantly
influenced by global trends, including economic crises and the instability of important
international markets. As a small country, Estonia is more vulnerable to changes in the global
economic environment than large ones, since such changes have a faster and deeper impact on a
small state, which is less able to manage risks and deal with their consequences. Changes in the
global energy market, as well as in the established structure of energy supply between the
European Union and Russia, may affect the Estonian economy.

The cyberspace has transformed human interaction and has become a part of global human
development, but also a political and military battleground; public services depend on it.
Information and communication technology and media can be used even more effectively to
influence people and their level of information how people are informed. The influence of the
reality distorting information has created tension in international relations, caused the
radicalisation of certain groups and harmed the cohesion of society. Manipulating with and
spreading of false information is widely used, also on a state level, to escalate conflicts. The
number of violations in the cyberspace is increasing, and the perpetrators include terrorist groups
and organised crime syndicates. Attacks are also launched by individuals and groups whose
activity is too often supported and directed by states.

Estonia’s digital services are integrated in large extent to the society. Without them it would be
impossible to function as a modern state, and this increases the impact that potential attacks have
on Nations security. Due to the connectivity between communications and information systems,
an interruption in one vital service may influence the availability of many others, thereby
endangering the functioning of the state as a whole. Cyber security and digital services are fields
where Estonia’s expertise is trusted on a global level, and Estonia is able to influence their
development internationally. Not only Estonian residents but also the constantly growing
community of international entrepreneurs related to Estonia depend on the quality and safety of
Estonian digital services. E-residency has created responsibilities and obligations for the state
also in relation to people who are not Estonian citizens and who do not physically live in the
Republic of Estonia.

Being responsible for guarding the European Union’s border, Estonia plays an important role in
maintaining the reliability of the Schengen area. Ineffective or non-existent control of the
internal borders of the Schengen area may be exploited to extend the reach of international


-----

crime, and create and strengthen connections between terrorist groups, illegal migration or
smuggling. In these conditions and taking into account that Estonia is a democratic and open
society the country may be also affected by the spread of extremist, malevolent or hate-based
ideologies. This weakens the cohesion of society, reduces tolerance and creates social tensions.

Organised crime and corruption harm the country’s reputation; weaken political, social and
economic stability; undermine trust in the state and democratic values; may facilitate the
emergence of an unfavourable social and economic environment; and be detrimental to the
population’s sense of security. Manifestations of terrorism are often connected to international
crime and the radicalisation of society. A major terrorist attack in a country of the Western value
system have an impact on Estonian security.

Security may also be jeopardised due to a crisis caused by natural disaster, environmental
pollution, or the spread of infectious disease or epizootic in Estonia or its vicinity. Considering
the country’s geographical position, this may, in turn, have an impact on food security, which
could significantly influence various links in the food chain and the availability of certain food
commodities. The spread of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances endangers people’s
health and their living environment. We cannot rule out the spread of a global outbreak,
epidemic or epizootic elsewhere to Estonia.

Uneven regional development, social inequality, poverty, poorly adapted segments of society or
manifestations of intolerance may also affect the stability of the state. The polarisation of society
due to adversarial opinions and understandings increases uncertainty and decreases society’s
resilience. In addition, the ageing and reducing size of population, which may also have
ramifications for the country’s security, affects the functioning of Estonia’s society and state.

Estonia’s future and security are clearly also connected to global trends. People have started to
understand better the challenges to the global sustainability, and their multiple facets and
interconnections. Poverty, and the inequality and limited access to education it causes, rapid
growth of the global population, and demand for vital resources necessary for life—fresh water,
arable land, food, energy—and climate change, as well as other changes in the environment
brought about by human activity, may exacerbate tensions and lead to conflict. All of this
generates global instability. People are more knowledgeable because they are better informed
and use new forms of communication, which in turn means that they expect more from
leadership and institutions but are also more prepared to contribute to the development of
society. The inability to harness this grassroots initiative may make people feel rejected on a
massive scale, which creates tensions in societies and increases the threat of conflict.
Urbanisation is spreading and the growth of the economic, social and political influence of cities
may cause changes in the traditional world order founded on the sovereignty of states.

**3. GOALS AND GUIDELINES**
Countering security threats and risks calls for preventive measures and if they do not prove
sufficient, state should be ready to take active steps. The cumulative impact of diplomatic,
informational, military, economic and social measures must create sufficient deterrence to
prevent attacks against the state and its citizens and maintain stability.

The broad security concept foresees increased and deepened integration of and cooperation
between the state institutions, but also at an international level, and the involvement of all sectors
of society. In maintaining security civil-military cooperation and the combined efficiency of its


-----

two components is critical. Networks of civilian volunteers and the private- public partnerships
also play an important role.

As maintaining security anticipates effective cooperation of the state institutions and other
stakeholders, joint planning is crucial for the better use of the state’s and society’s resources and
the improvement of resilience. For this, clear management and planning, quick and concise
decision-making, prompt division of labour and readiness to use their capabilities whatever their
ownership is needed.

To achieve the main objective, it is necessary to:

-  maintain world order based on international law and the UN Charter safeguard the global

influence and strength of the democracy, rule of law and human rights, and fasten the
identity based on these values

-  deepen the solidarity of NATO and EU member states, also in issues concerning security

-  increase the capabilities and effectiveness of diplomacy and the foreign service in

reinforcing a world order founded on shared values and common rules

-  strengthen the collective defence, enhance its efficiency and deterrence value, focusing on

the defence of the Alliance’s territory and consolidate the presence of combat-ready allied
forces in Estonia and its vicinity

-  develop independent defence capability based on actual and rapidly usable military

capabilities

-  implement the comprehensive national defence concept, focusing inter alia on development

and funding critical capabilities, increase the efficiency of the cooperation between defence
and security institutions, and employ to a greater extent the country’s research potential

-  empower a cooperative security system for the peaceful resolution of regional security issues

-  improve strategic communication to strengthen the cohesion of society and reinforce the

positive international image of the country, as well as consolidate psychological defence to
neutralise hostile information attacks

-  participate actively in international conflict prevention and crisis management,

peacebuilding and global or regional humanitarian aid

-  strengthen control of the country’s borders (also the external border of the European Union),

thereby reducing transnational threats and risks

-  improve society’s resilience by reducing the vulnerability of vital services and potential

interruptions in the supply of food and potable water as well as enhancing emergency
preparedness, civil emergency management, and protecting society from cyber threats by
introducing effective cyber defence system

-  guarantee that constitutional institutions and state governance are reliable and resilient, and

that public services, state functions and key leadership are able to operate without
interruption

-  improve the reaction of internal security authorities to prevent security threats with grave

consequences


-----

-  resolve security issues using a community-based approach[5] by involving civil society

networks and volunteers, which improves the resilience of society and strengthens the
deterrence

-  systematise present and future ICT solutions intended for defence and internal security,

information collection and management, and situational awareness, as well as develop their
connectivity

-  promote a cohesive, caring and tolerant society in which people feel safe and play a role in

day-to-day societal life

-  increase peoples´ perception of security and enhance their ability to evaluate various threats

and factors that influence security, as well as their ability and readiness to counter such
threats

-  contain manifestations of radicalisation, reduce corruption, create a counterbalance to the

ever-increasing threat from terrorism and international crime connected to it, as well as
reduce to a minimum the negative impacts of international migration

-  take steps to enhance the competitiveness of the Estonian state and enterprises, and make the

economic environment more attractive

-  analyse the long-term influence of an ageing society, a decreasing population and new

technological applications on the security and prepare measures for the neutralisation of
potential negative impacts.

**3.1 Diplomacy**
The objective of Estonian diplomacy in maintaining security is a safe security environment based
on international law and reinforced by broad international cooperation. Diplomacy primarily
focuses on preventing and pre-empting security threats for which the state will provide all
necessary means. In resolving security issues, Estonia prefers international and broad multilateral
cooperation, on both a global and a regional level, but also cooperation based on mutually
supportive inter-state relationships. The cornerstones of Estonian security are its belonging to the
Western value-based community, and membership and active engagement in NATO and the
European Union. Close bilateral relations with the United States are an important part of this.

Estonia supports maintenance of wider security on the basis of law and norms, values, preventive
diplomacy, international crisis management and peacebuilding, and confidence and security
building measures. Development aid and the protection of human rights help to create an
environment in which conflicts are less likely and which is more secure.

Security should preferably maintained by rules-based and internationally established means.
International organisations enable to use wide variety security enhancing instruments and ensure
the legitimacy of action. It is important for Estonia that the global and regional international
security organisations are effective. In order to develop international law and apply it effectively,
Estonia contributes to numerous international organisations, primarily the UN, the Organization
for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) and the Council of Europe.

5 The community-based approach is a concept envisaging the cooperation of the people, non-governmental
organisations, local governments and private sector in order to determine the problems, plan for joint preventive
action and minimize the impact of threats . Regional characteristics and needs are considered in the communitybased approach.


-----

On all international levels, Estonia strives to ensure that in maintaining security human rights
and fundamental freedoms are more decisively protected. Estonia proceeds from the position that
human rights apply also on-line and the Internet is free and available to all without restrictions.
Estonia also fully supports the activity of international courts and the prosecution of persons who
have committed crimes against humanity. International restrictive measures are used more
frequently as a foreign-policy instrument. In order to achieve political objectives, these
restrictions must be combined with diplomatic efforts and other appropriate means.

The UN is in the centre of international security and stability and enforcement of international
law. The OSCE, a regional collective security organisation, is Europe’s representative body for
broad political and security-related dialogue and confidence-building measures. It is in Estonia’s
interests that both the UN and the OSCE could perform their tasks more effectively. In order to
raise its influence and gain more information,, it would be advisable that in any given time a
country with similar security perception as Estonia, would serve as a non-permanent member of
the UN Security Council.

Arms control plays an important role in increasing international security and building mutual
trust. Estonia supports international agreements on arms control that increases the security for
Estonian and internationally. Estonia expects other states to follow the same principle. It is
important that restrictions related to arms control should not hinder collective defence or
Estonia’s independent defence capability. Estonia’s purpose is to prevent the smuggling or
unlawful transit through its territory of weapons of mass destruction and the components
required for their manufacture. Estonia continues its active participation in control regimes of
strategic goods to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and conventional
arms.

A united NATO and European Union are in Estonia’s interests. For that purpose, these
organisations should be internally integrated and the member states’ solidarity and readiness to
act should help to cope with security issues. Estonia aspires that NATO, the European Union and
their member states express joint positions and act in unison on the foreign policy arena and in
international organisations. To achieve it Estonia should fend together with other member states
alongside its national interests also for common interests.

NATO’s core task is to defend the territory of its member states, i.e. collective defence.
Collective defence must be visible, capable and credible in order that an attack on a member
state can be prevented, pre-empted and, if necessary, countered. Credibility and political impact
of NATO’s deterrence is largely determined by the Alliance’s unity and performance, as well as
its capabilities and resources available. It is important for Estonia that NATO functions for her
members as the primary representative body of transatlantic security policy. The United States’
political attention to and military presence in Europe, including the Baltic Sea region and
Estonia, is crucial, as is the political and military integration of all allies. As a member of NATO,
Estonia must be ready to act outside its territory if this is required to prevent and manage crises
that endanger the security of the Alliance and its member states.

The European Union is stronger and more united as long as its member states are unanimous and
the Union’s policy in terms of providing the four freedoms—the free movement of goods,
services, people and capital—is as cohesive as possible. More cohesive Foreign and Security
Policy of EU ensures greater protection against security threats. A more integrated European
Union is also more effective and powerful in international relations. The interaction of the CFSP


-----

and other fields of EU’s courses of action are an important factor in maintaining Estonia’s
security. Estonia contributes to increasing the EU’s international influence by taking part of the
development and implementation of the CFSP and CSDP and stands for the greater cohesion of
the European Union’s external action. Developing EU defence cooperation and creating new
more effective capabilities for member states will increase the Union’s influence and strengthen
security.

Political dialogue, close cooperation and bilateral coordination of EU and NATO activities is
crucial for the effective protection of European and transatlantic interests. Estonia will continue
to promote the cooperation between the European Union and NATO, including in the fields of
strategic communication and situational awareness. As Russia has become more aggressive in
the past decade, Estonia works for greater unanimity and consistency in EU’s and NATO’s
Russian policy. Estonia supports the continued enforcement of the restrictive measures imposed
until their reasons have been eliminated. As a neighbouring state, Estonia will cooperate with
Russia on a practical level as much as necessary and will keep the options for dialogue open. The
development of democracy and the rule of law in Russia would serve Estonia’s interests.

Estonia supports enlargement of both the European Union and NATO. The enlargement will
reinforce the Western values and virtues in Europe and around the World. Membership should
primarily depend on a candidate state’s readiness to bear responsibility and fulfilment of
membership criterias. Drawing on its own experience, Estonia will support the integration of
states that would like to join NATO and the European Union, and help them to carry out required
reforms and develop civil society.

Estonia values the EU’s and NATO’s partnerships with third countries. Estonia promotes the
European Union’s neighbourhood policy and wants this to develop into an effective instrument
in bringing the target states of the neighbourhood policy closer to the Union and increasing
stability in those countries. As a member of NATO, Estonia approaches flexibly to all
organisations’ partnerships.

In addition to being active in international organisations, Estonia develops bilateral relations that
help to secure its international status, find common interests and conduct joint activities, thereby
increasing Estonia’s security. Broad cooperation with all allies and partnerships with similarly
minded democratic states are an intrinsic part of Estonian security.

A good relationship between Estonia and the United States reinforces Estonian security and
transatlantic cooperation. US involvement in maintaining of European security is the central
factor in the security of Estonia and the whole of Europe. For Estonia, the strong transatlantic
link is manifested in the US presence, including its military presence in Europe, cooperation
within NATO, and relations between the EU and the United States, which are also the
prerequisite for resolving global political, economic and environmental issues. It is important to
deepen EU-US cooperation in international organisations, tighten economic and trade relations,
and facilitate cooperation in internal and legal matters and in the field of energy security and
research. Estonia wishes to promote extensive bilateral relations in all significant fields with the
United States and deepen the dialogue between the two countries.

Estonia wants to maintain a good relationship with all its neighbouring states. Its objective is to
maintain and develop security in the Baltic Sea region. Closer cooperation between the Nordic
and Baltic states is in Estonia’s interests. In this way, the country can promote political dialogue
and security cooperation, including in the fields of defence, energy, environmental protection

10


-----

and transport infrastructure. In order to employ better the potential of the Baltic Sea region,
Estonia participates actively in realising the regional strategies, as it is important to focus on
activities that unite the region as a whole.

**3.2 Military Defence**
The objective of Estonian defence is to prevent and pre-empt military threats, or counter them if
necessary. For this purpose, Estonia develops defence posture and deterrence, which must be
credible and is based on independently generated off-the-self military capabilities and collective
defence.

Estonia defends its mainland territory, territorial sea, peripheral bodies of water, air space and
cyberspace in all circumstances, however overwhelming the opponent, using the capabilities of
both conventional and asymmetric warfare. In the event of a military attack, the entire nation will
be involved in immediate defence and counterattack.

In the event of an attack, Estonia will defend its entire territory from the state border onwards
and will continue military resistance even in areas over which it may have temporarily lost
control. Estonia’s military, economic and other potential as a whole will be used to defend the
country. The participation of entire society in defence and counterattack in maximum extent is
ensured by the population’s high-rate willingness to defend their country, widespread military
training, and the large membership of the Defence League.

The organisation of Estonia’s military defence is subject to the democratic and civilian control.
The defence system is constantly being developed and the whole of society is involved. Military
expenditure is at least 2% of Estonian GDP, in line with the NATO-approved criterion; in
addition to these figures resources are allocated to the Host Nation Support and National Defence
Investment Programme.

Estonia’s individual defence capability must be based on real and existing military capabilities
and a functioning command structure. Decisions which military capabilities Estonia should
develop are made by a long-term planning process taking into account the country’s military
needs and resources available. The aim is to develop the complete military capabilities, _id est,_
fully manned, trained, equipped, armed and supplied units and capability packages. Estonia to
prevent military threats and apply timely collective defence must have a functioning intelligence
service and early-warning system. Military capabilities that Estonia cannot develop
independently will be provided in cooperation with NATO.

Defence Forces units will be armed and equipped with understanding that they must
interoperable with NATO allies and deployable as well as able to act as a “security blanket”
across the entire country. Military defence is built in line with the principle of territorial defence.
For this reason, Estonia will develop both mobile units and territorial defence units, which are
able to provide resistance that hinders the opponent in the event of a crisis.

Units of the Defence Forces are comprised of active duty personnel, members of the Defence
League, and reservists. Compulsory conscription is maintained as the main way of manning
reserve units and as a pool for recruiting active duty personnel. Training is organised with the
involvement of wider society, constantly expanding the circle of individuals who have passed the
military training. In order to raise the effectiveness of military training the state will develop
training areas that correspond to modern requirements on land and sea and in the air and the
cyberspace. The voluntary Defence League participates in preparing the country’s military

11


-----

defence capability, reinforcing the safety of Estonian people and deepening their patriotic
education.

Units of the Defence Forces are ready to commence military defence on the mainland, at sea and
in the air and the cyberspace, even when an attack is unexpected. To guarantee a timely
response, the state has an efficient early-warning system, a flexible legal base and the modern
mobilisation and apprisal systems. In order to make the mobilisation system more efficient,
reservist training and additional short-notice reservist training assemblies will be held regularly
and contemporary apprisal system used. Capabilities that can be used to notify Estonian residents
and the wider world about what is happening in the event of attack will be developed. Cyber
warfare is an integral part of military defence and cyber security. The private sector and
volunteers will be involved in these activities.

Estonia’s defence is foreseen as a collective defence operation under Article 5 of the North
Atlantic Treaty. The prerequisites of credible deterrence and defence are the unity and solidarity
of allies, which are constantly demonstrated. To develop unity NATO must deal with security
threats of all the Allies and guarantee a uniform level of security across its territory. NATO must
be capable of immediate collective counteraction everywhere on the Alliance’s territory—on
land and sea, in the air and the cyberspace - to make deterrence credible. NATO’s ultimate
security guarantee is its nuclear deterrent. This must be credible and available in the Alliance’s
European territory.

In order to maintain credible deterrence and defence of the Baltic region, combat-ready units
must be stationed in the Alliance’s territory, including Estonia, and organisation must be capable
to deploy more forces to the area if necessary. The allied military presence must be permanent
and involve several allied countries, and the forces must maintain interoperability with Estonian
units. Estonia participates in collective defence and other military operations outside its territory
to maintain the security of all its allies.

The prerequisites of the redeployment of allied forces are the rapid-reaction units and plans for
their deployment, an efficient early warning system, swift decision-making and highly capable
Host Nations Support system. Estonia together with its allies will guarantee the infrastructure
that meets the needs of hosting allied forces is in place and conforms to requirements, and
ensures the provision of Host Nation Support and training areas.

Estonia engages in bilateral and multilateral defence cooperation to strengthen NATO’s
collective defence and Estonia’s individual defence capability, and to promote stability and
security in Europe and its vicinity. Estonia wants to involve partner states that are not NATO
members in the defence of the region through NATO, the European Union and other forms of
bilateral and multilateral cooperation.

**3.3 Protection of Constitutional Order and Law Enforcement**
The foundation for safety is a safe living environment. This is maintained by constitutional order
and rule of law as well as the capability to prevent threats, rapid and effective reaction, and
maximum alleviation the damage caused to society as a result of a threat being realised.
Inadequate safety may amplify external threats.

In order to promote the safety of the population and develop internal security, the state will
ensure efficient management of state agencies and their cooperation, exchange of information,
modern working conditions, sustainable development and joint action with non-governmental

12


-----

organisations and private sector. IT solutions, effective information security measures,
motivation of personelle and legislation supporting it need more attention. Safety is reinforced by
a cohesive society and more extensive involvement, empowerment and support[6] of various
communal actors.

The increasing diversity of threats and their cross-border nature has made it more difficult to
maintain security. The reliability of constitutional institutions and state governance is the
prerequisite of safety. To achieve this, the state must ensure the continuity of those institutions,
plan and practise the uninterrupted functioning of the services provided by government agencies
during the crisis, and provide required safe locations, communications and supplies.

Relevant information must be collected and processed, hostile intelligence and subversive
leverage must be pre-empted, and cooperation must be practised on both the state and
international level to prevent and pre-empt the contingencies that endanger the constitutional
order. The state takes consistently care of the development of security institutions and focuses
more on defending the constitutional order, including through prevention and raising awareness
in society.

Efficient guarding of the external border helps to prevent illegal migration and international
crime, thereby strengthening the security of Estonia and other European Union member states.
Identifying dangerous individuals and hazardous substances and materials already on its border
makes the Schengen area safer. The Schengen area functions efficiently only if the member
states and the EU as a whole cooperate, and being a part of the area means that national
institutions interact. More efficient control of the EU’s external border requires that
technological surveillance be improved, new electronic control measures be taken and
departmental cooperation yield better results.

Estonia already contributes to cooperation and exchange of information in EU border control.
Common compensatory measures reduce risks for states that belong to the Schengen area.
Estonia is prepared to reintroduce temporary controls on the external border, should the need
arise. The control of the Estonia’s sea-territory will be improved by civil-military cooperation on
National level.

In the circumstances of globalisation and free movement within the EU fighting organised crime
needs more attention. Estonia is committed to prevent the impact of international organised
crime, gaining illegal profit and any attempts to legalise it. It has become more probable that the
global proliferation of violent extremism and hostile ideologies will gain ground in Estonia. To
counter radicalisation, we need to strengthen the cohesion of society— integration, adaptability
and inclusion of society, strategic communication and the psychological protection of the
population play an important role in this.

The threat of terrorism increases together with radicalisation; it is multifaceted and involves very
diverse security sectors, from hatemongering and reactivated firearms to the security of national
defence assets and key individuals. The terrorist groups, foreign fighters who have participated
in armed conflicts and self-radicalised persons and their eventual action constitutes a security
threat. Estonia contributes to the fight against terrorism on the national, regional and global level.

6 Communal actors are local residents, non-governmental organisations, businesses and the local government and
state institutions that service or influence them.

13


-----

The objective is to prevent and pre-empt terrorism in all its forms, achieving it without violating
people’s fundamental rights and ensuring the proportionality and flexibility of the applied
measures. Estonia has the objective to develop a support system for victims of terrorism and
contribute to programmes that help people who have de-radicalised to return to society.

In fighting corruption, Estonia prevents and pre-empts the proliferation of organised crime, the
black economy and money laundering, herewith avoiding harming the country’s reputation.
Corruption is prevented in both the public and private sectors, focusing on increasing awareness
and the capability of law-enforcement authorities to detect and investigate offences.

Estonia will improve ways of informing people of potential threats and in time of emergency will
inform public by communication means how to act. As part of emergency preparedness, more
training exercises involving all related parties will be organised, the prevention of emergencies
and dealing with their consequences will be reviewed, and using the Estonian Defence Forces
capabilities in emergency relief will be improved. Estonia supports voluntary activity undertaken
to prevent threats and cope with emergencies.

Like many other states, Estonia must improve concurrently with preventive measures its reaction
capability and rate. In neutralising threats the swift and efficient cooperation of all agencies,
clear and concise guidelines, communication, and cooperation with international partners are
more important than ever. In addition to developing IT systems, the country must also focus on
modernising existing systems.

**3.4 Conflict prevention and crisis management**
Estonia emphasises the importance of the international conflict prevention. Countering the crises
where they emerge reduces its impact to Estonia, its allies and the world as a whole. Contributing
to dialogue and communication with its partners Estonia emphasises the importance of
preventive diplomacy and supports the international actors in preventing conflicts.

Participating in international peace operations and civil missions is an opportunity, but also an
obligation to help maintain security and stability in our vicinity and elsewhere in the world.
Estonia participates in international operations, civil crisis management, humanitarian operations
and peacebuilding, as well as in generation of international formed to carry out these operations
with capabilities that are developed in accordance of the country’s priorities and needs. It is in
Estonia’s interests that conflict prevention and crisis management measures and tools are
effective, deployable, and available without National caveats and with clear division of labour.
Estonia supports the EU’s comprehensive approach to conflict prevention and crisis
management. Estonia is prepared to deploy internal security units to states that need support in
coping with migration pressures and combating transnational crime on the EU’s external border,
including in securing the proper functioning of the Schengen area.

In order to maintain security and stability, prevent conflicts and manage crises, Estonia provides
humanitarian aid and carries out development cooperation, the purpose of which is the political,
economic and social development of the target state, and the stability that goes with it. In
alleviating humanitarian crises, Estonia values cooperation between aid organisations and
assisting states and the ability to provide aid quickly and independently. Estonia considers it
necessary to improve the use of resources in development cooperation and endeavours to meet
the funding obligation taken on as a member of the European Union. In bilateral development

14


-----

cooperation, Estonia primarily supports states to whose development it can contribute with its
knowledge and resources and who are prepared to build up their society established on
democracy and human rights. Estonia helps to create a free and safe cyberspace in states where
the voluntary sector does not have the necessary expertise and technical capabilities.

Estonia implements outreach programmes and participates in international peacebuilding
initiatives to develop the security and defence sectors of partner states. The aim of Estonia’s
defence-related outreach is to help partner states to reform their security and defence sectors.
These policies increase security and create stability in areas important for NATO and the
European Union, promote democratic values and strengthen the bilateral relations of Estonia and
its partners.

**3.5 Economic Security and the Supporting Infrastructure**
The Estonian economy is part of the European and global economy, and is therefore influenced
by developments in the international financial system, and energy and commodity economies.
The reliability of the economy and economic security are i.a. improved by the development of
the country’s electronic communication network and transport infrastructure. These elements
have implications on wider security matters.

The state of the Estonian economy is dependant on exports to stable and reliable markets,
trustworthy foreign investments in the Estonian economy, and Estonian companies’ ability to
realise their potential, investing in stable markets that offer growth opportunities. Estonia has a
solid, simple and modern legal system for business environment. This increases competitiveness
and makes the economic environment more attractive, thus raising the level of reliability of the
economy. To sustain the development of strategic and important companies and provide highquality services (in the energy, transport, communications and information technology sectors)
the continuous investments should be ensured. Economic security is maintained through
defensive measures such as, inter alia, remedies against corruption, tax fraud, tax evasion and tax
havens.

The stable functioning, transparency and reliability of the financial system must be ensured so
that the country and its economy can function properly. Necessary legal and control measures are
taken to prevent and resolve international or national financial crises and to alleviate their
economic consequences. Funding is provided so that the financial system can function properly
and in a stable manner. In securing the stability of the financial system, it is important to prevent
problems related to the solvency of credit and other financial institutions present in Estonia, as
well as interruptions in payment and settlement systems, and to maintain the ability to eliminate
swiftly problems and interruptions that do emerge, should the need arise. In order to resolve
financial crises, the crisis management system that involves both national banks and the
European Banking Union as a whole, including reserve funding, is needed. It is of the utmost
importance in a crisis that liquid assets are available and can be used, and that reliable
transnational safety networks are in place—these must be provided by the state.

Energy security is ensured by securing infrastructure and supply systems, connection with other
power networks of EU member states, and enforcing energy diversity. Increasing energy
efficiency is a primary measure for Estonia in reducing dependence on imported energy. Security
of energy supply is facilitated by the European Union’s strategy to use and develop its internal
energy resources to the maximum. In the case of Estonia, this means the maximum rational use
of oil shale and peat, as well as wider use of renewable energy technologies. Working power

15


-----

transmission connections with the Baltic and Nordic countries and Poland ensure the security of
supply, reducing dependence on a single supplier or limited number of suppliers. The EU
measures on the storage of liquid fuel supply the stability of the liquid fuel market is ensured.

Estonia aims to produce power and thermal energy from renewable energy sources. In producing
thermal energy, a better balance must be found in relation to the energy sources currently used,
and conditions must be created so that large heat producers can switch from natural gas to other
fuels. Required security and safety measures must be applied in ensuring the continuous
operation of energy systems and protecting energy infrastructure.

Electronic communication and transport infrastructure and their development strengthens the
economy and make it more resilient. They are also directly connected to national security and
therefore the economic and social development, as well as national defence requirements are
taken into account in their planning and development.

Organisational, IT and physical security and safety measures are applied in protecting
information systems that support the functioning of electronic communications. State should
constantly have an overview of the technical working condition of means of communication,
communication systems and their infrastructure, and the options for duplicating and ensuring the
safe functioning of these systems in times of crisis. Estonia must develop and put to use
alternative solutions for making communication services available to institutions important to the
functioning of the state in situations where services provided by commercial operators are down.
International cooperation is necessary for ensuring cross-border communication. In this way, the
interoperability of electronic communication networks can be maintained and the use of
resources coordinated.

In the case of transport infrastructure, it is crucially important to reconstruct or build ports and
airports as well as railways and highways that form part of the trans-European transport network.
From the point of view of a Host Nations Support system, the transport network plays an
important role in national defence. In ensuring the continuous operation of the transport system
and defending it, security and safety requirements conforming to international standards are
applied.

**3.6. Cyber Security**
The population expects that the state functions expediently and safely. Modern information
technology plays an increasingly significant role in fulfilling their expectations, and employing it
comes with an ever-greater responsibility. The cyber world is present in all spheres of life, inter
alia, in security, so given the Estonian digital lifestyle and society’s trust in digital services the
state must guarantee information integrity.[7]

Estonia organises cyber security uniformly using the same structural solutions during peacetime
and war. Cyber defence as part of national defence system is organised in cooperation between
agencies and is regularly practised. Estonia also applies measures to ensure the digital continuity
of the state in a situation where it has lost control over its territory.

7 Information integrity—Data is accurate, complete, consistent and reasonable (in terms of value), and conforms
with the intentions of the person who created it; in the narrow sense, no unauthorised changes have been made to the
data (including that the data is identical for the sender and receiver and has been synchronised in a database).

16


-----

The Estonian cyberspace can be defended if the state and society as a whole participate in the
defence, the necessary experts have been trained, and society is aware of the dangers of the
virtual world and knows how to avoid them and acts correctly if problems occur. Estonian cyber
security is based on close and trust-based cooperation between the public and private sectors, in
which the involvement of volunteers and civil society also plays an important role. Cyber
security starts from the cyber safety of each institution. It is important to raise people’s
awareness about safety measures that can be used to avoid cyber risks. Improving the awareness
of users and introducing the norms of safe cyber behaviour must be a constant endeavour, the
results of which must be continuously evaluated.

Estonia will continue to develop cyber defence. Estonia monitors its cyberspace and controls the
application of information safety requirements in the information systems of the government and
vital service providers. In this way, the state ensures that the situation in the cyberspace
conforms to current standards and threat levels, while training service providers and providing
advice to them. Estonia must prepare for a situation in which there is reason to doubt the
integrity of information and where it must be able to cope with this situation’s impact on the
functioning of digital services and users’ trust in them.

Estonia will develop digital services and cyber security primarily by investing in them, providing
a role model for the private sector. In the case of new digital services and innovative projects, the
accompanying risks and options for their neutralisation will be always evaluated. In addition to
creating new projects, contributions must be made to modernising information systems already
in place, and updates must be carried out to improve security. In parallel, the use of encrypted
networks developed for the transmission of classified information must be expanded.

The Estonian cyberspace is part of the safe and stable global cyberspace. Cyber security is
founded on constant and close international cooperation. Cooperating and communicating with
allies and partners in the field of cyber security, contributing to the work of international
organisations—primarily the European Union and NATO—and participating in global cybersecurity forums is an integral part of international relations. Analysing international law that
supports cyber security and applying it in the Estonian legal system, and developing cyber
standards, have an important role.

**3.7 Protection of People**
A secure and predictable living environment makes people feel safer, creates better conditions
for the development of society and individuals, and improves the reliability of the state. This
reduces the vulnerability of society and individuals, the peoples’ will to defend the country is
stronger and they are happier to contribute to the country’s development. Factors that influence
the living environment are: the state of the natural environment and public health; the level of
emergency preparedness; the consistent, uninterrupted and steady availability of vital services,
food and potable water; and the ability of society and people to cope on their own for a certain
period, should these services be interrupted.

The living environment is more secure with effective civil protection system. The aim of
Estonian civil protection system is to protect people, the environment and property in the best
possible manner in the emergencies, whether caused by human or natural contingences, crises or
war. Civil protection system improves society’s ability to cope with crises of this nature and
scope, which can be reasonably foreseen and for which preparations can be made. This yields the
best results when society is aware of potential threats and knows how to neutralise them.

17


-----

To ensure the more effective functioning of civil protection system in times of large-scale and
long-term crisis, the government will inform the population, provide instructions on how to cope
independently, and create adequate operational stockpiles to deal with the emergency. Civil
protection works through cooperation between the state, local governments, the private sector,
civil society and individuals. If necessary, it is supported by the civil protection undertaken by
international organisations and measures set out in bilateral agreements.

The continuity of vital services is of the utmost importance in the context of security and safety.
To achieve this, the state applies measures to prevent emergencies and keep potential
consequences to a minimum in cooperation with all actors in society, monitoring the measures’
performance more closely than ever. Many vital services are provided by the private sector, so it
is critical to strengthen cooperation between the public and private sectors in ensuring their
continuous operation. The provision of these services not only depends on internal factors but is
also influenced by global events and developments in the world economy. This have to be
considered in planning.

Estonia takes measures to monitor climate change, neutralise its risks and deal with the
consequences on the local, regional and national level to reduce vulnerability created by it. The
best results are achieved through international cooperation and the balanced development of
conservancy and environmental protection, the economy and social sphere, and the intentional
and considered use of a well-functioning system intended for development as well as the funds
allocated for environmental protection. In addition to the national and local government level,
the private sector and non-governmental sectors and research facilities will be involved in
enhancing measures for adapting to the impact of climate change.

Estonia applies measures to prevent the spread of hazardous substances and materielle and to
neutralise sources of pollution on land and sea. Estonia develops maritime traffic management
and monitoring systems for the Baltic Sea, primarily the Gulf of Finland, in cooperation with
other states to prevent marine pollution. In order to discover pollution as early as possible and
identify the source, the long-distance surveillance of marine pollution, including aerial
surveillance, must be improved.

To prevent major accidents and alleviate their consequences interagency cooperation in planning
the location of and monitoring the activity of businesses where those accidents might occur must
be improved. Estonia has an early warning system for radioactivity detection, to identify and
warn of radiation accidents in nuclear power stations close to Estonia as early as possible.
Estonia engages in international cooperation with the EU, NATO and states in the Baltic Sea
region to react to major incidents promptly, promote protection against radiation, improve the
safety of nuclear plants and reduce possible radiation exposure in the Baltic Sea region. Estonian
rescue and crisis management units and experts could be used in UN rescue and aid missions.

Health protection helps people cope with their daily lives and increases their contribution to
society and the economy, thereby reinforcing the cohesion of society and also raising the
country’s ability to neutralise security threats. With globalisation and open societies, the
probability of the spread of epidemics and epizootics has increased and the state must be always
ready for prevention and their elimination. Diseases that are still unknown and incurable may
spread, lack of knowledge or low awareness may cause uncertainty and unsubstantiated fear in
the population.

18


-----

In terms of public health and the well-being of society, Estonia needs to focus on preventing the
spread of HIV and the excessive consumption of alcohol. General surveillance for infectious
disease is organised on a national level. A national programme of immunisation is carried out to
restrict the outbreak and spread of vaccine-preventable diseases and epidemics caused by them;
similarly, state-organised, funded and planned activities are undertaken to hinder the spread of
tuberculosis and HIV. The purpose of preventing drug addiction—a phenomenon that weakens
society—is to reduce the supply of and demand for illicit drugs and contribute to the treatment
and rehabilitation of addicts. The impact of the Estonian illicit drug prevention policy is
reinforced by reliable statistics, epidemiological research, constant monitoring and
communication with other countries. National emergency relief system will be improved to be
ready for natural disasters, catastrophes or outbreaks of infectious disease, in the event of which
many people may need medical assistance.

**3.8 Resilience and Cohesion of Society**
The more united a society and the more common values it shares, the less it can be influenced
and the less susceptible it is to security threats. The more residents trust the state, the more
resilient it is. Trust increases when the state takes responsibility for the well-being of its people
and prepares for coping with security threats and risks. Strategic communication is important in
determining society’s values and facilitating people’s readiness to contribute to it.

The cohesion of society is improved by tolerant, caring and inclusive understandings, the strong
integration of different segments of society, and uniform regional development. The resilience of
society develops through the joint influence of credible civil protection, people’s psychological
strength, and a safe social and physical living environment. All these areas need constant
attention and development; for some, global processes must be understood, while society has to
adapt and adjust to them; some fields have a broader influence in the region.

The national security is influenced by economic, social and environmental factors across Estonia.
Life must habitable and safe everywhere in Estonia. Unfavourable demographic processes and
the excessive accumulation of major socio-economic, security and safety risks in certain regions
must be avoided or prevented. To guarantee uniform regional development and even population
distribution, the government develop the infrastructure; support the improvement of the
performance of local governments; promote civil society and voluntary action; and ensure public
safety, the availability and quality of education, healthcare and other public services, as well as
the comprehensive management of regional policy. Regional characteristics will be considered in
providing state services. State agencies and local governments must cooperate more effectively
to cope with society related security risks.

Cohesive society is less vulnerable and less open to the influences from outside. The better
integration of society will reinforce unity and cohesion. The purpose of integration in Estonia is
to shape a culturally versatile society that has a strong identity and shares common values. The
state will continue activities that facilitate the adjustment and integration of different groups in
society to develop and improve the people’s willingness and opportunities to participate actively
in societal life. Integration is more effective through uniform regional development, equal access
to high-quality education, promotion of instruction in national language, making variety types of
support service available, and adaptation of new migrants to the society. The activity and
cooperation of civil society, local governments and state agencies helps to shape a favourable
environment for adjustment and integration. Excessively divergent views and unbalanced

19


-----

criticism of diversity damages the cohesion and resilience of society. The state must focus more
on the equal treatment of the most vulnerable segments in society, protecting their fundamental
rights and creating a liveable environment for them.

The cohesion and integration, as well as the resilience, of society can be reinforced if the
population is better and more reliably informed. Strategic communication involves planning the
state’s political, economic and defence-related statements and activities, preparing a
comprehensive informative whole on the basis of these, and transmitting it to the population. It is
based on the nation’s values expressed in a democratic, versatile and deep dialogue, which the
government will follow in serving society. The main objective of strategic communication—the
resilience and better cohesion of society—cannot be achieved by political declarations alone; it
comes about due to the combined influence of many factors. As a result, the living environment
will grow more stable and secure, and the vulnerability of society (due also to security threats)
will decrease.

Psychological defence is about informing society and raising awareness about informationrelated activities aimed at harming Estonia’s constitutional order, society’s values and virtues.
Psychological defence is needed to neutralise attacks by terrorist organisations as well as assaults
proceeding from the military doctrine of certain states with the help of efforts to influence the
society under attack with cognitive methods. Appropriate measures must be drawn up for this.
The purpose of psychological defence is to prevent crises in Estonia, facilitate security awareness
in society and neutralise information attacks that provoke violence in the population by
manipulation and the provision of false information, or that promote crisis management with
resources that are not compatible with constitutional order. The best tool of psychological
defence is to inform the public of attacks, manipulation and false information and guarantee
access to multifaceted information for all segments of society. Psychological defence is
developed in cooperation with civil society.

Strategic communication and psychological defence complement one another. While the
notification methods of psychological defence are mostly reactive, strategic communication must
be able to reach society as well as foreign target groups, which play an important part in conflict
management in the context of the greater information noise generated during a conflict. To
achieve this, networks of people and the media must provide their support.

**3.9 The Distant Future**
Although Estonian security is assured, maintaining stability requires constant attention and
action. The vigilance have to be sustained into the distant future since, although the security
environment is more and more unpredictable and ever-changing, there are security factors whose
influence will be revealed only decades from now but whose seeds are already present. For this
reason, there is in addition to current and highly likely security threats a need to monitor factors
that may affect Estonian security in the more distant future. We must raise awareness about this
subject and use preventive measures if possible.

The three trends that could hinder or obstruct achieving the main objective of Estonian security
policy are the ageing and gradual decreasing size of the Estonian population; failure to reach the
goals of global sustainable development, or the low effectiveness thereof; and the impact of
technological evolution on humankind and security. To cope with all these trends, we must
develop research-based methods that should be realised, depending on their impact, in
cooperation with Estonian society or in the context of global measures. Although the trends may

20


-----

turn out to be problematic in the distant future, they must be acknowledged and measures needed
to solve certain issues should be discussed now.

The biggest issue that depends on Estonia itself and may turn out to be a security risk is its
demographic condition. The Estonian population is ageing and decreasing. Global demographic
trends are the opposite and, if their influence is combined with potential negative changes in the
living environment, an economic recession, radicalisation and conflicts or crises, it may be that
waves of migration of a magnitude never before seen will occur, and Estonia will become a
potential target country for these.

In 2015, the UN General Assembly adopted 17 Sustainable Development Goals in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Achieving these would reduce the root causes of conflicts
and create global conditions for the survival of humankind. Relevant measures concerning
environmental, economic and social development should alleviate tensions arising from poverty,
inequality, environmental degradation, bad governance, population growth and low employment,
and help to create conditions that allow the global population (which will potentially number
more than ten billion) to coexist and develop peacefully. Should the global society fail in
reaching these goals, security pressures will increase and tensions will become keener. These
may grow into a large-scale conflict or global chaos. As a member of the global community and
a recognised developed country, Estonia must participate in promoting sustainable development,
and society has a distinct role in achieving the aforementioned goals. First and foremost, this
consists in admitting that Estonian society is a part of the rest of the world and that we are
responsible for what is happening there. If we consciously and deliberately participate in the
process, the results will be better and more substantial. Security risks will be neutralised more
effectively if we do not ignore the process or pay little attention to it.

Technological evolution is speeding up and its influence on security and warfare, as well as on
people’s daily life and behaviour, is evident. Modern smart technologies and their applications
will be replaced by next-generation intelligent technologies able to make decisions
independently in addition to analysing information. The application of artificial intelligence,
genetics, bio- and nanotechnology and our increasing ability to harness solar and magnetic fusion
energy create new possibilities that will change our living environment and existence to a
remarkable extent. Besides the major positive impacts, the use of new technologies will also be
accompanied by threats and risks; old ones will be complemented by new that require novel
countermeasures and solutions. In the context of security and defence, this means that if a
potential opponent’s technological solutions are very advanced, we need to work hard to ensure
that the defence organised against them is smart, preventive and well thought through. Procuring
strategic security technology and acquiring, developing and applying the knowledge and skills
related to it are important and inescapably necessary to all independent states, and Estonia needs
to pay more attention to this.

21


-----

22


-----

