## security strategy for society


-----

-----

#### SECURITY STRATEGY FOR SOCIETY

Government Resolution 16.12.2010

Eteläinen Makasiinikatu 8

PL 31, 00131 HELSINKI
**www.defmin.fi**

Layout: Tiina Takala / Ministry of Defence
Translation: Katri Suvanto / Ministry of Defence
Print: Vammalan kirjapaino, 2011

ISBN: 978-951-25-2234-7 print
ISBN 978 951 25 2235 4 df


-----

INTRODUCTION................................................................................................................1

1 THE CRITERIA FOR THE STRATEGY................................................................3

1.1 The objective

1.2 The actors and their responsibilities.............................................................4

1.2.1 The public administration....................................................................4

1.2.2 The business community......................................................................7

1.2.3 Organisations.........................................................................................9

1.2.4 Security research....................................................................................9

1.2.5 The European Union and the international dimension..................10

1.3 Threat scenarios and disturbances..............................................................13

2 SECURING THE VITAL FUNCTIONS..............................................................16

2.1 The entirety of the functions and the principles of securing them.........16

2.2 Management of Government affairs...........................................................18

2.2.1 Desired end state..................................................................................18

2.2.2 Strategic tasks.......................................................................................19

2.3 International activities..................................................................................21

2.3.1 Desired end state..................................................................................21

2.3.2 Strategic tasks.......................................................................................22

2.4 Finland’s defence capability..........................................................................27

2.4.1 Desired end state..................................................................................27

2.4.2 Strategic tasks ......................................................................................27

2.5 Internal security.............................................................................................29

2.5.1 Desired end state..................................................................................29

2.5.2 Strategic tasks.......................................................................................30

2.6 Functioning of the economy and infrastructure.......................................36

2.6.1 Desired end state..................................................................................36

2.6.2 Strategic tasks ......................................................................................39

2.7 The population’s income security and capability to function................46

2.7.1 The desired end state...........................................................................46

2.7.2 Strategic tasks.......................................................................................47

2.8 Psychological resilience to crisis..................................................................51

2.8.1 Desired end state.................................................................................51

2.8.2 Strategic tasks.......................................................................................52

3 CRISIS MANAGEMENT.......................................................................................54

3.1 Management of disturbances.......................................................................54

3.2 Situation awareness and situation picture .................................................57

3.3 Communications in crisis situations and disturbances ..........................59

4 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE STRATEGY.......................................................62

4.1 The principles and monitoring of implementation...................................62

4.2 Exercises.........................................................................................................64

ANNEX ................................................................................................................67


-----

### INTRODUCTION

for preparedness and the management of
disturbances are complementary to the
Strategy and deepen its approach.
In the reviewed Resolution special

attention has been paid to the international
dimension and the broad-based presentation
of actors in preparedness and crisis
management. The role of the business
community and organisations is underlined
as part of preparedness in society and the
management of disturbances. Security

research is discussed in more detail.
The role of municipalities is in focus
more than before; this also applies to the
effects of the reorganisation of regional
administration. These are also the focus
areas in the implementation of the Strategy.
In addition, the changes that have taken
place in legislation, the experiences gained
in VALHA 2010 preparedness exercise and
in the management of disturbances were
taken into account in the review as well as
the reports that assessed the utilisation and
implementation of the 2006 Resolution.
The present Resolution harmonises the

preparedness activities of the ministries,
adhering to both the division of duties
provided in the Government Rules of
Procedure and co-ordination provisions.
Security in society builds on the arrangements
made in normal conditions. Each ministry,
within its mandate, steers preparedness
and include all measures required by


One of the fundamental tasks of the state
leadership is to guarantee the security
of society. National and international
interdependency increases as a result of
globalisation and specialised development.
It is necessary to assess and develop security
more comprehensively than in the past and
from the intersectoral perspective, taking
into account all actors in society.
In the Government Resolutions of

2003 and 2006 on Securing the Functions
Vital to Society, vital functions and the
responsibilities of each administrative

sector to secure them were defined. A
comprehensive and intersectoral approach
is underlined in the reviewed Resolution
which, co-ordinated by the Secretariat of
the Security and Defence Committee, was
amended to better respond to the anticipated
development of the security environment
and the changes in the Finnish society in the
coming years.
The principles, objectives and

implementation criteria for Finland’s

security and defence policy were provided
in the Finnish Security and Defence Policy
Report in 2009. The Resolution on the
Security Strategy for Society, based on a
comprehensive security concept, concretises
these principles and goals. The Strategy
provides the common basis for preparedness
and crisis management for all actors in
society. Other strategies and guidelines


-----

the Resolution in the implementation of
their operating and financial plans. Here
also the activities of the regional and local
administration as well as the activities of the
business community and organisations are
taken into consideration.
The Resolution was written from the

perspective of functions vital to society that
will be secured in all conditions. The threat
scenarios which pose a risk to vital functions
are described. Descriptions of disturbances
are concretised with threat scenarios. For
the basis of preparedness, preventing and
combating threats and, further, for securing
the functions vital to society the ministries
are given the responsibility to develop, steer
and monitor strategic tasks in accordance with
the requirements of the security environment.
Also other parts of the public administration,
in particular municipalities, and the business
community and organisations play an

important role in the implementation of the
strategic tasks.


The Resolution encompasses the

implementation and monitoring of the
strategy as well as the implementation
principles of preparedness exercises. For all
the actors contributing to development, each
ministry, within its mandate, shall steer and
monitor the implementation of tasks and the
development of required capabilities related
to securing the vital functions. Supported
by the meeting of the heads of preparedness
of the ministries, the Security and Defence
Committee is responsible for the joint
monitoring and development of the Strategy.
Monitoring creates the preconditions for the
possible definition needs of the Strategy and
for the co-ordination of the comprehensive
defence approach. The Resolution further
defines that the top state leadership shall be
informed, on a regular basis, of the results of
the monitoring.
The Resolution on the Security Strategy

for Society replaces the previous Government
Resolution on Securing the Functions Vital to
Society, adopted on 23.11.2006. The decision
on the next review of the Resolution will be
made by the Government.


-----

### 1 THE CRITERIA FOR THE STRATEGY

###### 1.1 The objective


The most important tasks of Finland’s foreign,
security and defence policy is to safeguard
national sovereignty, territorial integrity and
basic values; promote the population’s security
and well-being; and maintain the functioning
of society.

The Resolution on the Security Strategy

for Society (hereafter Strategy) provides the
guidelines to ministries and also to regional
and local administration for achieving these
goals. The Strategy is based on a comprehensive
concept of security and covers the preparedness
of society and crisis management of normal and
emergency conditions. The Strategy provides
information to the authorities in public
administration, the business community and
organisations and harmonises the grounds of
planning in preparedness, crisis management
and security of supply. The measures required
to implement the policy decisions of the
Government Report on Finnish Security and
Defence Policy are discussed in the Strategy. A
number of decisions, strategies and guidelines
related to preparedness and crisis management,
issued by the Government and different
administrative sectors are complementary to it.

The Strategy has been compiled from the

viewpoint of safeguarding functions that are
vital to society in all situations.


The following are defined:

###### » the functions vital to society and their »

desired end states

###### » the threat scenarios that jeopardize »

vital functions, including the possible
disturbances within each scenario

###### »» the strategic tasks of the ministries to
secure and guarantee the continuation
of the functions

###### »» the criteria for crisis management
as required by the management of
disturbances

###### » the principles of the monitoring »

and development of the strategy’s
implementation

###### » the principles of exercises in »

preparedness and crisis management

On the one hand, the Strategy aims to

avoid duplication of development efforts and,
on the other hand, to prevent a situation in
which a capability required for securing the
vital functions is not developed. Ministries
steer the preparedness of their administrative
sector and related research, guidance of
activities and legislative measures on the
basis of the Strategy.
The Strategy is a public document which

aims at giving information to citizens and
to international co-operation partners with
whom security in society is safeguarded on


-----

the concrete measures taken, on the basis of
the guidelines provided by the Government,
to strengthen the security of society and
the population. The Security and Defence
Committee, supported by the meeting of the
heads of preparedness of the ministries, is
responsible for the joint monitoring of the
Strategy in co-operation with the different
authorities, the business community and
organisations.

###### 1.2 The actors and their responsibilities

**1.2.1 The public administration**

The **President of the Republic conducts**
Finland’s foreign policy in co-operation
with the **Government. The Government**
is responsible for national preparation
of decisions to be made in the European
Union, and decides on concomitant Finnish
measures, unless the decision requires the
approval of Parliament.

In emergency conditions, the

Government, subject to a Parliament
decision, may be authorized to use the
additional emergency powers provided in
the Emergency Powers Act. The decision to
begin using powers pursuant to the State of
Defence Act is taken by Presidential Decree,
subject to a Parliament decision. According
to the Emergency Powers Act, presently
under review, the Government would
introduce the statute on implementing
the Emergency Powers Act after having
concluded with the President of the Republic
that the country faces emergency conditions.
Parliament would be the ultimate decisionmaker.


Important aspects of foreign and security

policy and other matters concerning Finland’s
relations with other states, associated key
internal security issues, and significant
comprehensive defence approach issues are
handled at the joint meeting of the President
of the Republic and the Cabinet Committee
**on Foreign and Security Policy. They will**
have a joint meeting whenever the matters
so require. Matters related to securing the
functions vital to society are prepared also in
other cabinet committees.
EU-related policy issues are decided on

at the **Cabinet Committee on European**
**Union Affairs. As to the civil servant level,**
the co-ordination of EU matters takes place
in the Committee for EU Affairs and sectorspecific preparative sub-committees.
Government decisions are made either

at **plenary sessions or within the ministry**
concerned. The ministries co-operate with
each other as necessary, under the leadership
of the competent ministry. In addition,
ministries direct the regional administration
and local government within their respective
mandates. The **Prime Minister directs**
the activities of the Government. The
**Prime Minister’s Office assists the Prime**
Minister in the overall management of the
Government and in coordinating the work
of the Government and Parliament.

The Act on the Defence Forces and the

Border Guard Act provide for the powers
of the President of the Republic, the Prime
Minister, relevant ministers and the Chief of
Defence in dealing with military command
matters relating to the Defence Forces and
the Border Guard.
The Government directs, supervises and

coordinates the securing of functions vital to
society. Each competent ministry does the
same within its respective administrative
sector. In order to facilitate preparedness
and to instigate activities, all competent


-----

authorities employ their statutory powers,
which are already quite exhaustive in
normal conditions.
The **Permanent** **Secretaries** have

the task of directing and supervising the
activities of their respective ministries.
They are responsible for preparing

the administrative sector’s objectives,

monitoring their implementation and

ensuring the preparedness and security of
the sector. The Head of Preparedness is each
ministry assists the Permanent Secretary
in the implementation of preparedness
and security related tasks. The **Meeting of**
**Permanent Secretaries and the Meeting of**
**Heads of Preparedness are permanent co-**
operation bodies. When the matters being
dealt with so requires, the Secretary General
of the President of the Republic participates
in the meeting of the permanent secretaries.
The **Meeting of Preparedness Secretaries**
assists the heads of preparedness.
The **Ministry of Defence is responsible**

for co-ordinating comprehensive defence
activities. Coordinating the comprehensive
defence approach involves synchronising
measures of the public sector, that is, the
Government, State authorities and the
municipalities, and the private sector and
voluntary activities by citizens in order to
maintain the functions vital to society under
all circumstances. The Security and Defence
**Committee (TPAK) assists the Ministry**
of Defence and the Cabinet Committee
on Foreign and Security Policy on matters
relating to comprehensive defence and its
co-ordination. The Committee monitors
changes in the security and defence policy
and situation and evaluates their effects on
comprehensive defence arrangements. The
Committee has the task of monitoring and
co-ordinating the different administrative
sectors’ comprehensive defence measures.


The public administration is to a large

extent and increasingly dependent on the
functioning of the common information
systems and networks that have been
specifically designed for the entire

administration, security authorities and the
state leadership. In the Government, the
**Ministry of Finance** is responsible for the
general guidance and development of these
systems and information networks; it is also
responsible for the general guidance and
directing of information security and ICT
preparedness in the public sector.
Many branches are involved in regional
**administration the steering of which falls**
under the remit of relevant ministries or
central agencies. Regional administration
was reorganised in 2010 when Regional
State Administrative Agencies (AVI) and
the Centres for Economic Development,
Transport and the Environment (ELY
Centres) were established. They play a
central role in the preparedness of regional
administration; however, their preparedness
tasks require further definition and

development.
The AVI agencies foster regional parity

by executing all legislative implementation,
steering and supervision functions in the
regions. To this end the agencies strengthen
implementation of basic rights and legal
protection, access to basic public services,
environmental protection, environmental
sustainability, public safety and a safe and
healthy living and working environment
in the regions. In addition, the tasks of
AVI agencies include the co-ordination
of preparedness in the region and the
organisation of relating co-operation, coordination of preparedness planning, the
organisation of regional national defence
courses, supporting the preparedness

planning of municipalities, the organisation
of preparedness exercises, and promoting


-----

the security planning of regional and
local administration. The AVI agencies
support competent authorities and, when
necessary, co-ordinate the activities when
the competent authority directs securityrelated situations in the region. Regional
preparedness committees, which were set up
under the leadership of the agencies, are a
central body in promoting preparedness and
the co-ordination and co-operation within
preparedness planning.

The ELY Centres are responsible in their

areas for implementing and developing
tasks relating to preparedness and crisis
management of the respective ministries
in connection with the environment and
natural resources, traffic and infrastructure,
business activities including agriculture, the
use of workforce, immigration, education
and culture. ELY Centres co-operate with
provincial associations and the employment
and economic development offices are
subordinate to them.
Because municipalities for the most part

have the responsibility for organising basic
services and other functions vital to society,
their role in local administration is central
to society’s preparedness and management
of disturbances. The obligation of the
municipalities to prepare for emergency
conditions is based on the Emergency
Powers Act; however, the management of
security and disturbances under normal
conditions require that preparedness in the
municipalities is further developed.
Many new trends in local administration

and services such as changes in municipal
and service structures and the change in
the municipal service production need to
be taken into account; they are factors that
influence preparedness of municipalities and,
more widely, their security management in its
entirety. Many services that the municipalities
are responsible for organising are


increasingly produced outside an individual
municipality: by joint authorities, the host
municipality model in another municipality,
companies owned by municipalities,

privately owned companies and third sector
actors. This trend has a significant effect
on the preparedness of municipalities and,
consequently, municipalities must take
this into consideration when developing
their own preparedness. As a result, the
roles and responsibilities of supramunicipal
organisations and external service providers
in preparedness related matters must be
defined and well-functioning co-operation
procedures are to be established.
The securing of functions vital to society

as a whole is related to intersectoral activities
between different administrative sectors
and the co-operation between the state,
municipalities, the business community
and organisations. Preparedness and

security management in the municipalities
as a whole is defined with ordinances and
policy advice as well as through planning
and reporting activities.
The municipal managers, together with

the municipal boards, direct preparedness
in accordance with the law. Practical
responsibilities for preparedness and

operations are widely allocated. All significant
decisions regarding policies and resources
are always taken by representative bodies.
This is why preparedness for emergencies
and crisis situations should be integrated
into the budget proposals of a municipality
and joint municipal bodies. Elected officials
should fully familiarise themselves with and
be involved in the objectives of preparedness.
Municipalities can influence crisis resilience
in society also by means of land use planning,
thus promoting a crisis resilient community
structure.
Apart from municipalities and their

co-operation bodies, the actors of the


-----

regional state administration, parishes

and religious communities, universities
and other educational establishments and
the units of the business community that
contribute to the service production of the
local government play a key role in regional
preparedness and securing functions

vital to society. Organisations, too, are
important service providers and actors in
building preparedness. The co-operation
and operational models for regional

preparedness of these actors are developed
and the functioning of the models is tested
in joint preparedness exercises.

The Ministry of Employment and the

Economy is responsible for developing
security of supply and the related cooperation between administration and the
business community. In the Government
decision on the objectives of security
of supply (539/2008) the ministries are
obligated to steer and monitor, within their
mandates, the implementation of the tasks
in line with the strategy to secure the vital
functions and the required capability to act.
The ministries develop security of supply
within their respective mandates as part
of their strategic tasks. Ministry-specific
responsibilities for the security of supply are
listed in annex 1.
Well-functioning co-operation between

public authorities and the business

community create and maintain security
of supply in Finland. The security of
supply organisation brings together their
best expertise to support preparedness
planning in normal conditions and steering
in emergency conditions. The Finnish
organisation for security of supply consist
of the National Emergency Supply Agency,
which is subordinate to the Ministry of
Employment and the Economy, the Council
for Security of Supply and Infrastructure,
which is part of the security of supply system,


and the security of supply sectors and pools
which act as permanent co-operation bodies.
The voluntary pool agreements of the
business community are concluded between
the National Emergency Supply Agency and
sector-based organisations. The Council for
Security of Supply and Infrastructure, set up
by the Government, maintains and develops
relations with the key public sector and
business community networks, monitors
the state of security of supply and makes
proposals for necessary measures.
In addition to national preparedness,

the preparedness measures taken in the
European Union, the agreement on the
International Energy Programme and the
multilateral and bilateral agreements on
economic co-operation in crisis situations
concluded with a number of countries
contribute to security of supply.

**1.2.2 The business community**

The actors of the business community hold
a key position in securing the functioning
of the economy and infrastructure in
particular. The role in the areas of other vital
functions has grown when focus has been
on functions relating to core competency
and increasing subcontracts and services
outside the own organisation. Information
and communication technology (ICT)

services, transportation and the office
ownership and management are amongst the
service entities where outsourcing is typical.
Another trend in the business community is
internationalisation. The Finnish business
community is part of a global network
where industrial plants merge and through
the flows of raw material, information and
people become an entity where change is
permanent. This applies to all functions of a
company, their management and ownership.
The third change trend is the development


-----

of division of work and of co-operation
between public and private sectors. The
private sector produces an increasingly
larger share of the products and services, the
availability of which is the responsibility of
the public sector and often also funded by it.

Specialisation, focus on core functions,

internationalisation and the reorganisation
of the co-operation and division of work
between public and private sectors have an
impact on how the preparedness related cooperation can be built between them. The
co-operation between public and private
sectors and its continuous development
are essential because the main part of the
resources required by security tasks is, as
a rule, owned by the business community.
Long, even global value chains and the
internationalisation of companies have
significantly decreased the preconditions
of national authorities to regulate, steer or
control the activities of companies.
A secure and stable society the

development of which can be foreseen is
a significant competitive advantage for
companies and, ultimately, a precondition
for all activities. It is in the overall
interests of the business community that
it actively participates in the maintenance
and development of security in society.
This requires, from the perspective of the
business community, the possibility to
efficiently provide products and services
for the needs of the authorities on the
commercial basis, which allows it to
contribute also to societal discussion. In
general, partnership is seen as more flexible
than regulations, supporting the continuity
of business activities. In addition, the
contribution of the business community to
preparedness planning has a long history,
supported by the values of the key personnel
in the companies. This is shown, for
example, in the commitment to the security


of supply related work, national defence
and the development of internal security.
The internationally networked competition
environment does not allow, however, take
into account national security views that go
beyond statutory obligations. In practice,
co-operation has been improved through
the system of preparedness agreements,
which was developed as part of co-operation
between the security of supply organisation
and the business community. To improve
the reliable functioning of companies and
company networks, preparedness based
on agreements and the recommendations
of continuity management were developed
in the security of supply organisation. As
of autumn 2010, the security of supply
organisation will be gradually integrated
into Huovi information system. The system
supports companies in the systematisation
of their continuity management. It will
be used to produce and transmit sectorspecific situation awareness of the business
community and national-level situation
awareness.
The approach of the companies to

security co-operation with the public sector
is determined by a number of factors.
These include direct and indirect impact
on business activities, the agreements
concluded with clients, risk management and
securing the continuity of business activities.
Some sectors such as telecommunications,
transport, energy and financing are obligated
to preparedness by legislation. Security
co-operation between private and public
sectors is increasingly important to maintain
security in society and relating preparedness.
However, this can only be built on the
recognition by the business community that
the benefits of co-operation are worth the
resources invested in it. Structural changes
in society and the economy require the
public sector to guarantee that the actors


-----

of the business community are genuinely
committed to securing the functions vital to
society.

**1.2.3 Organisations**

In securing society’s vital functions, along
with the public administration and the
business community, non-governmental

organisations (NGOs) that base their
activities on voluntariness play a significant
role in providing everyday security as well as
in improving crisis resilience. They produce
and maintain resources and expertise that
support the authorities and, in addition,
implement education and communication
that support and promote preparedness.
By supporting the authorities, NGOs play
an important role in, for example, search
and rescue, air rescue operations and
maritime search and rescue, civil defence
and fire fighting, voluntary defence as well
as organising first aid and psychological
support.

National and international organisations

also have a significant role in providing
humanitarian aid to crisis areas. Various
organisations run sports, cultural, youth
and other societal activities, representing a
significant segment of our civil society.

The ability to recognise individual needs

is one of the strengths of these organisations.
They are often extensively networked,
both nationally and internationally. It is
characteristic of voluntary work that, when
needed, the actors can rapidly activate their
operations without the guidance of the
authorities.
The authorities are responsible for their

mandates and tasks which organisations
support through their own knowledge
areas. Each administrative sector bears
the responsibility for intersectoral cooperation arrangements with organisations


and voluntary actors within their respective
mandates. The structural changes of society
and the economy require that the necessary
organisations are genuinely involved in
securing society’s vital functions also in the
future. This is why administrative sectors
should regard the organisations as an asset
to them and launch development measures
accordingly.
When co-operation between

organisations and the authorities is planned
it should be taken into account that the
participation of the organisations is based
on the operating goals and principles that
they have set for themselves and also on
national and international law. Apart from
preparedness and exercises, co-operation
must be extended to planning.

**1.2.4 Security research**

Produced by scientific and research

communities to support the security

authorities of the public administration,
the business community and other actors,
security research plays an important role in
the management of preparedness planning
and disturbances planning. Security research
which is based on national approach
provides targeted information to support
decision-making, identifies new threats and
opportunities in a rapidly changing world
and develops courses of action, instruments
and systems for the management of various
disturbances and crises.
Security research which is of high

quality is, by nature, comprehensive and
multidisciplinary. It should directly support
the authorities and other actors and their cooperation or, indirectly, through the products
and services which have been developed by
commercial actors. To achieve this objective,
the security authorities must communicate


-----

their research needs to the scientific
community, recognize the possibilities of
the scientific community and be able to use
the knowledge gained for management and
activities. It is essential to create networks
within the security research of the EU and
also in a wider context.

**1.2.5 The European Union**

**and the international**
**dimension**

Many security challenges and threats have
far-reaching transnational impacts. Broadbased international co-operation is called
for to meet these challenges since Finland’s
security is closely connected to international
development. International activities are one
of the vital functions defined in this strategy
and constitute at the same time a key element
of all the other vital functions.
Finland prepares for security threats

both nationally and as a member of the key
European and global co-operation structures
and organisations. In addition to national
preparedness measures, international

agreements play an increasingly important
role. It is not possible to secure all vital
functions merely through national

arrangements. National preparedness

measures should be supplemented and
strengthened through the membership of the
European Union and international security
co-operation. It is in Finland’s interest to
take actively part in this work. However, it
is essential to prepare for serious crises with
national measures.

Finland’s membership of the EU is a

central element in Finland’s security policy,
offering possibilities to influence the security
environment in the entire field of securing
vital functions. Here the key features are
both the crisis management operations as
part of the Common Foreign and Security


policy of the EU and co-operation between
member states with regard to terrorism and
natural or man-made disasters.
Other EU policies also have a significant

impact on Finland’s possibilities to secure
society’s vital functions during disturbances.
This particularly applies to the policy areas
that fall into the exclusive competence of the
European Union. For example, the common
agricultural policy provides the framework
for securing food safety whereas the common
commercial policy provides the framework for
securing foreign trade. The common currency
of the Euro zone and relating regulations have
a key impact on addressing disturbances in
the economy. In many other areas, too, such
as the energy and communications policy, the
EU’s legislation and other activities support
the securing of vital functions.

When disturbances are going to be

addressed in the EU, Finland’s approach
is processed in the national co-ordination
system: the Cabinet Committee decides
on Finland’s position for the Council and
European Council meetings. On the civil
servant level the positions are discussed in
the Committee for EU Affairs and in its SubCommittees. Co-operation with Parliament
also takes place along the guidelines adopted
in the co-ordinating system.

In the Report on the Implementation

of the European Security Strategy, drafted
in 2008, attention is paid in a new way
to new challenges such as cyber security
and energy security. The EU has adopted a
directive to protect critical infrastructures
(2008/114/EC) with the purpose of securing
infrastructures that serve two or more
member states. The objective of the directive
is to agree on the procedures with which
critical infrastructures are identified and
designated. Finland plays an active role
in the implementation of the programme.
A European Programme for Critical


-----

Infrastructure Protection was being prepared
in 2010 to prevent and minimise the damage
caused by disturbances or failures in the
infrastructure.
In accordance with the Solidarity Clause

of the Treaty of Lisbon that came into force
in 2009, the Union and its Member States
act jointly in the spirit of solidarity if another
Member State is the subject of a terrorist attack
or the victim of a natural or man-made disaster
and, as a result, requests assistance. First, the
Union shall mobilise all the instruments at its
disposal, including the military resources made
available by the Member States. Secondly, the
other Member States shall assist it at the request
of its political authorities. Finland actively
participates in the negotiations about the rules
to implement the Solidarity Clause.
The mutual assistance obligation

incorporated into the Treaty of Lisbon aims at
strengthening solidarity between the Member
States and their commitment to developing
the common foreign and security policy. In
accordance with the obligation, if a Member
State is the victim of armed aggression on its
territory, the other Member States shall have
towards it an obligation of aid and assistance
by all the means in their power. The concrete
forms and application of solidarity and mutual
assistance will be defined in practice through
co-operation. Finland will establish the
capabilities to provide and receive assistance
pursuant to the solidarity clause as well as the
obligation to aid and assist another Member
State.

The European Parliament has adopted a

new financial supervisory structure aimed
at amending the past failures. Macroprudential supervision will improve after
the establishment of the European Systemic
Risk Board through which the monitoring
and management of systemic risks will
be guaranteed. In addition, new EU-level
supervisory authorities will be established


as part of the micro-prudential supervisory
authorities for banking, insurance and
securities. These will strengthen the

supervision of cross-border financial

markets and institutions and, in particular,
the solving of possible problems.

The EU’s Crisis Co-ordination

Arrangements (CCA) have been designed
for situations where a crisis is so far-reaching
or politically significant that to manage it the
co-ordination of EU measures is required
and the regular decision-making procedures
of the Council cannot be employed because
of time pressure, for example. The CCA
guarantee the EU’s joint situation picture and
determine how the EU bodies and Member
States co-operate in a situation where two
or more Member States face a disaster or an
emergency situation (including terrorism).
The presidency of the EU activates the coordination mechanisms after negotiating
with the Member State(s) involved. Being the
contact point for the Crisis Co-ordination
Arrangements, concrete measures are taken
by the Situation Centre (SitCen) of the
Council.
The three pillars of United Nations

activities are peace and security,

development and poverty reduction and
human rights and democracy. The United
Nations has maintained its position in
the international community as the key
norm setter, negotiating forum, actor,
and guardian of international law for the
international community. Finland fosters the
strengthening of multilateral co-operation
and international law and emphasises
the significant role of the UN as the most
comprehensive multilateral co-operation
mechanism. Finland’s active participation in
the activities of the UN promotes securing
society’s vital functions.
The Civil Emergency Planning (CEP) of

Nato aims at supporting the core functions


-----

of the alliance. According to Nato’s new
strategic concept, wide-ranging threats
have an impact on national preparedness.
National preparedness co-operation has
always been open to partner countries.
Finland has conducted co-operation in a
number of sectors. Through co-operation
Finland is informed of practices in other
countries and has the opportunity to
network internationally. Finland’s internal
preparedness expertise can be brought to the
table to benefit Nato and partner countries.
Participation in co-operation supports the
development of national preparedness.
A number of ministries and other actors

in preparedness matters co-operate with
other Nordic countries in matters relating
to preparedness. Nordic co-operation

is developed in accordance with the
objectives of the Strategy and the strategic
tasks. Arrangements on medical supplies,
defence materiel and securing electricity
transmission systems have been made under
the auspices of Nordic co-operation. The
Treaty of Lisbon provides the opportunity to
deepen Nordic co-operation.
International disaster response activities

are developed in such a manner that Finland
is able to provide and receive assistance
during major accidents and can participate in
the EU’s Civil Protection Mechanism and in
other international rescue co-operation. The
existing national resources and the planning
of how to use them offer a starting point for
development. Rapid mobilisation of resources
requires that the international rescue cooperation mechanisms and co-ordination
are developed. In addition, sufficient

operational readiness requires supplementary
acquisitions and plans to stockpile supplies.
The development of the operational readiness
of the SAR services and organisations is
also seen as an argument for supplementary


acquisitions to prepare for major national
accidents.

Co-operation of prosecutors on the

international level is particularly close within
the European Union. The mutual recognition
of the more serious and, therefore, societally
more threatening crimes means, for example,
that assistance must be given irrespective of
whether similar acts are defined as criminal
offences in one’s own legislation. Apart
from Eurojust, Finnish prosecutors are
represented in many international networks,
such as the EU’s national correspondents on
terrorism and the cyber crime network of
the International Association of Prosecutors
(IAP). Prompt and efficient international
co-operation is also promoted by liaison
prosecutors. Currently Finland has just one
liaison prosecutor who is based in Estonia.
Multilateral conventions on international

legal assistance constitute a system through
which crime prevention and judicial

authorities provide mutual assistance in
their administrative sectors in pending
matters that have an international dimension.
Finland plays an active role in developing
and monitoring conventions on international
legal assistance in the Council of Europe, for
example.
As for the policing function, the most

important forum for cross-border cooperation is the context of the European
Union. The objective of Europol, the EU’s
law enforcement agency, is to create a more
secure Europe by supporting the competent
authorities in the Member States to prevent
and combat serious forms of international
crime and terrorism. In addition, the
police co-operate closely with Interpol, the
international police organisation, and with
Nordic police organisations. It is also involved
in co-operation in neighbouring regions. In
this context the Baltic Sea Region Task Force,
BSTF, plays a particularly important role.


-----

###### 1.3 Threat scenarios and disturbances

A threat scenario in the Strategy refers to
a description of possible disturbances in
the security environment. The aim here
has been to describe the threat scenarios as
entities that concern the state, society and
population and for which various actors in
society prepare intersectorally and in cooperation.
Threats may be looked at from the

perspective of the cause, the way they
manifest themselves or their effects. It is not
relevant, however, to differentiate between
military and civilian threats. Instead of
advocating one perspective the Strategy
aims at ensuring that threat scenarios can
be used in a wide range of ways on different


The purpose of all international activities of
the police is to develop and improve crossborder co-operation between the police and
other law enforcement authorities.
Finland actively promotes the

development of the EU border policy
and integrated border management.

Free movement and the extension of the
Schengen area require the development of an
integrated border management system and
the reinforcing of checks and border controls
at the external borders. To secure external
borders, the European Agency for external
border management, Frontex, co-ordinates
operational co-operation between Member
States. Finland plays an active role in the
border security co-operation co-ordinated
by Frontex.


_Figure 1. Threats on the individual, national and global levels_


**Global**

**Threats which primarily afect the** **The future security of**
**earth and the future security of** **the earth and its population**
**its population**

**National**

**Threats which primarily** **The security of the state,**
**afect the state, society** **society and population**
**and population**

**Individual**

**Threats which primarily**
**afect the individual**

**The citizen’s**
**basic security**

**SECURING THE FUNCTIONS VITAL TO SOCIETY**


-----

administrative levels, including the threat
assessments and risk analyses of the actors
which contribute to preparedness in society.

Global threats such as security policy

related threats and large-scale climate threats
are addressed in their respective reports but
their impact on the threat scenarios defined
in the Strategy is taken into account to a
relevant extent. The threat scenarios here do
not primarily deal with threats that target
individuals although such threats do have an
indirect impact on the functioning of society.
Threats on the individual, national and global
levels are presented in figure 1. It is not possible
or even relevant to define clear boundaries
between threats of different levels because of
their interaction and interdependency.

The threat scenarios defined in the strategy
for securing the functions vital to society
are:

###### »» serious disturbances in the power supply » serious disturbances in the »

telecommunications and information
systems – cyber threats

###### » serious disturbances in transport »

logistics

###### » serious disruptions in public utilities» » serious disturbances in food supply» » serious disturbances in the financial »

and payment systems

###### » disruptions in the availability of public »

funding

###### » serious disturbances in the health and »

welfare of the population

###### » major accidents, extreme natural »

phenomena and environmental threats

###### » terrorism and other criminality that »

endanger social order

###### » serious disturbances in border security» » a political, economic and military »

pressure

###### » the use of military force»


Threats against society’s vital functions
may arise individually, several may emerge
simultaneously or they may appear as
continuums for each other. The speed and
duration of the escalation of threats vary.
Some of the threats escalate as intentional
action taken by a specific actor but there are
also threats without intention. The reasons,
origins, exact targets, objectives, scope,
repercussions or transition from one level
to another are difficult to predict. A more
detailed description of the threat scenarios is
in annex 2.
Analysing the changes of threat scenarios

in own activities should be done on a
continuous and active basis by all actors who
are responsible for preparedness in society
and the management of disturbances, thus
improving the situation awareness of all
those who contribute to preparedness. This
underlines the importance of networked
and intersectoral co-operation both on the
national and international level.
To concretise threat scenarios and

to support different actors in the further
analysis of threats in connection with their
own activities, a number of **disturbances**
have been identified for the Strategy.
Disturbances refer to a threat or an incident
which endangers, at least momentarily or
in a regionally limited way, the security or
functioning of society or the livelihood of
the population. The authorities and other
actors need to co-operate and communicate
in a wider or closer fashion to manage such
situations. Depending on the perspective,
the origin of the threat or its consequences,
the same disturbance may be connected
to several threat scenarios. Possible
disturbances have been presented in annex 3.
Disturbances may occur both in normal
**conditions and** **emergency conditions.**
Disturbances that occur in normal conditions
can be managed with the regular powers or


-----

resources of the authorities. The systems and
preparedness measures that are built in normal
conditions provide the basis for measures in
emergency conditions. In the same way, the
systems created for emergency conditions
can be used for managing disturbances under
normal circumstances. During emergency
conditions the management of a situation
may require additional powers or resources.

Threat scenarios and examples of

disturbances are meant for the authorities, the
business community and organisations as the
joint starting point of preparedness and for
background material. A number of actors may
benefit from the material when they draw up
**threat scenarios and assess the impact of the**
threats on preparedness, on the prevention
and management of disturbances and on the
development of relating capabilities.


-----

### 2  SECURING THE VITAL FUNCTIONS

###### 2.1 The entirety of the functions  and the principles of securing them


The vital functions encompass the

indispensable intersectoral functional

entities of society which have to be secured
in all situations.

Functions vital to the Finnish society include:

###### » management of Government affairs» » international activity» » Finland’s defence capability» » internal security» » functioning of the economy and »

infrastructure

###### » the population’s income security and »

capability to function, and

###### » psychological resilience to crisis»

A desired end state has been described

for each function, thus making it possible
for ministries to determine their respective
strategic tasks as well as relevant maintenance
and development needs. The functioning
of the different administrative levels and
the role of the business community and
organisations were taken into consideration
to the extent appropriate as the descriptions
of the said functions and the development
requirements for the strategic tasks were
compiled. In addition, Finland’s membership
in the European Union and activities within
the United Nations and NATO’s Partnership
for Peace (PfP) programme as well as other
international venues were also taken into
consideration. The time span of the desired end
states varies because of differences in functions
and planning systems.


The securing of the functions vital to

society builds on long-term and sufficient
management of capabilities, on the ability
to flexibly use capabilities just in time, and
on the ability to employ and coordinate
the capabilities already in use. Competent
ministries direct the authorities’

management of capabilities by designating
the strategic tasks of the ministries.
The measures and resource-finding

of other ministries, regional and local
administrations, the business community
and organisations are connected to the
development of most strategic tasks and
the relating development of capabilities. In
the development and use of capabilities the
ministries must always take into account
the different administrative levels and
the role of the business community and
organisations
The ministries’ strategic tasks and

related development requirements build on
the analysis of recognized threat scenarios
as well as on the conditions imposed by
concrete special situations which are derived
from the scenarios. Each ministry, within its
mandate, is responsible for ensuring that the
strategic tasks determined on the basis of
the desired end states will be completed. The
strategic tasks are compiled in annex 4.
In securing the functions vital to

society the commonly accepted and
observed principles of the Finnish society
are to be followed.


-----

**Democracy and the rule of law**
The inviolability of human dignity, principles
of representative democracy, separation
of powers, lawfulness of the use of power
and other principles of the rule of law are
maintained. The basic rights and liberties
of the individual are safeguarded in all
situations. Provisional exceptions to the
rights that are deemed necessary in crisis
situations and are adjusted on the basis of the
seriousness of the situation may be provided
by an Act.

**Sharing responsibility across society**
Vital functions are secured by the efficient
and comprehensive exploitation of society’s
resources. This requires that the public sector,
the business community, organisations
and state churches co-operate and that
capabilities are co-ordinated in all situations.

**Retaining the normal division of duties**
The regular lines of authority for securing
vital functions, the organisations responsible
for it under normal conditions and the
normal division of duties are maintained
unchanged as far as is feasible in all situations.

**Flexible preparedness control**
Resources and readiness levels are

appropriately regulated to prevent and combat
threats, to minimise their ill effects and to
achieve the required level of effectiveness in
securing society’s vital functions. Legislation
provides the authorities with sufficient
powers.

**Cost-effectiveness**
Society’s vital functions are cost-effectively
secured by developing the procedures and
structures for normal conditions in such a
way that they are also viable in disturbances
and crisis situations. Co-ordination ensures
that overlapping systems, organisations and


functions on all administrative levels are
minimised.

**Safeguarding of resources**
Ministries include their strategic tasks and
relevant maintenance and development

requirements in their own operating and
financial plans and budget proposals.

Development is planned within the authorised
spending limits. Administrative sectors are
responsible for providing the necessary powers
by amending regulations, as appropriate to the
control of disturbances.

**Taking the international dimension of**
**preparedness into account**
The underlying causes of Finland’s

success are, for example, globalisation
and the closely associated international
division of labour in many fields. National
preparedness arrangements take account
of the opportunities and uncertainty

factors that arise as a result of international
developments. Each vital function of
society contains its intrinsic international
dimension.

**Monitoring of preparedness development**
The administrative sectors’ measures for
developing and maintaining preparedness
are monitored. This makes it possible
to suitably and properly guide national
preparedness. Each ministry monitors the
development of capabilities required by the
strategic tasks within its mandate.

**Co-ordination of measures**
While one of the goals is to identify possible
shortcomings in activities and to clarify the
roles and responsibilities, the overall goals
of co-ordination are to avoid unnecessary
duplication. Subject to legislation, the
competent authority is always in charge
of making decisions, during and after the


-----

implementation of co-ordination. Some
or all administrative sectors may be cooperation partners. Depending on the case,
the same also applies to the representatives of
the business community and organisations.

###### 2.2 Management of Government affairs

**2.2.1 Desired end state**


Finland’s contribution to the EU’s

decision-making is secured by safeguarding
the national preparation of EU issues and
participating in the work of EU bodies.
The competent ministry is responsible

for implementing the Government

decisions. The management systems in
use in administrative sectors must enable
the implementation of statutory decisions
to secure the functions vital to society as
required by the security situation. Decisions
are based on situation awareness which
is compiled and analysed by different
administrative sectors and transmitted to
decision-makers. The Government Situation
Centre has access to reliable and up-to-date
situation awareness which can be used by the
state leadership and other actors.
Ministries and other authorities which

are important to securing the functions
vital to society ensure their continued
functioning under all circumstances

through administrative, structural and
technical measures. Leadership and

operational preparedness is maintained
around the clock, when necessary. The
operational preparedness of ministries

and specifically designated government
agencies, which are important for security
in society, is maintained by building and
maintaining protected command facilities.
The authorities on regional and local levels
secure their continued functioning under all
circumstances. Protected command facilities
are maintained to the required extent in
particular for emergency conditions on the
basis of a national strategy to be drawn up.

Communications support the activities

of the state leadership and other decisionmakers and guarantee the dissemination of
correct and timely information to the general
public and the media. Communications
and situation awareness generation operate
in close co-operation. Both internal and


**anagement of Government**
**affairs** **encompasses** **the**
# M

**combined activities of the Parliament,**
**the President of the Republic and the**
**Government as well as ministries in**
**drawing on the resources of the nation**
**as required by security situations.**
**Finland’s participation in the EU**
**decision-making is an element of the**
**management of state affairs.**


The objective is an end state in which
everything is in place to enable Parliament,
the President of the Republic and the
Government to make decisions with regard
to safeguarding society’s vital functions
in a given security situation. Decisionmaking is carried out in accordance with the
constitution and existing statutes.
The competent authority leads activities

in co-operation with other authorities, the
business community and organisations.
Intersectoral co-operation bodies can

be used to support co-operation and coordinate activities on all administrative
levels. Top state leadership may also launch
the required co-ordination required by the
situation.


-----

external communications will be guaranteed.
Apart from Finnish and Swedish, the national
languages, also the Sami language and other
languages will be taken into consideration to
the necessary extent.
Authorities on the different

administrative levels are prepared to ensure
that duties can be discharged as smoothly as
possible and, for their part, seek to ensure the
overall security of citizens. Through planning
a co-operation network to promote security
is maintained; authorities, the business
community and organisations participate in
it. Co-operation is of particular importance
in the management of disturbances.
Citizens’ participation in decision-making

related to society’s functions is safeguarded
by the Constitution. Elections are held in a
statutory manner; early elections can be held
at the earliest when 50 days have elapsed.
The constitutional right to protection

under the law is guaranteed. Decisions
depriving people of individual rights and
freedoms or placing responsibilities on them
will require a legal basis. Acts restricting
basic rights may not affect the right to life,
protection of health, personal freedom, the
protection of property or other core rights.
Human rights obligations are observed.
The realization of basic and human rights is
monitored, as is the legality of the authorities’
actions.

**2.2.2 Strategic tasks**

**Guaranteeing the proper functioning**
**of the Government (PMO).** Action will
be taken in accordance with legislation
and procedures pertaining to Government
decision-making and the existing

organisational structure. The required

premises as well as appropriate functioning
and development of technical systems and
support organisations are maintained.


Co-operation between the Government,
Parliament and the President of the
Republic is conducted as required by law
and in accordance with agreed co-operation
practices.

To ensure the Government’s smooth

decision-making procedure the times and
locations of the Government plenary session,
the presidential session, the meetings of
the Cabinet Committees and the unofficial
meetings of the Government are secured
and information is provided on exceptional
arrangements according to the established
practice. At the same time, needs to convene
co-operation bodies will be studied.
The equipment level and readiness to

be used of the premises as well as the proper
functioning of the support organisation are
maintained so that the securing of society’s vital
functions is possible in all security situations.
The Government situation centre, which

relies on co-operation among ministries, is
run by the Prime Minister’s Office and kept
in operational readiness so that it is able to
support Government-level management in
all security situations.
The command facilities of the ministries

and relevant central government authorities
must be in use already under normal
conditions, and the relating personnel must
be trained on a regular basis. As premises are
being developed, particular attention must
be paid to rapidly emerging disturbances and
the need to improve command preparedness
(including situation awareness) without delay.

**Finland’s activities in the European Union**
**and securing the national preparation and**
**handling of EU matters (PMO). National**
co-ordination arrangements are secured to
enable Finland’s well-timed participation in
the decision-making of the European Union.
Ministries are responsible for issues relating
to the EU within their mandates. The


-----

function of the Government Secretariat for
EU Affairs is to co-ordinate the preparation
and handling of issues relating to the
European Union.
Co-operation between the EU bodies

and Finland will be further intensified
to develop crisis situation management,
taking into consideration the duties and
opportunities coming with the Lisbon Treaty.
Capabilities will be developed to implement
the obligations pursuant to the solidarity
clause. Finland actively participates in the
EU’s emergency and crisis co-ordination
arrangements with a view to ensuring that the
EU can effectively support its Member States
in crisis management. Furthermore, Finland
will actively contribute to the development of
the EU’s Crisis Co-ordination Arrangements
(CCA) so that the EU will be able to support
member states in the management of crisis
situations. The Government Situation Centre
acts as a contact point for situations relating
to the CCA and the EU’s Civil Protection
Mechanism.

**Functioning of Government communications**
**(PMO). The ability to support the Government**
through communications is maintained.
This encompasses the co-ordination of
interauthority communications, dissemination
of reliable and timely information to the
general public, the media and key interest
groups as well as every ministry’s responsibility
for providing information concerning issues
within its own administrative sector.
The authorities’ joint telephone and

internet-based communication services

will be further developed for example by
setting up a citizens’ portal to serve crisis
communications. A sufficient number or
civil servants are selected earmarked and
trained for crisis communications. The
crisis communications capabilities of the
companies, communities and organisations


that support administration are developed
in view of disturbances and emergency
conditions.

**Maintenance** **of** **the** **Government´s**
**situation picture (PMO). A prognostic and**
real-time situation picture is compiled to
support Government decision-making and
communications and to improve situation
awareness of security issues relating to the
state and society.

The situation picture is developed

by taking into account and utilising the
authorities’ other pre-existing or future IT
environments. Co-operation and planning
that serve the compilation of the situation
picture are improved among the different
sectors of administration including regional
and local levels. Co-operation between the
gathering of information, the compiling of
the situation picture and communications
is intensified and tested. National structures
tap into the co-operation with the EU’s
Situation Centre (SitCen) and the companies
and organisations that practise contingency
measures. Crisis preparedness of the

business community is improved by regular
co-operation regarding situation picture.

**Securing the rule of law (MoJ).** The
principle of the rule of law, which guarantees
constitutionally protected rights, is secured.
This involves the ability of the judicial and
law enforcement authorities to function and
cooperate as well as ensuring the prerequisites
of a functioning judicial system.
The resources of the judiciary and the

prison service are tailored to meet demands
of the situation. When powers provided for
in the Emergency Powers Act are invoked,
the powers of the judiciary are updated so
that the principles underlying fair trials can
be adhered to.


-----

###### 2.3 International activities

**2.3.1 Desired end state**


**Holding elections (MoJ).** The necessary
technical arrangements are made to

ensure that general elections can be held
in accordance with the law in all security
situations. Furthermore, the preparedness
hold early general elections is maintained at
all times.

Organisational arrangements, data

systems and election materials are kept upto-date in compliance with the schedule
and operational requirements. The Ministry
of Justice is not the only entity involved
in preparedness requirements. Electoral
district committees, municipal central

election committees, the Population Register
Centre and local register offices also have a
role to play. The Ministry of Justice and the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs collaborate in
providing voting opportunities for Finns
residing abroad. Required funding and
communications arrangements for the

elections are maintained.


**y participating in international**
**activities contacts are maintained**
# B

**with foreign states and Finland’s**
**operating conditions are secured**
**in** **international** **organisations**

**and** **co-operation** **arrangements.**

**International information security**
**obligations are observed in accordance**
**with** **relevant** **legislation** **and**

**international agreements that bind**
**Finland. Foreign trade is safeguarded**
**so that import and export, vital to the**
**security of supply and the functioning**
**of the business community, can go**
**on as uninterrupted as possible.**
**Furthermore, international activity**
**also means the capability to obtain**
**any needed external assistance and**
**support as well as providing these to**
**other states, assisting Finnish citizens**
**and those residing in Finland on a**
**permanent basis during disturbances**
**abroad.**


-----

International activity is guaranteed by
upholding the capabilities of the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs and other actors,
securing the preconditions of foreign trade
and developing the international contacts
of other administrative sectors. Finland’s
diplomatic and consular missions abroad
maintain sufficient consular services and
capabilities to assist Finnish citizens and
those residing in Finland on a permanent
basis when emergencies occur overseas. They
also have readiness to co-operate with other
Nordic countries and EU member states.
Finland’s positions and opinions are

conveyed to the attention of foreign states
and other international actors in an active,
efficient and reliable manner. All ministries
are directly responsible for international
activities and co-operation within their
mandates.

Foreign trade is safeguarded so that

import and export, vital to the security of
supply and the functioning of the business
community can go on uninterrupted
in varying security situations. Under
emergency conditions it is necessary to
ensure that the decisions on trade policy, the
preconditions of foreign trade and the single
market are consistent with Finland’s foreign
trade objectives. Responsible authorities cooperate to achieve this objective.
Finland has readiness both to implement

its international obligations to provide
aid (including the mutual assistance

obligation and the solidarity clause of the
Lisbon Treaty) and to receive assistance.
Any possible requests and offers regarding
support and assistance are rapidly and
reliably communicated to other countries
and international organisations. Finland is
prepared to efficiently receive and provide
international assistance. To guarantee

rapid and uninterrupted humanitarian aid
and rescue activities the authorities aim to


provide humanitarian organisations with
necessary operating conditions and to
facilitate their work with all possible means.
Depending on the situation, the provision
and reception of assistance is implemented
by using all possible international channels.
Humanitarian organisations can deliver
assistance to and from Finland through
their own distribution channels. Finnish
authorities safeguard the functioning of
foreign missions in Helsinki.
Finland’s ability to participate in

international crisis management and

international humanitarian and civil

protection activities will be maintained and
developed.

**2.3.2 Strategic tasks**

**Maintaining contacts with foreign states**
**and key international actors (MFA).**
By maintaining contacts it is guaranteed
that Finland can convey its positions and
opinions to the attention of foreign states
and other international actors. Here the
European Union is a key actor. In order
to meet these objectives, an appropriately
proportioned network of diplomatic and
consular missions with expert resources is
maintained in relevant locations abroad. Upto-date and secure telecommunications exist
between the Ministry for Foreign Affairs
and the missions abroad. The missions
function in close co-operation in particular
with the European External Action Service,
the EU member states and the missions
of the Nordic countries. Up-to-date and
dependable telecommunication systems of
Finnish authorities on the EU level and with
foreign states and international organisations
are safeguarded.
In accordance with the Act on

International Information Security

Obligations, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs


-----

acts as the National Security Authority
(NSA) whose task it is to direct and monitor
that the data to be especially protected
is appropriately protected and handled.
Following international information security
obligations, the Ministry of Defence, the
Defence Command and the Security Police
act as designated security authorities (DSAs)
and the Finnish Communications Regulatory
Authority as the National Communications
Security Authority (NCSA), constituting the
security authorities responsible for statutory
tasks as well as tasks based on international
information security obligations.

All ministries, within their mandates,

bear responsibility international activity
and co-operation. As regards treaties or
other international obligations, the ministry
within whose purview the matter falls deals
with them. Treaties and other international
obligations that pertain to foreign and
security policy views are handled by the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs. It also assists
other administrative sectors in co-ordinating
international matters. Treaties that fall within
the competency of the EU are co-ordinated
by the Prime Minister’s Office.
In order to support decision-making

related to international activity, the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs and other ministries
within their administrative sectors maintain
a dependable and real-time situation picture
related to the international operating
environment. The business community
and organisations participate, for their
field of operations and in the manner they
determine, in compiling and conveying the
information to authorities, and vice-versa.
The Government situation centre compiles,
assesses and co-ordinates information and
conveys the compiled situation picture to
the state leadership, different administrative
sectors and, to the appropriate extent, also to
the business community and organisations.


Possible requests and offers regarding

support and assistance are rapidly and
reliably communicated to other countries
and international organisations. Authorities
involved in humanitarian and rescue tasks
co-operate with organisations as appropriate.
In addition to the work within the

European Union, Finland continues to
co-operate with Nato to further develop
civil emergency preparedness. Nordic cooperation is also intensified.
The network of missions is developed

to satisfy the demand for consular services
created by the growing number of tourists
and the needs of business community also
outside the EU. The telecommunications
links of the Foreign Service are developed by
increasing and improving wireless solutions
and communications systems, as standalone
as possible, and by harmonising it with state
IT systems (such as the authorities’ secure
ICT system).

**Protecting and assisting abroad Finnish**
**citizens and those residing in Finland on a**
**permanent basis (MFA). The preparedness**
to assist and protect the interests of Finnish
citizens abroad in situations where their
security is or has become threatened is
maintained. This involves, in particular,
sufficient and effective consular services and
well-functioning on-call and alert systems.
In order to maintain a satisfactory

service and response capability, the MFA’s
consular rapid deployment teams are kept
in operational readiness. Furthermore, the
functioning of the on-call and alert system,
as well as corresponding IT systems in the
Diplomatic Service is guaranteed. Missions
are to maintain up-to-date contingency and
evacuation plans, proper contacts with the
authorities of the host state, possibilities to
co-operate with the missions of the Nordic
countries and other EU Member States as


-----

well as good working relations with the local
Finnish community and travel organisations.
Capital-to-capital contacts particularly focus
on an appropriate exchange of information
between the Nordic countries, EU Member
States and EU institutions.

In accordance with the Lisbon treaty,

the EU citizens are entitled, when in third
countries, to receive assistance from any
Member State’s diplomatic or consular
service if their own country does not have
a competent mission in the area. This also
applies to Finland’s missions; assistance
will be provided on the same grounds both
to Finnish and other EU citizens. When
necessary, Finnish citizens can turn to an
EU or Nordic mission. The EU’s consular
service applies only to EU citizens, not
third country citizens residing in Finland
on a permanent basis. As agreed among the
Nordic countries, receiving and providing
assistance is similarly available to all those
residing in a Nordic country on a permanent
basis at a local Nordic mission. The Nordic
mission providing such assistance is agreed
on locally.
In addition to the authorities, contacts

are maintained to the extent required by the
situation with actors and organisations from
the business sector, such as travel organisers,
transport companies, the health care sector
and the Finnish Red Cross. Moreover,
by tapping into IT solutions utilising the
internet and mobile devices, the MFA
guarantees a sufficient capability to receive
information from the general public and to
provide information to it. This involves, for
example, issuing travel advice based on an
up-to-date situation picture.

**Securing Finland’s foreign trade (MFA).**
By applying trade policies which comply
with the trade legislation of the European
Community, the preconditions are


guaranteed for the import and export that are
vital to secure appropriate living conditions
for the people and the functioning of the
business community.
Regulating foreign trade is a part of

the European Community’s common

trade policy, in which the Member States
exercise joint jurisdiction. Unless specifically
permitted in Community legislation, a single
Member State’s individual trade policy
measures are prohibited. Nevertheless, in
order to maintain public order and security,
the Treaty on the European Union allows
import and export restrictions for the
purpose of protecting human, animal and
plant health. On corresponding grounds,
the free movement of labour and capital can
be restricted. Should the security situation
compel Finland to implement national
measures affecting the Single Market,
consultations with the other Member States
and the European Commission would be
required.
Finland actively contributes to an

undisturbed functioning of the Single
Market and thus guarantees the availability
of strategic products. A Member State can
take action which it deems necessary for its
key security interests and which relates to
the production and of and trade in weapons,
ordnance and military supplies. The World
Trade Organisation (WTO) rules include
exemptions on national security interests.
It must be possible to control and, if

necessary, regulate the export of strategic
products in domestic undersupply situations.
It must also be possible to link domestic
trade regulations to the export and import
regulations of comparable products.

Finland’s membership in the European

Monetary Union (EMU) entails that

problems relating to monetary and foreign
exchange policies must be primarily solved
through the EMU’s common procedures.


-----

In addition to the Ministry for Foreign

Affairs, the Finnish authorities participate in
the regulation of foreign trade, pursuant to
their mandates.

In exceptional situations, which include

possible disturbances in the EU’s trade policy,
the responsible authorities (MFA, MoEE,
MoAF, MoTC and the Finnish Customs)
co-operate to safeguard the co-ordination
of the decisions relating to the trade policy,
foreign trade and the Single Market from the
perspective of the objectives set for Finland’s
foreign trade.

**Comprehensive** **crisis** **management**
**(MFA). Finland participates in international**
military crisis management operations. The
objective is, in the spirit of solidarity, to
prevent and limit crises as well as to prevent
their effects from reaching Finland.
Finland’s participation in international

crisis management is based on the guidelines
established in the Government Report
on Finnish Security and Defence Policy,
Finland’s comprehensive crisis management
strategy and the decisions taken by the
state leadership. Evaluations and decisions
regarding Finland’s participation in

international crisis management are made
under the leadership of the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs in co-operation with other
relevant ministries. The final decision on
participating in military crisis management
and ending participation is made for each
case separately by the President of the
Republic on the basis of a proposal by the
Government.
Finland supports the development

of the EU’s crisis management capability
to strengthen the European Security and
Defence Policy (ESDP). Capabilities to
participate in NATO-led crisis management
operations in the future will be improved.
Finland’s commitments to the EU and other


international organisations are implemented
by supporting the development of their
civilian crisis management capabilities

and by deploying experts to international
crisis management operations. Domestic
capabilities facilitating civilian crisis

management are also seen to.
Finland strengthens a comprehensive

approach in crisis management and postconflict reconstruction in the strategic-level
co-ordination group which is led by the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs. Co-operation
between different administrative sectors
will be further developed. Military and
civilian crisis management, development
co-operation and humanitarian aid are coordinated so as to achieve optimal synergies
and lasting effects.

**International military crisis management**
**(MoD). Finland participates in international**
military crisis management operations
in accordance with the principles of
comprehensive crisis management and
supports the development of the military
element in the EU’s crisis management
capability. Finland improves its capabilities
of participating in Nato-led crisismanagement operations in the future. To
this end, co-operation to develop military
interoperability, force planning and the
necessary capabilities as a Partnership for
Peace country are sought. Finland will
participate as extensively as possible in
exercises.
The Defence Forces’ international

interoperability is developed on national
grounds and in line with the capability
requirements of the UN, EU, Nato and
Nordic co-operation standards, focus areas
and possibilities to co-operate. Special
attention is paid to developing networkcentric warfare capabilities as well as rapid
deployment and niche capabilities. Troops


-----

earmarked for crisis management are
trained and evaluated in a manner enabling
international certification.
The development of the Defence Forces’

international co-operation aims to create the
capability to operate in all command echelons
as well as with various modes of operation
and technical systems. Another aim is that
all services and niche capabilities are able to
participate in international co-operation and
operations, in line with our international
obligations. Furthermore, capabilities

required for receiving military assistance and
providing host nation support are created.

**International civilian crisis management**
**(MoI). Finland participates in international**
civilian crisis-management operations

in accordance with the principles of
comprehensive crisis management and
supports the civilian crisis management
elements of the EU’s crisis management
capabilities. Domestic capabilities Domestic
civilian crisis management capabilities are
strengthened to correspond to Finland’s level
of participation by intensifying co-operation
in the use of military and civilian resources,
improving the comprehensive approach in
civilian crisis management activities and
co-ordinating the national capabilities of
civilian crisis management at Government
level.
The Crisis Management Centre, colocated with the Emergency Services College,
is responsible for operational tasks related
to civilian crisis management: training,
recruitment, research and development,
materiel and logistic preparedness and the
required situation picture. The training and
research organised at the Centre of Expertise
in Comprehensive Crisis Management which
was jointly set up by the Crisis Management
Centre and the Finnish Defence Forces’
International Centre (FINCENT), intensifies


and improves co-operation with military
crisis management.

The training of police and border

management experts in civilian crisis
management is conducted in co-operation
with the Police College and the Border
Guard Academy.
The civilian crisis management

recruitment system and training of experts
ensures that experts can efficiently and
promptly be dispatched, observing the
values and principles of the national strategy.
The terms and conditions of employment for
experts are maintained at a sufficiently high
level so that the recruitment of top experts is
ensured. The solution for the rapid readiness
requirement in civilian crisis management
lies in establishing and training civilian
expert rapid deployment teams. The number
of women assigned to crisis management
tasks will be increased in line with the
Government decisions.

**International disaster response (MoI).**
The preparedness for international disaster
response is maintained. This involves the
capability to provide and receive rescue
personnel and relief supplies.
International disaster activities are

developed in such a manner that Finland
is able to provide and receive assistance
during major accidents and that Finland
can participate in the EU’s Civil Protection
Mechanism and in other international
rescue co-operation. The procedures and
obligations agreed at the international level
will be observed. In addition, the training
of personnel is developed and required
supplementary equipment as well as other
necessary gear is procured, and a stockpiling
plan that meets the requirements of rapid
response is drawn up. The availability and
transport options of the existing resources
are studied at the planning phase.


-----

Readiness to provide assistance builds

on securing the readiness of national rescue
services in major accidents. The experience
gained in operations raises also the level of
domestic readiness.

###### 2.4 Finland’s defence capability

**2.4.1 Desired end state**

**efence capability refers to**
**readiness which is developed**
# D

**and maintained through defence**
**policy,** **co-ordination** **of** **the**

**comprehensive defence approach**
**and military defence, and the ability**
**to carry out defence tasks in all**
**situations.**


Defence capability creates a credible

deterrence in our security environment
against the use of or the threat of using
military force. The deterrence necessitates
a demonstrable capability, appropriate to
the military capacities within the security
environment. The defence capability is scaled
to safeguard Finland’s territorial integrity
and preparations are made to defend the
entire area of the nation. Based on the
comprehensive defence approach, defence
is implemented in a comprehensive manner
including the capabilities of the Defence
Forces, other authorities and society.

By the development, maintenance and

flexible employment of defence capabilities
preparations are made to prevent and, if
necessary, repel political, economic or
military pressure or the use of military force


against Finland. Through co-operation
among authorities society prepares against
wide-ranging security threats. The defence
capability is maintained through networking
on the national and international levels.
The defence administration supports

other areas of society and authorities who
in turn provide support to the defence
administration. The development of Finland’s
security environment is monitored and by
generating information about the current
situation other authorities are supported
in protecting society’s vital functions and
targets. The authorities and communities
who take part in voluntary defence cooperate with the defence administration.

**2.4.2 Strategic tasks**

**Finland’s military defence (MoD).** The
nation’s military defence comprises the
following tasks: monitoring and safeguarding
territorial integrity, protecting society and
its functions, preventing and repelling a
military attack and preparing to receive and
use military assistance.
The principles of nation-wide territorial

defence are followed to conduct Finland’s
military defence. It is based on general
conscription, a strong will to defend the
country and international military cooperation.
Conflicts that erupt in the operating

environment may in extreme cases cause
intimidation by threatening to use military
force or to apply it also against Finland. The
use and threat of military force are prevented
and military aggression is repelled in the
entire area of the nation.
It must be possible to detect early enough

the emergence of threats. This requires the
compilation of a military situation picture
to provide early warning and enough
preparation time.


-----

A sufficient prevention capability

requires that the key troops and systems of
the defence system are capable of repelling
an attack. This requires that military force
can be rapidly moved in the entire area of the
nation and that focal points change to meet
the requirements of the evolving situation.

At decisive points the aggressor is

repelled and defeated in a joint operation
of all services. The services are supported
by joint intelligence, surveillance, logistics
and increasing the effect of engagement.
Crisis resilience and the security of supply
in society are promoted by networking.
International networking enables Finland to
receive assistance, acquire materiel in a costeffective manner and improve the security of
supply. The defence capability is improved
against cyber attacks.

Society’s vital targets are protected in

co-operation with other authorities. Cooperation among authorities and society’s
support to military defence is organised on a
contractual basis and through co-operation
arrangements and exercises.
Subordinate to the Ministry of the

Interior, the Border Guard which is an
integral element of the defence system and
participates in national defence. It executes
its national defence tasks by participating
in defence preparations and taking into
consideration the overall reorganisation
of the defence system and the structural
reorganisation of the Defence Forces and by
providing military and border surveillance


training to conscripts, reservists and staff.
The internal military organisation and the
independent status, capable of action, of the
Border Guard will be preserved.

**Supporting the other authorities (MoD).**
These functions comprise executive

assistance, participation in disaster response
and support to an authority in providing
assistance to another state.
The arrangements of support given to

other authorities will be developed, the
exchange of information between authorities
will be improved and the capabilities
applicable and available to executive

assistance maintained. The key capabilities
available to executive assistance are the
following: area surveillance capability; field
communication systems; search and oil
spill recovery readiness on land and at sea;
intelligence, analysis and decontamination
of CBRNE; fire fighting; rescue and
clearing; clearing of explosives; building of
temporary bridges and roads; first aid and
evacuation; land, sea and air transports;
SAR by helicopters; guarding duties;

accommodation and maintenance services;
and expert assistance.

Readiness to support other authorities

when they assist other EU Member States will
be developed by taking into consideration
the obligations coming with the Treaty of
Lisbon


-----

###### 2.5 Internal security

**2.5.1 Desired end state**


role in preventing accidents, carrying
out independent civil defence tasks and
mitigating the repercussions of accidents.
The activities of organisations also include
tasks for the development of and training and
education in internal security. The activities
of the organisations and their co-operation
with authorities are actively developed and
promoted.
Emergency and maritime search and

rescue services prevent and detect major
accidents and issue relevant warnings. The
goal is to prevent accidents altogether,
provide aid and assistance to those in
immediate danger, rescue the victims and
reduce the escalation of such accidents by
minimising their damages.
As to civil defence, the tasks referred to

in the protocols to the Geneva Conventions
are guaranteed. Different authorities and
entities are responsible, for their part, for
taking into consideration the civil defence
obligations in their preparedness planning.
Civil defence arrangements are dimensioned
to respond to the threat scenarios and
military defence capabilities. Independent
preparedness is maintained and developed
so that communities and businesses are
involved to be a part of the system and the
population has sufficient preparedness

to act correctly during disturbances and
emergency conditions. The building of civil
defence shelters will be continued primarily
to prepare for military threats.
Flood control and dam safety measures

are used to prepare for sudden events and
accidents as well as for gradual processes
such as climate change.

Oil and chemical spills in soil and

waters are rapidly detected and controlled.
Prevention is well-timed and effective.
State border management guarantees

tranquil conditions at our borders and
expeditious and safe conduct of border


**nternal** **security** **encompasses**

**the measures which prevent and**

# I

**combat crime against Finland and**
**its population, prevent accidents**
**and environmental damage or other**
**such disturbances and threats and**
**which are used to manage their**
**consequences.** **The** **operational**

**measures** **of** **competent**

**authorities are highlighted in**
**the** **maintenance** **of** **internal**

**security for which preconditions**
**are guaranteed by legislation.**
**Close** **co-operation** **between**

**other authorities and actors on**
**all administrative levels supports**
**this work.**


The law enforcement system guarantees
the preconditions for the police as well as
other law enforcement and investigative
authorities. It also upholds the

constitutional rule of law. Public order and
security protect the basic infrastructure
of society, prevent and combat terrorism,
organised and other serious crime as well
as serious disorderly conduct.

Through an independent and non-biased

security analysis of serious accidents and
other irregular events that have taken place it
is sought to prevent, as effectively as possible,
such incidents from reoccurring.
In maintaining internal security, the

measures taken by authorities are supported
and complemented by organisations

and businesses which play an important


-----

**2.5.2 Strategic tasks**

**Guaranteeing protection under the law**
**(MoJ).** The functioning of the courts of
law and penalty enforcement authorities
as well as co-operation between them are
safeguarded. Equal protection under the law
for the population is guaranteed by, among
other things, up-to-date statutes and efficient
enforcement of criminal liability.
The powers and number of personnel of

the law enforcement and judicial authorities
are maintained at the level required by the
operating environment and their tasks.
Preconditions and operational models for
prompt handling of matters are established.
The technical standards of court buildings
will be improved so that even the most
serious forms of crime can safely be tried in
courts of law. As stated in the Government
Resolution on the Internal Security

Programme, the measures aiming at the
protection of witnesses, which includes
the creation of relevant statutes, will be
implemented. The prison administration
is preparing for increasing and new forms
of criminality. In order to improve the
operating conditions of prisons, their
internal risks are taken into account
when security systems are developed. The
security of prisoner transport is improved.
As to the legislation and methods

regarding the conditions and treatment
of prisoners, the obligations based on the
international conventions on human rights
and the relating tasks of the International
Committee of the Red Cross will be taken
into consideration as appropriate.


traffic. Furthermore, it prevents and combats
illegal immigration as well as trafficking in
and smuggling of human beings.
Managed immigration guarantees

regulated migration and control for the
relating decision-making. It prevents

and combats illegal immigration. The
management of a major influx of asylum
seekers also includes the capability of
receiving the migrants and providing
them with basic services appropriate to the
situation.
Taking into consideration local

circumstances, the availability of emergency
response functions is guaranteed and their
quality is safeguarded in the entire country.
Services are to be provided both in Finnish
and Swedish. To the extent required, the
Saami language and other languages are also
taken into account. The operational model
is to be changed so that emergency response
functions will be harmonised in the entire
country by the year 2015 and that the staff
possesses sufficient competences.


-----

**Public order and security (MoI).** Serious
disturbances in society are prevented.
Crimes endangering peoples’ basic rights
and targeted against the foundations of
society and the economy are combated. This
involves a police capability to immediately
intervene in threats or crimes.
Intelligence, analysis and intersectoral

co-operation, in particular in the EU and
at the international level, are developed.
The exchange of information is increased
on combating, exposing and solving crossborder crime as well as on operations within
the EU and with countries highly significant
for Finland. This makes it easier to combat
various threats through intelligence-based
law enforcement.
By engaging in nation-wide security

planning, it is possible to have the various
actors in society committed as partners in
the fight against crime. Measures related to
the surveillance of organised crime, financial
crime and foreign workers are developed.
Expansion of the area in the EU where
persons have the right to move freely is taken
into account in the maintenance of public
order and security. The powers, numbers of
personnel, training and equipment of the
law enforcement authorities are maintained
at the level required by the operating
environment and their tasks.
Co-operation between the law

enforcement authorities, i.e. the Police,
Finnish Customs and the Border Guard
(PCB authorities) is intensified and focuses
on crime-fighting. The expansion of the
Schengen area presupposes even more
effective and comprehensive crime-fighting
on the national level, between old Member
States and also among the law enforcement
authorities of the new Member States.
Operational inter-authority co-operation
is developed in line with the principles of
Finnish PCB co-operation.


Preparations will be started to develop

the statutory basis and structures of the
reserve police system so that the reserve
police could better support the measures of
security authorities also during disturbances
in normal conditions.
Adopted in the Government

Resolution in 2010, the recommended
measures presented in the national
counter-terrorism strategy will be

implemented. To combat terrorism, a
terrorism situation picture is created.
This includes data on terrorist activities
threatening Finland, possible targets
of terrorism as well as persons deemed
to be a threat and who either reside
in Finland or threaten Finland. As the
situation picture is compiled, reports
from institutions participating in the
EU’s police and judicial authorities’ cooperation as well as other international
contacts are utilised.
Appropriate measures are launched to

prevent radicalisation in Finland.
Police counter-terrorism units,

technical capabilities and the legislative
basis are maintained at the level required by
the situation picture. The implementation
and development of the EU’s counterterrorism strategy and plan of action are
continued. The common use of the EU’s
pre-existing and planned information
systems in the fight against terrorism in
law enforcement is developed. The use of
the Border Guard’s special capabilities and
equipment in counter-terrorism activities
is developed together with the police. The
performance and interoperability of the
Defence Forces and the special response
units of other authorities are developed
under the leadership of the police and in
co-operation with other authorities.


-----

**Emergency services and maritime search**
**and rescue (MoI).** Serious accidents
are prevented, detected and warned of.
In addition, accidents are restricted by
attempting to limit their consequences.
Rescue activities concerning accidents

and disasters are developed. When developing
the system, the focus is on the capability to
launch swift and efficient rescue operations
during major accidents. This involves
contingency planning, the maintenance and
development of sufficient personnel and
materiel capabilities as well as developing the
detection, analysis and operating capabilities
in situations involving CBRNE threats.
Emergency services, for their part, contribute
to the planning of this area.
Maritime search and rescue (SAR) is

organised in such a way that assistance can
be provided without delay, scaled as required
by the situation. SAR falls within the purview
of the Border Guard. For this purpose,
constant command and communications
readiness is maintained, appropriate radio
communications in emergencies is ensured
and SAR tasks are carried out with the
support of other maritime authorities.
According to the division of tasks of
responsible authorities, the SAR command
and control system of the Border Guard can
also be used to lead other security situations
and tasks at sea.

Modern and appropriately secure

surveillance, warning and command systems
are developed for emergency and maritime
SAR services. The use of electronic media
in issuing warnings to the general public is
developed with the objective of enabling the
authorities to alert the entire population by
using some electronic medium. Particularly
in areas where there is a risk of a major


accident endangering the safety of the
population it must be possible to alert people
outdoors using general alarm signals around
protected targets.
In emergency conditions search and

rescue arrangements including materiel
readiness are build on threat scenarios which
provide the basis for defence planning.
The population can be warned and

alerted to emergencies as well as disturbances
in normal conditions. According to risk
assessments and the given threat situation
the population is prepared to be protected
in civil defence shelters, by evacuations or
by placing them in premises that yield the
maximum protection or temporary shelters.
By developing independent preparedness
and civil defence measures sheltering in
residential or other premises is supported.
The building of civil defence shelters will be
continued primarily to prepare for military
threats.

**Flood risk management and dam safety**
**(MoAF).** Floods, flood damages and dam
failures are prevented and averted and
preparedness to mitigate their consequences
is maintained.
Flood risk management is improved by

assessing the flood risks of waterways and
coasts and the risk posed by heavy rains,
charting significant flood risk areas and
drawing up management plans to contain
them, taking the risks into account in land
use planning and implementing necessary
flood protection measures at critical

locations. In order to improve operational
flood prevention, water level monitoring
and forecasting of water situations, warning
systems and co-operation procedures are
maintained.


-----

**Emergency response functions (MoI).**
The emergency response functions are
improved and their productivity is increased
by developing the structures and staff
competences in the Emergency Response
Centre (ERC) Administration. A nationwide information system and a common
database will be developed and introduced.

Emergency response functions will be

harmonised and the information systems
integrated into the operational command
systems of security authorities. For its part,
this will create capabilities to use emergency
response functions for alerts in emergency
conditions.

The operational readiness of the ERCs

will be developed so that the standby strength
enables the implementation of harmonised
processes. In addition, the adaptation to
and reliability in different conditions and
emergency conditions will improve when,
for example, ERCs effectively support each
other.

**Oil and chemical spill response on land**
**and water (MoE).** Oil and chemical spills
on land and water are prevented, recovered
and limited. This involves vessel safety
requirements, vessel traffic service (VTS)
systems and oil spill recovery.
It is possible to reduce oil and chemical

spills at sea with an efficient VTS system.
In addition, capabilities to detect accidents
and to rapidly limit and manage their
consequences are developed. The Finnish
Environment Centre SYKE maintains

24/7 duty readiness in view of various
environmental accidents. Oil spill response
readiness is improved by procuring a multipurpose vessel capable of recovering oil even
under winter conditions. The Border Guard’s
capacity for monitoring and combating oil
spills on the open sea and coastal areas is
enhanced. Collaboration with other Baltic


Sea States is developed in view of accidents
and the capacity of recovery equipment is
assessed. In co-operation with the European
Maritime Safety Agency (EMSA) a network
of chemical expert services and a satellite
image service are maintained to detect oil
spills.

Oil and chemical spills in land areas are

prevented with effective risk management
both in the logistic chain and in plants and
facilities. The actors are to meet permit
requirements, the following of which is
supervised at set intervals. They draw up
a rescue plan where the prevention and
planned recovery measures are entered.
The functioning of the rescue plan is tested
in the company, both independently and
with rescue authorities. Co-operation

between authorities and companies is
increased and further developed to ensure
better management of accidents involving
hazardous substances in land areas.

**Border management (MoI).** Violations of
provisions concerning the crossing of the
national border and the seaward limit of
territorial sea as well as threats against public
order and security caused by cross-border
passenger traffic are prevented. Furthermore,
a safe and smooth flow of border traffic is
guaranteed. This involves combating and
exposing human trafficking and smuggling,
the smuggling of nuclear agents and other
radioactive substances, inspecting border
traffic, surveillance of the Finnish-Russian
border as well as the capability to reinstate
border checks on a temporary basis on the
internal borders of the Schengen area.
In order to sustain and develop the entirety

of border management, different actors and
equipment are co-ordinated both nationally
and at the EU level. The free movement of
people and the expansion of the Schengen
area necessitate further development of the


-----

**Immigration** **control** **(MoI).** Legal

immigration is consistently developed and,
at the same time, the means to prevent
illegal entry are maintained. This involves
the regulation of legal immigration and
decision-making based on law, a situation
picture on the development of legal and
illegal immigration and the exchange of
information between authorities. The EUrelated obligations are also taken into
account including operational co-operation
between the EU and the Member States.

The Finnish Immigration Service

handles and makes decisions on matters
relating to entry, stay in the country,
displacement and Finnish citizenship.
A number of ministries are responsible
for promoting integration: the Ministry
of the Interior is responsible for

preparing the integration policy and
co-ordinating measures with other

administrative sectors; the Ministry

of Employment and the Economy is
responsible for the employment services
incorporated into the integration process
of immigrants. The regional Centres
for Economic Development, Transport
and the Environment (ELY Centres)
are responsible for co-ordinating

immigration and integration matters in
their regions. In addition, they ensure
that integration training, which is a part
of labour market training, is provided
for immigrants while the Employment
and Economic Development Offices are
responsible for the services supporting
the integration and employment of
immigrants. Municipalities bear the

overall responsibility to co-ordinate the
development, planning and monitoring
of the immigrants’ integration. Measures
and services that promote and support
the integration process are organised by
municipalities.


EU’s integrated border management system
as well as bolstering checks and surveillance
on the external borders of the Union. Finland
actively promotes the EU’s border policies,
integrated border management and the
development of the common environment
for exchanging information on the EU’s
integrated maritime policy and the EU’s
waters. Finland plays an active role in the
border security co-operation co-ordinated
by Frontex and in the key projects to develop
the maritime policy. Finland will make use of
the opportunities provided by the European
External Borders Fund for the development of
its own border management system.
A border situation picture is maintained

to guarantee the functioning of the national
border management system and a model
and system capable of producing risk
analysis is developed. As to the eastern
border, border controls correspond to the
risk analysis made; the focus is on the southeast border. Elsewhere on the eastern border
the border surveillance model is developed
to correspond to the conditions of a peaceful
and sparsely populated border area. Criminal
intelligence and investigation are developed
in the core task areas of the Border Guard.
Co-operation between authorities on the
national and international level is continued
to combat human trafficking and smuggling.
To guarantee a safe and smooth flow of

border traffic, infrastructure at international
border crossing points, human resources and
technical equipment are developed to meet the
requirements of increasing traffic and security
risks. This project is a joint operation, involving
the Finnish Border Guard, Customs and the
Road Enterprise. Russian authorities will also
be included in the development project with
the aim of establishing smooth and safe border
crossing practices. The automation of the
basic tasks in border surveillance and border
controls are continued.


-----

By vigourously combating illegal

immigration, the overall fight against crime
is supported and the means for responding
to extensive unwanted immigration flows
are created. Exchange of information
necessary for taking practical measures and
co-ordination of matters among competent
authorities are further developed and made
use of when necessary. Co-operation in
the EU context and other international cooperation, including regional transboundary
co-operation, are utilised and increased
when necessary. The development of the
EU’s common asylum and migration
policies contributes to the management of
legal and illegal immigration. Furthermore,
the development of common and effective
return and deportation policies contributes
to managing disturbances.

In combating illegal immigration special

attention must be paid to guaranteeing
international protection as provided in the
Geneva Convention. It must be possible
to identify those in need of protection,
and their protection must be guaranteed.
Similarly, those attempting to abuse asylum
procedures are to be quickly identified from
among justified applications.
Visa requirements are an effective way

to combat illegal immigration already in
the country of departure. The knowledge
of local conditions that Finnish missions
have acquired and co-operation with the
embassies of other Schengen countries in
visa matters increases both national security
and that of the Schengen area.

**The management of a major influx of**
**asylum seekers (MoI).** Preparedness to
control a major influx of asylum seekers
is maintained. This involves establishing
reception centres, other reception

arrangements as well as comprehensive cooperation among authorities. Decisions on


temporary protection are made nationally,
when necessary, or on the basis of the EU
Council decision.
In these kinds of situations, the border

security system is tasked to see to it that
the authorities are able to properly monitor
those wishing to enter the country. Permit
application and deportation systems are
developed so that the identities of all
applicants can be established and their
biometric data be promptly and efficiently
processed.
ELY Centres continue to maintain

preparedness plans with municipalities to
set up reception centres and other reception
arrangements in case of a major influx
of asylum seekers. Suitable premises are
identified together with municipalities, and
possibly with other entities. Preliminary
contracts are signed to facilitate the
reception of up to 100 000 asylum seekers.
As additional personnel are recruited, the
role of trained volunteers and organisations
must also be taken into account.

Participation in setting up reception
centres by bodies governed by public law,
private associations and foundations will
be decided both on the national level and
locally in case of a major influx of asylum
seekers.

A national reception centre register is

developed for the purpose of serving the
national situation picture as well as for
managing a large-scale influx of asylum
seekers. The Ministry of the Interior, jointly
with the ELY Centres and Regional State
Administrative Agencies (AVI), makes
an assessment of the required transport
equipment for different threat situations,
makes the necessary provisions and draws
up plans for establishing regional cooperation teams tasked to co-ordinate the
immigration.


-----

###### 2.6 Functioning of the economy and infrastructure

**2.6.1 Desired end state**


The required standards and setting up

arrangements for the planned reception
centres are detailed in the reception centres’
contingency plans. The task of the Finnish
Immigration Service is to make the setting up
agreements with municipalities and private
actors. The services for the asylum seekers,
including food services, accommodation,
clothing and necessary health services are
to be provided without delay after their
arrival at the reception centre. This requires
that food services are established and health
services are agreed upon in advance with the
municipalities and the AVIs.


**he functioning of the economy**
**refers to the economic exchange**
# T

**which meets the population and the**
**business community’s basic needs**
**and supports a sufficiently healthy**
**state economy. The maintenance of**
**infrastructure means the technical**
**structures and organisations which**
**are necessary for the population’s**
**livelihood and for the functioning**
**of society. This entirety includes**
**the** **safeguarding** **of** **the** **state**

**economy, the financial market and**
**the insurance business, securing**
**the functioning of food supply as**
**well as the electronic ICT systems**
**and** **transports.** **Furthermore,**

**sustaining society’s basic economic**
**functions, a competent labour force,**
**preserving a first-rate education**
**system and research structure as**
**well as detecting, controlling and**
**adapting to significant changes in**
**the environment are also included.**


**The significance of robust public finances**
**increases in emergency conditions. The role**
of public authorities in securing the welfare
of citizens inevitably increases when normal
economic activities are disturbed. Decisions
regarding state revenue and expenditure
guarantee the resources required by the
public authorities’ functions.


-----

**The functioning of infrastructure is a**
**multidimensional entity. The general goals**
of security of supply are scaled to safeguard
the population’s livelihood and to uphold
society’s vital functions as well as the material
preconditions for national defence. These
arrangements are in place to safeguard the
population, should the normal functioning
of the market not generate sufficient security
of supply. The premise of Finland’s security
of supply is the proper functioning of the
single European market.
Securing a sufficient labour workforce

supports the security of supply. When
the population’s basic services or accident
consequence management so require, the
labour force can temporarily be reassigned
to needed areas. The general work obligation
principle guarantees a sufficient number of
workers for companies that are important
to the securing of society’s vital functions,
national defence and society’s basic services.

To uphold the education and research

system, key education services, the training
of professionals and research facilities are
safeguarded.
Sufficient housing is guaranteed by

increasing supply or, if necessary, by imposing
regulatory and other measures on housing.
Sufficient construction capacity and availability
is earmarked for sites of primary importance as
regards military defence, civil defence, energy
supply, transport routes as well as society’s
other technical systems and health care.
The state of the environment is monitored
so that harmful long-term changes in the
environment can be detected in time to
allow for corrective and restrictive measures.

Waste transports are secured, if necessary,

with alternative collection and transport
equipment. Non-hazardous and hazardous
waste is taken to existing landfill areas or
temporary areas where environmental and
health impacts are low.


The functioning of the public economy

is assessed as an entity. For example, in
emergency conditions, municipalities’

responsibilities have to be re-evaluated in
order to secure adequate funding for key
functions. In the desired end state, economic
stability, an effective taxation policy and
collection of taxes, controlled central
government borrowing and the efficiency
of the budgeting system are safeguarded.
An efficient budgeting system guarantees
that appropriations can be allocated to their
appropriate purposes in the given situation.
This requires good co-operation between
ministries as well as readiness to make
proposals and decisions on savings and
reallocation of appropriations.

**The solid functioning of the financial**
**markets is based on the structures of**
**financial institutions and the European**
**central Bank.** The primary objective
of monetary policy is to maintain price
stability. The Bank of Finland is a member
of the European System of Central Banks
(ESCB) and, for its part, implements
the Euro zone’s single monetary policy
as defined by the Governing Council
of the European Central Bank. The
stable functioning of the financial and
insurance markets as well as key services
is secured through co-operation among
the proper authorities and companies. The
functioning of the money supply, payment
systems and financial services are secured
by appropriate arrangements. Serious
financial crises and emergency conditions
require measures which are jointly

implemented within the Eurosystem but
national arrangements have significance,
too.


-----

**Energy availability is safeguarded with**
**domestic solutions and international**
**co-operation.** The availability of energy
is secured in the first place by domestic
measures. The International Energy Agency
(IEA) and the EU also take measures to
secure the availability of oil products. Natural
gas is only imported from Russia and the lack
of stockpiling capacity affects the security of
supply. Energy supply, comprising fuel and
power supply, is safeguarded at the level
provided in the Government decision on
the objectives of the security of supply. Due
to Finland’s special conditions, security
stockpiles of imported fuels have not been
allowed to fall below the minimum levels
of EU obligations and IEA agreements
regarding the stockpiling of petroleumbased products. A versatile, economic
and sufficient power generating capacity,
forming the basis for the supply of electricity,
is secured.

**The critical functions depending on**
**information** **and** **communications**
**technology (ICT) systems are safeguarded.**
The ICT systems used by organisations
and the population are reliable and

secure. The functioning of these systems
is appropriately safeguarded through

preparedness of companies and on the
basis of agreements between authorities
and companies. Information security in
communication networks is safeguarded.
Statutory basic security requirements are
assigned to communication services and
service infrastructure. Compliance with
regulations concerning system construction,
maintenance and functioning is monitored.
The ICT systems of the state leadership and
security authorities secure, for their part, the
timeliness and decision-making capability
for the use of information and situation
picture. Electronic public services, the state


information management and information
security are guided. Operating 24/7, the
control rooms of society’s critical functions
use common operating models and joint
technical solutions.
The management to develop and

maintain public administration’s common
systems is centralised. The information
security arrangements are included in system
architecture and all government information
systems conform to information security
requirements.
The uninterrupted functioning of

key information systems is guaranteed as
required and a function is established to
secure real-time situation awareness and 24/7
response capability for the key information
systems in public administration. The
public administration has access to a secure
telecommunications network.
Technical warning systems are available

with which official warnings and advice via
electronic media can rapidly be issued to
Finnish citizens, both home and abroad in
large and sudden catastrophes.

**The continuation of transports is secured**
**also during disturbances and emergency**
**conditions.** The preconditions for society’s
necessary transports are safeguarded in all
situations. In order to guarantee domestic
transports, the public authorities regulate
the preparedness and security measures of
organisations responsible for constructing
and managing transport routes, ports and
harbours, airports and other transport hubs.
In order to maintain foreign trade, availability
of the required vessels is safeguarded. Finland
will retain the independent decision-making
capability to carry out air transports required
for the functioning of society and the
security of supply in all situations. Transport
infrastructure and the key logistic chains are
secured. Contingency plans include the use


-----

**2.6.2 Strategic tasks**

**Acquiring** **and** **allocating** **financial**
**resources (MoF). The resources required to**
ensure the functioning of the public sector are
secured. This involves taxation, the Customs,
the reallocation of financial resources as well
as processes linked to operating and financial
plans and budget proposals.
The information security and usability

of the government cash management system
will be improved, especially to counter
the threats posed by electronic media and
information risks. Furthermore, procedures
for guaranteeing tax payments and collection
will be developed. Radically simplified tax
collection methods for use in emergency
conditions might also become necessary.

**The** **financial** **system** **and** **money**
**management (MoF).** The finances of
households, companies and the public sector
as well as the stock exchange and financial
transactions will be efficiently organised.
This involves collaboration between the
authorities and businesses in the financial
sector and the need to secure activities with
technical backup systems. Control measures
will be established for banks, insurance
companies and the securities market to
better meet the requirements of international
activities.
Co-operation and situation monitoring

among banks, the authorities and other
key actors in the financial market will be
developed and maintained in the financial
sector of the security of supply organisation.
Developments in the financial markets will be
taken into account when drawing up an overall
picture of the national situation. A report of
the international technical infrastructure of
the financial sector will be drawn up to provide
the basis for preparedness arrangements.


of transport equipment and the sufficiency
of fuels for the most important tasks with
regard to securing society’s vital functions
in emergency conditions. When it comes
to securing Finland’s vital transports, state
guarantees can be issued in situations where
commercial insurance is unobtainable.

**Food and water supply as well as securing**
**the quality of drinking water are of**
**significance in meeting the basic needs.**
Food supply guarantees sufficient, healthy
and safe nourishment to the population as
regards the energy and nutrient content.
The supply of production inputs (including
labour force) needed in the primary
production and processing of foodstuffs,
logistics, household and mass caterers, and
water services is secured. Basic agricultural
production ensures the raw material supply
for the food and feed industry. Food industry
that is founded on self-sufficient production
of the most important agricultural products
and emergency stockpiles of cereals and
certain production inputs is capable of
processing the amount of food that meets
the regular consumption and to deliver these
to the consumers via the trade sector in all
security situations. State water supply and
controlling the quality of water guarantee
access to clean drinking water as well as
appropriate sewerage and wastewater

management, as required for health and
environmental protection. Access to water
sources required by large population centres,
society’s vital functions and food production
is guaranteed.


-----

**Securing the fuel supply (MoEE).** Fuel
availability is maintained by using different
types of fuel, tapping into several sources,
promoting the use of domestic fuels and by
maintaining emergency stocks.
This involves the development of renewable

energy sources and, in particular, of bio fuels.
Stockpiles of imported fuels and those

earmarked for power production are kept
at levels determined by the Government.
In view of natural gas delivery stoppages,
adequate quantities of alternative fuels are
stocked. Preparedness is maintained to
allocate and control preparedness.
Stockpiles of imported fuels and those

earmarked for power production are kept
at levels determined by the Government.
In view of natural gas delivery stoppages,
adequate quantities of alternative fuels are
stocked. Preparedness to direct and regulate
energy consumption is maintained in view
of disturbances.

Development will also take into account the

use of domestic energy, i.e. renewable sources
and bio fuels, as detailed in the National Energy
and Climate Strategy. Availability and use of
domestic, renewable, agriculture-based energy
as well as bio fuels will be increased. The share
of energy from renewable sources will have
to be raised to 38 % by 2020; in practice this
means to a large extent that the use of bio fuels
will be increased.

**Safeguarding the electric power supply**
**(MoEE).** The production of electricity
and heating, the capacity of the electric
grid, resilience of functions as well as
the functioning of technical systems are
safeguarded. Electric power supply relies on
a functioning electricity market, an adequate
electric grid, dispersed production facilities
and multiple sources of energy as well as the
proper balance between peak demand and
capacity.


Significant payment transaction services

are based on the European infrastructure.
When the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA)
is established people and businesses can make
payments in Euros as rapidly, advantageously
and safely as from their own country within the
entire Euro zone. An efficient infrastructure
is needed to harmonise the handling of
payments in Euros in the entire Euro zone for
the level of service and reliability of payments
to correspond to the national level of service.

**Safeguarding** **the** **insurance** **services**
**(MoSAH).** The capability for providing
insurance services is maintained by

safeguarding liquidity, cash management, the
functioning of IT and information networks,
by maintaining an extensive service network
as well as private-public partnership cooperation arrangements. Sufficient insurance
services are guaranteed for the individual
and the business community by fostering
co-operation between insurance companies,
other actors in the insurance business as well
as the authorities. As the financing business
continues to integrate, insurance/banking
co-operation is improved to secure its
activities. IT backup systems are developed
to guarantee the functioning of payment
systems.
The processes sand documents relating to

granting insurance guarantees of emergency
conditions will be developed so that the
continuation of vital sea, air, rail and road
transports is guaranteed with as little delay as
possible during the disturbances in normal
situations and emergency conditions where
appropriate reinsurances are unobtainable in
the insurance market.


-----

Power production which is based

on several types of fuel and sources is
promoted in line with the objectives set by
the Government. In line with the National
Energy and Climate Strategy, domestic
electricity generation aims at covering
domestic consumption also when there
are disruptions to importing fuels. This
and next decade the main part of Finland’s
electricity supply network will be renewed.
The reliability and quality of the electric
grid as well as the preparedness of electricity
distributors to disruptions and recovering
from them will be developed particularly as
part of the renewal of the network.

**Safeguarding the electronic ICT systems**
**(MoTC).** It is ensured that society’s vital
functions relying on communications

networks, communications services and
other ICT systems are not paralysed because
of functional disruptions and that services
can be quickly recovered.

Legislative measures, guidance

and supervision are used to secure the
construction, development and maintenance
of appropriate ICT systems in order to
guarantee the maximum feasible information
security and usability for the electronic
media and online services in normal as well
as in emergency conditions.
If need be, the authorities prepare to

guide, regulate and categorise networks
and their services as well as user groups
according to their relative importance.
Supervision, inspections and preparedness
exercises are used to guide and test the
preparedness of teleoperators. The activities
of the Finnish Communications Regulatory
Authority, being the security authority
for issues concerning information and
communications systems, are further

developed to ensure continuity.


National preparedness measures and

international co-operation prevent, for
their part, information security breaches
to domestic ICT systems from abroad.
Through legislation and other measures it is
safeguarded that changes in the ownership of
companies do not endanger the continuity
of critical functions. The development and
use of ICT systems is monitored, lest this
development jeopardise society’s critical
functions or their management. Advances
in weapons technology and IT-based
development used for criminal purposes
are also taken into consideration when
safeguarding the functioning of the systems.

**Safeguarding the state administration’s**
**IT functions and information security**
**and the service systems common to**
**the state administration (MoF).** State
administration’s information management
functions are safeguarded. These functions
comprise the administration of information
management, information security, IT

architecture and procedures, information
systems, online services, basic IT technology,
telecommunications and IT services.

The principles of information management

are developed and promoted in such a manner
that they enable the functioning of the key
sectors of the government in all security
situations. In line with the Information Society
Policy Programme, the National IT Strategy
and the National Information Security Strategy,
in co-operation with all administrative sectors,
information management supervision in the
public sector is strengthened. Based on the pilot
survey conducted in 2008, state administration’s
project to develop ICT preparedness defines
and starts the implementation of the proposals
regarding state administration’s joint ICT
preparedness. The supporting measures and
tools for implementing core measures are
produced. The objective is to enable public


-----

administration’s consistent and co-ordinated
preparedness in a cost-effective manner and
as part of each administrative sector’s projects
and daily activities.
State administration uses more and more

services and systems that are jointly produced
to the entire administration. To ensure their
good functioning in all situations, clear
ownership, responsibilities and procedures are
defined. The State Treasury plays a central role
in state administration to maintain, develop
and bear the responsibility for decisions
relating to joint IT services in normal
conditions. Departures from procedures in
normal conditions are agreed in advance
to deal with disturbances and emergency
conditions.

Joint services are often produced by an

external service provider who produces
the same services for the private sector,
for example. The competent ministry or
government agency is given a role involving
the entire state administration and the
powers to negotiate with different service
providers as to how services are secured for
the various actors in state administration
during disturbances in normal as well as
in emergency conditions when service
providers prioritise their production of
services.

**Supporting** **the** **construction** **and**
**maintenance of warning and alert systems**
**(MoTC).** It is ensured that legislation and
other measures enable the construction and
development of technical systems needed
to alert the population and to guarantee the
necessary dissemination of information in
crises both at home and abroad.

Technical arrangements are developed

for the purpose of broadcasting the security
authorities’ and the state leadership’s

emergency announcements to the entire
population via all electronic media promptly,


reliably and without altering the content. This
is made possible through legislative measures
and active co-operation with key partners.
The main focus falls on radio and television
broadcasting. However, it must be possible
to broadcast such announcements via other
media as well. Legislation shall take into
account domestic disturbances. Yet, these
systems must also be able to reach Finnish
citizens staying abroad to warn them, when
necessary.

**Safeguarding** **the** **continuation** **of**
**transports (MoTC).** The continuation of
domestic and foreign transports is secured
through legislation and other measures to
maintain constant and flexible readiness
to respond to disturbances and to launch
alternative arrangements. This involves
directing resources in emergency

conditions, guaranteeing the availability
of necessary transport vehicles and
equipment, protecting the transports as
well as securing transport logistic chains.
The preparedness of the transport

business to sustain transports in all
conditions is maintained by means of
legislation, preparedness guidance and
effective interest group collaboration.
National preparedness measures highlight
procedures which aim to increase transport
safety. They are endorsed and mandated
by the EU and international transport
organisations. Required resource guidance
and allocation measures are prepared for
emergency conditions. The same applies
to the administrative arrangements of
crisis organisations, yet to be established.
Preparations are made in co-operation
with relevant authorities, businesses and
organisations. With regard to foreign
trade in emergency conditions, transports
have to be safeguarded and protected, if
need be, even using military resources.


-----

In order to secure transports and the
critical security of supply, it is ensured
that sufficient numbers of land, sea and
air transport equipment are available in all
security situations.
The logistic chain in transport is

secured. This does not only call for the
development of transport equipment and
methods, it also requires that ports and
harbours, airports, railway stations and
land terminals are secured. Transport
routes, too, must be appropriately

constructed and maintained. Preparedness
measures pay special attention to securing
the electronic ICT systems which are
necessary for transports.

**Safeguarding the primary production**
**of food supply (MoAF).** In line with the
objectives established by the Government,
the sufficiency, quality and safety of food is
safeguarded by means of adequate domestic
agricultural production and emergency
stockpiling as well as by guaranteeing access
to the necessary foreign production inputs.
The preconditions of fishing industry are
safeguarded by seeing to the sustainable use
and care of fish resources.
Constant efforts are made to influence

the EU so as to preserve sufficient economic
preconditions for agricultural production
in the north as well. Basic agricultural
production, such as milk, beef, pigmeat,
sheepmeat, poultrymeat and egg production
is safeguarded by improving the conditions
of profitable agricultural production.
International agreements are developed

further, together with the Nordic countries
and other EU countries, in order to
guarantee the availability of critical
production inputs.
Measures are taken to prevent the

spreading of plant and animal diseases
that threaten food production. Monitoring


and control systems that are implemented
through co-operation between authorities
and the business are central to food safety.
Maintained by the European Commission,
the warning systems covering infectious
diseases, food safety, and animal and plant
diseases enable quick response when crossborder disturbances occur.
Growing conditions in Finland are more

demanding than in most other countries.
Plant breeding that has been done elsewhere
does not produce enough varieties which
would be successful in Finnish conditions.
Therefore our own plant breeding is
safeguarded to ensure that varieties that are
suitable for the northern conditions are in
production on a permanent basis. Sufficient
seed production and plant breeding is
ensured in normal conditions as well to
maintain adequate seed grain stocks even
after crop failures. Seed production must
take into account that cereals thriving in
Finland are not sold in central or southern
Europe, while certain plant seeds are not
produced in Finland at all.
Agriculture produces the raw materials

for the food industry, which means that the
steering of the production must be based
on real-time information regarding the raw
materials available from agriculture. In cooperation with the Ministry of Employment
and the Economy and the National
Emergency Supply Agency, preparations are
made to steer and refocus production and to
regulate, for example, fuels, fertilizers and
seeds in order to guarantee safe, healthy and
sufficient nourishment, both quantitatively
and qualitatively to the entire population
in all security situations. The Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry, The Agency for
Rural Affairs, each ELY Centre as well as
municipal agricultural secretaries in the
districts of each Centre steer the production.
Once powers contained in the Emergency


-----

**Safeguarding** **food** **processing** **and**
**distribution (MoEE).** The food industry’s
processing capability as well as the

functioning of wholesale and retail stores
is secured. The entire logistic chain of food
supply is secured.
Security of the food supply is maintained

as prescribed by the Government. Special
attention is paid to managing entities and
to guaranteeing the availability of retail
products in peripheral regions. In addition,
the entire food supply chain’s logistic
processes and outsourced support functions
are secured. Preparedness to steer and ration
food supply and consumption is maintained.
Focus is increasingly on safeguarding the
retail supply chain.

**Safeguarding** **critical** **industries** **and**
**services (MoEE). The capability to produce**
basic commodities and services required
by the security of supply is maintained as
well as the technological level of industry
and the functioning of relevant logistic and
technical systems.
In development work the following are

taken into consideration: the capability to
maintain and repair defence materiel and
systems, stockpiling of the most critical raw
materials, components and other production
elements, maintaining a well-functioning
private-public sector partnership as well as
international economic co-operation.

**Guaranteeing** **housing** **(MoE).** The

preparedness to rehouse large numbers of
people is maintained. This involves measures
to improve the use of the housing market. The
legislative and administrative preparedness
for controlling the housing market and
construction field as well as the rationing
of building materials is maintained. The
preparedness planning of the construction
field is further developed.


Powers Act are invoked, for example fuels,
fertilizers and seeds are regulated so as to
provide sufficient nourishment to the entire
population.
Energy and other production inputs

for primary production are guaranteed
by preparedness measures at each farm.
Electricity supply for livestock farms
is secured by promoting purchases of
individually or collectively owned emergency
power generators. Farm animals, feed stocks
and some farm machines can be relocated,
for instance, in the case of radioactive fallout.

**Safeguarding the water supply (MoAF).**
As required for health and environmental
protection, access to clean water and
appropriate wastewater management are
secured. This involves water protection and
functioning municipal water services.
Preparedness in water supply is

developed by reviewing the legislation on the
organisation of water supply. Municipalities,
owners of water supply facilities and real
estate owners are responsible for water
supply. Practical development measures
focus on communications, inter-authority
co-operation as well as contingency planning
which also includes the organisation of
temporary water distribution. The risks
involved in water supply are reviewed
comprehensively from water source to
sewerage and waste water treatment.

To safeguard the quality of drinking

water falls within the remit of the Ministry
of Social Affairs and Health. Preventive
monitoring measures are taken to deal with
health problems caused by contaminated
water.


-----

**Securing a sufficient labour workforce**
**(MoEE).** Sufficient numbers of workers for
companies vital to society, national defence
and fields providing basic services to the
population are guaranteed. Furthermore,
the capability to reallocate required labour
resources is maintained.

Even in emergency conditions, the labour

workforce is primarily regulated through
normal employment services. The necessary
workers for companies and public services
are guaranteed by invoking the general
obligation to work, if necessary.

**Maintaining the education and research**
**system (MoEC).** By maintaining education
and research activities, the level and versatility
of competence is guaranteed, as is the
availability of a sufficiently professional labour
force, according to supply and demand.
The functioning of all levels of education

is guaranteed by allocating education
resources to different levels and fields
of education, as required by the supply
and demand of labour. The possibility of
transferring from one level of education
to the next is guaranteed. Preparations are
made for carrying out matriculation and
other examinations, to provide daily school
meals as well as to see to the welfare of
students in all security situations. Education
resources are prepared in a manner which
permits them to be reallocated as required
in security situations. This necessitates the
development of education legislation.
The national research system provides

information for public decision-making.
This requires that research activities in state
research institutes and universities be secured.
The universities’ basic research

activities are guaranteed because applied
research that supports decision-making
is built on solid basic research. The
significance of national research activities


is highlighted in emergency conditions,
as it might be difficult to gain access
to information produced elsewhere. By
focusing research funding and applying
performance management on research
institutes and universities, sufficient access
to information is guaranteed. Ministries
are responsible for refocusing their own
administrative sectors’ research and

reallocating their non-assigned research
appropriations in emergency conditions.
The implementation of the security

strategy for society and the relating
development measures require information
furnished by research. In particular

multidisciplinary and cross-sectoral research
is increased. This requires the development
of co-operation structures.

**Detecting, controlling and adapting to**
**changes in the environment (MoE).** The
preparedness to detect, monitor and forecast
changes in the environment as well as
society’s preparedness to limit and adapt to
them is maintained. This involves Finland’s
participation in contributing to and

implementing international environmental
agreements.
Monitoring of changes in the

environment is maintained. Finland’s

participation in international co-operation
aimed at slowing down the climate change
is continued. International co-operation
is the vehicle by which Finland also aims
to promote measures against ongoing
environmental changes, such as the thinning
of the ozone layer and the deterioration of the
Baltic Sea ecosystem. On the national level,
environmental threats may cause significant
property damage and harm animals and
plants as well as alter the preconditions of
business activities. Through monitoring,
preparedness is maintained also to detect
and manage environmental accidents.


-----

**Waste management (MoE). In co-operation**
with the security of supply organisation,
the preparedness to organise alternative
capacity for the recycling, utilisation and
transportation of waste is maintained.
Sufficient areas and reserve areas for the
disposal of ordinary waste and hazardous
waste are reserved in land use planning.

###### 2.7 The population’s income security and capability to function

**2.7.1 The desired end state**

**he population’s income security**
**and capability to function refers**
# T

**to society’s capability to provide**
**comprehensive social security and**
**social and health care services.**
**These prevent social exclusion,**
**promote harmony in society and**
**the** **population’s** **independent**

**coping and functional capacity. This**
**entirety includes social insurance,**
**social benefits, social and health care**
**services, protection of the health**
**of the population and a healthy**
**environment.**


The constitutional rights to a life of dignity
and the essential means of subsistence
and care are guaranteed for all. In order to
sustain social protection and to prevent
social exclusion, civic structures as well
as welfare and social policy measures
in various fields are maintained. These
include employment, housing, education,
income and social protection for the entire


population regardless of age, gender, wealth,
status or domicile. All sectors in society bear
particular responsibility for social protection
and the prevention of marginalisation.
Key social and health care services for

the population are secured by supporting
the functioning of service providers, such
as hospitals and health centres as well as
social welfare institutions and outpatient
care units. This entails an adequacy of staff,
pharmaceuticals, vaccines and medical
supplies as well as the functioning of
critical infrastructure. Regardless of the
time of day, citizens have access to urgent
social and health care services in all parts
of the country. The health care system is
capable of providing diagnostic and medical
services for illnesses caused by radiation and
biological or chemical agents.
The availability of pharmaceuticals,

vaccines as well as medical devices and
supplies is secured. State emergency

stockpiling guarantees the sufficiency of
crisis-specific medicines and health care
devices and equipment.
A reporting and laboratory system

is maintained to ensure the detection,
monitoring and prevention of health
risks, both for infectious diseases, diseases
communicated between humans and

animals and readily contagious animal
diseases, and plant diseases and pests and
suspected food-borne and water-borne
epidemics. Different authorities co-operate
in risk assessment and epidemiological
analysis. The CBRNE expert guidance
establishments, associated centres of

excellence as well as laboratory systems
connected to these are capable of identifying
and controlling health hazard situations
caused by chemicals (C), microbes (B),
radiation sources (R), nuclear weapons
or accidents at nuclear plants (N) and
explosives (E). It is essential to conduct co

-----

operation with international organisations
monitoring microbiological, chemical and
radiation threats.

Finland effectively integrates to improve

and secure health and social well-being in
the EU’s structures, co-operates with the
Member States and has actively contributed
to addressing international issues with the
World Health Organisation.
Preparedness co-operation with the

private and public social and health care
services will be further developed.

**2.7.2 Strategic tasks**

**Income** **security** **(MoSAH).** Various

payment systems and the nationwide service
network facilitating the awarding and
disbursing of income security benefits and
other benefits vital to the subsistence of the
population are maintained. Sufficient funds
for the benefits are secured. The capability
to disburse the statutory income security
benefits, pursuant to the provisions that apply
in a given situation, is maintained. Extensive
private-public partnership co-operation

is required to safeguard the collection of
pension contributions, the appropriate
management of pension funds as well as the
preservation of data in the pension register.
A minimum income is guaranteed even in
emergency conditions. In order to guarantee
a reasonable standard of subsistence to
the population as well as to safeguard
sufficient financing for it, preparations for
altering the eligibility provisions used for
determining income security benefits are
made. Income security prevents poverty
and social exclusion, promotes harmony in
society, national unity and the population’s
psychological resilience to crisis.
Due to negative developments in the

economy and higher unemployment, an


increase in required appropriations must
be prepared for in order to organise income
security for the population. This includes
maintaining the required service system.
This challenge can be responded to by
maintaining plans for required legislative
amendments and by safeguarding the
nationwide service network. The Social
Insurance Institution and municipalities’
backup systems for processing and

disbursing minimum benefits or benefits
paid on a continuous basis must facilitate
cash payments, if need be, or another form
of payment in co-operation with banks.
Systems are developed to facilitate the essential subsistence of a citizen who has become the victim of an accident in phases
when statutory or other insurances do not
cover the financial losses, or when the benefits are not yet disbursed.

**Securing the social and health care**
**services and environmental health care**
**services** **(MoSAH).** Hospitals, health

centres, social welfare establishments as
well as outpatient and non-residential care
services are maintained in order to provide
key social and health care services for the
population.
Equal social and health care services

are provided for the population, regardless
of location. The securing of key services
is improved by intensifying regional cooperation, centralising functions requiring
specialised expertise and capabilities,

developing the division of duties within the
service system and by improving the regional
efficiency in jointly procuring and using the
required resources, supplies as well as expert
and support services.
When the practical arrangements for

providing and guaranteeing social and
primary health services in all security
situations are developed services and


-----

resources provided by the private and
third sector are taken into account. Sopivarecommendations can be applied to the
development of relating outsourcing

agreements to harmonise the agreements
and to improve continuity management.
Access to urgent and necessary social

and health services is guaranteed for the
entire population, regardless of the time
of day or location. In addition to the duty
system of health care services, a nationwide emergency social service system is
maintained.
In order to treat medical conditions

and illnesses caused by radiation as well
as biological and chemical agents, the
functional capacity and resources of the
health care service system are developed. The
capabilities of diagnosing and identifying
patients and contagious cases are improved,
as are the required isolation and quarantine
facilities.
The Ministry of Social Affairs and

Health may prioritise services and reallocate
resources during lengthy disturbances and
emergency conditions, so as to guarantee the
key social and health services.
The readiness of the public health care

system for proactively deploying medical
teams to assist Finns in major accidents
abroad is developed. The procedures and
arrangements of psychosocial assistance as
well as the operating models and organisation
of services are improved and those bearing
the nation-wide responsibility for functions
are designated for major accidents.

Health hazards caused by the living

environment are addressed primarily with
the measures of preventive monitoring.
Monitoring is based on regionally active
environmental management units whose
resources and smooth co-operation with
other authorities are secured.


Preparedness co-operation of the social

and health care services on the Nordic level
is implemented and developed on the basis
of a Nordic treaty.

**Guaranteeing the availability of medical**
**supplies and equipment (MoSAH).** The
availability of pharmaceuticals, vaccines
as well as medical devices and supplies
is secured. This involves the obligatory
stockpiling of medicines, the emergency
stockpiling of pharmaceuticals, vaccines,
medical devices and supplies along with
international and Nordic agreements and
projects.
Regional purchasing procedures for

pharmaceuticals and medical supplies

are developed. In order to guarantee the
functioning of the health care system and
to improve its crisis resilience, obligatory
stockpiles of medicines as well as emergency
stockpiles of medical supplies and

equipment and CBRNE defence equipment
are maintained.
Stockpiles are replenished to take into

consideration new threats and changes in
the operating environment. Pharmaceuticals
and vaccines as well as associated medical
supplies are procured to prepare for a
pandemic. The co-operation between health
care preparedness experts and authorities
and the National Emergency Supply Agency
is strengthened. The objective of this cooperation is to provide uniform minimum
levels of material preparedness nationwide.
In order to guarantee access to

pharmaceuticals, vaccines and medical
supplies, bilateral security of supply

agreements are developed. Finland actively
promotes the EU’s security of health care
supply dimension.


-----

**The** **detection,** **surveillance** **and**
**management systems for health risks**
**(MoSAH).** Detection and surveillance

systems capable of recognising and

managing health emergencies caused

by radioactive agents, microbes and

chemicals are maintained. This involves the
national radiation-monitoring network,

communicable diseases surveillance system,
including the infectious diseases register,
biological and chemical threat expert
guidance systems as well as isolation and
quarantine capabilities.
The surveillance and alarm systems

as well as the management systems of the
WHO and the EU support national systems.
This includes co-operation in accordance
with the International Health Regulations
and co-operation conducted with the
European Commission and the European
Centre for Disease Prevention and Control
(ECDC).
Equipment, technical systems and

human resources required in radiation
monitoring as well as detecting biological
and chemical threats are maintained
to meet the requirements of changes in
the operating environment and threat
scenarios. Radiation monitoring takes
into account Finland’s obligation to fully
participate in the radiation monitoring
and maintenance systems required by
international treaties.
In order to maintain and develop

the readiness of the automatic externaldose rate-monitoring network and the
network of radiation laboratories, the
availability of appropriate detection,

analysis and transmitting equipment for
abnormal radiation situations is secured.
Sufficient and appropriate laboratory

infrastructure as well as adequate staff is
also guaranteed. The laboratory network
comprises the laboratories of the Radiation


and Nuclear Safety Authority of Finland
as well as local food safety monitoring
and environmental laboratories. It shall be
verified that all sources of radiation used
in Finland are registered and appropriately
marked. Decommissioned sources of

radiation as well as radioactive waste are
to be safely disposed. The surveillance and
alarm systems as well as the management
systems of the WHO, the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the EU
and bilateral and multilateral international
treaties support national systems.
The local, regional and nation-wide

communicable diseases surveillance system,
including the infectious diseases register,
is maintained and improved to improve
the treatment and prevention of infectious
diseases. Co-operation with food safety and
animal disease authorities is increased. In
order to confirm epidemics, national and
international expert reserves are trained and
methods are developed. There is an active
contribution to co-operation with the ECDC
within the EU. These measures improve
medical treatment, prevent epidemics and
enable reliable estimates regarding the
success of the countermeasures.
The Ministry of Social Affairs and Health

has drawn up a national preparedness plan
for an epidemic (pandemic). The plan
does not only list the measures required in
social and health care, it also determines
the guidelines to different administrative
sectors and the rest of society on how to
prepare for a pandemic. It also determines
the lines of authority among public officials
as well as the principles of interauthority
co-operation during a pandemic. The plan
is updated at regular intervals and the
changing threats and the environment are
taken into consideration.
In order to detect and manage a biological

and chemical threat, Finland maintains


-----

effective expert guidance systems as well
as a nationally comprehensive network of
laboratories capable of sufficiently sophisticated
diagnostics and analysis, which have the
necessary expertise for diagnostics beyond
the routine biological and chemical agents.
Authorities develop co-operation procedures
with the network of laboratories and expert
establishments. The National Institute for
Health and Welfare co-ordinates the operation
of the nationwide hazardous microbes safety
laboratory system, and is also responsible for
conducting laboratory examinations which
are commercially unfeasible but of crucial
importance. As to the hazardous microbes
which, according to the international safety
regulations, cannot be studied in Finnish
laboratories, the service contract made with
Sweden will be continued.

Established jointly by the Defence Forces

and the National Institute for Health and
Welfare, the objectives of the Centre of
Excellence for Bio Threat Assessment are to
increase national competences to prepare
for biological threats. Apart from research
and development, it aims at strengthening
the ability to assess bio threats that
endanger society’s functions and to improve
capabilities to participate in international
co-operation. The Centre of Excellence acts
as a link between other actors in the field
of infectious diseases and, intersectorally,
contributes to official and expert tasks that
address B threats. The tasks of the Zoonosis
Centre, which is run by the Food Safety
Authority and the National Institute for
Health and Welfare, are to guarantee effective
and continued control and research activities
needed to monitor and fight zoonoses. The
monitoring of zoonoses and food poisoning
is co-ordinated by the Centre. The National
Institute for Health and Welfare co-ordinates
the monitoring of drug resistance in
microbes.


To prepare for chemical threats, the

Centre of Excellence for Serious Chemical
Threats is maintained. Operating in the
dispersed facilities of the organisations
involved, the Centre is a collaboration
network of various chemical threat experts
which utilises existing infrastructure. The
participants include authorities and expert
bodies and units from the Ministry of
Social Affairs and Health, the Ministry of
the Interior, the Ministry of Agriculture
and Forestry, the Ministry of Defence, the
Ministry of Employment and the Economy,
and the Ministry of Education and Culture.
The primary task of the Centre is to support
preparedness against chemical threats and
to maintain a chemical hazard duty and
emergency response system. The Finnish
Institute of Occupational Health develops
and maintains regional field teams which
can be deployed to incident sites for the
purpose of collecting samples and evaluating
the situation. The Finnish Institute of
Occupational Health, the National Institute
for Health and Welfare and the laboratories
of regional environment centres are capable
of providing services to address a disturbance
involving chemicals.
Authorities improve decontamination

capabilities in a disaster area and hospitals.
Co-operation and division of tasks is agreed
with the rescue service, health care and
the Defence Forces. The decontamination
capability in hospitals is to be improved.

The usability of the product register of the

national chemicals register in establishing
the health impacts of chemical accidents
and poisonings is improved by guaranteeing
rapid access, 24/7, to the chemicals register.
In view of incidents, experts and analysis
organisations will compile a national
database for dangerous chemicals.

The Poison Information Centre provides

nation-wide medical guidance pertaining


-----

to poisonings. It is to be developed into a
national expert centre for chemical-induced
poisonings and mass poisonings.
With regard to guaranteeing the

population’s ability to function, it is
imperative to see to food safety. This task
is within the purview of the Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry.

###### 2.8 Psychological resilience to crisis

**2.8.1 Desired end state**


The nation’s crisis resilience is expressed
in the collective determination to defend
the independence of the state as well as in
sustaining the livelihood and security of the
population in all situations. The solidarity of
citizens and their will to defend the country
support their capability to act in all crisis
situations of society. In the future, their role
will be increasingly important in particular
when preparing for disturbances and
securing functions vital to society.

The goal of developing psychological

resilience to crisis is strength in the long term.
The capabilities for crisis communication
are developed in the course of education
on the different levels of the educational
system. In addition, the education for
which different administrative sectors are
responsible encourages participation in
societal activities and promotes the citizens’
readiness to act in disturbances and
emergency conditions.
The continuation of teaching, the

functioning of basic educational structures
and the possibilities of schools to succeed
in their educational task are secured. The
continuance of teaching strengthens the
sense of security among children, adolescents
and adults and also builds confidence in
the post-crisis future. Education takes into
consideration the needs of society and those
of immigrants in the integration process.
Culture is a key element in the formation

of a person’s identity and self-esteem. A
strong sense of identity fosters inclusion
and the individual’s capability to commit
to common goals. Interaction and meeting
of different cultural groups contribute to
social unity and prevent subcultures from
becoming excluded from the rest of society.
Education and civic activities, such as
sport, cultural, youth and societal activities


**sychological** **resilience** **to**

**crisis refers to the nation’s**

# P

**capacity to endure stress in varying**
**security** **situations,** **overcome**

**the consequences and speed up**
**recovery from crises. The nation’s**
**psychological resilience to crisis is**
**preserved by parenting, education,**
**communications, religious activities**
**and protection of cultural heritage.**
**Social integrity which promotes**
**psychological resilience to crisis is**
**developed through lifelong learning.**
**Education develops the citizens’**
**solidarity and the will to defend**
**the country and strengthens co-**
**operation with civic activities that**
**promote psychological resilience to**
**crisis.**


-----

**2.8.2 Strategic tasks**

**Education (MoEC).** The uninterrupted
continuation of key educational services is
guaranteed. This involves educating pupils
and students about threats and different
crises, along with the preparedness to use
the field of education as a medium for public
information and influencing as well as other
activities promoting psychological and social
unity, people’s confidence in society and the
will to defend the nation. Psychological,
physical and social well-being is upheld
through education.
The development of education will take

into account the possibilities of conveying
information on threats and preparedness by
means of civic education. Topics promoting
psychological crisis tolerance are developed
both for curricula and curriculum-based
education. Pupils and students receive
education on the Finnish way of life as
well as information concerning the safety
of the population, responsible conduct
in life’s different situations as well as the
comprehensive defence approach and

security policy.
The marginalization of pupils and

students at all levels of education is prevented
by guaranteeing equal opportunities and
equal rights in education. Schools and
educational institutions are developed to
become communities where the well-being,
participation and community spirit of pupils
and students are promoted. Co-operation
between home and school is intensified in
educational matters. Pupils and students are
encouraged to adopt a healthy lifestyle by
expanding the opportunities of participating
in sports and physical fitness activities at all
levels of education.


support interaction, inclusion and contact
between different groups.
Authorities, churches and organisations

have the capabilities to provide psychosocial
assistance which prevents the negative
influence of the post-traumatic stress
syndrome and disturbances on the nation’s
psychological resilience. Capabilities are
developed as part of safeguarding social
and health care services.
Cultural heritage of national importance

is protected in all security situations. Many
of the things included in the national
cultural heritage, such as individual objects
and works of art, are symbols of our national
identity. By visibly protecting them in crisis
situations, the citizens’ sense of security and
solidarity is strengthened.
The preconditions to perform religious

activities and to participate in the provision
of psychological assistance and crisis support
are guaranteed to the state churches and
other religious denominations in all security
situations. This involves diaconal work,
funeral services and other societal services,
as uninterrupted as possible.


-----

Education strengthens the psychological

crisis resilience and solidarity of the citizens.
Through education they are encouraged to
societal participation and their capability
to act during disturbances and emergency
conditions.

**Strengthening** **cultural** **identity** **and**
**protecting cultural heritage (MoEC).**
The preservation of society’s traditions is
supported. This involves cultural services
and protection of the cultural heritage.
The formation of the cultural identity is

promoted by guaranteeing participation in
cultural activities to all citizens. This is done
by maintaining a comprehensive structure of
establishments and grants for art and culture.
The opportunity to participate in basic art
education, recreational arts and in cultural
events is guaranteed to every citizen. The
interaction and meeting of cultural groups
are promoted.

Nationally important cultural heritage is

protected. This heritage includes prehistoric
sites, historically significant buildings and
complexes, works of art, manuscripts, books
and objects, scientific collections as well as
archival and library collections. Cultural
heritage also includes the buildings in which
movable cultural heritage is collected for
storage or exhibitions, digital information
assets as well as intellectual property rights,
crystallized in copyrights.
Regional and local authorities ensure

that the information on the sites and
characteristics of the built cultural

environment and other cultural properties
is up-to-date and available. Authorities on
the national level are responsible for the
surveillance of cultural properties and the
functioning of national registers.


The preconditions for exporting Finnish

innovations to the international market
are safeguarded. From the viewpoint
of strengthening national identity, it is
essential that Finns increasingly penetrate
international science and culture networks
and Finnish innovations succeed in the
world market. Furthermore, international
and national intellectual property right
protection is preserved and promoted.

**Securing** **religious** **services** **(MoEC).**

The preconditions for the state churches
and other religious denominations in
supporting the population’s coping and
welfare and as providers of psychological
assistance are maintained.

The state churches and other

religious denominations are guaranteed
the preconditions to perform religious
activities and to participate in the
provision of psychological support as part
of the entirety of society’s psychosocial
assistance and crisis support in all security
situations. Funeral services, carried out in
a dignified manner and paying respect to
the deceased, are guaranteed.
The Evangelical Lutheran Church of

Finland, its parishes, parish unions and
cathedral chapters draw up their regional
contingency plans. This is co-ordinated by
each cathedral chapter in their respective
areas. Close co-operation with the AVI
agency supports contingency planning
and promotes support to psychological
resilience to crisis both locally and
nationally.


-----

### 3 CRISIS MANAGEMENT

###### 3.1 Management of disturbances


In order to manage threats against the
population, society and the state, modes of
operation that are known and exercised by all
actors who participate in the preparedness
and management of disturbances need
to be in place. As the vulnerability of
society increases, it is essential that initial
situation management and co-ordination
on unexpected and rapidly emerging
disturbances be implemented without delay.
Because most disturbances have multifaceted consequences it is important that the
competent authority can rely on as broadbased cross-sectoral support as possible. At
the same time is must be ensured that the
functioning of society can be secured on
an appropriate level despite disturbances.
Co-operation plans and exercises have to
extend to all levels of administration.
The principle of legality and the

established division of administrative duties
are observed to manage disturbances which
jeopardise the security of society and the
population. Both in normal situations and
emergency conditions the same principles for
the management of disturbances are followed.
The divisions of duties as well as operational
models customary under normal conditions
are retained as long as possible. The lines
of authority must be clear. Situations are
proactively managed and sufficient resources
are immediately put into use. The competent
authority empowered by the law to do so
leads the operational side and intersectoral


co-operation bodies support the responsible
authorities. Whoever is responsible for
situation management is also responsible
for communications. The other authorities,
companies and organisations participate to
the extent required to manage the situation.
Apart from operational measures, provision
of information among actors is highlighted
as well as the importance of keeping the state
leadership well-informed.
On the Government level, the ministry

empowered by the law to do so leads
activities and co-ordination among

ministries, when required. Permanent
Secretaries bear the primary responsibility
for the organisation of work at the
ministries, and therefore the meeting of
Permanent Secretaries may be necessary
when first addressing the management of
a disturbance. Possible disagreements on
which ministry bears the responsibility for
a matter or handles a far-reaching issue
will be solved at the Government plenary
session, if necessary. Intersectoral cooperation bodies can be used to support
the preparations to manage a disturbance.
The meeting of Heads of Preparedness is a
central co-operation body which supports
ministries in security matters. There
can be steering groups at the ministries
or civil service departments, which
convene together with representatives
from interest groups if required for the
management of a disturbance.


-----

It may be necessary to bring a

disturbance before the Government as
soon as possible so that all members of
the Government have an opportunity to
receive, at the same time, an accurate and
correct understanding of the matter. This
is essential for the work of the members
of the Government and for bearing
ministerial responsibilities. Apart from
situation awareness also preparation
responsibilities and further handling can
be discussed. Further handling includes,
for example, organising sufficient cooperation between ministries and

handling at Cabinet Committees.

When dealing with significant security

issues, the Cabinet Committee on Foreign
and Security Policy (CCFSP) or the joint
meeting of the CCFSP and the President of
the Republic may prepare the Government
decisions. The Committee is augmented
by inviting the competent minister

and pertinent experts to attend. The
Security and Defence Committee (TPAK)
assists the CCFSP on matters relating
to comprehensive defence and its coordination. The Committee’s secretariat
forms the core of the secretariat of the
Heads of Preparedness and chairs the
meeting of preparedness secretaries. Other
Cabinet Committees deal with matters
pertaining to their mandate. The Cabinet
Committee on European Union Affairs
prepares the matters to be decided in the
European Union. Decisions required by
the situation are taken at the Government
plenary session, by the competent ministry
or some other competent authority.


The Government and the ministries are

supported by the Government situation
centre, which comprises the high-level
leadership as well as the situation centre
and the information centre run by the
Prime Minister’s Office. The high-level
leadership can assemble on the following
levels: Heads of Preparedness, Permanent
Secretaries or members of the Government
(Cabinet Committee, Government meeting,
Government plenary session). The situation
centre maintains contacts with actors on
different levels of the administrative sectors.
The stand-by duty personnel in the

ministries and the situation centres of
different administrative sectors form the
base on the Government level from which
to respond to disturbances. The Government
situation centre acts as the contact point
for the stand-by duties of the ministries,
keeping the administrative sectors informed
of observed events and convening, when
necessary, the co-operation bodies and
experts from different administrative sectors
to secure up-to-date access to information.
Supported by the authorities and other
actors who contribute to the management
of a disturbance, the situation centre also
co-ordinates the compiling of the situation
picture, if necessary.

The principles discussed above are

presented in figure 2 which focuses on
the roles between the top state leadership
and the central administration and the
point of contact of their co-operation.
The responsible authority starts measures
relating to the management of the situation,
informs other authorities and actors of the
situation and involves the actors required by
the management of the disturbance.


-----

_Figure 2. The principle of the management of disturbances_


Top-level national decision-making
in crisis management and
international co-operation

Preparatory handling of signifcant
security issues

CCFSP = Cabinet Committee on Foreign

and Security Policy

Support to the authority in charge
of the management of a disturbance
and to decision-making in national
crisis management

Management of a disturbance
within own mandate

Support to the authority in charge
of the management of a disturbance

|Col1|CCFSP / PRESIDENT- CCFSP|Col3|CABINET COMMITTEE ON EU AFFAIRS|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|CCFSP / PRESIDENT- CABINET COMMITTEE ON CCFSP EU AFFAIRS DISCUSSION IN GOVERNMENT||||||||
|||||||||
|The Security MEETING OF PERMANENT SECRETARIES and Defence Committee MEETING OF HEADS OF PREPAREDNESS||||||GOVERNMENT SITCEN GOVERNMENT COMMAND CENTRE||
|||||||||
|||||||||
|||||||||
|||||||||


PARLIAMENT

PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC


GOVERNMENT
(PLENARY SESSION)


CCFSP / PRESIDENT-
CCFSP


CABINET COMMITTEE ON
EU AFFAIRS


DISCUSSION IN GOVERNMENT


MEETING OF PERMANENT SECRETARIES


MEETING OF HEADS OF
PREPAREDNESS


The Security
and Defence
Committee


GOVERNMENT
SITCEN

GOVERNMENT
COMMAND
CENTRE


Ministry
COMPETENT AUTHORITY
Central, regional and local administration

OTHER AUTHORITY BUSINESS COMMUNITY ORGANISATIONS

NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL ACTORS


-----

###### 3.2 Situation awareness and situation picture

Every organisation needs information of
the environment and its events as well as
their impact on its own functions. Relevant
and rapid situation awareness, based on
correct information and assessments, is
of particular significance in disturbances
when prompt decision-making is called
for with possibly far-reaching effects.
In order to make the right decisions,
decision-makers need to know the basis
and consequences of their decisions, how
others will react to them and what risks are
involved. Decision-makers must therefore
possess on all operating levels sufficient
situation awareness which is instrumental
in timely decision-making and operations.
Situation awareness requires co-operation
and competence, which enables decisionmakers to comprehensively monitor

the operating environment, to compile,
analyse and disseminate information, to
identify research needs and to manage
networks. Information systems must

allow a systematic use of information
sources and co-operation as well as flexible
dissemination of situation information.
Because of the expectations of the media

and citizens situation awareness is demanded
from the political leadership and other
decision-makers even when the situation
does not require them to take immediate
action to manage or address the situation.
The flow of information should therefore be
guaranteed to the different actors in society
to the appropriate extent.

Situation picture arrangements support

the forming of situation awareness of
organisations and decision-makers. In

general, a situation picture refers to a
description, compiled by experts, of

prevailing conditions and the response


Disturbances have in most cases a local
impact which means that their management
is primarily based on local measures.
Taking into account the extent and gravity
of the disturbance co-operation relating to
situation management can be implemented
also on other administrative levels. Local
and regional administrations follow, where
appropriate, the general principles of the
management of disturbances described
in this chapter (the responsibility of the
competent authority, standard co-operation
measures, exploitation of the resources of
society’s different actors). The principles
and arrangements of the management of
disturbances in local administration are
reviewed by taking into consideration
the changes that have taken place in the
organisations of authorities, the municipal
service structures and co-operation

arrangements.
When necessary, the obligations imposed

on the Presidency country or the Member
States by the EU’s emergency and crisis coordination arrangements are taken into
account. The Government situation centre
acts as a contact point for these activities and
the EU’s civil protection co-operation.
The powers provided for in the

Emergency Powers Act can be invoked
when the situation so requires. In specific
emergency conditions, the position of the
President of the Republic is highlighted as
the leader of foreign and security policy, the
Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Forces
and a central decision-maker.


-----

capabilities of various actors, incidents
generated by the disturbance and relating
background information and assessments
about developments. The entity is formed
from different sources by using a networking
operating mode. The process consists
of compiling, grouping and analysing
information as well as the timely and effective
dissemination of the analysed information
to those needing it. The surrounding
“information space” is arranged so that the
information will be correctly understood
and actors can access information which is
significant for their activities.

A situation picture can be a general

assessment, drawn up at regular intervals,
or a more detailed analysis of a current
topic or topics where events and their
impacts are assessed. This kind of descriptive
(strategic) situation picture can be provided
to decision-makers on a regular basis (for
example, three times a year, once a month
or once a week). A situation picture can also
be a more often (for example daily) drafted
report or a compilation of events which is
made available in the information system
for actors. Normally it does not contain
assessments of situational developments or
recommendations for measures.
An operational situation picture is

compiled and updated as much in real time
as possible during a disturbance. Through
continued monitoring and updating it
should provide a picture of the development
of events and thus enable the management
of the situation and the management process
required to solve the situation. A decisionmaker must be able to trust that the conveyed
situation picture is a reliable one in all its
details and that the analyses are made with
the best possible expertise.
The Prime Minister’s Office is

responsible for compiling the Government’s
common situation picture and for


constructing and maintaining the relating
technical and administrative systems.

Other ministries bear the responsibility for
arranging the situation picture required by
the management process of their respective
administrative sectors. The situation
picture systems of the ministries are to
support the situation picture of the top state
leadership as appropriate. For this purpose,
the situation picture systems of the Foreign
Service, the Ministry of the Interior and the
defence administration in particular are
developed. Each administrative sector must
analyse what situation picture information
is relevant to be exchanged with the business
community and organisations.

Apart from the central administration, a

relevant situation picture system is built also
on the regional administration level. The
system is to serve the common needs of the
regional administration and enable flexible
transmission of necessary information
to local and central administrations. The
situation pictures of the state’s central
and regional administrations are to be
designed and implemented in such a way
that they also support situation awareness
in municipalities and the business

community. Exchange and exploitation of
situational information between systems is
to be planned as part of preparedness in an
appropriate manner. The situation picture
arrangement is built in co-operation with
competent ministries, relevant authorities,
municipalities, the business community
and organisations.

In a situation where a disturbance is

managed on the local level, in addition
to local actors the regional and central
administrations are expected to have
situation awareness and sometimes also to
take concrete measures and more efficient
communications. Therefore it is commonly
advised that the local level provides as soon


-----

as possible information to the regional and
central administrations on disturbances and
other events and threats which significantly
affect or may affect the population’s safety
and official measures, and which require
or may require measures from relevant
authorities. In the same way information
must be provided without delay on situations
which generate or may generate significant
public interest in Finland or internationally.

A number of private or public

corporations such as universities,

polytechnics, joint authorities providing
and maintaining all-round education and
vocational training, limited companies
owned by municipalities and other similar
corporations hold a significant position
for the continuity and maintenance of
society’s functions. These may involve
various and sometimes even complicated
combinations of public and private actors.
Functions are often dispersed across several
municipalities or in different parts of the
entire country. Also these actors are to be
taken into consideration in the compilation
and exploitation of a situation picture.

###### 3.3 Communications in crisis situations and  disturbances

**Communications is a tool for the**
**management.** Communications are an
integral part of managing a disturbance.
The authority responsible for action is also
in charge of disseminating information.
Disturbances are often situations which
involve a number of authorities and where
other authorities support the one in charge.
It is typical of a serious disturbance that an
investigating authority is involved with the
responsibility to disseminate information.


Consistent communications policies with
the authority in charge of the situation
have to be secured through effective cooperation procedures. The basis for

communications during a disturbance is
defined in the Government instruction for
communications in crisis situations and
emergency conditions (the publication series
15/2007 of the Prime Minister’s Office).

Alarm and duty systems must be

organised so that the communications staff
receives relevant information without delay
and is able to take measures to support
the authority in charge. In organising
communications the situation awareness
of the relevant staff must be seen to so that
they can start communications measures to
support the competent authority.
The immediate task of communications

in disturbances is to warn and save
people from a known danger. The more
serious the disturbance threatening

the health or safety of the population
the more important is the speed of
communications. In Finland, basic services
are the responsibility of municipalities and
therefore communications on the local level
often faces the biggest challenges during
disturbances. It is necessary that on the
local level central administrative sectors
and rescue services agree on emergency
announcements in situations that pose an
immediate threat to health; such situations
include disruptions in energy supply,
contamination of drinking water, radiation
and other similar disturbances.

The responsible authority must keep

other authorities who contribute to the
situation management informed as to
the content of their announcements
and instructions. This prevents the

dissemination of conflicting instructions to
the population. Organisations can support
the authorities with their communications.


-----

Responsibilities in communications

matters must be agreed in connection
with securing society’s vital functions
in such a way that various actors and
administrative levels are clear about their
responsibilities in large-scale disturbances.
In order to prepare for the most likely
risks, it is necessary to negotiate and
practise in advance the communications
responsibilities as well as the contents and
conveying of messages. Preparedness can
be made more effective with intersectoral
communications instructions.

**Communications** **must** **be** **active.**
Communications are carried out effectively
through various channels: official and
emergency announcements to rapidly warn
the population, news briefings, briefings for
the media, web pages, the social media, expert
interviews and guidance over the phone. It is
important during a disturbance to take the
initiative and communicate without delay
to avoid rumours and misunderstandings
which are very hard to correct afterwards.
Speed is not, however, more important than
the correctness of information. Furthermore,
preparations need to be made for disruptions
in the electronic infrastructure and using
alternative means for communications.

When extensive disturbances

occur, involving several municipalities
or provinces, the maintenance and

transmission of a real-time situation picture
and compiling a media situation picture are
essential for managing the disturbance and
communications. The situation picture is
conveyed to the local and regional levels to
the central administration and vice-versa.
It is important to monitor the development
of publicity.

Communications are co-ordinated

on appropriate administrative levels.

Each ministry is responsible for their


communications during a disturbance

and, when necessary, for co-ordinating
communications within their administrative
sector. The Government Communications
Unit is responsible for the Government’s
communications, as well as for co-ordinating
the dissemination of official information.
There must be regular exercises

in arranging communications during

disturbances and emergency conditions
as part of wider preparedness. Apart from
authorities, also other relevant actors in
communications need to be involved in the
exercises.

**Communications have a global dimension.**
If extensive international disturbances occur
Finland must have the capability to convey
the country’s political views and policies to
international awareness. In practice it is the
responsibility of the state leadership to issue
relevant messages that provide the basis
for all communications. The Ministry for
Foreign Affairs plays a central role in foreign
communications.
Strategic communications are made

more effective in conflict situations,
competitive situations and when

conducting co-operation. To co-ordinate
messages, both regular negotiation

mechanisms and mechanisms for daily
communications co-operation between
administrative sectors are needed. This
requires that the Government and key
ministries exchange information on

a regular basis and increase situation
awareness. Different administrative sectors
must be able to promptly produce analyses
of changing security situations and submit
the analyses to the Government. The
capability to respond to disturbances and
communicate about them is expedited.
Ministries must be able to rapidly compile
a situation picture of disturbances and co

-----

ordinate the political guidelines of the state
leadership before the situation is analysed
in public.

Communications relating to

international issues and EU matters as well
as necessary co-operation with international
authorities must be taken into consideration
on all operating levels.

**Communications can be centralised in**
**emergency conditions. The responsibility**
for communications may have to be
transferred in emergency conditions either
partly or entirely, from special authorities
to the Government Information Centre. On
the basis of the Emergency Powers Act, the
Government decides on the moment and
extent of transferring the responsibility for
communications.
When the State of Defence Act becomes

effective a Government Information Centre
is established, with communications

officers from various ministries and

subordinate administrations working

there. The duties of the Centre include
communications, research, psychological
defence and maintaining contacts with
organisations, businesses and communities
in communications matters.


-----

### 4 IMPLEMENTATION OF 
 THE STRATEGY

###### 4.1 The principles and  monitoring of implementation


Security in society and securing vital functions
are based on the strategic tasks of ministries
and the functioning of the security of supply
in all security situations. The implementation
of strategic tasks entails a number of other
measures to be taken by actors who are involved
in society’s preparedness and the management of
disturbances. Relevant plans and arrangements
must regularly be reviewed and always when
major changes take place in society or in the
security environment.
To maintain security in society requires

correct information about the preparedness
and capability to function of administrative
sectors as well as resilience to crisis and crisis
preparedness. The monitoring of the Strategy
should enable timely and proper development
along with maintenance measures. Monitoring
provides information to the state leadership
regarding how correctly resources are being
allocated for the purpose of securing society’s
vital functions.
Consistent implementation of the principles

of the Security Strategy for Society also on
the local and regional levels is a prerequisite
for securing vital functions. To promote
implementation and in particular to benefit
from best practices it would be appropriate
to prepare threat assessments, risk analyses
and common guidelines for implementation
as interectoral co-operation on the local and
regional levels, too.


The entity that consists of security

management and preparedness measures is to
extend on the municipal level all the way to the
person(s) carrying out a security measure. On
the basis of this and to support implementation
and outputs as well as rapid responding to
demanding situations, lists of measures should
be compiled on the local level by areas of
responsibility, linked to threat scenarios and
related disturbances. Based on the lists of
measures, each participant should be given
cards of measures. On the regional level,
however, it is not necessary and not always
possible either to compile such comprehensive
guidelines.

Each ministry, within its mandate,

monitors the implementation of tasks related
to securing society’s vital functions as well as
the implementation and development of the
security of supply arrangements. Monitoring is
carried out as part of the functional practices
established in the administrative sectors in
question and it shall cover the perspectives of
both the subordinate administration and the
key co-operation bodies.
The Security and Defence Committee

(TPAK), supported by the meeting of the
Heads of Preparedness, is responsible for
the joint monitoring and development of the
Strategy. For this task, TPAK can ask for expert
opinions from independent research institutes
and other actor. The monitoring shall provide


-----

the grounds for updating the Strategy as well
as for co-ordinating comprehensive defence
measures. Long-term monitoring is required
and as much as possible it must be based
on routinely produced reports and research
papers. TPAK submits the results of the
monitoring to the President of the Republic,
the Government (the Cabinet Committee
on Foreign and Security Policy) and the
Parliament (in particular to the Defence
Committee and Foreign Affairs Committee).

By informing parliamentary committees

it is ensured that society’s preparedness will
be implemented in line with parliamentary
guidelines.

In co-operation with the subordinate

administration and co-operation partners,
ministries draw up a report on a regular basis
on the functioning of crisis preparedness and
development needs to the Security and Defence
Committee. The capability of an administrative
sector support other administrative sectors
and co-operation arrangements are taken into
account.

From the point of monitoring it is

important that, when disturbances occurring
in Finland or abroad have been managed,


the management measures are recorded and
analysed as comprehensively as possible.
The analysis of “close call” situations is to be
included in the monitoring in particularly to
prevent threats and risks. The lessons learned
and the resulting measures are discussed in
the co-operation bodies to ensure that best
practices are used.

The monitoring of the Strategy’s

implementation also produces grounds for
security research in administrative sectors and
also for national co-operation in the field of
security research. National and international
security research is conducted and forms of cooperation are developed through the strategy
for national security research; the Advisory
Board for Sectoral Research is in charge of
the strategy’s implementation. Furthermore,
the Scientific Advisory Board for Defence
(MATINE), the security programme of the
Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and
Innovation (TEKES), the EU’s framework
programme for security research and the
technology programmes and excellence

networks of the Defence Forces produce
research to support the Security Strategy.


The monitoring is to be based on at least the following entities:

###### » ministry reports and assessments on how their strategic tasks have been taken into »

account in the administrative sector’s preparedness and the capabilities to manage a
disturbance

###### » compiling and analysing the lessons learned from having managed disturbances» » assessments on the functioning and development needs of the security of supply »

arrangements in their administrative sector, and

###### » experiences from the preparedness exercises of administrative sectors, the »

Government and the authorities nation-wide


-----

###### 4.2 Exercises

The preparedness of our society to
overcome disturbances is tested in

preparedness exercises which provide
an opportunity for various actors to
train their personnel and develop

performance. Exercises can be divided
into three groups: extensive national and/
or intersectoral preparedness exercises,
exercises within an administrative sector
and regionally limited exercises. There
are also international exercises. Exercises
must be planned, and for this reason the
Heads of Preparedness meeting, supported
by educational institutes giving security
training, maintains an exercises’ calendar
and makes proposals to co-ordinate and
develop exercises.

The responsible body decides on the

organisation and arrangements of exercises.
The Security and Defence Committee in cooperation with the Heads of Preparedness
of ministries, directs the Government’s joint
exercises and their preparation.
Responsible authorities must be involved

in preparing the exercises in good time.
Exercise situations are to be built on the
division of responsibilities of authorities
as stated in law. Exercises must be based
on actual powers as well as the principles
of the line of authority and disturbance
management in accordance with the Security
Strategy for Society. When agreement is
made with the actors in question, part of
administration can be dealt with by means
of games. In order to set up games regular
arrangements are created for the needs of the
Government. The games must enable a twoway playing.


Information security matters must

be taken into consideration in exercises
and research activities that are connected
to the management of preparedness and
disturbances. In particular, the confidential
operational information on the decisionmaking system, preparedness and

performance as well as the operating modes
of public administration must be protected.

The experiences gained from the exercises

provide tangible information on securing
the functions vital to society and relevant
co-operation. In addition, there is also
information on what kind of development is
required by the strategic tasks and the overall
situation of crisis management capabilities.
The experiences also provide useful feedback
for reviewing the Strategy and preparedness
plans.
The capability of the central government

to manage disturbances is tested in the
Government’s joint exercises. In line

with the threat scenarios of the Strategy,
these exercises test the preparedness for
disturbances, the functioning of situation
management arrangements as well as cooperation. The topics of the exercises are
chosen to correspond to the challenges of
the prevailing security environment. They
can either be organised as scenario-specific
exercises or, alternatively, by arranging
several sequential seminars that deal with the
management of a special situation chosen as
the topic for the exercise.
The pools of the security of supply

organisation have a long history of arranging
exercises to improve preparedness for
disturbances. The exercises that bring
together actors from the business community,
administration and organisations deal with
situations which require the co-operation
and expertise of a number of sectors.


-----

In order to develop comprehensive

preparedness in society also organisations
are taken into account in the exercises.
By involving organisations on different
administrative levels necessary co-operation
models are developed, the preparedness
development of organisations is supported
and voluntary actors are engaged.

The independent exercise activities of
organisations can be used to develop the
capabilities of authorities. Regional and local
administrations play a highly important role
in establishing smooth forms of co-operation
for exercises.

Administrative sectors arrange their

own exercises to train their staff and test
and develop performance. The framework
for these exercises is built on the threat
scenarios defined in this Strategy by taking
into consideration possible changes in the
security environment. Where possible,
the exercises are to be used to develop the
strategic tasks of administrative sectors.
The reports on the experiences gained in
the exercises are distributed to the extent
required and taken into account in the
annual reports on preparedness monitoring.
In order to develop their activities,
administrative sectors can take part in the
exercises organised in the private sector.
Preparedness exercises are organised

when necessary in regional and local
administrations. Regional and local actors
who play a key role in the management of
society’s preparedness and disturbances take
part in these exercises. Also actors from the
central administration can participate to the
extent required.
Finland participates in international

exercises which it regards as useful,
organised by the EU, Nato, Nato’s EuroAtlantic Disaster Response Coordination
Centre (EADRCC) and other international
organisations and actors.


-----

-----

###### THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE MINISTRIES FOR  THE SECURITY OF SUPPLY


The Government has decided the objectives
of the security of supply on the basis of
relevant legislation (Government decision
539/2008). The Decision obligates the
ministries to direct and monitor, within
their mandate, the implementation of the
tasks relating to society’s vital functions
and the development of the capability to
function. Each ministry is responsible for
developing the security of supply within
their respective mandates.

The task of the National Emergency

Supply Agency (NESA) is to promote
and co-ordinate the preparedness of the
authorities to steer the country’s economy
for crisis situations and serious disturbances
(Government decree 455/2008 on NESA).
The key responsibilities of the ministries’

security of supply are listed below to improve
the co-ordination of the tasks in accordance
with the requirements of the Security
Strategy for Society and the security of
supply requirements.
In addition to the responsibility to guide

and develop ministry-specific security of
supply, the Bank of Finland plays a special
role in preparing for directing payment
systems and money supply.


**Ministry of Employment and the Economy**
The National Emergency Supply Agency
functions as a special authority within the
security of supply, directed by Ministry of
Employment and the Economy.

**Ministry for Foreign Affairs**
The Ministry of Employment and the
Economy consults the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs when necessary regarding concluded
security of supply agreements between states
and the possible need for new agreements.
The ministry promotes the continuity of
international trade also from the perspective
of Finland’s interests in the security of supply.

**Ministry of Finance**
Determines the participation of its

administrative sector in the activities of the
security of supply organisation’s financial
sector and possible other sectors. Guides,
develops and safeguards the capability to
function of the Government’s common
information systems and information

networks in different threat situations and
disturbances. The Ministry contributes to
the work of the information society sector
within the security of supply organisation.

**Ministry of the Interior**
Participates in the activities of the security
of supply organisation to promote

municipal preparedness and co-ordinates
the participation of rescue services in the
preparedness measures in the security of
supply. The Ministry co-operates in situation
picture matters with the National Emergency
Supply Agency for the needs of the business
community.


-----

**Ministry of Defence**
Participates in the sectors’ work in the
security of supply organisation and supports
the Defence Forces participation in the
pools.

**Ministry of Transport and**
**Communications**
At the national and regional levels,
contributes to the work of the information
society sector and the transport logistic sector
within the security of supply organisation.
Maintains and develops the preconditions
for Finland’s transport logistic system and
electric communications infrastructure

also from the perspective of the security of
supply.

**Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry**
Participates in the work of the food sector and
the health care sector within the security of
supply organisation. The Ministry maintains
and develops the preconditions for primary
production also from the perspective of the
security of supply.

**Ministry of Social Affairs and Health**
In co-operation with the National

Emergency Supply Agency, reorganises
and makes the material preparedness and
organisation within the health care sector
more systematic. Participates in the work of
the health care sector within the security of
supply organisation.


**Ministry of the Environment**
Supports the participation of its

administrative sector in the work of the
water supply pool and waste management
committee within the security of supply
organisation. The Ministry supports the
launching of preparedness agreement

arrangements through which a sufficient
capability is ensured to implement the
construction needs of emergency conditions
and serious disturbances.

**Ministry of Justice**
Assesses the functionality of the Emergency
Powers Act against modern threat scenarios
as well as possible legislative needs in view of
serious disturbances in normal conditions.

**Prime Minister’s Office**
Develops and maintains a co-ordinated
national situation picture system,

incorporating into it, when necessary,
information on the security of supply
situation from the business community,
conveyed through the security of supply
organisation.


-----

###### THREAT SCENARIOS

**1.** **Serious disturbances in the power supply.**

Undisturbed production and distribution of power is the precondition for the
functioning of society and, in fact, for all vital functions. Short power failures cause
disruptions and damage, but they do not threaten widely vital functions or the
well-being of the population. Extensive and long-term failures in production and
distribution of power can seriously undermine society’s capability to function.
In an energy-demanding society based on electric power connections, better

quality is continuously expected from the transmission and distribution of electric
power distribution. The reliability of the national main grid and distribution networks
and the capability to overcome serious disturbances are essential for the functioning
of society. It is therefore important to ensure that the capabilities and skills required
for repairs remain in the country. Electricity networks require large capitals and
investments have long-term effects.

On the whole, transmission line control and monitoring systems depend on

telecommunications. Hence, a problem concerning one of the systems immediately
generates a problem concerning another. Key factors with regard to guaranteeing
electric power supply for telecommunications also include human resources and
contingency planning, among other things, with power companies. Disruptions
in power supply are most likely caused by extreme weather conditions or inherent
problems in the systems. However, as the energy transmission and distribution
networks form a part of the critical infrastructure of society and may therefore invite
terrorist attacks, organised crime related attacks or military operations,  disruptions
caused by an intentional act cannot be excluded from threat scenarios.
The production and distribution of district heating in Finland is almost

exclusively managed by the public utility companies owned by municipalities.
Distribution of district heating is entirely dependent the availability of electricity.
Functional disturbances in the district heating pipes compare technically speaking to
disruptions in water supply. As a total of 2 600 000 people depend on district heating,
an extensive supply failure in winter could lead to the need to relocate people, which
would require co-operation from a number of authorities.


-----

**2.** **Serious disturbances in the telecommunications and**
**information systems – cyber threats**

In addition to electric power, most of society’s services and functions make
increasingly use of electric services and are thus dependent on telecommunication
networks. The main part of society’s critical services is based on telecommunications
and the use of electric data assets. Services are computer-controlled or they are
entirely electric services. Electronic information systems and the connecting data
transfer networks merge and form system entities even on the global level. The
consequences of system malfunctions can extend from individual services into fullblown system-wide breakdowns. The very fast development of the used technology
has an impact on preparing for threats. Mobile solutions and internet are central
to communications. The electric infrastructure may constitute a vulnerable entity
which is difficult to control. The threat is highlighted by the fact that information and
communications systems which are based on electricity are used to manage society
and warn the population in disturbances and emergency conditions make.

The functioning of information systems, telecommunications and the electronic

media can be threatened by forces of nature, human error or technical malfunctions
and deliberate cyber or physical attacks against systems. In recent years, a widely
used way to interfere with Internet services is the denial-of-service attack, aiming to
flood and saturate Web servers or the capacity of the Internet service with automatic
messages. There are also numerous other possibilities for interfering with Internet
services. There are no solutions for absolute protection although there are systems in
use which aim at detecting and repelling attacks.
Unintentional or intentional network disturbances may target all actors who use

telecommunications and network services in their operations. Today it can be said,
then, that the threat may be aimed at all who use electric services. Cyber attacks
are directed primarily against network operators or e-commerce businesses but also
industry, hospitals and bodies governed by public law are targeted.
Organised crime and terrorism are rapidly making use of the vulnerabilities

of information networks. Telecommunications and network services have societal
importance and therefore they are vital elements also in political and military crises.
For most countries military preparedness also means capabilities to interfere with,
exploit and sabotage information systems. Information warfare is an integral part
of modern military preparedness. Through networks, systems can be targeted with
more traditional and stronger means such as an Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP), a
High Power Microwave (HPM) or physical destruction.
Preparedness in the field of telecommunications and information systems

is influenced by the financial situation of companies, tightened international
competition and the aim to minimise expenses and concentrate on commercially
relevant operations. Outsourcing and chaining of support services have in some cases
led to unclear lines of responsibility in safeguarding system entities. Outsourcing is
intensified by virtualisation of services. Network management and critical spares
are often located abroad. A growing challenge is to keep critical programmes up-to

-----

date and retain a skilled workforce. The overall preparedness is undermined by lower
protection levels in new data centres as well as the reluctance of operators to invest
in preparedness. Neither are users of networks always aware of the existing threats or
they do not consider them serious.

Data processing service producers are merging and concentrating their

functions. This poses a challenge to preparedness when critical systems increasingly
operate in a few service centres. Payments in Finland depend on the functioning
of telecommunication and information systems and the availability of electricity.
As a result of rapid technical development, the maintenance of back-up systems
is increasingly difficult and expensive. For the financial sector, decentralising
infrastructure and providing services on the European level pose challenges to
managing the systems.

**3.** **Serious disturbances in transport logistics**

The infrastructure of the Finnish society, the functioning of administration and
other organisations, security of supply, the business community and trade are
today almost entirely dependent on transports. The transport system is based on
telecommunications and the use of information systems. The system is vulnerable
to disturbances. Extensive and long-term disturbances are very rare, but the
consequences of such a disturbance can be very serious for society.
Finland’s transport logistic system includes, apart from transport equipment,

transport routes, loading, unloading and removal equipment, ports and harbours,
airports and land terminals. Logistics comprise general and logistics guiding
information transfer systems and information systems, monetary and payments
systems as well as communication and navigation satellites. Transports are regulated
by extensive legislation as well as instructions and guidelines issued by authorities.
Insurances and guarantees, a reliable maintenance and repair service, spare parts
service as well as availability of electricity and fuels all have an impact on functioning
of transports. The operating environment of the transport logistic system is global,
influenced by the status of the international economy and trade, general political
situation as well as investments and financial arrangements.

Sea transports are particularly critical for the functioning of society. In normal

conditions, sea transports and vessels may be threatened by, among other things,
disturbances in transports of critical materials or port functions, restrictions of
maritime traffic, threats posed by vessels themselves as well as terrorism and accidents.
In disturbances, maritime traffic may be impeded by the Gulf of Finland becoming
non-navigable, sabotage against vessels and ports, restrictions against using foreign
territorial waters or ports as well as the outflagging of Finnish-registered vessels. The
vulnerability of transports to disturbances is on the increase and valid insurance on
vessels, cargo and crew constitute a necessary precondition for the continuation of
maritime traffic. When transport risks increase there may be a dramatic rise in insurance
costs and international reinsurance markets cease to function. Decision-making of the
Finnish transport business regarding key issues is gradually migrating abroad.


-----

**4.** **Serious disruptions in public utilities**

For the functioning of society, the key elements of public utilities are water supply,
wastewater management, waste management and district heating. In addition,
securing the preconditions for the public transport system is societally important.
Municipalities bear, for the main part, responsibility for these functions.
Contamination of a water source or exceptional drought may cause a disturbance

in water supply. This could also be caused by the difficulty in obtaining essential
maintenance services, spare parts or processing chemicals. Old distribution networks
and cutting investments for renewing the infrastructure increase disruptions of
supply. Epidemics caused by contaminated water constitute an extensive local threat
to the health care system and the well-being of the population. Of primary concern in
Finland are small groundwater suppliers without adequate disinfection capabilities.
Widespread urban epidemics can be caused by the breakdown of the water treatment
system. Exceptional floods, for example, may cause serious disturbances to the
wastewater systems.
Waste management as a whole tolerates disturbances; the most vulnerable part,

however, is waste transport. In the disposal and treatment of sudden and exceptional
amounts of waste which could be the result of a large-scale oil spill or radioactive
fallout, for example, transport and handling capacity would create problems as well
as the sites which could be needed for the waste.
Serious disruptions in public utilities are likely to be caused by weather conditions

or inherent problems in the systems and not by an intentional or negligent act.
However, intentional criminal or terrorist acts can threaten also the functions of
public utilities.

**5.** **Serious disturbances in food supply**

As for primary production, processing and distribution system, food supply is highly
centralised regionally, which increases the system’s vulnerability. For example energy
supply, information systems, outsourced support services, water supply and logistics
form central dependency relations. The food industry depends heavily on imports
as a large part of raw materials, packing materials and in particular chemicals are
either partly or entirely imported. They play a key role in safeguarding agriculture
and food supply. Even if the level of primary production were sufficient, the securing
of the preconditions for the processing industry poses a challenging entity to the
functioning of food supply.
In primary production, livestock farming is more vulnerable than plant cultivation

because it is highly dependent on electricity, energy and water supply, transport
logistics and the functioning of information systems. Regional centralisation, the
intensely increasing farm size and prevalence of automation and machine systems
have increased the vulnerability of livestock farming. Dependency on machine and
equipment repair services and the risk of epizootic diseases have been on the increase


-----

because of these factors. Today, the difficulty in finding skilled workforce is also a
growing risk factor.
The dependency of farms on inputs for production and the processing industry as

well as the functioning of their resource planning systems forms a chain of functions
where significant disturbances would cause great losses in production. Livestock
farming is today dependent on the feed industry and in particular the availability of
additional protein; protein dependency is one of the key factors affecting production.

Animal and plant disease epidemics may cause serious disturbances in food

supply. Already at the threat phase they generate additional costs and work. The
internalisation of food markets poses threats to food safety and challenges to food
control. Food crises in the area of the EU are often linked to zoonoses, which are
dangerous to humans, or to highly contagious livestock diseases. Should foreign
substances enter the food production chain, this could result in widespread
withdrawal of feed and foodstuffs from the market.

**6.** **Serious disturbances in the financial and payment systems**

A well-functioning financial and payment system is a fundamental prerequisite for
the functioning of the economy and society. It requires a stable financial system which
is capable of conducting its fundamental tasks such as the transmission of financing
and payments, pricing of financial instruments and risk sharing. Furthermore, the
risk-bearing capability of the actors in the financial market and the confidence of
citizens in financial institutions and infrastructure must be sufficient to sustain
disturbances in the operating environment.
A concrete example of a serious disturbance in the financial market is the global

financial crisis the worst phase of which passed during 2009. The infrastructure of
the financial sector showed its capability to function reliably also in crisis situations.
Liquidity and infection risks, caused by the internal problems of the financial sector,
have diminished. The operating environment continues to be difficult for the actors
in the financial market as recovery has relied on the exceptionally extensive support
measures of authorities. The recovery of economic growth is still uncertain. Despite
weakening performance the profitability and solvency of the Finnish bank sector
have, however, remained good in an extremely difficult operating environment.
In the future, the risk situation of banks will be more and more clearly linked to

general economic development. It is anticipated that a diminishing interest margin
and growing credit losses will weaken the profitability of the bank sector in the
foreseeable future. The large capital buffers of the banks will sustain, however, the
anticipated losses. In the light of the stress tests the solvency of the financial sector
is assessed to be able to take weaker economic development than expected. A key
question is the ability of the financial system to maintain the granting of debts to
support economic recovery.
The internalisation of the domestic financial market infrastructure continues

alongside European integration. When functions are centralised, good governance
represents a way to decrease the exposure of both the infrastructure and its users


-----

to risks. This requires transparency when structures are changing, in other words
the gathering of information for the needs of market participants and authorities is
safeguarded.

The most important risks and threat scenarios that differ from anticipated
development in the coming years are as follows:

###### » extended recession with the operating environment of the financial sector »

weakening anew

###### » the banks in crises remain dependent on the support from the financial »

market

###### » while economy recovers the lending capability of the financial system »

remains weak

###### » regulatory reforms of the financial system are not implemented and, as a »

result, structural weaknesses remain in the system

###### » problems emerge in the information technology of an important »

infrastructure actor or in liquidity


The internationalisation of the infrastructure of the payment and security

markets continues. In the future, the different parts of the infrastructure will be
increasingly transferred outside Finland to benefit from European integration
and large-scale production. The adoption of the single euro payments area
(SEPA) continues. It is likely that payments on account will be processed for the
main part outside Finland.
The Markets in Financial Services directive (MiFID) tightens the competition of

trading in securities. As a result of the directive, Helsinki Stock Exchange introduced
central counter party clearing in autumn 2009. Compared to the previous working
methods, the change is considerable and improves the counterparty risk management
of dealers. As a result, one part of the chain of trading in securities was transferred
abroad.
A central threat scenario for the infrastructure is that problems relating to the

information technology or liquidity of an important actor, such as an international
bank, reflect on the infrastructure. Because Finland’s infrastructure is highly
centralised, problems of a substantial actor would strongly reflect on us. If confidence
in financial institutions is diminished the problems of the infrastructure that the end
users face could be more far-reaching than normally. For example, extensive copying
of payment cards could erode the citizens’ trust in the means of payment.

The biggest risks in the insurance business relate to the investments of insurance

companies. A dramatic fall of stock prices rapidly reduces the working capital of
insurance companies and weakens their solvency. The impact is most significant for
employment pension insurance companies.


-----

**7.** **Disruptions in the availability of public funding**

The work of the public sector plays a central role for the well-being of citizens. Public
administration is responsible, for example, for providing various services, allocating
income transfers to different population groups and maintaining and developing
infrastructure needed for the functioning of society. The expenses of the public sector
are for the main part financed by taxes, social security contributions and capital
incomes. Furthermore, borrowing can be used to level out the effects of economic
fluctuations on the resources available to public administration.
As a result of the financial crisis, Finland’s incurring of debt has increased to a

record-high level. Despite improving economic outlook, without strongly balancing
measures the state will have to finance a larger part than before of its expenses
through borrowing. For the financing of the public economy, the amount of public
debt constitutes a larger threat than before. The more in debt the public economy is,
the more vulnerable is the availability of financing for disturbances and crises in the
operating environment.

It is typical of crises that the financial position of the public economy and,

in particular, the state economy tends to weaken when the preconditions for
economic activities are degraded. The tax revenue may fall at the same time as
public expenditure is under pressure to rise because of unemployment, for example.
Furthermore, responding to disturbances that jeopardise the functioning of society
usually increases various expenses as the focus is on preventing the repercussions of
the crisis.

Apart from various economic phenomena, a serious disturbance in economic

development can also be linked to the heightening of a military-political conflict and
tension. All crises which lead to reduced economic activity may, when lasting for
a long time, jeopardise the availability of funding for the public economy. Possible
disturbances in international financial markets or collapsed confidence in Finland’s
capability to pay its debts may quite quickly reflect on the availability of loans and an
increased interest rate.

As a small and open economy Finland is dependent on the status and development

of the World economy. Economic integration in all its forms has increased the
effectiveness and production of the world economy. Although the integration
development has brought about many positive impacts, the interdependency of
national economies has increased and their vulnerability has increased as a result of
different economic crises that have happened globally.

Problems in the availability of public funding mean that as different crises come

to a head, resorting to tightened taxation and cutting expenditure is unavoidable.
Disturbances in the availability of financing the public economy reflect on the
functioning of the entire society.


-----

**8.** **Serious disturbances in the health and welfare of the**
**population**

The well-being of the population can be threatened by an extended recession,
pandemics and dangerous infectious diseases, radiation accidents and other
environmental accidents, contamination of food and drinking water, chemical
threats, difficulties in obtaining pharmaceuticals or medical equipment and the
availability of skilled workforce. Challenges posed by the climate change, the ageing
of the population, social exclusion and the general deterioration of the health of the
population constitute more gradually developing threats.
An extended recession may generate problems in providing the required social

and health care services for the population or in maintaining social protection.
Inadequacies in social insurance financing and liquidity may complicate the
maintenance of income security. In such cases, the functioning of the social insurance
system may become disturbed.
Internationalisation and people’s mobility have, for their part, increased

the threat of epidemics. New and for us very rare infectious diseases may cause
serious epidemics and require capabilities and measures which are not in use in
normal situations. A pandemic may have wide-ranging effects on the health of
the population, the functioning of the social and health care system and society’s
vital functions. A pandemic would cause major changes in people’s daily lives, for
example in going to work, education, making a living and the community spirit.
Already now a number of bacteria and viruses which are drug-resistant pose a
considerable challenge to our health care system.
As social and regional tendency to exclusion increases the people living

outside the regular societal structures are a major challenge. Being outside
the working life, poverty, insufficient integration of immigrants, illnesses and
the increasing use of intoxicants and drugs strongly contribute to exclusion. It
increases the tendency to illnesses, infectious diseases, accidents and premature
death; it also increases violence in families and disturbed behaviour especially in
young people. Exclusion and disturbed civil peace undermine national unity and
the psychological resilience to crisis.


-----

**9.** **Major accidents, extreme natural phenomena and**
**environmental threats**

Major accidents or natural disasters caused by freak weather phenomena often bring
about widespread destruction or danger to human life, property or the environment.
They very often have direct and indirect effects of different extent on the well-being of
the population. These accidents occur unexpectedly and may have only local impact
at first. However, their effect can continue to expand, unless rapid and efficient rescue
activities can be organised. Major accidents are normally caused by human error or
technical system malfunctions.
The most probable culprits for an industrial major accident are plants dealing in

hazardous substances, such as nuclear plants and the so-called Seveso-plants, which
contain an inherent risk for a major accident. An accident in these types of plants
could result in a radiation or chemical accident, presenting a clear danger to humans,
property, water sources and the environment. Nuclear radiation or emissions of
hazardous substances may restrict the use of certain areas, as well as animals and
foodstuffs in the area, for years to come.
In passenger traffic a major accident causes loss of human lives and, in case of

public transport, blocks people’s mobility. In passenger and goods traffic and in
particular when hazardous substances are transported a major accident may also lead
to material damage and environmental problems such as contamination of soil or
water and shores.

Widespread fires and other accidents in public buildings may prevent the use

of the premises over a long period of time. Accidents or criminal or terrorist acts
in large venues and public buildings may pose an immediate threat to people and
property as well as to the continuation of all activities.
From the Finnish perspective, the most likely extreme natural phenomena are

storms, heavy rains and a sudden rise in the level of water. The adverse effects target
in the first place the functioning of critical infrastructure. Extreme phenomena can
jeopardise people’s health and safety and cause an environmental catastrophe which
could have long-term effects on the environment and living conditions.
Environmental threats are changes in the environment which may threaten

the health or living conditions of the population by destroying the preconditions
of business, agriculture and forestry, contaminating water sources, threatening the
existence of species and eroding infrastructures. Changes in the environment may
develop rapidly; such cases normally involve environmental accidents. Gradually
developing environmental threats, such as gradual contamination, are more difficult
to detect. Their detrimental effects usually reach deep into the basic functions of
ecosystems and often cause massive damage.
Environmental threats can also be generated by human activity or extreme

forces of nature. A severe environmental threat may be the result of poor industrial
planning involving the use of raw materials, land and minerals, potable water as
well as logging. Environmental threats can also be created by the wrong handling of
industry and urban waste.


-----

At their worst, environmental dangers involve the entire earth. Other global

environmental threats include ozone depletion, loss of biodiversity, depletion of nonrenewable natural resources, diminishing potable water resources and land erosion.
Environmental threats may remain regional even if their impact was felt in several
countries. The most serious regional threat in our near environs is the deterioration
and, particularly, eutrophication of the Baltic Sea as well as the risk of averages due to
the rapidly increasing shipping. A local environmental threat can also be serious. For
example, as a result of industrial production or poor waste management, the heavy
metal or chemical concentrations contents can rise above approved limits for health
in the surface water and ground water.
Accidents can occur spontaneously and they can also be intentional whereas

extreme natural phenomena are, as the name suggests, non-intentional. Also
environmental threats must be regarded as non-intentional.

**10.** **Terrorism and other criminality that endanger social order**

There is not so far a generally accepted definition for terrorism. Terrorism
usually refers to violent, illegal, national or international, activity or the threat
of violence with the objective of causing unrest and deep fear. Most often the
aim of a terrorist act is to force political leaders to succumb to the terrorists’
wishes. It is typical of their action to seek and exploit visibility in the media to
achieve their goals.

The threat of terrorism against Finland is considered low. It is possible

that terrorists might attempt to use Finnish territory as one of their areas of
transit, rest and hiding. Furthermore, there is always the danger of ideologically
motivated sabotage which most often targets property. The United States, large
Nato countries, Russia, Israel, moderate Arab countries and their citizens, leaders
and economic interests continue to be seen as primary targets. However, the
possibility of Finnish embassies, companies or individuals being targeted abroad
by terrorists cannot be excluded.

Representatives, foreign missions and other premises of the terrorists’ primary

target countries, as well as their vessels and aircraft, also exist in Finland, and
may be targeted by terrorists. Major international meetings and other comparable
events organised in Finland could also increase the risk of terrorism. On the
other hand, strikes against infrastructure vital for the functioning of society are
considered unlikely. Terrorist acts committed abroad, in particular if weapons of
mass destruction are used, may also introduce direct or indirect spill-over effects
in Finland.
The threat of terrorist acts where CBRNE elements would be present is less likely

than other types of terrorist threats but they would have serious repercussions.
Factors relating to the proliferation of hazardous substances such as technological
development and other trends may increase the risk in the future. Terrorist acts
involving such threats do not need to take place on a large scale to lead to grave
physical and psychological consequences. Instead of a large number of casualties, the


-----

objective may be to generate fear, economic and social repercussions or merely to
create disturbances.
Violent radicalisation can create a threat if spreading wide and, as a result,

contribute to the gradual collapse of the welfare society.

Organised crime which is established in Finland further develops its

networks and mutual co-operation. Identified international and domestic
criminal organisations become more active and increase their acitivities.
Strengthened international co-operation between criminal groups influence
the concrete forms that criminal activities take. From the point of networking
and management, prisons are an integral part of the operating environment of
criminal organisations.
Criminal organisations are particularly active in drug-related crime but they also

make determined use of business activities to support their operations and to expand
into financial crime. At the same time the grey economy markets gain ground in the
Finnish business sector.
Even if mutual agreements and division of tasks are more advantageous for

criminal activities tensions between criminal groups occur. Violent settling of
disputes between criminal groups and the resulting retaliations can cause serious
situations for outsiders and weaken public order and security. Organised crime has
already clearly brutalised violent crime. When threats against authorities and key
witnesses increase law enforcement and the legal system can be impeded.
In the context of international organised crime, Finland is still a periphery,

providing mainly a ground for organised crime against property and drug-related
crime from neighbouring areas. Organised crime from Russia continues its efforts
to infiltrate the Finnish business life and seeks to establish itself and influence
for example the forwarding business, logistics companies and foreign trade. The
reliability of business activities and their various branches can diminish. Corruption
can increase if the operating modes of organised crime from neighbouring areas are
adopted more and more often.


-----

**11.** **Serious disturbances in border security**

Illegal immigration is a global phenomenon. An increasingly large part of illegal
entry happens as a result of trafficking in human beings and human smuggling,
organised by international organised crime. Illegal immigration is rooted in social
inequality, insecurity, population growth, armed conflicts, ethnic issues and in the
quest for a better life. Conflict areas and countries with clearly lower standards of
living compared to the west are the countries of origin of illegal immigration and
more extensive migrations.

Trafficking in human beings is the fastest growing criminal activity. It is also one

way for terrorists to finance their activities. Many other forms of serious cross-border
crime are often linked to trafficking in human beings. Millions reside illegally within
the EU and in its neighbours. Particularly worrisome global phenomena involve the
trafficking in and smuggling of children and the organ trade the effects of which may
be seen in Finland, too.
Finland is both a target and a transit area of illegal immigration. The good

security situation and social welfare as well as good connections to the other western
countries make Finland lucrative for these purposes. As illegal immigration increases,
the threat of more and more people living on the outside of society or the supervision
of the authorities increases. However, no massive migratory flows that could directly
jeopardize our security have taken place, nor are they more likely in the foreseeable
future.
Illegal immigration and illegal residence lay the foundations for other threats,

such as the shadow economy, illegal employment and terrorism. A growing number
of people, whose real identity and citizenship will never be established, continue to
reside in Finland.
Armed conflicts, ethnic cleansing, nuclear accidents, natural disasters or seriously

degraded livelihood prospects in Finland’s neighbouring regions could generate a
major influx of asylum seekers. An epidemic breakout could also spawn dangerous
migratory flows if sufficient medical treatment was unavailable in the country
of origin. A large-scale influx could also be the result of deliberate action on the
part of some state. In such a case, tens of thousands of illegal asylum seekers could
arrive at the border in a short period of time. Processing the applications of asylum
seekers, identifying accommodation as well as organizing food and health care would
significantly tie up society’s resources. The border control and asylum policies of
Finland’s neighbouring regions play an important role in determining whether such
a situation could develop.

Threats to border security are the result of intentional acts. Direct disturbances

and problems generated by these threats can be and should be addressed with the
authorities’ activities. The main reasons for border security threats are, however, big
international social and economic issues which cannot be much directly influenced
even with national political decisions.


-----

**12.** **A political, economic and military pressure**

Through political, economic and military pressure means activity a state or another
actor aims to influence, wilfully and deliberately, governmental decision-making in
another state or to challenge another state’s sovereignty in order to achieve political,
economic or other strategic goals which are non-negotiable or unacceptable for
the state in question. Such pressure could focus on the state leadership, the public
opinion nationally or internationally, the functioning of society or the citizens’ will or
capability to defend the nation. It would also partly aim to demoralise the population.
The party putting on the pressure may utilise instruments of influence and strategic
communication on the information environment and tie them to political, economic
and military measures of pressure. Pressure can be exercised in international relations
and international organisations as well as in the media. It may occur in isolated cases,
increase gradually or measures of pressure can occur simultaneously. Information
operations of various types, such as network interference, are more and more often
linked to political, economic and military pressure.
Political pressure may include contesting or limiting the normal co-operation

and interaction between states or the preconditions of economic activity. Attempts
can be made to limit Finland’s international freedom of action. The pressure may
also occur as a result of a conflict or a cultural clash between the EU and some other
party, in conjunction with which attempts are made to influence Finland in order to
weaken the Union’s internal cohesion and solidarity.
It is possible that, in addition to measures of pressure, Finland would be offered

certain advantages if it agreed to accept the demands. Should a large international
interest group, be it political, religious or economic, attempt to influence Finland or
Finnish actors, it could be construed as political pressure.
Economic pressure aims to impact the national economy and create uncertainty

among the population. It may include embargo and sanction-related measures, such
as impeding or interrupting the import of energy, raw materials and goods as well
as e-commerce and financial transactions. Obtaining loans from the international
finance market can be made more difficult and unjustifiable increases of debt
expenses can be imposed. The capabilities of companies to procure critical goods
and services from abroad may be obstructed. Vital foreign-owned companies can
be regulated or closed down altogether. Transports of critical materials and relevant
logistic functions can be interfered with, for instance, by restricting the availability of
vessels or their access to certain sea areas or ports.
Military pressure can include violations of territorial integrity, increased military

exercises and troop concentrations close to our borders, military intelligence
activities, armed skirmishes and sabotage, interference in land, sea and air traffic as
well as telecommunications and information operations. The pressure can also be
intensified by means of asymmetric warfare.


-----

**13.** **The use of military force**

Political, economic or military pressure may continue with the use of military force
if the party exerting pressure on Finland has not reached its vital objectives by other
means. The use of military force against Finland may be part of a European-level
crisis which reflects on or escalates to Finland; in such a case the pre-crisis measures
would not necessarily be directed against Finland.

The use of military force may begin with a surprise attack if the adversary

believes that such an attack will be sufficiently successful. The strike aims to force
the state leadership to make the desired decisions by crippling vital systems,
targets and functions in society. Possible military targets include the integrated
intelligence, surveillance and command and control system as well as air and naval
defences, airfields and ports. An attack may include the disruption of air and sea
traffic. It can be a single-service or a joint operation, involving long-range weapon
systems and special forces. Information operations constitute an integral element
of the activities.
The use of military force aiming to surprise is especially suited to bringing

a highly advanced society to its knees. Society’s increasing vulnerability creates
favourable conditions for the surprise element in the use of force. When a
strike is being considered, key success factors include the functioning of the
political decision-making system, the leaders’ resolve and the population’s
crisis tolerance.
Such attacks typically involve normal and precision-guided air-to-ground

weapons, cruise and artillery missiles, electronic warfare using, for instance,
jamming, information system intrusions as well as electronic weapon systems
and special forces. Information warfare, such as psychological operations and
propaganda, support the goals of the strike. Limited ground operations using
troops in high readiness are possible, especially, when the defender is unprepared
for such operations. Weapons of mass destruction and the use of relating materiel
can also be used.
A large-scale use of military force can begin with a surprise strike, continued by

intensive use of force involving all services. It would be aimed directly at targets and
functions vital for defence, endeavouring to seize key areas from the viewpoint of the
war’s ultimate goal. An attempt to break the backbone of the defence will use as wide
a range of instruments as possible. The objective would be pursued by the combined
impact of information warfare, special forces and sabotage, long-range precision
weapons and a ground attack, and by isolating the country internationally. Achieving
this goal does not necessarily require seizing extensive land areas or annihilating
the entire armed forces of the defender. It takes months to prepare for a large-scale
military operation.


-----

###### POSSIBLE DISTURBANCES

By maintaining and developing capabilities it is possible to prepare for the management of
disturbances, which comprises planning readiness, materiel readiness and the expertise of
organisations and their personnel.
The planning for special situations, which was started and organised on the basis of the

Strategy for Securing the Functions Vital to Society adopted in 2006, provides the necessary
foundation and structure for the ministries to prepare for various disturbances. The planning
and organisation of preparedness must be continuous, however, extending to the different
administrative levels and taking into account the activities of the business sector and organisations.
Possible disturbances have been compiled in the matrix below where their connection to

the threat scenarios described in the Strategy is assessed. A list of disturbances or how they are
connected is not unambiguous and extensive but it deals with significant disturbances in society
that a number of actors may benefit from and use as support to plan and organise preparedness.

The exchange of information between various actors and the assessment of their capability needs
are facilitated when the operational infrastructure and operational concept of preparedness
are as congruent as possible. The plan structure below can be used in preparedness planning.
It covers the central issues to be taken into account when risk analyses are drawn up and
preparations are made for the management of disturbances.

###### » threat assessment» » the basic plan to prepare for a disturbance and manage a possibly escalated situation »
 » prevention» » information gathering» » compiling and disseminating the situation picture» » preparing for situation management, including advance preparations » » situation management» » communications»
 » implementation of the key tasks»
 » the areas of responsibility of various actors and lines of authority» » immeadiate measures» » required resources»
 » an assessment and plan for co-operation needs»
 » co-operation with other administrative branches» » co-operation with other actors in society»
 » upholding plans, training and exercises»


-----

|POSSIBLE DISTURBANCES AND THEIR CONNECTION TO THREAT SCENARIOS IN THE STRATEGY|Serious disturbances in the power supply|Serious dis- turbances in the telecom- munications and informa- tion systems – cyber threats|Serious disturbances in transport logistics|Serious disruptions in public utilities|Serious disturbances in food supply|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Disruption in the availability, transmission and distribution of electricity|x|x|x|x|x|
|Disruptions in the functioning of telecommunications and information systems|x|x|x|x|x|
|Damage in the ICT infrastructure|x|x|x|||
|Disturbance in the nation-wide radio and television broadcasts|x|x||||
|Transport disruptions|x||x|x|x|
|Disruptions in the availability of imported fuels|x||x|x||
|Disruption in the fuel supply|x||x|x||
|Disruption in the supply of non- durable consumer goods|x|x|x|||
|Disruption in the water supply (incl. wastewater management)|x|x|x|x||
|Disruption in waste management|||x|x||
|Failure of district heating|x|x||x||
|Failure of financial transactions|x|x||||
|Disruption in the availability of cash||x|x|||
|Collapse of the credit rating of the state and municipalities||||||
|Downfall of the solvency or reinsurance cover of an insurance company||||||
|A pandemic or other widespread outbreak of serious infectious disease|x|x|x|x||
|A serious animal or plant disease outbreak|||||x|
|Mass extinction of species|||||x|


-----

|Serious disturbances in the fniancial and payment systems|Disruptions in the availability of public funding|Serious disturbances in the health and welfare of the population|Major ac- cidents, extreme natural phe- nomena and envi- ronmental threats|Terrorism and other criminality that endanger social order|Serious disturbances in border security|A political, economic and military pressure|Teh use of military force|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|x|x|x|x|x||x|x|
|x|x|x|x|x|x|x|x|
|x|||x|x|||x|
||||x|x||x|x|
||x|x|x|x|x|x|x|
||x||||x|x|x|
||||x|x|||x|
|||x|x|||x|x|
|||x|x|x|||x|
|||x||||||
|||x|x|x|||x|
|x|x|||x||x|x|
|x||x||x||||
|x|x|x|||||x|
|x|x|x||||||
|x||x|x|x||||
|||x|x|x|x|||
|||x|x|x|x||x|


-----

**POSSIBLE DISTURBANCES**
**AND THEIR**
**CONNECTION TO**
**THREAT SCENARIOS IN**
**THE STRATEGY**

|Declining conditions in primary production|x|Col3|Col4|Col5|x|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Widespread contamination of soil or waters|||||x|
|A storm or flooding and a dam disaster|x|x|x|x|x|
|An accident relating to CBRNE hazards||||||
|Land, sea or air traffic accident|||x|||
|An accident afefcting Finns or action taken against them abroad||||||
|A terrorist attack or a clear threat thereof|x|x||x||
|A criminal act that widely endangers the population|x|x||x|x|
|A criminal act that widely endangers functions in society|x|x|x|x||
|Jeopardised border security||||||
|Major infulx of asylum seekers||||||
|Adversely infulencing the State’s capability to function||||||
|Disruption in foreign trade|||x|||
|Threatening with WMD||||||
|Information operation|x|x|x|||
|Provocative violation of territorial integrity||||||
|An armed incident|x|x||||
|Teh use of military force attempting to surprise|x|x|x|x|x|
|A large-scale use of military force|x|x|x|x|x|


**Serious** **Serious dis-** **Serious** **Serious** **Serious**
**disturbances** **turbances in** **disturbances** **disruptions** **disturbances**
**in the power** **the telecom-** **in transport** **in public** **in food**
**supply** **munications** **logistics** **utilities** **supply**

**and informa-**
**tion systems –**
**cyber threats**


-----

**Serious**
**disturbances**
**in the**
**financial and**
**payment**
**systems**


**The use of**
**military**
**force**

|Col1|Col2|x|x|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||x|x|||||
|||x|x|||||
||x|x|x|x|||x|
||||x|x||||
|||x|x|x||x||
|x|x|x||x||x|x|
|||x|x|x||x|x|
|x|x|||x||x|x|
|||||x|x|x|x|
|||x|x|x|x|x||
||x|x||x||x|x|
|x|x|x|x|x|x|x|x|
|||x|x|x||x|x|
|x|x|||x||x|x|
||||||x|x|x|
||x|x||x|x|x|x|
|||x|||x|x|x|
|x|x|x|x|x|x|x|x|


**Disruptions** **Serious** **Major ac-** **Terrorism** **Serious** **A political,**
**in the** **disturbances** **cidents,** **and other** **disturbances** **economic**
**availability** **in the health** **extreme** **criminality** **in border** **and military**
**of public** **and welfare** **natural phe-** **that** **security** **pressure**
**funding** **of the** **nomena** **endanger**

**population** **and envi-** **social order**

**ronmental**
**threats**


-----

###### STRATEGIC TASKS

The strategic tasks which are central to securing society’s vital functions and the ministry
responsible for the development of each strategic task are presented in the table below. The
development of most strategic tasks and relating capabilities is connected to measures and
resource allocation by other ministries, regional and local administration, the business
community and organisations.

|STRATEGIC TASK|RESPONSIBLE MINISTRY|
|---|---|
|Management of Government affairs Guaranteeing the proper functioning of the Government Finland’s activities in the European Union and securing the national preparation and handling of EU matters Functioning of Government communications Maintenance of the Government’s situation picture Securing the rule of law Holding elections.|PMO PMO. PMO PMO MoJ MoJ|
|International activity Maintaining contacts to foreign states and key international actors Protecting and assisting abroad Finnish citizens and those residing in Finland on a permanent basis Securing Finland’s foreign trade Comprehensive crisis management International military crisis management International civilian crisis management International disaster responce|MFA. MFA. MFA MFA MoD MoI MoI|
|Finland’s defence capability Finland´s military defence Supporting the other authorities|MoD MoD|


-----

|STRATEGIC TASK|RESPONSIBLE MINISTRY|
|---|---|
|Internal security Guaranteeing protection under the law Public order and security Emergency services and maritime search and rescue Flood risk management and dam safety Emergency response functions Oil and chemical spill response on land and water Border management Immigration control Teh management of a major infulx of asylum seekers.|MoJ MoI MoI MoAF MoI MoE. MoI MoI MoI|
|Functioning of the economy and infrastructure Acquiring and allocating financial resources Teh financial system and money management Safeguarding the insurance services Securing the fuel supply Safeguarding the electric power supply Safeguarding the electronic ICT systems Safeguarding the state administration’s IT functions and information security and the service systems common to the state administration Supporting the construction and maintenance of warning . and alert systems Safeguarding the continuation of transports Safeguarding the primary production of food supply Safeguarding the water supply Safeguarding food processing and distribution Safeguarding critical industries and services Guaranteeing housing Securing a sufficient labour workforce Maintaining the education and research system Detecting, controlling and adapting to changes in the environment Waste management|MoF MoF MoSAH MoEE MoEE MoTC MoF. . MoTC. MoTC MoAF MoAF MoEE MoEE MoE MoEE MoEC MoE. MoE|


-----

|STRATEGIC TASK|RESPONSIBLE MINISTRY|
|---|---|
|The population’s income security and capability to function Income security Securing the social and health care services and . environmental health care services Guaranteeing the availability of medical supplies and equipment Teh detection, surveillance and management systems . for health risks.|MoSAH MoSAH MoSAH. . MoSAH|
|Psychological resilience to crisis Education Strengthening cultural identity and protecting cultural heritage Securing religious services|MoEC MoEC MoEC|


**Key of abbreviations:**

PMO = Prime Minister’s Office
MoJ = Ministry of Justice
MFA = Ministry for Foreign Affairs
MoD = Ministry of Defence
MoI = Ministry of the Interior
MoAF = Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
MoE = Ministry of the Environment
MoF = Ministry of Finance
MoSAH = Ministry of Social Affairs and Health
MoEE = Ministry of Employment and the Economy
MoTC = Ministry of Transport and Communications
MoEC = Ministry of Education and Culture


-----

###### TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 

|Border management system|Relating to policies, legislation, co-operation, sharing of responsibilities, personnel, instruments and technology of difefrent levels, this is the entity of measures which are implemented by the competent authorities of member states in co-operation with other actors, when necessary. Teh system beneftis, among other things, from the four- step border security model and the common integrated risk analysis to guarantee a consistent and high- level external border control and smooth border traffic.|
|---|---|
|CBRNE|CBRNE is an abbreviation from the English words chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear and explosives. CBRNE threats refer to incidents or weapons in which any of these fvie hazards are present, aiming at causing significant physical or social damage or destruction.|
|Comprehensive approach (CA) in crisis management|A comprehensive approach in supporting crisis management on the ground by various means refers to diplomacy, civilian and military crisis management, development co-operation and humanitarian assistance. Teh goal is to coherently co- ordinate difefrent activities while respecting the independent role of each actor. Teh impact of activities must be assessed in its entirety.|
|Comprehensive concept of security|Teh comprehensive concept of security comprises security issues which, if exacerbated, may turn into threats that can jeopardise or seriously harm Finland, Finns or the functions vital to Finnish society. Wide-ranging threats include premeditated action such as the use of military force, terrorism or interference with information networks. Tehy can also occur spontaneously, such as widespread failures of the electric grid or extreme forces of nature.|
|Comprehensive defence approach|Comprehensive defence approach is all of the military and civil functions by which Finland’s sovereignty and the livelihood and security of its citizens are safeguarded against threats by other nations or other external threats. Co-ordination of the comprehensive defence approach involves co-ordinating the measures of the public sector, i.e. the Government, state authorities and municipalities, the private sector and voluntary activities by citizens to maintain the functions vital to society under all situations.|


-----

|Critical infrastructure|Critical Infrastructure (CI) comprises the structures and functions which are critical for the continuous functioning of society. This involves physical facilities and structures as well as electronic functions and services; to guarantee these, specific critical points must be found and secured while at the same time paying close attention to the functioning of the infrastructural entity.|
|---|---|
|Cyber threat|So far the use of this term is not established on the national level. Here it is used to describe a threat against interdependent networks, including various information networks and data transmission networks, internet, telephone networks, computer systems and the embedded processors and controlling devices of the critical production.|
|Defence capability|This is developed and maintained through defence policy, co-ordination of the comprehensive defence approach, and military defence, resulting in the readiness and ability to carry out national defence tasks in all situations.|
|Defence system|Teh defence system is an entity that consists of a command and control system, intelligence and surveillance system, logistics systems and troop structure.|
|Disturbance|This is a threat or an occurrence which endangers security in society, capacity to act or the population’s living conditions. Co-operation and communication of the authorities and other actors on a wider or more intensive scale are needed to manage the situation.|
|DSA|DSA (Designated Security Authority) is a designated security authority who is responsible for carrying out the tasks enacted by law as well as other tasks generated by international security obligations. Teh Ministry of Defence, the Defence Command and the Finnish Security Intelligence Service are designated security authorities in Finland.|
|Emergency conditions|Emergency conditions are laid down in the Emergency Powers Act and in the State of Defence Act; it is not possible to control them with the regular powers or resources of the authorities.|


-----

|Emergency services|An entity that encompasses the prevention of accidents, rescue activities and civil defence. Rescue activities consist of urgent tasks in response to an accident or the risk of an accident carried out to save people and/or property, to limit damage and to mitigate the consequences. Rescue activities are also implemented in situations involving comparable deliberate harm or the threat of it. Civil defence refers to the protection of people and property, the carrying out of rescue services in a emergency conditions, and to preparedness for these tasks.|
|---|---|
|The EU’s emergency and crisis co-ordination arrangement|This is the EU’s common crisis-management system and model for dealing with cross-border crises (Integrated EU Crisis Management Arrangements). It is based on the principle of subsidiary, i.e. responding to emergencies is primarily a matter for member states whose national competence is fully respected. Tehse arrangements come into operation in emergencies within or outside the EU requiring political co-ordination when: »» the situation directly afefcts several member states or requires action at EU level, »» the situation simultaneously involves several member states, or »» the situation afefcts the interests of several member states and concerns areas for which EU bodies are competent.|
|Independent preparedness|Property owners and occupants as well as business and industrial entrepreneurs, government agencies and other organisations are required to prevent dangers and take proper precautions to protect persons, property and the environment as well as prepare for such rescue activities as they are independently capable of performing.|
|Information security|Information security refers to the administrative, technical and other measures that protect and secure information, services, systems and telecommunications and manage their risks in all security situations. Information security is also a condition in which threats against the confidentiality and integrity of information, information systems and telecommunications security do not pose a significant risk.|
|Internal security|Teh state of affairs in society when the judicial system guarantees rights and freedoms for all and people have no cause to fear crime or disturbances or to feel insecure about events and changes in Finnish society or the increasingly international world.|


-----

|Major accident|An accident which is considered to be especially serious because of the number of killed or injured persons, damage to the environment or property, or the nature of the accident.|
|---|---|
|Major infulx of asylum seekers|This refers to a situation in which the number of asylum seekers is so large that it becomes impossible to process and register them by the means normally available. Teh situation may arise as a result of a massive refugee crisis or deliberate action by some state.|
|Maritime search and rescue|An entity comprising search and rescue (SAR) operations needed to help those in distress at sea, the administration of first aid as well as emergency radio communications. In addition to SAR operations resulting from accidents, maritime SAR also deals with sudden illnesses at sea and other comparable rescue situations.|
|Mass infulx of refugees|This refers to a large-scale infulx of asylum seekers during which large numbers of people have had to abandon their home or country of permanent residence without the possibility of returning because of an armed conflict, other violence or an environmental disaster.|
|NCSA|NCSA is a national communications security authority which acts as an expert in all security matters related to the electronic transfer and handling of classified material and sees to related tasks that are based on international information security obligations.|
|NSA|NSA is a national security authority responsible for providing guidelines for and monitoring that international specially protected data are dealt with accordingly in the state administration, companies and organisations which are to handle international classified material. Teh NSA co- ordinates the activities of designated security authorities (DSA, Designated Security Authority) and of the national communications security authority, represents Finland in international conferences on information security, negotiates for bilateral and multilateral agreements about information security and provides personnel security clearances for the purpose of international co-operation.|
|Preparedness|Teh measures with which it is guaranteed that tasks can be carried out with minimal disruption in all situations. Tehse measures include, among other things, preparedness planning, advance preparations and preparedness exercises.|


-----

|Public order and security|Public order and security encompasses all police activities intended to create and uphold a safe and pleasant living and working environment for the members of society, to combat and prevent violations of justice and disorderly conduct as well as to eliminate disturbances and to solve the violations of justice. Prevention, in the wider sense, embraces crime prevention in its entirety.|
|---|---|
|Security of supply|Teh capacity to maintain the basic activities that are indispensable for safeguarding the population’s living conditions, for sustaining the functioning of critical infrastructures, and the material preconditions for maintaining national preparedness and defence in case of emergency conditions and serious disturbances.|
|Serious crime|An individual aggravated ofefnce, a widespread series of crimes or crimes committed by professional and habitual criminals or organised criminal groups. Serious crime investigation focuses on a person, a group of persons or a community suspected of planning, preparing or committing a serious crime, aiding and abetting a serious crime or having previously done so, and whose aim is to accrue significant unlawful, individual, societal or economic gains or to cause notable property damage.|
|Situation awareness|Teh understanding of decision-makers and their advisors of what has happened, the circumstances under which it happened, the goals of the difefrent parties and the possible developments of events, all of which are needed to make decisions on a specific issue or an entity of issues.|
|Situation picture|This refers to a presentation on a situation or capabilities, compiled on a basis of individual pieces of information, which provides the grounds for situation awareness.|


-----

|The Solidarity Clause included in the Treaty of Lisbon and the obligation of mutual assistance|According to the Solidarity Clause, the Union and its Member States act jointly in a spirit of solidarity if a Member State is the subject of a terrorist attack or the victim of a natural or man-made disaster and requests assistance. Teh Union shall mobilise all the instruments at its disposal, including the military resources made available by the Member States. Teh purpose of the obligation of mutual assistance is to strengthen solidarity between the member states and their commitment to the development of the common security and defence policy. If a Member State is the victim of armed aggression on its territory, the other Member States shall have towards it an obligation of aid and assistance by all the means in their power. Teh concrete meaning and mode of application of solidarity and the obligation of mutual assistance will be defined in practical co-operation Finland creates preparedness to provide and receive aid and assistance in accordance with the solidarity clause and the obligation of mutual assistance.|
|---|---|
|Strategic task|A task assigned to a ministry in the Resolution, indispensable for the securing of society’s vital functions in all situations. Each ministry will carry out its strategic tasks as part of the normal operating and financial planning process and its implementation.|
|Terrorism|Terrorism is politically motivated use of violence or the threat of it, with the intention to instill widespread fear among the population, unlawfully force a government, another state authority or international organisation to do or not do something, or to tolerate something, unlawfully overthrow or change s state’s constitution, seriously disrupt the state’s judicial system, cause grave harm to the national economy or to the foundations of society, or seriously damage the economy or other basic structures of an international organisation.|
|Threat assessment|An assessment of a competent authority or another actor, based on a threat scenario and regarding the tasks the authority is responsible for and disturbances. Teh scenario concretely describes the origin of the threat, target, method of implementation, probability, efefcts on the authority’s tasks as well as response options and the time required for advance preparations.|


-----

|Threat scenario|A threat scenario is a general description of disturbances in the security environment. It presents the impact mechanism, source, target and impact on the target, probability and the most serious disturbances in the threat scenario that are identified.|
|---|---|
|Vital function|This is the collective term for measures vital to the functioning of society. By safeguarding the functions vital to society, national sovereignty, security in society and the livelihood of the population are maintained.|


-----

-----

