-----

###### Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

# Government's Defence Report

###### Finnish Government Helsinki 2021


-----

**Publication sale**

###### Online bookstore
 of the Finnish Government

vnjulkaisumyynti.fi

**Publication distribution**


###### Institutional Repository
 for the Government
 of Finland Valto

julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi

Finnish Government
© 2021 Authors and Ministry of Defence


ISBN pdf: 978-952-383-852-9
ISSN pdf: 2490-0966

ISBN printed: 978-952-383-796-6
ISSN printed: 2490-0613


Layout: Government Administration Department, Publications

Helsinki 2021 Finland


Printed by: PunaMusta Oy, 2021


Printed matter4041-0619Printed matter1234 5678


**PEFC-certified**

The wood used to make
this printing paper
comes from sustainably
managed, monitored
forests.

PEFC/02-31-151 www.pefc.fi


-----

###### Description sheet
 9 September 2021

 Government's Defence Report

**Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80**
**Publisher** Finnish Government

**Group author** Publication type: Government's Defence Report

Commissioned by: Government Programme

**Language** English **Pages** 63

**Abstract**

The Government Defence Report to Parliament provides the defence policy guidelines for
maintaining and developing Finland's defence capability. The Report and its implementation
ensure that Finland's defence capability meets the requirements of the operating
environment.

The Government Report of Foreign and Security Policy (Publications of the Finnish
Government 2020:32) has examined Finland's security policy environment and presented
the goals and priorities of Finnish foreign and security policy. The focus of the analysis in
the Defence Report is on defence policy and on military defence. The Defence Report was
prepared in a cross-governmental cooperation, and the Parliamentary Monitoring Group was
regularly consulted. The Defence Report guidelines cover a time period until the end of this
decade.

The Defence Report and its implementation will ensure Finland's defence capability in an
operating environment that is tense and unpredictable. The implementation will create the
prerequisites for developing and maintaining a defence system that encompasses the entire
country and all domains; it will outline the personnel requirements and economic resources
required for maintaining readiness, for training of conscripts and reservists, and for developing
new capabilities; and it will steer the development of international defence cooperation and
national legislation.

**Keywords** defence policy, national defence, defence systems, reports

**ISBN PDF** 978-952-383-852-9 **ISSN PDF** 2490-0966

**ISBN printed** 978-952-383-796-6 **ISSN printed** 2490-0613

**URN address** [http://urn.fi/URN:ISBN:978-952-383-852-9](http://)


-----

###### Kuvailulehti
 9.9.2021

 Valtioneuvoston puolustusselonteko

**Valtioneuvoston julkaisuja 2021:80**
**Julkaisija** Valtioneuvosto

**Yhteisötekijä** Julkaisun laji: Valtioneuvoston puolustusselonteko
Toimeksiantaja: Hallitusohjelma

**Kieli** englanti **Sivumäärä** 63

**Tiivistelmä**

Valtioneuvoston puolustusselonteko eduskunnalle antaa puolustuspoliittiset linjaukset
Suomen puolustuskyvyn ylläpidolle ja kehittämiselle. Puolustusselonteolla ja sen
toimeenpanolla varmistetaan, että Suomen puolustuskyky vastaa toimintaympäristön
vaatimuksiin.

Valtioneuvoston ulko- ja turvallisuuspoliittisessa selonteossa (VN julkaisuja 2020:30) on
arvioitu Suomen toimintaympäristöä sekä esitetty Suomen ulko- ja turvallisuuspolitiikan
painopisteet ja tavoitteet. Puolustusselonteko syventää tarkastelua puolustuspolitiikan
ja sotilaallisen maanpuolustuksen näkökulmasta. Puolustusselonteko on valmisteltu
poikkihallinnollisessa yhteistyössä ja sen laatimisessa on kuultu parlamentaarista
seurantaryhmää. Puolustusselonteon linjaukset ulottuvat 2020-luvun loppuun.

Puolustusselonteolla ja sen toimeenpanolla turvataan Suomen puolustuskyky jännitteisessä
ja vaikeasti ennakoitavassa toimintaympäristössä, luodaan edellytykset koko maan kattavan
ja kaikki operatiiviset toimintaympäristöt huomioivan puolustusjärjestelmän ylläpidolle ja
kehittämiselle, linjataan valmiuden ylläpidon, asevelvollisten kouluttamisen sekä uusien
suorituskykyjen kehittämisen edellyttämä henkilöstötarve ja taloudelliset voimavarat sekä
ohjataan kansainvälisen puolustusyhteistyön sekä kansallisen lainsäädännön kehittämistä.

**Asiasanat** puolustuspolitiikka, maanpuolustus, puolustusjärjestelmät, selonteot

**ISBN PDF** 978-952-383-852-9 **ISSN PDF** 2490-0966

**ISBN painettu** 978-952-383-796-6 **ISSN painettu** 2490-0613

**Julkaisun osoite** [http://urn.fi/URN:ISBN:978-952-383-852-9](http://)


-----

###### Presentationsblad
 9.9.2021

 Statsrådets försvarsredogörelse

**Statsrådets publikationer 2021:80**
**Utgivare** Statsrådet

**Utarbetad av** Typ av publikation: Statsrådets försvarsredogörelse

Uppdragsgivare: Regeringsprogrammet

**Språk** engelska **Sidantal** 63

**Referat**

Statsrådets försvarsredogörelse till riksdagen drar upp de försvarspolitiska riktlinjerna för hur
den finska försvarsförmågan ska upprätthållas och utvecklas. Genom försvarsredogörelsen och
genom att verkställa den säkerställer man att den finska försvarsförmågan motsvarar de krav
som verksamhetsmiljön ställer.

I statsrådets utrikes- och säkerhetspolitiska redogörelse (Statsrådets publikationer 2020:31)
bedöms Finlands omvärld och presenteras prioriteringarna och målen för den finska utrikesoch säkerhetspolitiken. Försvarsredogörelsen fördjupar granskningen ur försvarspolitikens
och det militära försvarets synvinkel. Försvarsredogörelsen har beretts genom ett
tväradministrativt samarbete, och den parlamentariska uppföljningsgruppen har hörts.
Riktlinjerna i försvarsredogörelsen sträcker sig fram till slutet av 2020-talet.

Genom försvarsredogörelsen och verkställandet av den tryggas Finlands försvarsförmåga i en
spänd och svårförutsägbar verksamhetsmiljö, skapas förutsättningar för att upprätthålla och
utveckla ett försvarssystem som täcker hela landet och beaktar alla domäner, dras riktlinjer
upp för det personalbehov och de ekonomiska resurser som upprätthållandet av beredskapen,
utbildningen av värnpliktiga samt utvecklingen av nya förmågor förutsätter samt styrs
utvecklandet av det internationella försvarssamarbetet och den nationella lagstiftningen.

**Nyckelord** försvarspolitik, landets försvar, försvarssystem, redogörelser

**ISBN PDF** 978-952-383-852-9 **ISSN PDF** 2490-0966

**ISBN tryckt** 978-952-383-796-6 **ISSN tryckt** 2490-0613

**URN-adress** [http://urn.fi/URN:ISBN:978-952-383-852-9](http://)


-----

#### Table of Contents

###### EXECUTIVE SUMMARY...............................................................................................  8

 1 INTRODUCTION .........................................................................................................  11

 2 OPERATING ENVIRONMENT OF FINNISH DEFENCE......................................................  13

 3 CURRENT STATUS OF DEFENCE...................................................................................  19

 4 MAINTENANCE AND DEVELOPMENT OF DEFENCE CAPABILITY....................................  25

4.1 Defence Policy Guidelines.................................................................................. 25

4.2 Defence System Maintenance and Development Priorities................................... 28

4.2.1 Land Defence................................................................................................ 30

4.2.2 Maritime Defence.......................................................................................... 31

4.2.3 Air Defence.................................................................................................. 33

4.2.4 Cyber, Information and Space Defence.................................................................. 34

4.2.5 Other Joint Capabilities of the Finnish Defence Forces................................................ 35

4.2.6 Development of Local Defence........................................................................... 36

4.2.7 Strategic Capability Projects.............................................................................. 37

4.3 Conscription, Voluntary National Defence and Will to Defend the Country............ 38

4.4 Focus Areas of Defence Cooperation................................................................... 40

4.4.1 Multilateral Defence Cooperation:....................................................................... 41

European Union............................................................................................. 41

NATO......................................................................................................... 42

NORDEFCO................................................................................................... 43

Country Groups............................................................................................. 43

4.4.2 Bilateral Defence Cooperation............................................................................ 44

Sweden...................................................................................................... 44

Norway....................................................................................................... 44

United States................................................................................................ 45

Other Partner Countries................................................................................... 45

4.4.3 Crisis Management......................................................................................... 45

4.4.4 International Exercises.................................................................................... 46

4.5 Essential Enablers for Defence............................................................................ 47

4.5.1 Digitalisation and Information Management........................................................... 47

4.5.2 Research and development............................................................................... 48

4.5.3 Military security of supply and partnerships........................................................... 49


-----

4.5.4 Infrastructure............................................................................................... 50

4.5.5 Sustainable development and the environment....................................................... 51

4.5.6 Legislation.................................................................................................. 51

4.6 Personnel and Funding...................................................................................... 52

4.6.1 Personnel.................................................................................................... 52

4.6.2 Funding...................................................................................................... 53

###### 5 SUMMARY.................................................................................................................  56

 Appendix 1: The funding level of the Government Defence Report 2017...............  57

 Appendix 2: Permanent Structured Cooperation (PESCO) and
 the European Defence Fund.....................................................................................  58

 Appendix 3: Country groups....................................................................................  59

 Appendix 4: Concepts, definitions and explanations..............................................  60


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

###### EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The operating environment of Finnish defence will remain tense and unpredictable.

Broad-spectrum influencing against our society has increased and the methods used are
diverse. Despite the increasingly tense international situation, Finland is not under any
immediate military threat. Nonetheless, Finland must prepare for the use or the threat of
use of military force against it.

Finland maintains a credible national defence and ensures sufficient resources for it.
General conscription, a trained reserve, defence of the entire country and a high will
to defend the country will remain the foundation of Finland’s defence. A Parliamentary
Committee on National Defence Obligation and Conscription was established in 2020 to
review the options for developing and strengthening conscription.

The Finnish Defence Forces prepares to counter broad-spectrum influencing, together
with other actors, as part of the evolving national comprehensive security model.
Interagency cooperation must be further developed in the fields of cyber defence,
strategic communication and information defence.

Finland’s defence capability will be maintained on a level that meets the requirements
of the operating environment. Finland will defend its territory and citizens using all of
the society’s resources. By engaging the resources of the entire society, Finland strives to
prevent the use of military force or threats of military force against itself. The capabilities
and readiness of Finnish defence have been developed according to the guidelines set
in the previous Government Defence Report. Defence readiness requirements extend to
include the cyber, space and information domains. Finland must be able to monitor all
domains and, if necessary, activate necessary measures for defence.

The force structure of the Defence Forces wartime units will be reorganised. In the
future, they will be divided into operational forces and local forces. Local defence will be
developed into a package of military capabilities that encompasses the entire country,
which will also contribute to preventing and combating broad-spectrum influencing.
Local forces will be used to maintain national defence reaction capabilities nation-wide
and in all security situations, to enable the effective use of operational forces, and to
safeguard functions vital to society and defence. Land, maritime and air defence, and the


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

joint capabilities of the Defence Forces will be maintained and developed to meet the
requirements of the operating environment. Cyber defence will be developed to better
safeguard, not only the systems of the Defence Forces, but also other systems directly
impacting defence capability. Strategic capability projects will be carried out as planned.

International defence cooperation strengthens Finland’s defence capability. Issues
highlighted in the cooperation are changes in the threat environment, situational
awareness, military capabilities and interoperability in all security situations. Finland is
strengthening its defence cooperation and developing its ability to act together with its
key partners in all security situations affecting Finland. Finland will continue its active
participation in international exercises and military crisis management.

The effects of digitalisation on the operating environment of defence are increasing. They
highlight the importance of maintaining and developing domestic legislation, skills and
technological capabilities. The defence administration will develop its competencies and
capabilities for innovation and foresight, and ensure adequate resources for capability
development and international research cooperation. The possibilities provided by new
technologies will be harnessed in defence capability development.

The operation of the Defence Forces’ critical systems will be ensured in all conditions.
A well-functioning and internationally competitive Finnish defence industry contributes to
the maintenance of military security of supply and the operational capability of national
defence. Partners and their subcontractors have a well-established and significant role in
the defence system and in ensuring the military security of supply.

The required training areas and infrastructure dictated by the tasks of the Defence Forces
will, in cooperation with local actors, be maintained at a level required in all conditions.
The activities of the Defence Forces are dependent on society’s infrastructure. The
structures needed by national defence and military security of supply will be developed
during the reporting period, which extends to the end of the current decade.

The Defence Forces will continue to develop its environmental responsibility. Carbon
neutrality goals will be advanced without compromising defence capability.

Up-to-date legislation is necessary to ensure the statutory prerequisites are in place for
Defence Forces activities.

The cost savings obligations directed at the Defence Forces during previous years and the
currently available resources make it challenging to maintain activities and readiness on
the current level. This also restricts preparations for a crisis or warfare of long duration.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

The number of Defence Forces personnel has to be gradually increased by 500 personyears by the end of the current decade. The increase is needed to maintain the readiness
requirements stemming from the operating environment, to meet conscript and reservist
training requirements, and develop new capabilities. More financial resources are needed
to increase the number of personnel, and to increase the number of contractual military
personnel needed for conscript training.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

### 1 INTRODUCTION

The Government Defence Report to Parliament sets the defence policy guidelines
for maintaining and developing Finland’s defence capability. The report looks at the
developments in the operating environment of defence and evaluates the needs of
defence in the medium term. The Government Defence Report and its implementation
ensure that Finland’s defence capability meets the requirements of the operating
environment.

This Government Defence Report is a continuation of the previous Government Defence
Report (Prime Minister’s Office Publications 7/2017) and Government Report on Finnish
Foreign and Security Policy (Publications of the Finnish Government 2020:32). The analysis
of the operating environment that was presented in the Finnish Foreign and Security
Policy report has also guided the preparation of this Defence Report as prescribed in the
Government Programme. The Defence Report has also taken into account Parliament’s
comments concerning the Government Report on Finnish Foreign and Security Policy.

The goal of Finland’s foreign and security policy is to strengthen Finland’s international
position, to secure its independence and territorial integrity, to strengthen Finland’s
security and prosperity and to ensure that the society functions efficiently. An important
objective of the Finnish foreign and security policy is to take national action and to
engage in international cooperation in order to prevent the emergence of armed conflicts
and situations endangering Finland’s security and society’s ability to act, and of Finland
ending up a party to a military conflict. As a Member State of the European Union, Finland
could not remain an outsider should threats to security emerge in its vicinity or elsewhere
in Europe.

A strong national defence capability is a key prerequisite for achieving the goals of
Finland’s foreign and security policy.

Finland is a militarily non-aligned state which maintains a credible national defence
capability. By maintaining its defence capability, Finland prevents the use of military force
against Finland, shows readiness to respond to the use or the threat of use of military
force, and the capacity to repel any attacks against our country. To strengthen its own
defence capability, Finland participates in international foreign, security and defence
policy cooperation, which has been increasing and getting deeper in recent years.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

The preparation of the Government Defence Report also takes into account other recent
publications: Government Report on Internal Security (Publications of the Finnish
Government 2021:48); the Government Report on EU Policy (Publications of the Finnish
Government 2021:6); and the Recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee on Crisis
Management on developing Finland’s crisis management (Publications of the Finnish
Government 2021:18). The importance of the High North to Finland and policy guidelines
on the Arctic region are covered in-depth Finland’s Strategy for Arctic Policy (Publications
of the Finnish Government 2021:55). The Parliamentary Committee on National Defence
Obligation and Conscription that began working in 2020 will finish its work in late 2021,
i.e. after the publication of this Government Defence Report.

The Government Defence Report will span over the current electoral term and until the
end of this decade.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

### 2 OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
 OF FINNISH DEFENCE

The security situation in the neighbouring areas of Finland and Europe is unstable and
difficult to predict. The international rules-based system, international law, and commonly
agreed principles have been questioned and challenged. This has a negative effect
especially on the position of small states.

The security situation is affected by competition between Russia, the United States and
China, as well as increased tensions that have been exacerbated by the coronavirus
pandemic. Great power competition, repeated violations of arms control treaties, as well
as withdrawals from international treaties weaken the rules-based international system
and make anticipating changes in Finland’s neighbouring areas more difficult. New types
of nuclear weapons are being developed. There is a threat that the threshold for using
low-yield tactical nuclear weapons will decrease.

Russia is seeking to strengthen its position and to weaken the unity of Western actors. It
is still aiming at a sphere-of-influence-based security regime in Europe. Additionally, the
use of military force remains a central tool for Russia, and using force or threats of using
military force cannot be ruled out.

The United States’ goal is to maintain its position as the leading superpower that based
on common interests acts together with its partners and allies. A well-functioning
transatlantic relationship and the United States commitment to European defence is of
great importance for the security of the whole of Europe. China’s emergence as a global
actor has changed the dynamics between the great powers. The potential effects of
China’s influencing methods on the security of the target countries is of growing concern.

Russian security thinking aims to achieve strategic depth and a broad operational area,
reaching from the Arctic regions to the Black Sea and on to the Mediterranean. Northern
Europe and the Baltic Sea region are a central part of this larger space. Additionally, the
significance of the High North in great power competition has increased as the Northern
Sea Route opens up and opportunities improve for exploiting natural resources in the
area. Increased international tensions in one region may rapidly lead to increased military
activities in other regions as well.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

From the perspective of great powers, Finland is located in a strategically important
region. Moreover, from a military-strategic perspective, Northern Europe is seen as one
theatre of operations during a possible Europe-wide conflict. Increased military activity
in the Baltic Sea region is a sign of increased tensions in international security. The
significance of North Atlantic sea lines of communication and of Finland’s neighbouring
Arctic regions is growing, and military activity in the area has increased.

Military force will remain one of the tools used by great powers throughout the current
decade. The role of traditional military capabilities remains central in Finland’s security
environment. In addition to the land, sea and air domains, the importance of cyber,
information, and space domains is increasing. Malicious influencing has increased and
its methods diversified. The methods used include political, diplomatic, economic and
military ones, as well as information and cyber influencing.

Evolving technology and digitalisation enable the use of new means of influencing,
which may endanger functions vital to society and threaten critical infrastructure. The line
between normal conditions and different types of conflicts, ultimately military conflicts,
has become blurred. The early warning period of a conflict has shortened and conflicts
have become more unpredictable. These factors place demands on developing decisionmaking and the execution of decisions, and particularly on developing the situational
picture, readiness and early warning capabilities.

Countries in the neighbouring area have reacted to changes in the security environment
by improving the readiness and materiel capabilities of their armed forces, by raising
defence budgets, and by deepening defence cooperation. They have also further
developed their comprehensive security arrangements, to improve their societies’
resilience. The coronavirus pandemic has demonstrated the importance of armed forces
supporting other authorities and society. The need for preparedness and security of
supply has increased.

Sweden and Norway are strengthening their total defence to ensure a credible
warfighting capability. Increasing the wartime strength of forces, bolstering conscription,
command and control arrangements, readiness and the capability for sustained
operations have all been emphasised in the development of their armed forces. Defence
cooperation between the Nordic countries has deepened, and it seeks to develop
prerequisites for cooperation even in crisis situations. The Baltic countries have continued
strengthening their own national defence capabilities and NATO’s collective defence.

Russia maintains significant conventional warfighting capabilities in Finland’s
neighbouring areas and has, during the past few years, increased its military capacity in
particular in its western region. It has continued the modernisation of its armed forces,


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

and has developed their operating procedures by incorporating combat experiences from
recent operations. The ability to make rapid decisions and the high readiness of its armed
forces enables Russia to carry out rapid and unexpected operations. Different methods,
such as prolonging conflicts, are used to achieve desired goals. Russia has demonstrated
its ability to use this wide selection of methods in a coordinated manner, with military
force still playing a central role. Russia has illegally annexed Crimea and maintained the
conflict it started in Eastern Ukraine. In the spring of 2021 Russia concentrated a large
number of military forces in Crimea and on its border with Ukraine. Its activities, for
example, in Georgia, Ukraine and Syria demonstrate that the threshold for threatening to
use or using military force to try and reach a political goal has lowered.

During the last few years, Russia has positioned some of its most technologically advanced
weapons systems and increasingly more capable forces close to Finland. It regularly
conducts joint service exercises, and its ability to project military force in a swift and
surprising manner has improved. Long-range weapon systems, such as cruise missiles,
enable Russia to extends its military capabilities beyond its borders, and restrict the
freedom of action of other actors. Russia conducts exercises and operates actively outside
its territory, which could escalate tensions. Furthermore, it has strengthened its strategic
nuclear deterrent, and hardened its nuclear rhetoric.

The United States is committed to European defence, but expects that Europe will assume
more responsibility over its own defence. The United States has increased its presence and
training activities in Europe, as well as invested in infrastructure development, particularly
in NATO’s eastern member states. The increased operations and presence of NATO and
United States in the Baltic countries and Poland have enhanced stability in the Baltic
Sea region. The United Kingdom, France and Germany are significant military actors that
have a large influence on the defence and security of Europe. The United Kingdom-led
Joint Expeditionary Force (JEF), the French-led European Intervention Initiative (EI2), and
the German Framework Nation Concept all have a prominent role in European defence
cooperation.

NATO has continued to strengthen its collective defence and deterrence, for example by
improving readiness, increasing exercise activities, by enhancing defence and operational
planning, reorganising its command and force structures, and by supporting the resilience
of its member states. NATO takes cyber, space and information domains into account in
its activities, pays increasingly more attention to northern regions, and to securing sea
lines of communication in the Northern Atlantic. NATO will update its Strategic Concept
by its 2022 summit. The previous update was published in 2010. NATO has a central role in
European security, and a strong and united NATO is in the interest of Europe and Finland.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

European Union defence cooperation has increased over the last few years. In addition to
concentrating on crisis management and training operations outside its area, the Union
also focuses on developing the Member States’ military capabilities, on developing the
foundations of European defence industry and technology, as well as on the security
and safety of its citizens. With the establishment of Permanent Structured Cooperation
(PESCO), EU Member States have committed to developing defence through national
means and in deeper cooperation with each other. The United Kingdom’s departure from
the EU weakens the union as a military actor. The EU’s goal is to maintain close security
and defence policy ties with the UK.

The EU plays an important role as an enabler of European defence cooperation and as
an actor in comprehensive security, but most European countries will continue to rely
on NATO for collective defence. Cooperation between the EU and NATO has advanced in
recent years, for example in countering hybrid threats and developing military mobility.

The focus of military crisis management has shifted from large, army-intensive operations
to smaller operations that are more focused on train-and-advise activities. At the same
time, the operational environments have become more demanding. Issues highlighted in
intrastate conflicts, and especially in counter-terrorism, include a large number of actors
and diverse threats as well as the absence of clear borders. Experiences in Afghanistan
have demonstrated the challenges in crisis management operations and shown that their
effectiveness depends on several factors. These experiences and ongoing developments
in Afghanistan are likely to impact future international crisis management operations,
evaluations thereof, as well as international security more broadly.

Technological advancements, particularly in the fields of digitalisation, artificial
intelligence, machine autonomy and sensor technologies, affect all operating
environments of defence, but the effects are pronounced in the cyber, space, and
information domains. In the military context, new and emerging technologies are used,
for example, in information management, in assembling and creating situational pictures,
in weapon system guidance and in logistics. One objective is to support decision-making
with more rapidly available and accurate information.

The conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan demonstrated the growing importance
of remotely-piloted and autonomous unmanned systems in warfare. Critical areas
of expertise also include the resilience of systems to cyber related malfunctions,
management of the electromagnetic spectrum and quantum technology. The Finnish
Defence Forces monitors the development of warfare and of technology. Experiences
and observations of military crises are incorporated into the development of the
defence system.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

The operating environment of Finnish defence will remain tense and unpredictable. Thus,
Finland must maintain the ability to deter aggression, and, to defend itself in all domains.
Changes in the security environment challenge the resilience of the entire Finnish society.
Finland’s military national defence and comprehensive security will be increasingly more
intertwined.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80


###### Broad-spectrum influencing


Changes in the security environment have made the concepts of hybrid influencing and
hybrid warfare a permanent part of Western threat discourse. The Government Report
on Finnish Foreign and Security Policy mentions hybrid influencing and its means, which
include political, diplomatic, economic and military methods, as well as information
and cyber influencing. Non-military methods are more common as means of hybrid
influencing.


The Government Defence Report views the threats from a military perspective,
considering them to be broad-spectrum influencing. Broad-spectrum influencing is
a threat perception used in the context of Finnish military planning. It includes hybrid
influencing, but it also contains the open use of military force.


Broad-spectrum influencing is systematic, combines various methods and is often
used over a long period of time. Influencing may be difficult to identify, and it exploits
society’s vulnerabilities even during normal conditions. The influencing party tries to
create circumstances that are advantageous to it, and to further its own goals by using
means that are suitable for the current situation. The goal is to shake the foundations of
the target country’s defence capability, for example by creating uncertainty among the
population, by weakening the people’s will to defend the country, and by weakening the
political leadership’s ability to act.


In broad-spectrum influencing, the use of military force may be systematic, or the
situation may inadvertently escalate into use of military force. From the perspective of
Finland’s national defence, exerting military pressure and the use of force are the most
severe methods of broad-spectrum influencing.


Broad-spectrum influencing may include exerting military pressure, draining the
resources of the defence system, and those of society as a whole. Long-term pressure
has spillover effects on the target country’s internal security, its international position,
psychological resilience, the will to defend the country, and state leadership. Broadspectrum influencing may lead to a military conflict either rapidly, or after a long
influencing operation.


In broad-spectrum influencing, the opponent may attempt to use military methods
and the threat of using them, while still below the threshold of open conflict. In such
cases, declaring emergency conditions and naming the attacker becomes more
difficult, forcing the defender to only operate with the powers and resources of normal
conditions. The above-mentioned characteristics have been identified in recent conflicts.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

### 3 CURRENT STATUS OF DEFENCE

The Finnish Defence Forces’ most important task is the military defence of Finland.
Defence capability is maintained in a way that meets the requirements of the operating
environment. The aim is to prevent the use of military force or threats of military force
against Finland. If deterrence fails, military attacks will be repelled.

General conscription, a strong will to defend the country, and sufficient national unity are
the foundations of Finland’s defence capability. A well-functioning conscription system
is necessary for Finland’s defence and the only way to train a sufficient number of troops
to fulfil the tasks of the Defence Forces. The conscription system generates a sizeable
and versatile reserve, which ensures the territorial coverage and sustainability in a longlasting or large-scale crisis. The will to defend the country also strengthens comprehensive
national defence, comprehensive security and the crisis resilience of Finnish society.

The readiness and capabilities of Finnish defence have been developed according to
the guidelines set in the previous Government Defence Report, to reflect changes in the
operating environment. The Defence Forces must be able to carry out its statutory tasks
in all security situations. Defence capability is demonstrated during normal conditions
through various actions and operations. This is one response to counter the threats of
broad-spectrum influencing. Finland must be able to mobilise its defence capability in
situations that develop rapidly. It is important that defence readiness can be adjusted
commensurate to the threat, and also that it can be maintained during a crisis of long
duration.

The wartime strength of the Defence Forces has been increased to 280,000, and readiness
on land, at sea and in the air has been improved. The defence readiness requirements
include cyber, space and information domains. Finland must be able to monitor all
domains and, if necessary, be able to launch necessary defence measures. This requires
preparedness from all of society, legislation that supports the implementation, and
cooperation with international partners, as necessary.

Finland’s territory and airspace are monitored and its integrity is protected in all situations
by maintaining an up-to-date situational picture and by ensuring the ability to adjust
readiness and respond rapidly. Improved defence readiness enables flexible reinforcement
of territorial integrity surveillance and protection capabilities. This required the


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

development of new capabilities that can be fielded rapidly. High readiness detachments,
high readiness units, conscript units and rapid reaction units can be used to swiftly begin
the military defence of Finland. Cooperation with international partners supplements the
surveillance and protection of territorial integrity.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, the Defence Forces has been able to adjust its operations
quickly and flexibly to meet the challenges of emergency conditions and disruptions in
normal conditions. The Defence Forces has been able to continue training and sustain
defence readiness, while maintaining its ability to provide assistance to the rest of society.
This has been enabled by a current situational picture, timely decision-making, as well as
cooperation with other authorities and partners. When requested, the Defence Forces has
supported the rest of society during the pandemic.

Changes in Finland’s operating environment have required that the Defence Forces
create a more comprehensive situational awareness, ensure sufficient early warning and
support for decision-making, adjust readiness, as well as maintain a strong and credible
defence capability. Responding to broad-spectrum influencing requires development
of the comprehensive security model and cooperation between different authorities.
Common situational awareness and command capabilities of state leadership and the
authorities are key during a large-scale military crisis. The legislative preconditions for
Defence Forces’ activities have been improved based on the guidelines set in the previous
Government Defence Report. The legislative work has supported enhancements in
information gathering, territorial surveillance, readiness regulation, and the development
of interagency and defence cooperation.

The budget increase allocated for improving readiness has been used to increase the
number of exercises and for pre-prepared construction, improved availability of defence
materiel stocks and command capabilities, as well as for improving readiness regulation.
The implemented changes have required, and will require, ongoing updates of operating
procedures. It is estimated that the defence readiness requirements set by the operating
environment will remain at least on the current level during the reporting period. This has
implications vis-a-vis personnel, funding, materiel quantity and maintenance. Significant
further development of readiness requires additional resources.

The training of conscripts and reservists has been enhanced to meet the changes in
the operating environment and in society, and to utilise the possibilities presented by
evolving technology. Voluntary national defence training and the legislation regulating it
have been updated. While preparing the reform of local defence, we have identified the
possibilities and needs to use our sizeable reserve more effectively. In the future, local
defence will have a significant role in responding to broad-spectrum influencing.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

International defence cooperation supports maintaining defence capability, and its
importance for Finland’s defence has increased. Since the previous Government Defence
Report, Finland has deepened defence policy dialogue with its partners, and signed
multiple bilateral and multilateral agreements, especially with countries operating in the
Baltic Sea region. The cooperation priorities are demanding exercise activities, materiel
cooperation, research and development and information exchange. Defence cooperation,
international exercises and crisis management operations have improved the Defence
Forces’ competencies, interoperability, situational awareness, as well as the ability to
provide and receive military assistance. Defence cooperation has been deepened in
particular with Sweden, aiming to achieve the ability to conduct combined operations.

The readiness and capabilities of the Army have been improved as the result of
implementing the previous Government Defence Report. The Army’s ability to respond
to rapidly emerging threats has been improved by establishing high readiness units
and rapid reaction units, and by developing the command structure, and by improving
the ability to mobilise forces. The Army’s training and education system has been
developed significantly, and the changes are visible in the day-to-day activities of the
brigade-level units.

The Army’s mobility and firepower projects, such as the procurement of Leopard 2A6
main battle tanks, K9 armoured howitzers and supplementary procurement of anti-tank
weapons, have enabled the maintenance and partial development of the most important
operational and regional forces. The Army’s command and control projects have improved
the ability to command mobile combat operations. The protection of different forces
has been improved by supplementing CBRN Defence and camouflaging material. The
procurement of key land-defence-ordnance has been continued, as has improving the
individual soldier’s equipment. To meet the requirements of the operating environment,
there is a need to further modernise the Army starting in the late 2020s, as many of its key
systems are becoming outdated.

The Navy’s capability for surveillance and protection of territorial integrity has been
maintained and further enhanced. This has been achieved by using different vessel
classes for varying tasks, by taking advantage of cooperation and capabilities of other
Services and maritime authorities, and by enhancing international cooperation regarding
a recognised maritime picture. The Navy’s ability to repel seaborne attacks and its
capabilities for securing territorial integrity and vital sea lines of communication has
been improved and developed through the flexible adjustment of readiness, and by
establishing high readiness and rapid reaction units.

The Squadron 2020 project is in the implementation phase, and the Pohjanmaa-class
multirole corvettes will be taken into operational use by 2027. The procedures required


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

for introducing the corvettes into operational use have been started. Upgrading maritime
surface and underwater surveillance systems has started, and the Navy is introducing
a torpedo system to develop its anti-submarine warfare capabilities. The Navy’s
minelaying capability has been sustained, and the Navy’s surface warfare capability will
be maintained and developed by a surface-to-surface missile project. The project is in the
implementation phase. In the coastal forces, the focus of capability development has been
on improving mobility and communications systems.

The readiness of the Air Force and ground-based air defence have been maintained on
a level required by the operating environment. The Air Force’s capabilities for surveillance
and protection of territorial integrity have been improved by introducing a new
surveillance and command-and-control system. Air-to-ground weapon systems are now
fully operational. Additionally, the protection of forces and systems has been improved by
developing new operating procedures and by using them in exercises. The facilities and
structures of Air Force bases have been improved to support the flexible use of capabilities
as required by the readiness level.

Owing to the updated operating procedures and the introduction of rapid reaction
units, the Air Force is able to raise its readiness and strike capability in rapidly changing
situations. Currently, the capabilities and availability rate of the existing fighter fleet is at
the required level. The procurement and introduction of the new multi-role fighter fleet is
conducted as part of a joint Ministry of Defence and Defence Forces project. After the final
procurement decision, the Defence Forces is responsible for the introduction and use of
the new system. The reach of ground-based air defence will be increased by introducing
high-altitude interception capability.

Replacing the main equipment of the Navy and the Air Force during this decade is of
critical importance to Finland’s defence capability. These strategic capability projects were
initiated using supplementary funding, making it possible to continue the development of
the Army, and other parts of the defence system. Carrying through the strategic capability
projects and integrating the new capabilities into the defence system requires enough
skilled personnel to also ensure the required level of operations while the new capabilities
are being taken into operational use.

The Defence Forces has continued introducing a deep fires capability and improved target
acquisition and targeting capabilities in all Services. The amount of ordnance available has
been increased but has not reached the set numbers.

The Military Intelligence Act and the powers granted by it have increased the intelligence
system’s ability to create a situational picture and to provide an early warning to regulate
readiness. In accordance with legislation, military intelligence acquires and processes


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

intelligence to support the decision-making of the highest levels of state leadership, and
to support the execution of the statutory tasks of the Defence Forces.

Cyber capabilities are part of the modern means of broad-spectrum influencing, and the
development of such capabilities has been rapid. State and non-state actors alike are
active in the cyber domain.

The Defence Forces has developed its ability to create a common operational picture
in cyber domain, to protect and monitor its systems, and improved the planning and
execution of defensive cyber operations. The integration of cyber defence into general
operational activities must continue and it must also be included in the close cooperation
between different functional areas, with various authorities and the rest of society.

The military defence of Finland is dependent on society’s infrastructure, and Finland’s
military defence uses the services of its partners in all security situations. Thus, their ability
to continue functioning must be secured.

The goal of information defence is to protect the functions of national defence against
the effects of externally directed or harmful communication. Information defence is one
part of society’s defence against information influencing. The harmful use of information
is an everyday part of broad-spectrum influencing. The Defence Forces has developed
its capability to monitor the information environment, protect against information
influencing, and created prerequisites for operations in the information domain.
Information defence has become a part of the normal activity of the Defence Forces.

Interagency cooperation has been initiated to further enhance the creation of a space
situational awareness. The international treaty basis has been drafted and we will
continue to expand international cooperation. A recognised and current space situational
awareness helps increase the protection of society and of the defence system, and
promotes the safety and sustainable use of space.

The Defence Forces has continued combining and simplifying its communication
networks and information systems. The Services have their own command and control
systems, as well as compatible and joint command and control systems. Development
of the systems has taken advantage of standards defined in multinational cooperation
forums, enabling interoperability and compatibility with the systems key partners. The
command systems used by the Defence Forces have been systematically supplemented
with tools and solutions based on commercial technology. This has enabled better use of
widely available systems and the utilisation of conscripts’ and reservists’ civilian skills to
benefit national defence.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

In addition to using its own capabilities and the capabilities of its strategic partners,
the Defence Forces also utilises the capabilities of the rest of society. Some of these
capabilities are in use by other authorities, which facilitates seamless interagency
cooperation when necessary. The Defence Forces maintains and protects those
operational command systems that enable the creation of the Defence Forces’ situational
picture and command of the Defence Forces.

The logistics of the Defence Forces is grounded in a system where the services are
provided by the Defence Forces and its cooperation partners, both in the private and
public sector. For partners the current focus is on developing their readiness. The
logistics of military units has been developed in accordance with readiness requirements,
so that logistics support is also available if a situation escalates rapidly or if a crisis is
prolonged. The military security of supply has been improved by deepening cooperation
with national emergency supply actors. For this purpose, the Defence Forces and
partner companies have organised logistics exercises together, developed partnership
management mechanisms and partner companies’ preparedness planning, and the
creation of a situational picture.

Starting the process of raising defence readiness must be achievable by using the materiel
at the Defence Forces’ disposal and by using peacetime resources. Preparations have been
made to start national production and services in emergency conditions. The procurement
chains for materiel resupply and the ability to move forces and materiel in a crisis have
been improved through multinational and bilateral cooperation arrangements. However,
materiel self-sustainment is still not on an adequate level. The procurement of spare parts
and ammunition especially must be continued. There are challenges vis-a-vis resourcing
maintenance, as equipment and systems are becoming increasingly complex and the cost
of services is rising.

The cost savings obligations directed at the Defence Forces during previous years and
the currently available resources are creating challenges for maintaining activities and
readiness at the current level. They are also limiting the Defence Forces’ preparations for
a crisis or warfare of a longer duration.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

### 4 MAINTENANCE AND DEVELOPMENT OF
 DEFENCE CAPABILITY

Finland’s defence capability is developed systematically, as a whole entity, and using
a long-term perspective. Defence readiness and military capability for repelling attacks
must meet the requirements of the operating environment. Finland’s defence rests on the
deterrence function of a robust military capability that is supported by the entire society.
The importance of a strong deterrence function – dissuading an adversary from using
military force against Finland – is accentuated in the current, unpredictable operating
environment where the early warning period for military crises has shrunk and the
threshold for using military force has been lowered.


###### The Duties of the Finnish Defence Forces


1) the military defence of Finland

2) providing support for other authorities


3) participating in providing international assistance, participating in


territorial surveillance cooperation and in other types of international
activities

4) participating in international military crisis management and military tasks


in international crisis management.


#### 4.1 Defence Policy Guidelines

Developments in European security affect Finland, particularly the increased military
activities in the Baltic Sea region and in the High North. The operating environment of
Finnish defence will remain tense and unpredictable.

Despite the increasingly tense international situation, Finland is not under any immediate
military threat. Nonetheless, Finland must prepare for the use or the threat of use of
military force against it. Finland’s defence must be able to counter military pressure,


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

a rapidly developing military threat, and the use of various degrees of military force,
including a large-scale military attack. The use of military force is also one of the methods
of broad-spectrum influencing.

Finland maintains a credible national defence and ensures that defence has sufficient
resources. General conscription, a trained reserve, defending the entire country, and
a high will to defend the country will continue to be the foundations of Finland’s defence.
Finland will defend its territory, citizens and society with all available resources. The
continuous development of defence will ensure the ability to monitor all domains – land,
sea, air, cyber, information and space– and, if necessary, to initiate measures for defence.

Military national defence is an integral part of society. The conscription-based defence
solution is built on a strong will to defend the country, which is sustained and fostered as
a part of comprehensive security. At the core of the will to defend the country is sufficient
national unity and the belief that Finland and the Finnish way of life are worth defending.

Maintaining defence requires close cooperation with different actors in society.
In accordance with the principles of comprehensive national defence, we will rely
on agreements and joint exercises to ensure that the resources and capabilities of
other authorities and our partners are rapidly available when needed. An analysis
will be conducted during this defence report’s reporting period on how to develop
comprehensive national defence to meet the changes in the operating environment.

The defence administration counters broad-spectrum influencing together with other
actors as part of the evolving comprehensive security model. Managing broad-spectrum
influencing requires foresight and preparations by a number of administrative branches,
as well as deepening cooperation between public administration actors, the private
sector, civil society organisations and international partners. To effectively counter
broad-spectrum influencing, further development is needed in interagency cooperation,
legal frameworks, national and international cyber defence cooperation, strategic
communication and information defence.

In Finland, cyber security activities are coordinated by the Ministry of Transport and
Communications. The Defence Forces is responsible for military cyber defence as a part
of national cyber security. Improving the cyber situational awareness of the defence
system and preventing and combating cyber threats requires developing information
exchange procedures, powers and national cooperation structures between authorities.
The demands of interagency cooperation must be analysed and defined as the basis for
further development.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

Threats to the cyber operating environment and related national development needs are
evaluated in Finland’s Cyber Security Strategy Development Programme and in a future
review. The review will assess the authorities’ capacity for ensuring national cyber security,
for combating cybercrime, for cyber defence, and responding to rapidly developing
situations that threaten the cyber security of society. Cyber defence development
measures, including necessary legislative preparation, will be initiated based on the
review. The purpose of development is to ensure that the cyber defence powers, skills and
necessary access to information required by the security environment are in place.

International cooperation is central to Finland’s cyber security and cyber defence. It is in
Finland’s interest to cooperate closely with international actors, multilaterally, regionally
and bilaterally. This applies to both technological cooperation and to political dialogue.

Assisting other authorities has become more demanding and time-sensitive, which
requires improving interagency cooperation and legislation. The Defence Forces supports
other authorities according to assistance requests and cooperation arrangements.

International defence cooperation strengthens Finland’s defence capability. Cooperation
improves operational readiness, strengthens threat prevention, raises the threshold
against military activity directed at Finland, and creates prerequisites for providing and
receiving political and military assistance if needed.

Finland conducts defence cooperation based on its own premises and based on
common interests. Cooperation during peacetime is a foundation for cooperation during
emergency conditions. The trust required in defence cooperation is built through steady
and long-term efforts. In bilateral cooperation, the focus is on countries that would be,
from the perspective of Finland’s defence, significant actors in Northern Europe and in the
Baltic Sea region during a crisis.

Defence cooperation plays a key role in increasing Finland’s situational awareness,
contributing to maximum freedom of action and options for decision-making. Particularly
during a potential crisis situation, it is important to be able to exchange information
on how other actors see the development of the security situation and regarding what
actions they are planning to take. Additionally, cooperation provides Finland with the
opportunity to communicate the reasons for its actions. Cooperation also improves
readiness and the ability to anticipate, as well as increases regional stability.

The defence administration actively participates in the implementation and development
of arms control treaties, arms control arrangements and confidence building measures.
The Defence Forces sustains and develops its readiness for supporting the abovementioned activities. For its part, the Defence Forces prepares to prevent naturally


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

occurring, accidental or intentional biological threats, and to respond to them.
Additionally, the Defence Forces will continue to develop the required capabilities for
responding to CBRNE (chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear and explosive) threats
through international defence cooperation. Defence administration actors have a
significant role in national health security.

Bilateral and multilateral materiel cooperation creates prerequisites for cost-effective
maintenance and development of materiel capability, and for military security of supply.
Materiel cooperation between defence administrations supports the internationalisation
and networking of domestic defence industry, and reinforces military security of supply.

Research and development is a key area of defence cooperation. It creates a knowledge
base for planning and decision-making, opportunities for materiel cooperation,
prerequisites for capability compatibility, for combined operations and for providing and
receiving assistance.

#### 4.2 Defence System Maintenance and
 Development Priorities

The primary goal of maintaining defence capability is to deter the use of military force or
the threats of using military force.

Effective prevention is built on deterrence that is created by all of society and all
administrative branches through different activities and preparations. The Defence Forces
creates the military component deterrence. It is defensive by nature.

If deterrence fails, attacks will be repelled. In such a case, efforts will continue to be made
to prevent the situation from deteriorating further, by creating thresholds that the attacker
estimates to be too costly to cross. It must be possible to defend Finland using national
capabilities.

The defence and operational planning of Finland’s defence is based on estimates of
potential military threats directed at Finland. It is estimated that military threats against
Finland are likely connected to a Europe-wide crisis, or that they arise as a result of
a military conflict developing in areas close to Finland. Observations from contemporary
crises or military conflicts suggest that the use of methods associated with broadspectrum influencing has increased.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

In addition to other methods, broad-spectrum influencing may include exerting military
pressure or the use of military force. Broad-spectrum influencing may lead to a limited or
large-scale military conflict either rapidly, or as a result of a long influencing operation.

A military operation may be carried out in a swift and surprising manner using highreadiness forces and deep fires weapons systems. A limited operation may strive to gain
control of specific targets or physical areas to improve military operating requirements
and to influence the target country’s leadership, and to affect the implementation of
defence measures and functioning of infrastructure vital to society.

In a military crisis, exerting pressure on the target country and on the readiness of its
defence system may take place over a period of many months. During this time, the
attacker can concentrate military force in the neighbouring area, and thus enable the
execution of a large-scale military operation. The objective of large-scale operations
may be to break through to strategically important areas and to paralyse the defence
capabilities of the target country in order to achieve the attacker’s strategic objectives.

When combating broad-spectrum influencing, it is important that all actors are able
to execute their tasks as required by legislation and the principles of comprehensive
security. This requires close cooperation between the authorities, a comprehensive
situational picture and a command system that is able to integrate many actors into it. The
defence system must be able to respond to military threats as a part of broad-spectrum
influencing, and to contribute to creating thresholds against other means of influencing
that might weaken defence capabilities.

The means of implementing defence are being developed to better meet the changes
that have occurred in the military operating environment, in warfare and threats.
Finland will be defended by using all of the country’s available resources, including the
possibilities offered by international defence cooperation. The doctrine of comprehensive
territorial defence is built on combat-effective operational forces and systems, on local
defence based on a large reserve, and on evolving interagency cooperation. A key part of
comprehensive territorial defence is the ability of the reformed local defence to prevent
and to combat broad-spectrum influencing throughout Finland, in addition to more
traditional tasks.

Finland’s security environment requires maintaining at least the current level of defence
readiness into the future. Surveillance and protection of Finland’s territorial integrity is
ensured in all security situations. Defence readiness will be developed to better include
all domains.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

The force structure of the Defence Forces will be reformed during the reporting period.
The previously used concept of regional forces will be discontinued as local defence
is reformed. In the future, the wartime units of the Defence Forces will be divided into
operational forces and local forces. Local forces are used to create a nation-wide defence
capability, to enable the effective use of operational forces, and to safeguard functions
vital to society and defence. The reform increases the readiness and capabilities of local
forces. The operational forces are used to create the focus of main efforts of defence, and
for fast-paced, more demanding combat operations.

The usability of regular personnel as well as of conscripts and reservists in readinessrelated duties will be improved by creating new operating procedures and by evaluating
the necessity of legislative revisions. It must be possible to rehearse the regulation of
defence readiness more flexibly and extensively.

The powers and high readiness of the Border Guard is utilised by the defence system
in surveillance and protection of territorial integrity. Border Guard forces are used for
land and maritime defence duties as part of the defence system when readiness is
raised. If needed, the Border Guard forces can be integrated into the Defence Forces. The
Border Guard’s operational planning and preparations are done in cooperation with the
Defence Forces. The force compositions, principles of use and the defence materiel of the
Border Guard forces are developed as part of the defence system, in cooperation with
the Defence Forces. The development projects take into consideration the increase in
readiness requirements. In its materiel projects the Border Guard continues to take into
account any defence capability requirements.

###### 4.2.1 Land Defence

Land defence prevents, and if necessary, repels ground attacks directed against Finland.
All Services participate in land defence together with Defence Command and its
subordinate establishments. The Army is responsible for planning, coordinating and
leading land defence. Land defence is executed by assembling the combat capabilities
required by the situation and the mission, in order to prevent the capture of land areas,
and by defeating a ground attack with the support of air and maritime defence. Land
defence covers the territory of the entire country. Other authorities are supported in
safeguarding the vital functions of society. The capabilities and organisation of the Army
have been heavily invested in during the last decade, and the Army has the capabilities for
defeating large enemy ground operations.

The Army will be able to maintain its capability during the 2020s with the planned
resources. The principles of use, skills and equipment of the Army’s operational and


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

local forces will be tailored to the requirements and resources of their operating areas.
Developing readiness and local defence, mobile operations, and concentrating effects
on key targets are areas which are emphasised. Regional battle groups will be organised
as mobile and capable infantry units that are able to meet the requirements of the
transformed local defence.

The Army’s mobility, firepower and strike capability will be improved in the 2020s with
the procurement of new armoured personnel carriers, with the mid-life upgrade of the
CV-9030 infantry fighting vehicle fleet and with supplementary procurement of antitank weapons. Additionally, Finland is the lead nation in the EU’s multinational armoured
vehicles development programme which aims at e.g. improving Arctic mobility by
developing a replacement for the current all-terrain carriers. The project has received
funding from the European Defence Industrial Development Programme. The Army’s
surveillance and targeting capabilities will be improved by purchasing light UAV’s and new
generation night vision equipment. Some of the ageing artillery pieces will be replaced
with artillery systems that have enhanced mobility and firepower. The protection of units
and soldiers will be improved by purchasing CBRN defence and camouflage systems,
as well as individual soldier equipment. The suitability of unmanned aerial and ground
vehicles for different land defence tasks is being studied, and preparations are ongoing
to use these more extensively. Development of the Army’s command and control systems
enables mobile command for both the operational forces and for the most important
local forces.

The Army’s long-range fires capability will be improved during this decade by purchasing
new ordnance that significantly extends the range of the heavy multiple rocket launchers
from the current 80 kilometres. The Army is also developing capabilities that enable
command, control and targeting of the long-range strikes of the other Services. These
development projects also take into account the capabilities gained through the
Squadron 2020 and HX projects.

To meet the requirements of the operating environment in the 2030s, the Army will need
to undergo a development and recapitalisation process starting late this decade, as many
of its key systems are reaching the end of their life cycles. Planning continues for replacing
anti-tank weapon systems, infantry fighting vehicles, artillery and ground-based air
defence systems and ordnance, so that the capability to repel ground attacks is sustained.

###### 4.2.2 Maritime Defence

Maritime defence prevents, and, if necessary, repels seaborne attacks, and secures the
country’s sea lines of communication and territorial integrity at sea. All of the Services


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

participate in maritime defence together with Defence Command and its subordinate
establishments. The Navy is responsible for planning, coordinating and leading maritime
defence. Readiness, fires, a recognised maritime picture (RMP), survivability, long-range
strike, and underwater warfare are the focus areas of developing maritime defence. The
Navy’s command and control capabilities will be improved by building mobile C2-systems.

The Squadron 2020 project will deliver four Pohjanmaa-class multi-role corvettes during
2022–2027. The corvettes will be used year round for extended periods at sea, in all Baltic
Sea weather and ice conditions. The vessels will be tasked with surveillance and protection
of Finland’s territorial integrity, command of naval operations, anti-submarine warfare,
naval mine laying, surface warfare and air defence.

During this reporting period, the Navy will introduce a new anti-ship missile system,
torpedoes that strengthen its anti-surface and anti-submarine warfare capability, and
modernised mines. The new systems will enable regional sea control. The anti-ship missiles
can also be used as surface-to-surface missiles against ground targets over 200 kilometres
away. The anti-ship missile system will be installed on the Pohjanmaa-class corvettes,
anti-ship missile batteries, and in the modernised Hamina-class fast attack craft. Torpedo
systems will be installed on the Pohjanmaa- and Hamina-class vessels. The Hamina-class
will be equipped with a new combat management system.

The preconditions for maritime defence are maritime situation awareness formed with
the help of maritime surveillance and high readiness for fires. The territorial integrity of
sea areas is monitored and protected together with the other services and authorities.
Maritime surveillance capability is ensured by maintaining the surface surveillance
systems and by beginning modernisation of the sub-surface surveillance system. The
modernisation will look at new possibilities provided by unmanned systems in territorial
surveillance.

The Navy’s coastal forces participate in repelling any seaborne attacks. The coastal forces
will hold vital areas for defence along the coast and in the archipelago, create operating
conditions for the operational forces, and participate in compiling the situational
awareness.

The life cycle of the coastal batteries providing regional and local firepower will reach
its end by the end of this decade. The capability of the coastal batteries will be replaced
so that the coastal units will retain the capability to repel seaborne attacks. Modernising
the landing crafts along with other procurements will secure the coastal forces’ mobility
until the early 2030s. Systems will be procured to improve the command capability
of coastal forces.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

Modernisation of minesweeping capabilities will be started by replacing the ageing Kuhaand Kiiski-class vessels. Additionally, a project will be started for planning the replacement
of surface warfare and oil spill recovery capabilities and that will reach the end of their
lifecycles in the next decade.

###### 4.2.3 Air Defence

Air Defence prevents, and if necessary, repels air attacks against Finland and secures the
country’s territorial integrity in its airspace. All of the Services participate in air defence
together with Defence Command and its subordinate establishments. The Air Force
is responsible for planning, coordinating and leading air defence. A multi-layered air
defence helps to enable the mobilisation of the Defence Forces’ units, and the operating
requirements of land and maritime defence, by preventing the attacker from gaining air
superiority and by protecting critical targets and functions. All Services develop and use
air defence capabilities.

During this reporting period, the Air Force will lead the introduction of the capabilities
chosen as part of the HX Programme. The new multi-role fighters will start entering
service in 2025, and the decommissioning process of the legacy Hornet fleet will begin.
Operational capability will be ensured during the transition.

High-altitude interception capacity and the volume coverage of ground-based air defence
will be increased with the procurement of a surface-to-air missile system during this
reporting period. Additionally, the layered nature and area coverage of ground-based air
defence capabilities will be maintained, and the targeting capability of ground-based air
defence will be developed. The Defence Forces will respond to the growing drone threat
by improving its counter-drone capabilities.

The Air Force maintains a constantly updated recognised air picture (RAP) of Finland’s
airspace and the neighbouring areas, distributes it to the Defence Forces and other
authorities, and regulates its readiness to respond immediately to potential changes in
the operating environment. The integrated intelligence, surveillance and command and
control system will be further developed to improve the prerequisites for leading air
operations.

The pilot training of the Air Force will be adjusted to meet the increasing needs of the
Defence Forces and the Border Guard.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

###### 4.2.4 Cyber, Information and Space Defence

Defence systems and capabilities are increasingly more dependent on digitalisation,
information and the exploitation of space. The defence system must be able to monitor
different domains more extensively, to understand the cross-effects between them, and, if
necessary, to initiate defensive measures in different domains.

The Defence Forces is responsible for military cyber defence as a part of national cyber
security. The goal of the capabilities of cyber defence, i.e. protection, intelligence and
offensive cyber operations, is to safeguard the systems of the Defence Forces as well as
others that directly impact defence capability, particularly against threats formed by state
actors and state-sponsored actors . The systems must be protected so that the Defence
Forces is able to carry out its statutory tasks. The Defence Forces has the obligation to
counteract intelligence collection in information networks and cyberattacks against
national defence and the defence system, particularly when these are carried out by
a state actor. Cyber defence is conducted in cooperation with national and international
security authorities, and the Defence Forces supports other authorities by providing
executive assistance.

The cyber domain will be protected by raising the threshold for cyberattacks. We must be
able to detect cyber threats on time and to monitor changes in the cyber environment
in real time. The common cyber operational picture contributes to the detection and
identification of state and other threats, and aids in preventing them from accessing
systems and information central to the defence system. A better national foundation will
be created for developing cyber effects and cyber countermeasures.

The importance of information defence, much like cyber defence, has grown since the last
Government Defence Report. As the volume of externally directed and other malicious
information, and the ways to disseminate it, is increasing, an effective information
defence requires that the Defence Forces has, for example, the necessary digital tools
for monitoring the information environment and for initiating defensive measures when
necessary. In information defence and in responding to information influencing, it is
key to be able to harmonise the information content and communication procedures
among authorities and other actors, so that swift and effective responses are possible.
The capabilities of information defence are developed together with other authorities
and international partners, while ensuring that the legal frameworks and powers are
up-to-date. While developing these capabilities, the Defence Forces will take into
account measures taken by other central government entities to respond to information
influencing.

Space defence is used to protect the activities of national defence and the rest of
society against space-based threats, and to secure the function of space systems and


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

services critical to society in all conditions. The activities of the Defence Forces and other
authorities are increasingly more dependent on space-based systems. A space situational
awareness is the foundation of space defence. The Defence Forces will develop its ability
to maintain a constant space situational awareness in cooperation with other authorities
and international partners.

###### 4.2.5 Other Joint Capabilities of the Finnish Defence Forces

Other joint capabilities of the Finnish Defence Forces include intelligence, command
and control, logistics systems, special operations forces, and some of the deep fires
weapon systems. Joint capabilities are used to achieve operational objectives in all states
of readiness. They are used in a centrally commanded fashion everywhere on Finnish
territory, and in all domains.

Military intelligence collects and processes information on military activities targeting
Finland or activities that are significant in terms of Finland’s security environment.
It produces intelligence information to support decision-making and maintains
the capability to give early warning on a military threat directed at Finland. Military
intelligence procedures for supporting the decision-making of the Defence Forces’
leadership and state leadership will continue to be developed. The possibilities presented
by the strategic capability projects will be considered during the development of military
intelligence procedures. To secure intelligence collection, the intelligence and surveillance
system is being developed, and analysis and information management capabilities will be
strengthened. Military intelligence works together with civilian intelligence in detecting
threats against Finland. Developing the use of the powers of the Military Intelligence Act
and standardising new intelligence methods as part of the organisation will continue.

The ability to have an effect on targets from a long distance away is a key part of military
deterrence. High readiness and reach of deep fires restricts and limits the attacker’s
possibilities for using its own deep fires. The development of joint fires capabilities will be
continued with purchases of ordnance for the Army, Navy and Air Force. The command
capabilities, equipment and mobility of the special operations forces will be improved to
meet the needs of their missions and operating environment.

The command and control system of the Defence Forces must enable centralised
command and operations of the Defence Forces in all domains. The development of the
command system must facilitate the digitalisation of the Defence Forces, as outlined
in the Digitalisation Programme. The establishment of a new C5 School will improve
experimentation and development activities that support the development of and
acquisition of knowledge in the C5 field.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

The Defence Forces builds and operates its own operational information systems. The
communication networks of the Defence Forces will be expanded to areas that are
critical to defence. In addition to its own access networks, the Defence Forces can use the
communication networks of partners, commercial operators and other authorities.

The ability to command will be safeguarded and ensured through cyber defence and
information security solutions. Compatibility of communication and information exchange
solutions will be verified according to multinational standards. Compatibility and costeffectiveness will be improved by taking advantage of government information systems,
and by participating in their development.

The readiness and capabilities of the logistics system to support the operation of the
forces and to enable the use of new capabilities will continue to be developed. The
logistics support network will be updated as required by the local defence reform. The
readiness to use the logistics system to support other authorities will be maintained, as
well as continuing to develop it in order to prepare for crisis situations.

The contracts-based cooperation between the Defence Forces and service providers is
being developed and deepened. Common training and regular testing of readiness ensure
support capabilities for all security situations. Effective leadership of logistics resources
of the Defence Forces and partners requires continuous development of information
systems.

###### 4.2.6 Development of Local Defence

Local defence is being developed into a military capability encompassing the entire
country, which will for its part contribute to preventing and combating broad-spectrum
influencing. Local forces will create a national network that is able to participate in
versatile and demanding cooperation with other authorities. The local defence units
can be used to assist in mobilisation; for combat; for infrastructure protection, and for
supporting other authorities and society. They can be used to protect infrastructure vital
to defence and society, and they can participate in restoring services after disruptions,
together with the authorities and other actors. The local forces will seek to utilise the local
knowledge and civilian skills of the reservists more effectively.

The strength of the local forces will be increased starting in 2025, by transforming most
of the regional forces into local forces. At the same time, the local forces will be given
new tasks and the standards will be raised. With this change, the local forces will include
more units that can be used for combat in rapidly escalating situations. The force reserve


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

of the local forces will enable land defence to conduct extended combat operations
everywhere in Finland.

The readiness and equipment of the local forces will be improved to meet the
requirements set by the new tasks. Local forces will be called in for more refresher training
and voluntary training exercises as the regional forces are removed from the force
structure. Developing the local forces will create a meaningful career path for reservists
in different wartime positions, and enable active participation in national defence. The
importance of reservists’ commitment and networking will be emphasised as the missions
of local defence become more versatile. The resources of voluntary national defence and
volunteer reservists will be increasingly used in training and recruiting reservists into the
local forces. The ability of reservists to participate in national defence will be improved by
reforming training, and by increasing the capability of the local defence units.

The brigade-level units and regional offices under the brigade-level units will retain their
important role in local defence planning and execution. Local defence exercises will
continue to play a key role in improving and training interagency cooperation. Exercises
will be developed to suit the regional characteristics and the expanding number of
missions of local defence.

###### 4.2.7 Strategic Capability Projects

Maintaining defence capability requires that the capability of the Hornet fleet is
replaced in its entirety with new multi-role fighters beginning in 2025, as outlined in the
previous Government Defence Report. The new multi-role fighters are the foundation
of air defence, and a necessary part of land and maritime defence as well. The fighters’
capabilities will also be used to improve intelligence, surveillance, and command and
control. Effective use of the multi-role fighters requires that the operating principles of
air defence and of the defence system are developed, so that the new capabilities can
be utilised in full. Functions, structures and infrastructure will be developed in order to
optimise the use of the equipment. The fighter aircraft are expected to remain in service
until the early 2060s.

The programme to replace the Hornet fleet has been ongoing since 2015, in accordance
with the capability and security of supply requirements set by the Defence Forces, and
the constraints set by the state leadership. Parliament has approved funding for the
programme and the Government will make the procurement decision in late 2021. The
effects of the capability and the lifecycle costs of the new system on the defence system
will be factored in, so that they support the HX system procurement decision, while taking
into account the requirements set in 2019 by the Government.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

Implementation of the Squadron 2020 programme has been outlined in the 2017
Government Defence Report. The Government authorised the procurement decision in
the autumn of 2019 and the project is proceeding. Squadron 2020 is the Navy’s project
of four multi-role corvettes that will replace capabilities of seven vessels that the Navy
has decommissioned or will decommission. The construction of the first vessel is set to
begin in 2022. In addition to maritime defence, the Pohjanmaa-class vessels will augment
national situational awareness by generating intelligence and surveillance data from the
air and maritime domains. They will participate in national air defence and deep fires.

In addition to defence tasks, the vessels will be used to support other authorities. They can
also be used to participate in crisis management and in providing military assistance. The
Pohjanmaa class vessels are expected to remain in service until the 2050s.


###### Defence system maintenance and development priorities during the reporting period:



##### • Maintaining defence readiness and improving materiel readiness
 • Implementing strategic capability projects and introducing new


capabilities into service

##### • Maintaining land defence and other parts of the defence system during


the implementation of the strategic capability projects

##### • Developing local defence and local forces.


#### 4.3 Conscription, Voluntary National Defence and
 Will to Defend the Country

Conscription is the foundation of the Finnish defence solution. The conscription system
generates a sizeable reserve that makes it possible to defend the whole country. The
current conscription system does not require significant reforms from the perspective
of military national defence. However, changes related to the operating environment,
population, society and technology will require developing the conscription system.
By developing conscription, it is possible to create capabilities that support all of the
tasks of the Defence Forces. Inclusion of citizens in national defence will be improved,
by increasing participation opportunities, particularly for women, and for those in the
reserve. Developing conscription includes the different phases of when a person is liable
for military service: from the call-ups to conscript service, and time in the reserve.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

A Parliamentary Committee on National Defence Obligation and Conscription established
in 2020 will define the goals for strengthening and developing conscription. According
to the appointment decision of the Committee, the development must be based on the
needs of military national defence and must generate additional operational value. The
identified options for development must also strengthen equality and the will to defend
the country. By integrating these requirements, it is possible to ensure that conscription
remains the effective and generally accepted foundation of defence. It is beneficial from
the perspective of comprehensive security that the non-military service system is also
developed, in accordance with the expected needs created by emergency conditions and
disruptions in society.

A large-scale reform of conscript training is ongoing. The goal of the Training 2020
Programme is to use new technologies and optimised training processes to develop highquality skills; to ensure successful selections of individuals for training during conscript
service; and, to promote versatile human performance and training activities. In order
to improve the selection of individuals for training, a new digitalised and AI supported
selection system is being developed. The economic benefits available to conscripts during
their military service will also be improved during this reporting period.

Increasing the number of women completing voluntary military service is a goal. The
objective is to take advantage of the increase in the number of applicants in order to
ensure the size and quality of the Defence Forces’ reserve. By increasing the number of
women, we will deepen the societal impact of national defence and improve the will to
defend the country, and increase equality and non-discrimination.

Reservist training will be made more effective by developing the different exercise types:
refresher training exercises, Defence Forces’ voluntary exercises, voluntary national
defence training, and independent skills training for reservists, including opportunities
for firearms training. More flexible use of conscripts and reservists to support other
authorities will be investigated.

The revised Act on Voluntary National Defence will further the systematic planning,
preparation and implementation of reserve training. The training organised by the
National Defence Training Association of Finland (MPK) and its member organisations will
be developed into a cumulative and progressive package that supports military training
and the needs of the Defence Forces. Additionally, the reform enables developing the
cooperation of the National Defence Training Association and the Defence Forces into
an operational partnership, as well as more effective harmonisation of refresher training
exercises, Defence Forces’ voluntary exercises and voluntary national defence.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

The national defence awareness of young people will be improved. The Parliamentary
Committee on National Defence Obligation and Conscription is looking into the
possibilities of using the public education system to increase young people’s knowledge
about matters relating to comprehensive security, the national defence obligation and
general conscription. The Defence Forces will develop its messaging targeted at young
people as part of reforming call-ups. Furthermore, the parliamentary committee on
national defence obligation and conscription will look at possibilities for expanding callups to include the entire age group, including women. The electronic services of the
Defence Forces that are currently being developed will make it easier for conscripts and
reservists to contact the Defence Forces in matters related to their service. All of these
measures also seek to maintain the will to defend the country.

#### 4.4 Focus Areas of Defence Cooperation

Changes in the operating environment have resulted in defence cooperation becoming
more focused on issues relating to the security situation of the neighbouring area,
changes to the threat environment and military capabilities, situational awareness, and
cooperation during crisis situations. Regular and versatile international exercises are an
important part of this cooperation.

During the last few years, Finland’s defence cooperation has been developed actively and
decisively by building a bilateral and multilateral defence cooperation network and by
signing a number of defence cooperation framework documents with key partners. The
focus is on maintaining the defence cooperation network and developing the contents
of the cooperation. New defence cooperation framework documents may be drafted on
a case-by-case basis following a deliberation and decision-making process in each case.

One of the objectives of defence cooperation is to develop ability to act together with
Finland’s key partners including in times of crisis. This strengthens Finland’s security and
creates prerequisites for coordinating and combining activities, according to separate
decisions.

Materiel cooperation continues to be deepened with the Nordic countries (NORDEFCO),
within the European Union framework, with NATO, and bilaterally with our key partners.

The focus of international defence cooperation in the field of logistics is on cooperation
with Sweden and the other Nordic countries. This includes practicing activities related to
_Host Nation Support, and standardising associated operating procedures._


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

Finland continues to strengthen defence cooperation with its key partners, while ensuring
that the cooperation is maintained and further developed so that it provides meaningful
content. The resources required for these activities must also to be ensured. The different
defence cooperation arrangements complement each other.

###### 4.4.1 Multilateral Defence Cooperation:

 European Union

Deepening security and defence cooperation within the EU strengthens the Union as an
independent actor and as a security community, and provides tools for developing the
defence of the Member States. France and Germany have a central role, the continuation
of which is necessary for deepening EU defence cooperation. Finland supports
strengthening the EU’s security and defence policy and actively participates in the framing
of the EU’s common defence policy. It is in Finland’s interest that the EU is able to defend
its interests, promote stability in its neighbouring regions and to support the defence of
Europe, as stated in the Global Strategy for the European Union’s Foreign and Security
Policy. Finland is ready to provide and receive assistance in accordance with the European
Union’s mutual assistance clause (TEU Article 42 paragraph 7) and solidarity clause (TFEU
Article 222). Requesting and providing assistance is based on a national decision. Finland
also participates in the exercises related to the application and implementation of these
articles.

Permanent structured cooperation (PESCO) has a key role in EU defence cooperation.
Finland supports developing PESCO, implements its PESCO commitments and participates
in PESCO projects. Another key initiative, the European Defence Fund, will create new
cooperation opportunities in technology, research and development between the
Member States and the defence industries of those states. Finland will take advantage
of these opportunities when developing national capabilities and the industrial and
technological foundations of Finnish defence. The EU’s defence initiatives and new
tools will be taken into account in the Defence Forces’ planning, so that Finland is able
to both influence their development and benefit from them. Finland will strengthen its
participation in the EU’s military crisis management operations.

Developing a common European strategic culture is important for strengthening security
and defence policy cooperation. The EU is defining the level of its ambition on security
and defence cooperation more closely with the so-called Strategic Compass, i.e. a strategic
reflection and steering process that Finland actively participates in. Finland believes that
the EU must be a globally credible actor that is able to promote and defend its values
and interests, and one that is able to execute demanding crisis management operations
independently should the need arise.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

Changes in the operating environment and specifically the impacts and possibilities of
technological development must be accounted for in defence capability development.
This requires systematically strengthening the connections between security, defence
and other EU policy sectors. From that perspective, the central entities include military
mobility, hybrid and cyber threats, new and disruptive technologies, artificial intelligence,
digitalisation, space, and the link between climate change and security. EU cooperation is
important for improving military security of supply and the comprehensive crisis resilience
of society, and for reinforcing the defence industrial and technological base.

Furthermore, closer EU−NATO cooperation is increasingly more important and adds value
to responding to the challenges of the operating environment. The European Centre of
Excellence for Countering Hybrid Threats, located in Helsinki, is a vital cooperation partner
that supports the EU, NATO and their member states in combating hybrid threats.

###### NATO

NATO is the key actor for advancing transatlantic and European security and stability.
NATO offers Finland and other partner nations cooperation possibilities based on mutual
benefits. Finland develops its partnership with NATO from its own premises and interests,
and effectively employs the partnership tools and cooperation programmes provided by
NATO, to strengthen its national defence capabilities.

Participation in demanding NATO exercises and crisis management develops Finland’s
own capabilities and interoperability with partners. Finland participates in these activities
by separate decisions made by the President of the Republic and the Government’s
Ministerial Committee on Foreign and Security Policy. In Finland-NATO cooperation, it
is taken into account that partnership cooperation neither includes any Article 5 based
security guarantees nor obligations.

In addition to defence policy dialogue, capability development, interoperability and
shared situational awareness, Finland cooperates with NATO in such areas as cyber
defence; arms control; CBRN; developing crisis resilience; defence materiel and questions
related to combating hybrid threats. The objective of research cooperation with NATO is to
create compatible solutions and identify new and disruptive technologies and their effects
on warfare. Cooperation with NATO also supports military security of supply.

The close cooperation among NATO, Finland and Sweden (30+2) is a key part in Finland’s
partnership cooperation, and it is carried out in the NATO Enhanced Opportunities Partner
(EOP) framework. Dialogue on the security situation of the Baltic Sea region and practical
military cooperation improve Finland’s possibilities to influence its security environment,
and increase predictability and stability in the region. It is also in Finland’s interest to


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

engage in dialogue with NATO on the security of the northern region and on keeping it
outside of any international tensions. Promoting political dialogue with NATO is important
to Finland.

Maintaining a national room to manoeuvre and freedom of choice are also integral
parts of Finland’s foreign, security and defence policy. This retains the option of joining
a military alliance and applying for NATO membership. The decisions are always
considered in real time, taking account of the changes in the international security
environment. Interoperability achieved through cooperation ensures the elimination of
any practical impediments to arising to a potential membership.

###### NORDEFCO

In addition to the founding document, signed in 2009, the development of Nordic
defence cooperation (NORDEFCO) is guided by a document called Vision 2025 that was
approved in 2018 and that outlines mid-term goals for cooperation. The vision states that
Nordic countries will improve their defence capability and cooperation in peace, crisis
and conflict, and that they ensure a close dialogue on security and defence. The goal is
to strengthen each country’s national defence and the ability to act together. Improving
cooperation also during crisis and conflict is a new level of ambition in multilateral Nordic
defence cooperation.

In order to implement the Vision, the Nordic countries will continue cooperating
in areas like military mobility; comprehensive security; military security of supply;
situational awareness; crisis consultations; crisis resilience; military crisis management;
logistics cooperation; capability development, and training and exercises. Transatlantic
cooperation will be enhanced and regular dialogue with the Baltic countries will be
continued. The Nordic countries will continue seeking and working on common defence
materiel projects, and developing industrial cooperation. Despite the different defence
solutions of the Nordic countries, Finland sees great potential for deepening relations in
defence cooperation, and participates in the cooperation pro-actively.

The trilateral cooperation between Finland, Sweden and Norway also supports achieving
the objectives of NORDEFCO Vision 2025.

###### Country Groups

Finland supports defence cooperation between the Nordic and Baltic countries, and
the cooperation between defence administrations in the so-called Northern Group.
Multinational country groups, such as JEF (Joint Expeditionary Force), EI2 (European
_Intervention Initiative) and FNC (Framework Nations Concept) are an important part of_


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

the defence cooperation network. Active cooperation in the country groups supports
developing defence capability, interoperability and situational awareness. At the same
time, participation reinforces the EU’s defence cooperation, Finland’s partnership
cooperation with NATO and bilateral defence cooperation. Bilateral and multilateral
defence cooperation advances Finland’s objectives to prevent different crises. It also
improves the ability to act together with partner countries during a crisis if a decision to
cooperate is made.

###### 4.4.2 Bilateral Defence Cooperation

 Sweden

Like Finland, Sweden is a country that is not a member of any military alliance. Both
countries also conduct close defence cooperation with other international partners.
Sweden’s position as Finland’s closest bilateral partner is strong. The objectives of
cooperation with Sweden are to strengthen the security of the Baltic Sea region, as
well as the defence of Finland and Sweden. Defence cooperation between Finland and
Sweden covers times of peace, crisis, conflict and war. The framework for this cooperation
is formed by the Memorandum of Understanding on defence cooperation signed by the
governments of Finland and Sweden (2018).

The countries’ defence cooperation includes operational planning for all situations.
An example of this is the inherent right to collective self-defence as stated in Article
51 of the UN Charter. Additionally, areas of deepening cooperation include situational
picture cooperation, common use of logistics and infrastructure, Host Nation Support
arrangements, surveillance and protection of territorial integrity, and defence industry
and materiel cooperation. The purpose of cooperation is to lay long-term foundations
in Finland and Sweden for military cooperation and combined operations in all
circumstances. There are no pre-set limits to deepening this defence cooperation.

Interoperability that has been planned, built and rehearsed during peacetime between
Finland and Sweden aims to enable carrying out combined defence measures, including
their prerequisites, based on existing plans and in all conditions.

###### Norway

Defence cooperation with Norway will be increased and deepened, both bilaterally
and together with Sweden. Key areas in bilateral defence cooperation with Norway
include defence policy dialogue; interoperability, military security of supply and materiel
cooperation, including defence industry cooperation; cooperation in operational
planning, and training cooperation.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

The objective of trilateral cooperation between Finland, Sweden and Norway is to create
prerequisites to execute military operations in times of crisis and conflict, if separately
decided. Trilateral cooperation does not replace NORDEFCO, but it adds to the bilateral
defence cooperation between both Finland and Sweden, and Finland and Norway.

###### United States

The United States is an important and close partner for Finland; defence cooperation
with the United States improves Finland’s defence capability. The United States is the key
outside actor in Northern Europe. The US commitment to Europe, both through bilateral
arrangements and through NATO, is of key importance for European security and for
Finland as well. Finland will continue close cooperation and the development of its ability
to act together with the United States.

The bilateral Statement of Intent mentions, for example, the following as important
areas of cooperation: extensive defence policy dialogue; closer, deepening materiel
cooperation, including military security of supply; information exchange; capability
cooperation; training and exercises; research cooperation, and developing readiness and
interoperability. New technologies, and particularly the United States’ expertise in them,
are emphasised in military capability development.

In addition to bilateral cooperation, trilateral cooperation between Finland, Sweden and
the United States is also important, especially from the perspective of enhancing defence
policy dialogue, information exchange and interoperability.

###### Other Partner Countries

Finland continues to also intensify bilateral defence cooperation with other countries that
have signed framework documents with Finland.

The United Kingdom, Germany and France are important partners, and cooperation
continues to be developed with them, both bilaterally and multilaterally. Finland
considers it important that defence cooperation with the United Kingdom remains as
close as possible, despite the country’s departure from the European Union. Estonia is an
important neighbour to Finland, including close cooperation in the field of defence.

###### 4.4.3 Crisis Management

Crisis management is a central foreign, security and defence policy instrument used for
supporting conflict resolution, stabilisation of post-conflict situations and building of


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

safe societies. Participation in military crisis management promotes achieving Finland’s
wider foreign and security policy goals, and participation is also part of international
cooperation and bearing responsibility for international peace and security. In addition
to helping achieve foreign and security policy goals, Finland’s participation also improves
national defence capabilities.

Finland will increase its participation in international military crisis management, including
UN missions and operations in Africa. Finland evaluates its participation in international
military crisis management from the perspective of effectiveness and national objectives.
Crisis management operations are conducted in demanding operating environments
where security risks have increased. While deciding on participation in crisis management
operations, Finland considers both the policies outlined in the Government Report on
Foreign and Security as well as national resources.

In early 2021, the Parliamentary Committee on Crisis Management drafted a
comprehensive policy outline, extending over government terms. Based on the outline,
the Committee issued a recommendation to strengthen military crisis management by
setting the 2020 level of participation and appropriations as the minimum.

###### 4.4.4 International Exercises

Finland will continue active participation in international exercises that support
maintaining, developing and demonstrating Finland’s defence capability. Exercises
promote interoperability with key partners, provide information on the activities of other
parties and strengthens regional security. The focus of exercises is in demanding unit and
staff exercises in Finland’s neighbouring areas.

In planning international exercise participation, the focus is on exercises that best develop
the capabilities and skills required by the statutory tasks of the Defence Forces, as well as
interoperability and readiness. Exercises that cannot be organised or it is not practical to
organise nationally are important, as are exercises that include capabilities that Finland
does not possess. International partners will continue to be invited to exercises organised
in Finland, and it is possible to incorporate these exercises into those of key partner
countries.

NATO may also invite partner countries to participate in its demanding exercises.
Participating in such demanding exercises is justified from the perspective of Finland’s
own capabilities and interoperability. When participating in any NATO Article 5 exercises
Finland’s role is only that of a partner country, and Finland participates from its own
premises and interests. Finland participates in international military exercises according


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

to guidelines given by the President of the Republic and the Government’s Ministerial
Committee on Foreign and Security Policy. The Parliament’s Defence Committee and
the Foreign Affairs Committee are informed of the Defence Forces’ participation in
international exercise cooperation.

#### 4.5 Essential Enablers for Defence

###### 4.5.1 Digitalisation and Information Management

Digitalisation changes the security environment and operating models, and creates
benefits with emerging technologies. Legislation, knowledge, effects evaluation and
technological ability must be developed alongside emerging technologies. The goal is to
manage risks associated with emerging technologies, take advantage of opportunities,
optimise activities, create new services, activities and knowledge, develop new abilities,
and to be involved in national decisions. A key objective is to develop abilities related
to utilising information and knowledge, and leading with knowledge, which can be
reinforced with different artificial intelligence applications. Applications can be used to
improve the basis for decision making, since information will be available faster and it will
be more accurate.

With its digitalisation programme, the Defence Forces will create prerequisites for
digitalisation and the utilisation of related technology. The programme will support the
introduction of emerging technologies and applications in development programmes and
projects in a centralised manner. The production of network and infrastructure services
and connecting operator services that are critical to the Defence Forces command system
must be ensured.

By upgrading the resource planning information system and building the information
management system, the technical prerequisites are created to improve the ability
to support command and control and leadership through information, as well as the
ability to process and analyse information comprehensively and securely. New mobile
information transmission technologies such as 5G will be utilised in national defence. At
the same time, vulnerabilities related to, for example, supply chains will increase, which
requires the development of risk management, carried out together with other authorities.
This underlines the importance of a common situational awareness, information exchange
and operational cooperation between authorities. Suitable legislation is a prerequisite to
ensure this. The private sector is the main developer of technology, which from a national
security perspective requires well-developed regulations.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

It is vital for national security and defence that information banks, communications
solutions and information systems are protected from misuse. Geospatial data is a key
element in information society and it often incorporates other target data as well. Detailed
information or the operating processes of critical infrastructure should not be made
publicly available.

Different navigation systems must enable safe operations in accordance with the
requirements set by the operating environment. The usability and availability of
geospatial, time and navigation data will be considered when developing defence.
Military aviation and unmanned aviation will be integrated by developing airspace control
in lower airspace.

###### 4.5.2 Research and development

Technological development, particularly in the areas of digitalisation, AI, machine
autonomy, sensor technologies and new domains, also have a considerable impact
on the development of military capabilities. The number of autonomous and partially
autonomous systems that contribute to military capabilities is increasing, which
emphasises the need for cooperation between humans and machines. While taking
advantage of the opportunities provided by new technology, it is necessary to take into
account the related ethical challenges and legal limitations. It is also necessary to be also
able to respond to the threats posed by these systems.

The defence administration maintains and develops its own as well as national skills in this
field, while maintaining the capacity for innovation and foresight. It also ensures support
for maintaining and developing capabilities and prerequisites for international research
cooperation. The defence administration concentrates its own research and development
activities and resources, both in national and international research cooperation, in
knowledge areas that are vital for the defence administration or which cannot be acquired
elsewhere.

However, the research and development activities of the Defence Forces or occasional
project funding alone cannot maintain and develop the extensive skills base needed
for national defence. When directing national research and innovation policy and its
resources, the needs of national defence and national security must be systematically
taken into account. Ensuring critical skills and domestic security of supply and
developing them further will require long-term cooperation with universities, research
establishments, technology companies and the defence industry. Development costs and
rising requirements place pressure on the resourcing of research and development, both
nationally and within the defence administration.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

###### 4.5.3 Military security of supply and partnerships

Military security of supply ensures the operation of the Finnish Defence Forces’ critical
systems in all conditions. Wartime defence capability is largely based on resources
available from society. Ensuring military security of supply requires that military
preparedness and civilian society’s preparedness for disruptions and emergency
conditions are integrated, and that cooperation with the National Emergency Supply
Agency and other actors involved in security of supply matters is increased. The needs and
objectives of military security of supply will be reviewed when renewing the Government’s
decision on the goals of security of supply. Finland is dependent on the procurement and
availability of defence materiel from abroad.

Production, technology and skills critical for national defence must be available and at the
disposal of the defence system in all security situations. The availability of technology, and
the ability to create and integrate new technology and technological solutions into the
defence system cost-effectively, requires national industrial and technological skills and an
appropriate production capacity. It is particularly important to ensure the maintenance of
critical technological systems and the production of critical consumable material used in
national defence.

A well- functioning and internationally competitive domestic defence industry, its
international networks and exports contribute to maintaining the military security of
supply, and improve the operational capability of national defence. The export and
internationalisation of Finnish defence industry will continue to receive support. Exporting
military equipment in concordance with international obligations also supports military
security of supply. Responsible export control rests on careful considerations that are
made on a case-by-case basis.

Partners and their subcontracting chains have a significant and established position in
the defence system. They have a key role in ensuring the military security of supply, for
example in relation to the Defence Forces’ materiel and equipment maintenance and
repair, and catering.

A partnership refers to contract-based, long-term cooperation between the Defence
Forces and a private sector service provider, where the provider prepares and commits to
providing the services also in emergency conditions. A strategic partnership is the closest
form of cooperation between the Defence Forces and a private sector service provider. The
traits that characterise a strategic partnership are mutual trust, openness, shared goals for
development, as well as preparedness, continuous improvement of operating procedures,
and training for emergencies during normal conditions.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

The services provided by the strategic partner are of critical importance to the core
functions of the Defence Forces, and they are connected to the state’s key security
interests. The services always include preparedness requirements that are essential during
emergency conditions. A strategic partner commits to providing the services also during
emergencies, and takes this into account already during peacetime.

Therefore, special attention is paid to the preparedness of partners to ensure their
operation in all security situations, including personnel availability. The changes in the
operating environment require that both the Defence Forces and its partners are able
to react rapidly to events. The possibilities for the defence administration to affect the
activities of the partners is ensured by contractual guidance, supplemented by ownership
steering by the state. The cost-effectiveness of partnerships is monitored.

###### 4.5.4 Infrastructure

Since early 2021, the management of the properties of the State used by the Finnish
Defence Forces has been centralised under the unincorporated state enterprise Defence
Properties Finland. Defence Properties Finland supports the readiness, preparedness and
security of the Defence Forces via the usability and protection afforded by the premises,
while managing rising real estate costs. This is realised by the advancement of efficient
design of premises, optimisation of life-cycle costs of the properties, ensuring the
health security of the buildings, and giving up old ones. Renovations will continue to be
undertaken to address indoor air problems in barracks.

The required training areas and infrastructure needs dictated by the tasks of the Defence
Forces will be maintained on a level required in both normal and emergency conditions, in
cooperation with local actors. The Defence Forces Estate Strategy assesses the key internal
and external drivers for change and development needs.

The activities of the Finnish Defence Forces are dependent on society’s infrastructure, both
in normal and emergency conditions. For example, Finland’s airport network and air traffic
control systems must enable the execution of the statutory tasks of the Defence Forces
and associated training, in all states of readiness. An analysis on developing the structures
needed by national defence and military security of supply will be conducted during the
reporting period. The defence administration also considers it important to identify the
critical physical infrastructure of the rest of society, and to develop the methods required
for protecting and managing this infrastructure.

The Ministry of the Interior will examine the condition of civil defence and civil defence
shelters and their distribution in Finland, and lead the necessary development actions.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

###### 4.5.5 Sustainable development and the environment

Finland and the defence administration continue implementing the UN’s Agenda 2030
for sustainable development. All of the Finnish Defence Forces’ national and international
activities take into account the effective management of environmental risks and
prevention of environmental damage. The Defence Forces will continue to develop its
environmental responsibility according to its environmental strategy and the strategy’s
implementation plan. The Defence Forces monitors and reports on its greenhouse gas
emissions.

The defence administration will advance the carbon neutrality goals set by the
Government without compromising defence capability. The Defence Forces is developing
its ability to use fuels and energy sources available in society. Renewing the energy system
also helps to improve energy independence, security of supply and resilience of the
garrisons. Security of supply, energy efficiency and emissions reduction targets will be
taken into account in fuel selection.

Wind power construction must account for the operating requirements of national
defence and the implementation of statutory tasks of the Defence Forces. Wind farm
placement has an impact on territorial surveillance duties, the command and control
systems of the Defence Forces, and on the usability of training areas. The defence
administration welcomes the construction of wind power in areas where it does not
interfere with the operating requirements of national defence.

The impact of climate change on security and defence has also become a theme in
international defence cooperation. The defence administration actively participates in
environmental cooperation within the frameworks of NORDEFCO, the European Union,
NATO and the UN, and continues bilateral environmental cooperation with the United
States and other countries. It participates in environmental cooperation among defence
sectors in matters related to the High North and the Baltic Sea region.

The defence administration monitors the ways in which climate change impacts the
operating and security environment. Adaptation needs, including weather phenomena
caused by climate change, will be accounted for in planning.

###### 4.5.6 Legislation

Legislative reforms on key laws concerning the Finnish Defence Forces were enacted
during the previous electoral term. These reforms significantly improved the Defence
Forces’ ability to flexibly raise its readiness, and reformed the legislation concerning
military intelligence. The most significant reforms still require further review and


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

development, to ensure that they serve their purpose and that the new, reformed
provisions are implemented properly.

The Government has identified a need to re-examine the Emergency Powers Act. It
is important for the Defence Forces that it is able to execute its statutory tasks in any
circumstances, on the basis of up-to-date legislation.

The usability of conscripts and reservists for demanding military duties and executive
assistance in different security situations will be improved, by developing operating
procedures and by examining the need for possible legislative revisions. The Government
has submitted to Parliament a government proposal, prepared under the leadership of the
Ministry of the Interior, for a new act on executive assistance to the police by the Defence
Forces. The purpose of the new act is to specify the possibilities for the police to request
executive assistance from the Defence Forces.

The Territorial Surveillance Act and related regulations must be examined and revised to
meet the needs of Finland’s international cooperation and exercises.

Government entities have identified the need to examine the development needs of
legislation related to the cyber environment, and the need to further develop and clarify
interagency cooperation on national security and national defence in the field of cyber
defence.

The Act on Military Discipline and Crime Prevention in the Finnish Defence Forces provides
instruction on preliminary investigation tasks in the Defence Forces and on preventing
and uncovering offences. An area designated for specific review is the use of force and
powers, as both entities have been identified as requiring changes.

The defence administration’s technical safety regulations regarding e.g. military explosives,
electrical safety and transportation of hazardous materials will also be reformed. The
updated regulation will also include transportation of hazardous materials in international
exercises.

#### 4.6 Personnel and Funding

###### 4.6.1 Personnel

The Defence Forces Reform of 2012–2015 reduced the number of personnel employed
by the Finnish Defence Forces to meet the tight budgetary demands of the time.
Furthermore, the reduction was implemented during a lower threat level security


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

environment. The number of personnel employed by the Defence Forces was reduced by
approximately 2,300 persons to the current 12,000 persons.

During the last few years, the Defence Forces has been given new obligations, and these
changes have required an increase in the number of personnel. The security environment
requires maintaining adequate readiness and the readiness to react to disruptions.
Conscript and reservist training need to receive the personnel resources required to
meet the objectives. International cooperation has increased, and international exercises
have become more diverse and demanding. In addition, the personnel’s participation in
international military crisis management is important in order to develop international
skills and knowledge.

The personnel’s well-being at work and their performance is supported by high-quality
working hours management and working capacity-management efforts, by using and
developing flexible working methods and working hours, by analysing personnel survey
results and reacting to identified areas of improvement. The possibility to develop the
terms and conditions of both civil servants and employees will also be reviewed within
constrains of the budget. Personnel numbers have a critical impact on well-being at work.

The more demanding capability requirements call for more personnel resources. In
addition to developing joint and service-specific capabilities, additional resources are
needed for skills related to new technologies, the development of cyber, space and
information capabilities, and for implementing the military intelligence legislation.

The defence administration has for years identified the need to increase the personnel of
the Defence Forces by approximately 600 person-years. Of these, approximately 100 will
be realised during the current electoral term. The objective is to increase the personnel
number gradually by 500 person-years by the end of this decade, so that it meets
the required need. In order to meet the instructor goal of 2.5 instructors / platoon for
conscripts, the number of Contractual Military Personnel must be guaranteed to the level
of 350 person-years.

Evaluation of the effects of the changes in the military pension system and the retirement
of the warrant officer personnel group, and the development of the personnel system will
be continued.

###### 4.6.2 Funding

Maintenance and further development of a defence capability that meets the changes in
the operating environment will be ensured. Resources for this purpose will be included in


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

the funding framework spanning over the current electoral term. The detailed financing
decisions will be taken in connection with general government fiscal plans and budgets.

In 2021 Finland’s defence budget is a total of EUR 4.6 billion, which is approximately
1,8 % of the Gross Domestic Product. Calculations of defence expenditure that follow
international praxis allows for the inclusion of military pensions, parts of the Border
Guard’s expenditures and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs expenditures on international
crisis management. When these are included, the share of GDP is approximately 2.1 %.
The share of strategic capability projects of the 2021 defence budget is EUR 1.5 billion. The
funding profile of the multi-role fighter procurement will have a significant impact on the
annual variation in the defence budget during the reporting period. During the strategic
project procurement period the defence budget will remain on a higher level, after which
it is estimated to return to the previous level.

During this reporting period, cost-level adjustments will be made on the Defence Forces’
appropriations (excluding salaries), its defence materiel procurement, and military crisis
management equipment and administration funding, as an established practice.

Maintaining and developing the Defence Forces’ capability is dependent on the full
realisation of the funding outlined in the 2017 Government Defence Report. The capability
of the Finnish Defence Forces has been maintained and developed based on this funding:
partially returning to the required materiel investment levels, additional funding for
improving readiness and separate funding for strategic capability projects has enabled
maintaining defence capabilities on a level required by the tasks. Reallocations or cutting
of the budget will create a growing challenge for the Defence Forces, weakening the longterm maintenance and development of the defence capability.

The Squadron 2020 project will replace Navy vessels that will be decommissioned, and the
HX programme will replace Air Force capabilities that will be decommissioned. Parliament
has approved the additional funding for both strategic capability projects in full. The
index and foreign exchange costs created by the strategic capability procurements will be
budgeted separately in annual budgets. The unallocated financing portions of the multirole fighter purchase will be annually adjusted for purchasing power as necessary.

Gradually increasing the number of personnel will require additional resources. Increasing
the personnel by 500 person-years requires a permanent annual indexed increase of
EUR 38 million by the end of this decade. Furthermore, ensuring that 350 person-years are
available for hiring Contractual Military Personnel means an annual increase of 80 personyears over current numbers.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

The Parliamentary Committee on National Defence Obligation and Conscription will later
define goals for its chosen areas for development. Possible programmes and achieving
development goals may incur costs that are directed, for example, at call-ups and
voluntary national defence. The daily allowance of conscripts and women in voluntary
military service will be raised, and other economic benefits available during their military
service will be improved during the reporting period.

The new Military Intelligence Act enables the use of new intelligence collection methods,
which will increase the amount of intelligence information that must be processed.
Information systems will be developed to reduce the amount of manual work, which on its
part necessitates additional resources for both military and civilian intelligence activities.
Future activities will also be outlined in the Government Intelligence Report, which the
Government will give to the Parliament by the end of 2021.

Development of critical skills, digitalisation, and ensuring military security of supply
require sufficient investment in defence research, development and innovation.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

### 5 SUMMARY

1. The operating environment of Finnish defence will remain tense and
unpredictable. In addition to the land, sea and air domains, cyber, information
operation and space domains are emphasised. The importance of Arctic
neighbouring areas is increasing.

2. Broad-spectrum influencing challenges the crisis resilience of society,
defence readiness and maintenance of defence capability. This requires that
the national model of comprehensive security is updated and defence is
developed accordingly.

3. Close international defence cooperation strengthens Finland’s defence
capability. Defence cooperation improves Finland’s interoperability with its
closest partners in all security situations affecting Finland. Finland must be
able, subsequent to a separate decision, to act together with its key partners
under all circumstances, including in times of crisis.

4. Defence readiness will be maintained. The defence system will be developed
to better meet the current and future changes in warfare, threats and the
operating environment. Local defence will be reformed. The importance
of interagency cooperation and the role of reservists will grow. A wellfunctioning, up-to-date and developing conscription system is the
foundation of Finland’s defence.

5. Finland’s defence is developed with a long-term perspective, systematically
and as one entity. The implementation of the Squadron 2020 and HX projects
will continue. At the same time, we will ensure the maintenance of land
defence and other parts of the defence system.

6. The policies of this Government Defence Report and their implementation
cover a time period until the end of this decade.

###### Appendices (4 pcs)

− Appendix 1: The funding level of the 2017 Government Defence Report

− Appendix 2: Permanent Structured Cooperation (PESCO) and the European
Defence Fund

− Appendix 3: Country groups

− Appendix 4: Concepts, definitions and explanations


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

### Appendix 1: The funding level of the Government Defence Report 2017

**The funding level of the 2017 Government Defence Report consist of three entities:**

− The additional resources needed annually to improve readiness due to changes in
the security environment were estimated to be EUR 55 million since 2018. Based on
that, the Finnish Defence Forces operating expenses have received an increase of
EUR 50 million since 2018.

− In accordance with the recommendation of a Parliamentary Reporting Group it
was estimated that the annual resources needed to maintain the current materiel
investment level in the Defence Forces is EUR 150 million in addition to the index
raises starting in 2021. As agreed, the above-mentioned increases have been
accounted for in the funding given to defence materiel projects.

− The preparations of strategic capability projects of the Navy and Air Force (Squadron
2020 and HX) will be continued and the decommissioned capabilities will be replaced.
The projects will be carried out using budget funding 2019–2031. The Finnish
Parliament made the key decisions concerning the funding of Squadron 2020 in the
2018 budget, and the multi-role fighter procurement funding was decided in the 2021
budget.

**The following factors have impacted the funding level prescribed in the 2017 report:**

− The Finnish Defence Forces operating expenses announced in the 2017 budget were
cut by EUR 27 million based on the 2015 government programme.

− Starting from 2020, the operating expenses of the Finnish Defence Forces have been
given a gradually increasing 0.3 % cost savings requirement related to digitalisation
and improving productivity (the so-called general government cost savings). The
Government decided in the spring of 2020 that the cost savings will not be continued
from 2023 onwards, which means that the permanent annual cuts are approximately
EUR 19 million.

− Based on the 2019 Government Programme, the appropriations of the Finnish Defence
Force will be gradually increased by a total EUR 10 million by 2023. The increase will be
used for increasing the number of personnel and positions, for increasing the number
of refresher training exercises, and for voluntary national defence. In addition, there
have been numerous smaller and one-off increases of funding.

− With the general government fiscal plan of 2022-2025, the Government decided to cut
EUR 35 million from the Ministry of Defence main title of expenditure starting in 2023.
Additionally, a EUR 2 million travel budget cuts were directed at the administrative
branch, starting in 2023.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80


### Appendix 2


###### Permanent Structured Cooperation (PESCO) European Defence Fund (EDF)


###### The Council of the European Union adopted a decision establishing the Permanent Structured Cooperation (PESCO) in December 2017. All EU Member States are taking part in PESCO, except for two countries (Denmark and Malta).

 The aim is to promote the EU’s goals, help Member States to improve their defence capabilities and deepen defence cooperation among Member States. PESCO has a two-layer structure:

 1. The participating Member States have undertaken binding
 commitments, subject to annual regular assessment.

##### • In the areas of defence investment, the participating Member

###### States commit to e.g. increasing defence budgets and increasing investments, research and development.

##### • In the field of defence system harmonising, the focus is on, for

###### example, active participation in the Coordinated Annual Review on Defence (CARD) and cooperation within the European Defence Fund framework.

##### • Commitments in deployability of forces include participation

###### in CSDP operations and in European Union Battle Groups, and expanding the common funding of operations.

##### • Regarding capability shortfalls, the PESCO countries commit to

###### finding primarily common European projects in procurement, and to participate in at least one PESCO project.

##### • In European equipment programmes the emphasis is on the

###### European Defence Agency’s (EDA) role in capability cooperation, and its support to strengthening the foundations of European defence industry.

 2. The binding commitments are implemented through PESCO
 projects, where Member States participate within their means and capabilities. There are a total of 46 projects, Finland has a participating status in four projects and an observer status in eight projects (2021).

 PESCO is divided into strategic phases, the two first phases being 2018–2020 and 2021–2025. The Council specifies at the beginning of each phase the more precise objectives for meeting the binding commitments. Participating Member States have to communicate every year a national implementation plan, outlining how they intend to meet the binding commitments and what they plan to do in the future.


###### In the summer of 2018 The European Commission proposed a European Defence Fund as part of the next multiannual financial framework (MFF) 2021–2027. The European Defence Fund fosters joint innovation, research and development in defence technology and equipment.

 The funded projects cover the entire research and development cycle of defence materiel. The Fund’s aim is to foster the global competitiveness, efficiency and innovation capacity of the European defence industry and research actors, and thus advance the EU's strategic autonomy. Additionally, the Fund’s aim is to encourage taking advantage of synergies and reducing duplication in the defence industry, and to strengthen an open single market for defence in the EU.

 The Fund started in 2021, and it is operated based on annual work programmes. Its budget for seven years is EUR 7.953 billion euros (current prices).

 Projects are funded mainly through competitive calls. The beneficiaries are primarily industry and research consortiums, and the amount of awarded EU funding depends on the nature of the project. Defence research may be funded in full, but additional funding from Member States or industry is required in development projects.

 Projects supported by the Fund must be done as a collaboration between at least three companies or research establishments located in three different countries. The goal is to promote particularly the participation of small and medium sized enterprises, as well as midcaps in development projects. This is done by using different types of bonuses. The proposals for funded projects are evaluated using criteria that are defined in EU regulations. The evaluation focuses, among other things, on quality and effectiveness of activities, breakthrough potential, innovation and technological development, the competitiveness of European defence industry, the EU's security and defence interests, and increasing cross-border cooperation.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80


### Appendix 3


###### COUNTRY GROUPS


###### Joint Expeditionary Force (JEF)

 The Joint Expeditionary Force is a multilateral defence cooperation framework, led by the United Kingdom, and consisting of ten countries: Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom. Finland joined JEF in the summer of 2017, along with Sweden.

 The purpose of JEF cooperation is to develop the military readiness of the participating countries, to prevent different types of crises, and if necessary, to work together in crisis situations. Training together and coordinating military exercise activities between the participating countries is an important part of JEF. Combined exercises mainly take place in Northern Europe.

 The JEF framework can be utilised in a variety of operations. The Joint Expeditionary Force may not necessarily operate alone, but it can be used to support, for example UN, NATO or EU operations. A tailored force will be stood up for each mission and situation, and each country decides on possible participation based on national legislation.

 European Intervention Initiative (EI2)

 The European Intervention Initiative was launched by France in June 2018, and Finland joined it in November 2018. The following 13 countries are currently participating in the initiative: Belgium, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom.

 The purpose of the EI2 is to develop European strategic culture, to support the creation of a common situation picture, the capacity for prediction and sharing of information, and to develop Europe’s readiness on the politico-strategic level in order to respond to the crises and security challenges facing it.

 The development of a common strategic operating culture strives to support the ability of European countries to initiate and execute military missions and operations within the framework of EU, NATO, UN or a situation-specific country coalition.

 Framework Nations Concept (FNC)

 A total of 21 countries are part of the Framework Nations Concept, which is led by Germany. Finland, Austria and Switzerland joined in 2017 and Sweden joined in 2018. The Framework Nations Concept includes many important partners for Finland in the Baltic Sea region and in Northern Europe, such as Denmark, Estonia, Germany, Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland and Sweden.

 Cooperation within the Framework Nations Concept improves the international interoperability of the Finnish Defence Forces, and supports the maintenance and development of the defence capability. Participation in the Framework Nations Concept also supports EU defence cooperation, Finland’s partnership cooperation with NATO, and bilateral defence cooperation with Germany.

 The Framework Nations Concept includes activities which aim to fill European capability shortages. Finland’s participation in the aforementioned activities is based on the needs of the Defence Forces. Finland has not earmarked any forces to Framework Nations Concept Larger Formations.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

### Appendix 4: Concepts, definitions and explanations

_Many of the concepts also have so-called common language and other meanings. Some_
_concepts have been explained below, instead of defining them._

**CBRNE**
A CBRN threat refers to incidents (incl. armed use) caused by the use of chemical (C),
biological (B), radiological (R), nuclear agents (N) and explosives (E), as well incidents
caused by the misuse of expertise related to them.

**Comprehensive National Defence**
Comprehensive national defence includes all the national and international military
and civilian activities that secure the prerequisites of military national defence during
emergencies.

**Comprehensive security**
Cooperation between the authorities, businesses, organisations and citizens to attend
and safeguard the functions that are vital to society. The following functions are defined
as vital: leadership; international and EU activities; defence capability; internal security;
economy, infrastructure and security of supply; functional capacity of the population and
services; psychological resilience. The content and implementation of comprehensive
security is described in the Security Strategy for Society. A new strategy will be released in
the autumn of 2022.

**Cyber Operating Environment and Cyber Security**
A cyber operating environment consists of one or more information systems that are
meant for processing data or information in electronic form. Cyber security is a state
where the threats and risks posed against functions vital to the society or other cyber
environment- dependent activities are managed in a cyber operating environment.

**Defence capability**
In this Defence Report defence capability refers to the ability of the Finnish defence
system to defend the country, and the ability of the Finnish Defence Forces to carry out its
tasks as part of the defence system.

**Defence cooperation**
Defence cooperation refers to the international, bilateral and multilateral defence policy
and military cooperation done under the guidance of the Ministry of Defence in order


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

to support and strengthen Finland’s defence capability, and to improve interoperability.
International exercises and international materiel cooperation are a part of defence
cooperation.

**Defence system**
A defence system is a systems perspective on national defence. In this Defence Report
_defence system describes Finland’s national defence as a collection of various sub-systems,_
and the Defence Forces as one part of that defence system.

A defence system is an entity of military defence and other comprehensive national
defence actors. It creates the defence capability section of society’s comprehensive
security.

The defence system produces military defence capability through the activities of Defence
Forces’ command echelons, units and systems. The entity of defence capability includes
other activities of comprehensive national defence which are led by the state leadership.
Those other highlighted entities are strategic communications, society’s resilience and
security of supply, interagency cooperation, international defence cooperation, and
voluntary defence.

The defence system may be divided into sub-systems that include the personnel, materiel
and knowledge needed to carry out the tasks of military national defence, as well as the
other activities and resources of comprehensive national defence. Military sub-systems
include intelligence and surveillance systems, command, combat and logistics systems, as
well as force production and resource planning systems.

The Defence Forces is responsible for developing the military part of the whole and
participates as an expert in developing the other parts and activities of the defence
system. The military sub-systems are developed on capability basis to respond to the
estimated threat and to meet the tasks set for them. The military capabilities of the Border
Guard are developed as part of the defence system.

**Geospatial information**
Geospatial information is information about a target at a known location, and it always
includes a reference to a certain place or area. It can also describe any other activity or
phenomenon that has a location. Geospatial information is an information entity created
by the attribute value that describes the properties of the location information, target or
phenomenon.


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

**Host Nation Support**
Host Nation Support refers to activities that the Host Nation carries out upon a separate
agreement, in order to support and enable the activities of forces of another state during
peacetime, in emergency conditions and during a crisis or a conflict.

**Hybrid influencing**
Hybrid influencing does not have an internationally accepted, common definition.
There are multiple, additional terms that are similar and alike in meaning (hybrid threats,
hybrid influencing, hybrid operations, hybrid warfare). The use of the terminology in
Western security discourse is mainly clear and easy to grasp, but there are differences in
emphasis and in the range of the methods. Although the range of methods is understood
to be wide, the descriptions often focus on cyber and information operating domains,
for instance. The Government Defence Report looks at this topic as broad-spectrum
influencing, from the perspective of military threats and readiness.

The 2020 Government Report on Finnish Foreign and Security Policy describes hybrid
influencing in the following way:

“In hybrid influencing, a state or other external actor systematically employs a variety of
methods, concurrently or sequently, with an aim to influence the target’s vulnerabilities
to reach its own goals. The range of methods is wide, including political, diplomatic,
economic and military methods, and informational and cyber. The influencing is injurious,
and the actors strive to implement it in such a manner that their involvement in the
actions can be denied.”

**Local forces**
Local forces are wartime units used for local infrastructure protection, combat and support
tasks: they are used to create a national coverage by surveilling areas, mobilising units, by
protecting and defending infrastructure and by supporting other authorities. The local
defence reform improves the readiness and capabilities of the local forces and increases
their presence around the country.

**Military capability**
A military capability is formed by plans enabling the operating of a system and/or a force
and operating and use principles practised for different duties as well as competent
personnel, mission essential equipment, mission necessary infrastructure and the support
opportunities provided by either the Defence Forces or society at large.

**Operational forces**
Wartime forces meant to be used all around the country: they are trained and equipped
for many types of different combat missions in different operating conditions. Depending


-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2021:80

on the situation, the operational forces are used to create the areas of main effort for
defence, and for the most demanding combat operations.

**Regional forces**
Wartime forces meant to be used in regional combat: they are trained and equipped to
undertake combat missions in the different conditions of their area of operations. This
particular concept of regional forces is phased out with this Government Defence Report.
The majority of the regional forces will be reclassified as local forces, and some parts will
be incorporated into the operational forces.

**Resilience**
The ability of individuals and communities of maintaining their performance in changing
circumstances, the readiness to face disruptions and crises and the ability to recover from
them. The term resilience is partially used to mean the same as crisis resilience.


-----

SNELLMANINKATU 1, HELSINKI
PO BOX 23, 00023 GOVERNMENT, FINLAND
valtioneuvosto.fi /en/
julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi

ISBN: 978-952-383-852-9 PDF
ISBN: 978-952-383-796-6 printed
ISSN: 2490-0966 PDF
ISSN: 2490-0613 printed


-----

