# REVIEW ON FINLAND’S SECURITY COOPERATION


-----

-----

## Review on Finland’s security cooperation

**MINISTRY FOR FOREIGN**
**AFFAIRS OF FINLAND**


-----

ISSN 0358-1489 (print)

ISSN 2341-8230 (pdf)

ISBN 978-952-281-288-9

PDF ISBN 978-952-281-289-6

e-pub PDF 978-952-281-290-2

Print: Grano Oy, Jyväskylä

Layout: Erja Hirvonen, Grano Oy, Joensuu


-----

#### Contents

**1** **Summary.............................................................................................................7**

**2** **Significance of the multilateral system......................................................27**

**3** **Security dimension of the European Union..............................................37**

**4** **Cooperation under NATO partnership and cooperation with the**
**United States....................................................................................................51**

**5** **Nordic cooperation and cooperation with Sweden..................................67**


-----

-----

#### 1 Summary

The purpose of this review is to provide an overview of the content of international security cooperation under the present guidelines, and to point out the options of said cooperation. The review concentrates on cooperation implemented
within the EU, under the auspices of NATO partnership, between the Nordic
countries and, especially on bilateral cooperation with Sweden.

International cooperation is of the utmost importance to Finland’s international
position and security. It also helps strengthen national defence. The review focuses on these perspectives; an analysis of the security environment in flux, an
in-depth assessment of international security cooperation and questions associated with comprehensive security are not reviewed in this context.

International law and a rules-based international system are the prerequisites
for welfare, security and stable development. Defending them is increasingly
topical. A key goal of Finland’s foreign and security policy is to nurture and
strengthen this foundation.

The UN system, in particular, plays a central role in this. However, in Europe
the principles of the OSCE and the Council of Europe also lay an important
foundation. The European Union, for its part, is Finland’s most important frame
of reference and channel of influence.

From the perspective of Finland’s international position and, broadly speaking,
its security the membership of the EU has been its most important decision.
The extensive vertical and horizontal integration of the EU impacts Finland in
a profound manner.

Each of the aforementioned cooperative fora, central to Finnish security policy,
brings added value to Finland, be it from a security policy perspective or from
a national defence viewpoint. The fact that the different cooperative structures
complement each other, and that there is no conflict between them, is a positive
factor.


-----

Development of European capabilities is the shared goal of each structure.
Whereas NATO’s dominant objective is to bolster the collective defence capacity, the EU has emphasised crisis management. Nordic defence cooperation is
tangible proof of the goals’ parallel nature in principle. When it comes to developing Finland’s national defence, our NATO partnership provides the most
concrete added value and possibilities.

Europeans are expected to shoulder more responsibility over their own security.
The EU’s Common Security and Defence Policy and defence cooperation lay the
foundation for establishing the base for a European defence capacity in the long
term. Nevertheless, the structures and capabilities for the EU’s mutual defence
are not being created.

Society’s values are the basic cornerstones of security. The Nordic identity continues to be irreplaceably important to Finland.

As the international security and defence policy cooperation keeps developing,
it is important to have a sufficient statutory basis for the utilisation of potential
partnerships.

**Security dimension of the European Union**

Membership of the European Union is a fundamental value-based choice for
Finland. Finland has stated that, as a Member State of the European Union,
Finland is not neutral.

The significance of the EU’s enlargement policy remains great. The strong and
attractive Union has a stabilising effect by promoting economic and social reforms in its neighbourhood. The Union does not exercise spheres-of-influence
politics. It wants to promote good relations in its neighbourhood. Finland supports the EU’s continuing enlargement policy.

The EU’s importance to its Member States is highlighted in questions associated
with comprehensive security such as energy security, cyber security and terrorism, the threat of extremism, communicable diseases as well as corruption and
international crime. From Finland’s standpoint the EU is the key actor regarding
most issues of comprehensive security, apart from military security.


-----

Many of the aforementioned topics also involve action which may intend to
destabilise the stability and viability of societies through unconventional means.
In principle, the resilience of society and institutions, both nationally and at
Union level, is a fundamental security issue. The European Union should tackle
the topic with a more determined and goal-oriented approach.

National measures are also necessary. Within the sphere of comprehensive security Finland is prepared to secure its vital functions through means of extensive
inter-sectoral cooperation. Finland also advocates the utilisation of this model
on an international scale.

Strengthening the EU’s global influence calls for a vigorous external relations policy, and bolstering the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CSDP).
Strengthening the Union’s external action is important to Finland. Developing
the Union as a security community serves Finland’s interests. For this reason,
among other things, it is Finland’s view that the Union needs to draft a new,
updated European Security Strategy.

Finland supports the active development of the CSDP and defence cooperation, as agreed in the EU Council in December 2013. The objective is to actively
promote cooperation with other similar-minded actors.

Crisis management has been, and continues to be, the most visible and successful element of the CSDP. The capacity for comprehensive action is the EU’s
particular forte. The challenge for the Union involves the practical execution of
these capabilities, and the ability and willingness to carry out demanding operations. The need to meet this challenge, for its part, guides and strengthens the
EU’s capability cooperation.

The Treaty of Lisbon, entering into force in 2009, strengthened the character of
the EU as a security community. The solidarity clause and the mutual defence
clause emphasise solidarity among the Member States, and obligate them to act
in support of mutual assistance in different crises. Work on securing the preconditions for the solidarity clause’s concrete implementation continues.

The mutual defence clause is a commitment between the Member States and it
does not bestow any additional competence for the EU per se. In practice each


-----

Member State will make an individual decision regarding the provision of aid
and assistance, including its forms. Most EU Member States are also members
of NATO and they do not see the need to develop mechanisms and capabilities for military support within the framework of the EU. It is clear that the EU
would not remain passive should one of the Member States become the victim
of an armed attack.

Thus far the EU has added relatively little value to the development of national
defence. However, the CSDP and defence cooperation are systematically being
developed.

From the Finnish perspective participation in crisis management operations and
EU Battlegroups is both rational and beneficial. Finland wants to improve the
usability of the Battlegroups. The capability projects have helped develop the
Defence Forces’ capabilities. The EU’s capability cooperation can open a venue
for Finland to participate in projects which otherwise would be completely out
of Finland’s national reach.

While the EU’s capability projects depend on the initiative of the Member States,
the European Defence Agency plays a strong and established role in their implementation. The point of departure is that the projects are coordinated between
the EU and NATO. It is unlikely that the capability projects be extended to the
area of critical defence capabilities in the foreseeable future.

The EU’s emerging defence cooperation covers the development of the defence
sector’s internal market, its defence industry and defence research. The objective
is to make available the Union’s different instruments. This kind of progress
serves Finland’s interests.

The strengthening of the European defence industry is important for the overall
development of defence materiel cooperation and the CSDP. It increases the
EU’s strategic autonomy. The work that occurs through the development of the
internal defence market in the EU adds unique value. Advancing transparent
and fair competition is in the interest of Finland. It is necessary to secure the
competencies of the critical domestic defence industry in the future as well.


-----

The option of developing the EU s mutual defence is included in the EU s constitutional treaties. For the foreseeable future the majority of the Member States
do not consider it to be necessary to create any common defence arrangements
for the EU. For most of them NATO provides the framework of their collective defence. The EU has no structures for a common defence such as defence
planning or plans, command and control arrangements or any other resources
required by a common defence. There are no plans to create structures duplicate
to those of NATO.

**NATO PfP cooperation and cooperation with the United**
**States**

Finland is not a member of NATO, but in many ways the Alliance influences
Finland’s security. The possibility for engaging in dialogue and tangible cooperation with NATO through the partnership remains valuable for Finland’s security. NATO also considers questions associated with comprehensive security.
However, NATO’s role in questions associated with comprehensive security is
not as central to Finland as that of the EU.

In military terms NATO will remain the most important actor in Europe for the
foreseeable future. While NATO is in the process of shifting its focus to collective defence, crisis management and partnership policy remain important for it
as well. The significance of the Alliance from the standpoint of the transatlantic
relationship has again become emphasised.

NATO has reformed its partnership policy in such a manner that it provides an
opportunity for considering new openings with partner countries selectively.
The partner countries, in turn, define their goals nationally, and from their own
standpoints. The core activities associated with collective defence will remain the
sole purview of NATO Member States; they will not be opened to the partner
countries. The reformed partnership policy resonates well with the previous proposals made by Finland and Sweden regarding partnership policy development.

The new partnership initiative can be regarded as an indication of NATO’s willingness to improve and open its activities to earnest partners. However, NATO
clearly realises that the status of a partner country is completely different than
that of a Member State. The partner countries are not under the umbrella of collective defence, nor does the collective defence obligation apply to them.


-----

Continued success in partnership cooperation requires that it not only benefit
the partner countries, it must also serve the interests of the Alliance. The partner
countries’ forces must be effective and interoperable with NATO. Moreover,
there must be sufficient political will to cooperate and deploy the capabilities.

From the Finnish perspective the core area of NATO partnership involves the
development of military effectiveness and interoperability. In practice, the capabilities are developed in, among other things, international crisis management
operations, through country-specific Partnership Goals and in multinational exercises. Large multinational exercises offer an environment in which the troops
can efficiently train for demanding operations. The development of capabilities
and interoperability serves the needs of international crisis management and
national defence alike.

NATO cooperation provides versatile practical benefits for Finland. The Partnership Goals are selected on the basis of national defence development needs and,
for all practical purposes, they cover the whole spectrum of the defence system.
Despite its importance, from the viewpoint of Finland’s national defence the
added value achieved through NATO cooperation is supplementary at best. It
can advance the development of the defence capacity, but even if the cooperation
expands it will not affect the basic principles of Finland’s defence solution, nor
will it solve defence materiel related challenges.

Partnership cooperation does not lead to membership of the Alliance. Nonetheless, the interoperability achieved through PfP cooperation for its part helps
eliminate any practical obstacles to potential membership. This, as such, enhances Finland’s options and possibilities in influencing its security policy position.

It is safe to assume that the benefits of PfP cooperation will continue and evolve
in the future as well. Under the present terms of cooperation Finland can access
most of the capability development sectors it is interested in.

It behoves Finland to remain an advanced partner in the future as well so as to
be able to maximise the benefits from the partnership. It is also significant to
Finland’s security policy position.

The United States is an important partner for Finland, both bilaterally and
through NATO. The bilateral defence cooperation has an established setting,


-----

and the goals of cooperation are, for the most part, associated with interoperability and capabilities, exercises and training cooperation as well as research
and development (R&D).

Materiel cooperation is the most important dimension of Finnish-US defence cooperation. Much of our critical wartime materiel originates in the United States.
Especially the F-18 project has fostered close contacts between the Finnish Defence Forces, Finnish industry and their American counterparts.

It is important that Finland maintain well-functioning relations with the United
States, both bilaterally and through different international cooperative frameworks.

**Nordic cooperation and cooperation with Sweden**

The significance of Nordic cooperation and togetherness is profound for Finland
and Finland’s security. The Nordic countries have a shared view of the preconditions and challenges of security. By acting together the Nordic countries
can improve the security of their region, and increase their influence on topics
related to promoting international security.

Deepening cooperation among the Nordic countries, cooperation between the
Nordic countries and the Baltic States and EU-NATO cooperation improve stability and security in the Baltic Rim and Northern Europe.

When it comes to security and defence policy the Nordic countries are not a homogenous group. Iceland, Norway and Denmark, as founding members of the
North Atlantic Alliance, are strongly transatlantic-oriented countries for whom
all other cooperation only supplements their NATO membership. They emphasise the primacy of NATO’s collective defence, and their defence planning and
defence plans originate from this premise. The guiding principles of Sweden’s
security and defence policy are guaranteeing its national security and solidarity.
Sweden has followed the policy of abstaining from mutual defence obligations.

The Nordic countries aim at advancing peacetime cooperation in a manner that
facilitates the generation of national defence capabilities.


-----

The possibilities of developing Nordic defence cooperation have been assessed
exhaustively. NORDEFCO provides a flexible framework for this cooperation.
The countries participate in joint projects which they deem to be of value in caseby-case tailored compositions. The implementation of NORDEFCO’s vision,
adopted in 2013, as such will not result in any noteworthy specialisation in the
generation of defence capabilities, or commitment to the sharing of capabilities.

Materiel and logistics cooperation contains possibilities for intensified Nordic
cooperation. Whereas the expansion of materiel cooperation is challenging, the
exchange of information on acquisition programmes may improve the odds for
future cooperation.

Finland aims at a continually developing, pragmatic and active Nordic cooperation under the auspices of NORDEFCO in the future as well.

Owing to similar security policy solutions and geographical proximity, FinnishSwedish cooperation is exceptionally close and wide-ranging, and both parties
want to invest in it.

Finnish-Swedish bilateral cooperation is associated with their wider international defence cooperation. The inclusion of potential defence cooperation as
early as the planning phases of defence development programmes could lay a
good foundation for the further development of Finnish-Swedish defence cooperation.

The point of departure for deepening defence cooperation always entails a political consensus on how far the parties want to proceed in harmonising their
defence systems, and whether the goal of cooperation, in addition to defence
capability development, should extend all the way to pooling and sharing of
capabilities.

It is possible for Finland and Sweden, if desired, to deepen their cooperation
towards a joint use of capabilities, especially in the area of air and maritime defences. Should the cooperation extend to the development of further capabilities
or projects related to the joint development and use of capabilities, associated
contractual arrangements would become necessary.


-----

It is possible to gradually advance bilateral cooperation and goal-setting between Finland and Sweden without having to pre-determine the desired end
state. The development of cooperation may advance further even without including or excluding a defence alliance as a goal.

In order to enter into an actual defence alliance both countries would have to
sign a State Treaty. A defence alliance between the two countries would also
result in deeper cooperation in other foreign and security policy.


-----

-----

#### Introduction

**Points of departure**

On 2 July 2014 the President of the Republic and the Cabinet Committee on
Foreign and Security Policy decided that a review on security cooperation be
written. The purpose of the review is to describe the content and development
of Finland’s present security policy framework and partnerships as well as their
significance to Finland’s security and defence. In addition, the review assesses
how far it is possible to advance under the respective cooperation fora. The
review does not evaluate military non-alignment or abolishing it.

The most recent Finnish Security and Defence Policy Report, published in 2012
(VNS 5/2012), states that “Finland’s security policy encompasses both actively
creating security and anticipating and responding to security threats”. The point
of departure for Finnish security-policy thinking is from the comprehensive
concept of security, which entails using a wide range of instruments.

Even though analysing the different dimensions of comprehensive security is
very important in view of the overall picture, it is outside the remit of this
review. First and foremost, the cooperative fora and their significance for Finland are described and assessed from a general security policy perspective and
from the standpoint of defence development. The review does not contain an
in-depth analysis regarding the transformations in the international operating
environment.

The 2012 Report states that “Finland’s security and defence policy guidelines
are characterised by continuity, transparency and a strong commitment to European and international cooperation. These are epitomised by active participation
in the development of the EU’s common security and defence policy, NATO
partnership, Nordic cooperation and international crisis management.” This
being the case, the review particularly focuses on the European Union, NATO
partnership and Nordic cooperation as well as bilateral cooperation with Sweden and the United States.


-----

This review is not an update of the Security and Defence Policy Report. Rather,
its purpose is to be an element that helps clarify the structure that Finland’s
security policy is comprised of.

The review was written at the Ministry for Foreign Affairs. The Office of the
President of the Republic of Finland, the Prime Minister’s Office and the Ministry of Defence provided comments and expert assistance to the review.

**The security policy perspective and key challenges**

Finland’s security is integrally linked with its immediate surroundings, Europe
and global development. Increasing international interdependence means that
improving security and countering threats call for wide-ranging participation
in international cooperation.

Comprehensive and active foreign and security policy is needed to advance
Finland’s international status and security. In practice this is done by nurturing
bilateral relations, through active involvement in the European Union and the
most important international organisations for Finland, such as the UN system
and the OSCE, as well as through Nordic cooperation and under the auspices
of NATO PfP cooperation.

International law and a rules-based international system lay the foundation
for international security. Maintaining and developing them is, particularly,
the task of the UN and other international organisations such as the OSCE and
the Council of Europe. A key goal of Finland’s foreign and security policy is to
nurture and strengthen this foundation.

Taking care of the functioning of society and the welfare of the citizens is the foundation of security. The citizens’ confidence in the fairness and viability of society
is important to stability. The resilience of society and institutions has received
particular prominence especially in light of new threats and ‘hybrid warfare’.

Increasingly resolute international cooperation is required to meet the new,
asymmetric and hybrid threats and to improve crisis resilience. Finland raises
these questions within the EU framework, particularly, as well as in Nordic
cooperation and in the UN.


-----

Finland has focused long-term attention on this problem by, among other things,
drafting a Security Strategy for Society. Comprehensive security has now become
an established model which could even serve as an example on a wider scale.

The challenges associated with comprehensive security are typically of such
a nature that they can only be met through international cooperation. International cooperative arrangements and involvement in different organisations
complement each other. From Finland’s standpoint the EU is the key actor regarding most issues of comprehensive security, apart from military security.

Cyber security serves as a good example of intertwined international cooperative mechanisms. From the viewpoint of cyber security it is essential for Finland
to participate in the UN system, the EU, the OSCE, the Council of Europe and
NATO as well as in several organisations and bilaterally with different states.

Membership of the European Union defines Finland’s international position and
comprehensively impacts its security. The Union is an important global actor
and political force in international cooperation. Owing to its extensive vertical
and horizontal integration the EU is more than an international cooperative
organisation. It is a value and security community, a political and economic
union as well as an internal market. As stated in the Government Report on EU
Policy 2013 (VNS 11/2013) Finland highlights the importance of strengthening
the Union’s external action.

International cooperation builds on international law, a shared value base and
mutual benefit. Alongside one’s own goals it is important to recognise and show
consideration for the goals of the other partners. By bearing international responsibility Finland can contribute its fair share to the creation of peace, security
and welfare, and also shape Finland’s image as a credible actor and an important
security partner.

In this respect Finland’s long-standing arms control policy and strong participation in crisis management, among other things, have played an important role.
In the future this will continue to be the case as well.

Participation in international cooperation is of great importance to Finland’s
security, even though its tangible benefits may be difficult to weigh. From a se

-----

curity perspective Finland s EU membership, its status as a Nordic country and
its solid international profile are of essential importance, irrespective of Finland
having membership of a military alliance or not.

The Finnish Security and Defence Policy Report of 2012 emphasised comprehensive security. When it comes to military security the Report stated that “While
the probability of armed aggression against Finland is low … A security threat
extending to Finland can emerge within the context of a wider regional or European conflict” and that “the unpredictability of the operating environment and
uncertainty may also cause negative security impacts on Finland”.

Since the 2012 Report negative developments in the international situation have
taken place that also affect the security of Europe and Finland. The following
presents a brief overlook of the key phenomena.

-  Russia, through its actions in Ukraine, has breached international law
and the fundamental principles of European security, which include in_ter alia the right of states to independently take decisions regarding their_
own security policy guidelines. While Russia’s precise goals and intentions are unknown, great-power posturing and spheres-of-influence
thinking seem to be guiding its actions.

-  Relations between the West and Russia have deteriorated and are pervaded by mistrust. Furthermore, military tension has increased. These
also impact Finland’s immediate security environment. Russia’s internal development is worrying.

-  The situation in the Middle East and North Africa has become more
and more unstable. Islamist extremist movements create a cross-border
security threat which can only be countered by means of effective international collaboration. The stalled peace process in the Middle East also
makes the situation there ripe for new conflict.

-  Ebola serves as an example of a suddenly emerging cross-border threat
which blurs the boundary between external and internal security. Rapid
response, a wide range of instruments as well as multi-level and extensive international efforts are also necessary in meeting these kinds of
threats.

-  The complexity of security threats has been highlighted. The stability
and viability of societies can be compromised in many ways through a
phenomenon called hybrid warfare. Correspondingly, actions that bolster the cohesion and resilience of society are emphasised.


-----

fered from weak economic growth. The Union’s internal problems impede its ability to help stabilise its neighbourhood.

-  It is increasingly challenging to defend shared values and cooperative
security, principles agreed under the auspices of the OSCE and the
Council of Europe.

-  International cooperative structures, including the UN system, suffer
from various confrontations. At the same time global challenges such as
climate change call for increasingly focused and more purposeful international cooperation. Because of this schism it is even more difficult to
defend and improve the international rules-based system in line with
the new requirements.

**On the importance of international defence cooperation**

The point of departure for Finland’s defence policy is that Finland, in every
situation, is responsible for its own defence. The fundamental purpose of the
resources allocated to defence is to guarantee the military defence of Finland.
The same resources are used for the international military crisis management
missions in which Finland participates.[1] The cornerstones of Finland’s defence
solution are: general conscription, defending the entire territory of the country
and military non-alignment.

The defence allocations of several countries have been decreased after the Cold
War. The protracted recession has manifested itself in the defence budgets of
European countries. Technological advances have made defence procurements
extremely expensive. All of the abovementioned only increases the need for
international defence cooperation.

From the European viewpoint the situation has dramatically changed within
a decade: development occurring under the auspices of NATO or the EU is no
longer perceived as rivalry. Instead, it is viewed as a mutually complementary
process. The United States holds a positive view of the EU’s Common Security
and Defence Policy development. In general, cooperative goals under various

1 Pursuant to the Act on the Defence Forces (551/2007) the duties of the Defence Forces are:
the military defence of Finland; providing support for other authorities, and; participating in
international military crisis management.


-----

frameworks complement and support each other. This is largely explained by
the fact that most countries that participate in different cooperative fora are
members of NATO.

Often defence development is spawned by action initiated by individual countries or country groupings whose capabilities are advanced, which is also evident at the organisational level. For example, the UK-France Summit 2010 Declaration on Defence and Security Co-operation provided an impetus for action
in the EU and NATO alike. Germany’s Framework Nations Concept, which it
proposed in NATO, is yet another example of a single country’s initiative.

In October 2014 a parliamentary assessment group published its estimate of
the long-term challenges associated with Finland’s defence. The group focused
particular attention on shortages in materiel and stated that additional financing
at the level proposed by the defence establishment for 2016-2020 in the Finnish
Security and Defence Report 2012, at minimum, must be allocated to procurements in order to eliminate the shortage of systems and equipment. According to
the parliamentary group the abovementioned additional appropriations could
secure the basic structure and the defence of the entire territory of the country
into the early 2020s. Still, even such additional financing would be insufficient
to cover the sizeable capability related acquisition programmes scheduled for
the 2020s. While the increasing international defence cooperation supplements
and supports national action, it does not solve the discrepancy between the
goals set for the defence capacity, and maintaining and developing capabilities.

International defence cooperation is a cost-effective way to add value to Finland’s defence. The guiding principle of defence cooperation is how it can best
serve the development of Finland’s national defence capabilities. Another factor
which speaks for more defence cooperation is associated with military security
of supply. Access to materiel through reliable supply channels is of the utmost
importance during a crisis.

Materiel cooperation plays an important role in the overall picture of defence
cooperation. Along with technological advances its importance has progressively grown as simultaneously procurements are being sourced from more
and more countries. Finland acquires defence materiel with the objective of
establishing the best possible defence capability within the limits of the available


-----

resources. Usually decades-long partnerships are created between key countries
and manufacturers, which may help pave the way for the domestic defence industry to engage in industrial cooperation through maintenance, updates and,
possibly, deliveries to third parties.

Cooperation within user communities makes it possible to achieve savings and
bolster defence relationships. Especially the user communities of the F-18 C/D
fighter, the CV-90 combat vehicle and the NH-90 transport helicopter are prime
examples of such cooperation. It is an international trend and but one example
of increasing interdependence in the defence branch, as well.

As the international security and defence policy cooperation keeps developing,
it is important to have a sufficient statutory basis for the utilisation of potential
partnerships. Associated with this are the Government bill (HE 297/2014 vp)
on amending the Act on Military Crisis Management, presented to Parliament
this past December, and assessments, in general, for the purpose of legislative
review concerning international cooperation.[2]

**Crisis management viewed from the standpoint of security**
**policy and national defence**

Finland participates in international crisis management on foreign and security
policy grounds; this is a part of international burden-sharing and the establishment of shared security. In crisis management Finland has traditionally emphasised comprehensiveness and the roles of civilian and military crisis management. The goal is to create stability, alleviate human suffering and generate
proper conditions for development in crisis areas through crisis management activities. At the same time the intention is to prevent the escalation of conflicts. In
a globalised, interdependent world the effects of conflicts spread far and wide.

Participation in international military crisis management also strengthens the
national defence capacity. For the Defence Forces participation in crisis management operations translates into developing the interoperability of troops
and capabilities at the practical level. Operating as part of a larger international

2 On 14 May 2013, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs set up a working group to assess the
needs for legislative amendments related to crisis management and other international cooperation. The working group completed its report in November 2014.


-----

contingent provides an opportunity to improve competence and demonstrate it
to others. Lessons learned in demanding conditions strengthen the professional
skills of personnel. Crisis management participation and national defence do
not compete with each other. Quite the contrary, they complement each other.

When measured by the number of personnel participating in crisis management
operations Finnish participation has decreased from its peak years. At the same
time the operations have become much more demanding in nature and, consequently, more expensive. The share of the NATO-led operations KFOR and
ISAF from Finland’s total participation has been high. At present, the Finnish crisis management force in Lebanon (SKJL, approximately 350 troops) in UNIFIL
is the largest single Finnish crisis management contingent. Alongside the SKJL
another large Finnish contingent (ca 80 troops) is deployed in Afghanistan in
the NATO-led mission called Resolute Support which continues the work of
Operation ISAF to help stabilise Afghanistan.

Military crisis management and international defence cooperation are closely
associated with each other. The EU and NATO have been the key actors in implementing, in particular, demanding military crisis management operations.
An important goal of capability development under the auspices of the EU and
NATO has been to improve the crisis management abilities of their Member
States. The role of the UN in demanding military crisis management is rising,
especially as NATO-led crisis management is on the wane. NATO is increasingly focused on questions associated with the Alliance’s collective defence. For
the UN to succeed in its peacekeeping operations, countries possessing critical
capabilities must participate in these missions. NATO and some of its Member
States continue to be the only ones that possess the required capabilities for
the most demanding operations. Simultaneously, the UN still expects that the
EU make a significant contribution. The development of capabilities needed in
international crisis management continues to be an important goal for the EU
and NATO alike.

New features in international military crisis management include the emphasis
of cooperation between international organisations, developing the capacity of
regional organisations and bolstering the local security structures. Actions associated with the latter include Security Sector Reform (SSR), Disarmament,
Demobilisation, Reintegration (DDR) and Defence Capacity Building (DCB).


-----

The EU, several international organisations and country groupings are presently developing the capabilities and models needed in the abovementioned
activities.

From a security policy and national defence perspective participation in military
crisis management is valuable for Finland. In the future it will be important
to guarantee a sufficient level of participation, and to participate in UN, EU
and NATO-led operations. Wide-ranging participation with troops and niche
capabilities achieves maximum benefits and visibility. As crisis management
participation capabilities are being developed, it is important to pay attention to
the aforementioned new developments in military crisis management.

Finland continues to emphasise the importance of comprehensive action and
the need for military and civilian crisis management. Finland deems it important that the effectiveness of crisis management be continually improved and
evaluated.


-----

-----

#### 2 Significance of the multilateral system

**United Nations**

The security significance of the UN system is fundamental for Finland. It is
particularly important as the guarantor of a rules-based international system
and in meeting challenges associated with comprehensive security.

The United Nations plays a unique role in the international system. The UN
Charter is the most important ‘rulebook’ of the international community, widely
respected for its international legitimacy. The input of the UN General Assembly and UN agencies is noteworthy in developing international justice and in
monitoring its implementation. The UN Security Council plays a central role
in preventing and resolving conflicts as well as in mandating the use of armed
force, even though the Security Council has not always been able to function
when its resolutions were needed. Agreements and codes of practice negotiated
under the auspices of the UN are fundamentally important for many key questions regarding security.

The key standards regulating the use of armed force, indispensable from the
perspective of international security, are included in the UN Charter. The point
of departure is that “all Members shall refrain from the threat or use of force”
(UN Charter, Chapter II, Article 4) except under a Security Council decision
(UN Charter, Chapter VII) or in self-defence (Article 51). Article 51 of the UN
Charter gives the state the “right of individual or collective self-defence” should
it become the victim of an armed attack. It is important to influence the interpretation of these basic standards in such a manner that the most far-reaching
international consensus be reached.

Article 51 of the UN Charter, alongside with a Security Council mandate, is
generally recognised as the sole exception to the prohibition of the use of force,
but different interpretations exist regarding, for example, the pre-emptive use
of self-defence or situations in which the aggressor is a non-state actor. Furthermore, it has proved difficult to draw the line between the prohibited use of


-----

force and other infringements, for instance, in anti-terrorist action and questions
associated with cyber security. Situations in which a state actor carries out an
attack by using armed groups, yet denying any complicity, are another matter
altogether. Even though this kind of action was already defined as an attack
during the Cold War, it is reappearing in new forms and manners of implementation, thereby causing uncertainty.

The Responsibility to Protect (RtoP or R2P) is a political commitment adopted
by the UN Member States in 2005 to protect civilian populations from genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing. The response
includes the wide range of measures included in Chapters VI-VIII of the UN
Charter. While these primarily include non-violent response measures, they also
permit the use of military force when mandated by the Security Council. The
debate regarding the implementation of the Responsibility to Protect principle
continues. Finland, highlighting its preventive character, is in favour of consolidating the RtoP principle.

The UN is not an important actor from the standpoint of developing and maintaining the national defence with the exception of its peacekeeping operations,
whose environments are increasingly demanding and dangerous. The mandates
of peacekeeping operations are gradually becoming more demanding and their
tasks are extremely challenging.

UN-led peacekeeping operations combine military action with police missions
and wide-ranging civilian activity. Women’s status in conflicts and involvement
in conflict resolution (SC Resolution 1325 (2000), questions associated with the
protection of civilians, and topics related to the rule of law as elements of conflict
resolution have become focal points in the development of UN-led peacekeeping operations.

Nearly 90,000 troops served in UN-led operations in September 2014. Add to
that the police, observers and civilian staff, the total number of personnel in
UN-led missions in the autumn of 2014 was approximately 116,000. The volume
of personnel serving in UN missions has surged in the 2000s, considering only
10,000 persons served in UN missions in 2000.

The focus of UN peacekeeping operations has shifted to Africa. Nine out of the
sixteen UN-led operations are being implemented in Africa, and when the op

-----

erations led by the African Union are taken into account, the role of Africa as the
main stage of present military crisis management becomes all the more manifest.

All crisis management and peacekeeping operations rely on the resources allocated by the UN Member States. Great powers in UN peacekeeping include
states such as India, Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh, Rwanda and Senegal. Owing
to the wide spectrum of countries that deploy peacekeepers, there are wide
discrepancies with regard to capabilities and training among the contingents
participating in UN-led operations.

In order to meet the challenges of the new security environment the UN must
be able to strengthen the mandate of operations, develop the command of operations as well as the operational effectiveness and training of troops, including human rights issues, and improve logistics and the utilisation of modern
technology. Finland, deeming it important that the UN be capable of meeting
these challenges, continues its active involvement in ensuring it. There are many
expectations for the work of the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations, established by the Secretary General.

Cooperation between the UN and regional organisations continues to increase.
The preconditions of crisis management are developed within the framework
of the plan of action aimed at enhancing EU support to UN peacekeeping. The
EU and the African Union have closely cooperated with the UN in several crisis management operations in Africa. NATO’s crisis management operations
have been carried out under UN mandate. NATO supported the work of UN
agencies in delivering humanitarian assistance, for instance, when it protected
the aid transports of the World Food Programme (WFP) in Somalia, and in the
aftermath of an earthquake in Pakistan in 2005.

**Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE)**

The activities of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE) are based on the concept of comprehensive security which, in addition
to politico-military security, emphasises the significance of democracy and human rights, as well as economic and environmental issues regarding the overall
picture of security. Its goal is to improve cooperation between the participating
states. There are 57 participating states in the OSCE, which also include countries from outside Europe such as the United States and Canada.


-----

The key commitments of the OSCE are the Helsinki Final Act including its Accords as well as the Charter of Paris for a New Europe and its human dimension
commitments, adopted at the end of the Cold War.  The original Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) was renamed an Organisation in
1994.

The key principles of the OSCE, on which the security structure of Europe relies,
include the respect for states’ territorial integrity and sovereignty. The principles
also include every state’s right to join international agreements or organisations,
for example.

The OSCE is a key actor in Europe as regards election monitoring, minority
rights, human rights questions as well as a forum for military transparency
and confidence-building and the democratic control of armed forces. The organisation employs different instruments in promoting cooperative security and
in supporting social development in its participating states. Through its field
operations the OSCE supports development and security in many of its participating states, and advances the implementation of their OSCE commitments.

At its best the OSCE can be a flexible and resourceful actor in civilian crisis
management, conflict prevention, early-warning and mediation. Nonetheless,
the OSCE, abiding by the principle of consensus, is vulnerable to shifting international relations. In recent years distrust among the participating states has
impeded action in the OSCE. This has resulted in a debate within the organisation regarding the future of OSCE cooperation, which is built on shared values
and commitments.

Russia’s action associated with the crisis in Ukraine has dealt a severe blow to
the OSCE’s model of cooperative security. Russia has violated the OSCE’s central principles. Then again, the OSCE has proved its worth in conjunction with
the Ukraine crisis; through its international presence in Ukraine the organisation has carried out special monitoring and election monitoring, among other
things. The organisation has also played an important part in the efforts to find
a political solution to the crisis.

Ever since the preparatory phases of the Helsinki Final Act Finland has had
an important role in the organisation. Finland hosted the Summits of 1975 and


-----

1992, and held the OSCE Chairmanship in 2008. Among other things, Finland
has also significantly contributed to the OSCE’s field operations. Finland deems
that, in the future as well, there is room for wide-ranging European cooperation
in which the USA also participates. The OSCE’s principles still constitute one
of the basic pillars of Europe’s security; it is therefore vital to preserve them.

**Arms control and disarmament**

Arms control and disarmament play central roles in strengthening international
security. For this purpose there are countless international regimes and cooperative mechanisms, and international conventions. Arms control and disarmament cover both conventional and nuclear weapons as well as other weapons of
mass destruction. The rapid development in arms technology, such as robotic
weapons, poses a particular challenge, as do new environments such as space
and cyberspace.

The regime that regulates the limit and regional deployment of conventional
weapons, the exchange of information and compliance with obligations comprises the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE), the Agreement on Adaptation of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe
(also known as the adapted CFE Treaty), the Vienna Document and the Treaty
on Open Skies.[3]

The CFE Treaty regime has probably reached an unsolvable impasse since Russia placed a moratorium on participating in the Treaty in December 2007, and
after NATO countries ceased to deliver the annual exchange of information
document to Russia in December 2011.[4] Following the impasse with the CFE
Treaty the significance of the Vienna Document (VD) as an instrument of military exchange of information and openness has grown. The crisis in Ukraine has
demonstrated the worth of the VD. The implemented inspection and evaluation
visits have contributed to the access of information. For its part, the Treaty on
Open Skies facilitates aerial surveillance flights in the airspace of its participants

3 The CFE Treaty entered into force in 1990; the adapted CFE Treaty entered into force in
1999 (Finland is not a party to this Treaty); the Vienna Document entered into force in 1990, and
the Treaty on Open Skies entered into force in 1992 (entered into force internationally in 2002).

4 Foreign Minister Lavrov reiterated Russia’s position regarding the CFE Treaty in the
Duma in November 2014.


-----

on short notice, and the use of such instruments defined in the Treaty to photograph military targets and activities.

All of the abovementioned elements of the treaty regime need updating, but this
is blocked by the disagreement between Russia and, mostly, NATO countries
as regards the goals of conventional arms control and its relationship to missile
defence and nuclear weapons. The problems with conventional arms control
were already discernible before the outbreak of the crisis in Ukraine. The United
States has made two attempts to kick-start talks for an agreement replacing the
CFE Treaty, most recently in 2011, but to no avail. The NATO countries confirmed their commitment to conventional arms control in Europe at the 2012
Chicago and 2014 Wales Summits.

It is widely regarded that conventional arms control measures are needed. However, any hopes for breaking the deadlock are probably unrealistic before the
frosty international relations significantly improve. In principle, the need for
openness and confidence-building measures in general increases as tensions
grow. However, for a long time already, Russia has only selectively implemented the available measures.

Nuclear weapons have retained their importance in great-power military strategies. All traditional nuclear powers, being the State Parties reaffirmed in the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)[5], i.e. the United
States, Russia, China, France and the United Kingdom, are presently modernising their strategic nuclear arsenals. Because of the sheer scope and expense
their modernisation programmes will continue over several years, even decades. India and Pakistan, both non-state parties to the NPT, continue to develop
their nuclear weaponry. It is generally presumed that Israel possesses nuclear
devices. Up until the present day it has been impossible to verify the peaceful
purpose of Iran’s nuclear programme. Iran is a State Party to the NPT. North
Korea withdrew from the NPT and it is suspected to be continuing with its
nuclear weapon development.

In 2010 the United States and Russia signed a new Strategic Arms Reduction
Treaty. The ‘New START Treaty’ entered into force in February 2011: it limits

5 Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, NPT (SopS 18/1972)


-----

the number of deployed strategic nuclear warheads to 1,550, and the Treaty
extends to 2021.

The situation with the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF) between
the United States and Russia is a topical issue. The treaty concerns groundlaunched ballistic and cruise missiles with intermediate ranges, defined as between 500 – 5,500 km. The United States claims that Russia has violated the
Treaty. Russia, denying this, countered the allegation by referring to the missiles
of the US missile defence system, and to combat drones. Should the Treaty fail
it would be a setback to nuclear disarmament.

No agreement has been reached on tactical nuclear weapons.[6] Russia and the
United States are presently modernising their nuclear arsenals, tactical nuclear
weapons included. Russia’s military doctrine still assigns concrete tasks to tactical nuclear weapons and Russia’s large military exercises organised in recent
years have included tactical nuclear weapon drills. Russia has also introduced
the road-mobile Iskander missile system into its Western Military District. The
Iskander can carry a tactical nuclear warhead. The tactical nuclear weapons of
the United States are part of its overall nuclear deterrence.

In the present, tense international situation it is unlikely that disarmament
will also extend to tactical nuclear weapons. Whereas the United States has
expressed certain readiness to talk about tactical nuclear weapon control, Russia has shown no inclination to this. In NATO the question of tactical nuclear
weapon disarmament continues to divide the Member States. In the present
situation there is no support for unilateral reductions.

Thanks to the NPT the United Nations also plays a central role in action concerning nuclear threats. The NPT and its review process lay the foundation for
nuclear non-proliferation, for the peaceful use of nuclear energy and nuclear
disarmament. The next NPT Review Conference is scheduled for the spring of
2015. Authorised by the international community, Finland advances the effort to

6 Tactical nuclear weapons normally mean short-range (<500 km) nuclear weapons which
remain outside the START and Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF) regimes which
regulate continental and intermediate-range missiles. It is estimated that Russia has approximately one thousand of these weapons, 500 of which being deployed in its western regions, and
that the USA has approximately 500 of them, some of which being deployed in Europe. Of the
European states France has air-launched cruise missiles whose range is approximately 500 km.


-----

organise a conference on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear
weapons. [7] This question is one of the most important ones from the standpoint
of a successful NPT Review Conference. In addition, the still continuing negotiations on Iran’s nuclear programme will have an effect on the background of the
conference. It remains to be seen how negative the effect of Ukraine’s example
will be on nuclear disarmament. Ukraine acceded to the NPT and gave up its
nuclear weapon stockpile in the early 1990s. In return, in the ‘Budapest Memorandum’ of 1994, it received security assurances from Russia, the USA and the
UK against the threat of using force against it, and for its territorial integrity
and political sovereignty.

**Arms control and Finland**

Traditionally, Finland’s foreign and security policy has had a clear arms controlorientation. The point of departure is that properly functioning arms control
increases stability, transparency and confidence. Finland’s active involvement
has strengthened its international profile and security; most recently in conjunction with the destruction of Syria’s chemical weapons.[8] Finland has acted systematically in support of enhancing export control and arms control measures.

Finland actively supported the efforts to negotiate the Arms Trade Treaty[9] regulating the trade of conventional weapons including small arms and light weapons, within the UN. The Treaty which entered into force in 2014 is one of the few
truly remarkable steps forward in the UN disarmament sector in recent years.

Finland actively influences the European Union’s arms control policy formulation, and the Nordic countries are an important frame of reference for Finland.
Finland has promoted the intensification of Nordic arms control cooperation.
When it comes to the NPT Review Conference in 2015, Finland’s emphases lie on
tactical nuclear weapons, humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons and

7 Organising the conference was agreed in the 2010 NPT Review Conference. In October
2011 the Secretary General of the UN, the United Kingdom, Russia and the United States informed the UN General Assembly of Finland’s role, following their consultations with the
countries in the region.

8 Finland played a comprehensive role in the phases of weapons identification (VERIFIN),
protecting the transports from Syria (Vessel Protection Detachment) and destruction (Boarding
Team and EKOKEM).

9 Arms Trade Treaty, ATT, (SopS 98 and 99/2014)


-----

the goal of instituting a ban on the production of fissile materials for military
purposes.

Finland and Sweden are not parties to the CFE Treaty. However, they have been
actively involved within the framework of the Vienna Document. The verification mechanisms of the VD and the Open Skies Treaty have generated information which supplements the assessment compiled by national intelligence
authorities regarding military developments in nearby areas.

Finland’s defence solution is based on general conscription and mobilised wartime units formed by reservists; they guarantee the defence of the entire territory
of the country within the framework of a territorial defence system. Because
of the special features of the defence system, in-depth verification methods included in conventional arms control regimes are challenging for Finland. Arms
control arrangements à la CFE Treaty, which could result in explicit conclusions
regarding the principles of Finland’s wartime formations and unit types, would
be problematic for Finland.

Even in the future Finland’s challenge will be how to balance the need to protect
the special features of the defence system with the exchange of critical military
information within the security environment of Finland. It is nevertheless important for Finland to participate in the development of arms control regimes.

Attention must be paid to the active involvement of NGOs in issues related
to international disarmament. Among other things, their active participation
in recent years has directly influenced the establishment of the Arms Trade
Treaty, the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention and the Convention on Cluster Munitions.[10] In this way their active involvement may even impact national
defence planning. The Defence Forces’ acquisition programmes should take into
account any comparable treaty negotiations and their impact on weapon system
availability. This is especially important when large procurement projects are
being prepared.

10 Convention on the prohibition of the use, stockpiling, production and transfer of antipersonnel mines and on their destruction (‘Ottawa Treaty’), (SopS 12 and 13/2012), Oslo Treaty
prohibiting the use, transfer and stockpile of cluster bombs, which entered into force internationally on 1 Aug 2010. Finland has not signed this treaty.


-----

-----

#### 3 Security dimension of the European Union

**The Treaty of Lisbon, strengthening the security community**
**character of the Union**

The European Union has become a global power whose strengths include its
comprehensive character. Comprehensiveness is also the forte of its external action. Nevertheless, in foreign and security policy the EU is not a global power the
way it is in, for instance, economic policy, in which it exerts exclusive competence.

European integration started out as a peace process after WWII. For decades, the
European project had no foreign and security policy role to speak of. The task of
defending its Member States was, in practice, assigned to NATO. The security
of Western Europe relied on US commitment and military power.

The development of the EU’s Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP)
which had its origin in the Maastricht Treaty (1993), picked up speed towards
the turn of the millennium. Moreover, the development of a Common Security
and Defence Policy (CSDP) began. Its goal, first and foremost, was to achieve a
strong role for the EU in crisis management. For this purpose common Headline
Goals were set and the development of crisis management structures started.

The Treaty of Lisbon[11], signed in December 2007, consolidated the base for
strengthening the EU’s external action. It was seen that the Common Security
and Defence Policy was an integral element of the Common Foreign and Security Policy. Europe was facing ever-increasing expectations pertaining to the responsibility-bearing for security on its own continent and in its neighbourhood.

The Treaty of Lisbon strengthened the character of the EU as a security community. The Treaty included two clauses – the solidarity clause and the mutual defence

11 The Treaty of Lisbon amending the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty establishing
the European Community, (SopS 66 and 67/2009). The Treaty entered into force on 1 December
2009.


-----

clause – which bolster solidarity between the Member States and require that they
take action in providing mutual aid and assistance in different kinds of crises.

Pursuant to the solidarity clause the Union and its Member States shall act jointly ‘in a spirit of solidarity’ if a Member State is the object of a terrorist attack
or the victim of a natural or man-made disaster. The Union shall mobilise ‘all
the instruments at its disposal’, including the military resources made available by the Member States. In addition to action at Union level the solidarity
clause includes assistance between Member States should the aforementioned
threat scenarios materialise. The Member States can choose the most appropriate
means to comply with their own solidarity obligations towards the other Member States. In June 2014, on the joint proposal of the European Commission and
of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
the Council of the European Union made a decision on the arrangements for the
implementation of the solidarity clause by the Union.

The mutual defence clause of the Treaty of Lisbon states that “If a Member State
is the victim of armed aggression on its territory, the other Member States shall
have towards it an obligation of aid and assistance by all the means in their
power, in accordance with Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.” When it
comes to those EU Member States that are members of NATO, the Treaty states
that “Commitments and cooperation in this area shall be consistent with commitments under the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, which, for those States
which are members of it, remains the foundation of their collective defence
and the forum for its implementation.” In addition, the Treaty states that the
mutual defence clause “shall not prejudice the specific character of the security
and defence policy of certain Member States”. This refers to the non-aligned
Member States.

The Treaty of Lisbon includes no provisions for decisions on the arrangements
for the implementation of the mutual defence clause, nor has this been discussed
among the Member States since the Treaty entered into force. The clause is a
commitment between the Member States and it does not bestow any additional
competence for the EU per se. In practice each Member State will make an individual decision regarding the provision of aid and assistance, including its
forms. Finland maintains that the mutual defence clause must be interpreted in
such a manner that it requires sufficient preparedness from the Member States


-----

to provide assistance, when necessary, should a Member State become a victim
of armed aggression on its territory.

**Strengthening the Common Security and Defence Policy and**
**defence cooperation**

In December 2009, as the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force, the EU was predominantly focused on dealing with the economic crisis. Crisis management
activities continued and developed, but in all other aspects the development
of CSDP remained in the shadow of economic questions until December 2013
when topics associated with security and defence were brought to the agenda
of the Council of the European Union. The Council provided guidance for the
development of three interleaved entities: 1) increasing the effectiveness, visibility and impact of the CSDP, 2) enhancing the development of capabilities, and
3) strengthening Europe’s defence industry. The EU Council plans to discuss
topics related to the CSDP and defence cooperation in June 2015. Defence topics
are becoming regular items on the EU’s agenda.

Bringing the theme to the agenda of the EU Council was important because it
was necessary to obtain strong political support and guidance on the subject
matter. It is also important to make available all instruments, whether they be elements of the CSDP or other matters under the EU’s competence. Following the
Council’s discussion, cooperation questions associated with the internal market,
industrial policy and research can better be taken into account.

The status of the Commission as a facilitator of cooperation has strengthened.
The Commission has increasingly made available its own financing and support
instruments for defence cooperation. For example, it is possible to get financing
from structural funds for such projects that meet the required criteria. At the
same time the Commission can steer cooperation in a direction which supports
addressing the EU’s identified capability shortfalls. By doing so, it serves the
development of the EU’s strategic autonomy.

The intention, confirmed by the EU Council in December 2013, is to increasingly
make defence cooperation more strategic and systematic, rather than focusing
on individual projects, which often only involve defence materiel cooperation.
For this purpose, in November 2014 the Council adopted a policy framework


-----

which includes a description of the goals, principles and processes of defence
cooperation.

Defence cooperation is a new and somewhat nebulous concept in the EU. It involves cooperation that overlaps with the Common Foreign and Security Policy
which, however, is not only limited to the Common Security and Defence Policy,
but also encompasses the development of the defence market, defence industry
and defence research. The goal is to improve capabilities and to facilitate the
strategic guidance of defence policy and the exchange of information regarding
planning processes and supply sector cooperation.

The meeting of the EU Council confirmed the Member States’ commitment to the
wide-ranging development of the CSDP. Crisis management is the most visible
and most effective area of the Common Security and Defence Policy. The EU is
a strong actor in civilian and military crisis management, and much has been
invested in the comprehensive approach. These questions have already been
Finland’s focal points for a long time now.

Since 2003 the EU has executed approximately 30 military and civilian crisis
management operations. The Union’s crisis management activities have particularly supported the stabilisation of conflict areas in Europe, in its neighbourhood
and in Africa. At present, there are five ongoing crisis management operations
and eleven civilian crisis management missions. Finland participates in most of
them. The most recent military crisis management operations of the EU are in
Mali (EUTM Mali) and the Central African Republic (EUFOR RCA).

The lack of the EU having its own command systems is a hindrance in military
crisis management. In 2002 the EU and NATO signed the ‘Berlin Plus’ agreement. This allowed the EU’s military crisis management activities to draw on
NATO’s planning and command assets in such military peacekeeping operations which are not led by the Alliance. This arrangement has only been used in
conjunction with one operation (EUFOR ALTHEA in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which began in 2004). The arrangement’s lack of use derives from the political
problems in the Turkey-Cyprus discord. Should these problems at some stage
cease to exist an opening for closer EU-NATO cooperation would emerge as
regards meeting the needs of the EU’s military crisis management activities,
especially considering particularly demanding crisis management tasks.


-----

While the dialogue between the EU and NATO has intensified, it is unlikely that
any significant new decisions for closer relations will be taken in the near future
(such as reforming the cooperative arrangements or joint crisis management
exercises). Nevertheless, it is important that cooperation at the practical level
functions properly. The EU and NATO have acted successfully and in a mutually complementary manner in, among other things, operations in Afghanistan
(EUPOL Afghanistan, ISAF) and Kosovo (EULEX Kosovo, KFOR).

The EU Battlegroups are a rapid reaction instrument in the EU’s military crisis
management. The Battlegroups which rotate every 6 months have been available since 2007. They have never seen action even though during their existence
several crises have occurred in which they could have been put to good use.
This has raised many questions regarding the wisdom of the concept. If, despite
a need, the Battlegroups are never deployed, the Member States will begin to
question participating in their rotation periods.

The need to make the Battlegroups more flexible and usable is recognised. From
the Finnish perspective participation in the Battlegroups has been a useful vehicle in capability development. Finland has participated in the rotation periods
and supports the improvement of their usability by, among other things, increasing the share of collective financing and by developing their ‘modularity’;
meaning that the troops in rotation could be utilised, when needed and as applicable, by deploying smaller units than the entire Battlegroup. Correspondingly,
the Battlegroups in readiness could accommodate units and required capabilities from willing Member States whose troops are not in rotation at the time.

The EU is considered to have succeeded in crisis management, and there is
every expectation that this activity will continue to be successful. Even so, the
finite limit of European capabilities may prove to be challenging in large and
demanding crisis management operations.

**Enhancing the development of capabilities**

Progressively more, the EU has attempted to support multilateral cooperation in
the development of military capabilities. Primarily, the goal has been to guarantee the capabilities needed in crisis management, but this activity also strengthens other military capabilities in general. By pooling procurement plans and


-----

by tapping into economies of scale it is possible to increase the efficient use of
resources and ensure interoperability. Another aim is to facilitate cooperation
by increasing openness and the exchange of information in defence planning, so
that national planning and decision-making could harmonise capability requirements and development schedules at the European level.

Europe’s military capabilities encompass both shortfalls and duplication. The
situation can be rectified by influencing both demand and supply. Demand is
for the most part the purview of Member States, while the defence industry
takes care of supply.

Capability development is based on the Headline Goal process which identifies
critical military shortfalls and the EU’s Capability Development Plan (CDP),
which is primarily compiled with the assistance of the European Defence Agency (EDA). The first plan was drafted in 2008. The CDP helps identify areas from
a large volume of capabilities (defence materiel, exercises, research etc.) where
pooling and sharing would add special value.

When it comes to capability development in the EU, the ‘Pooling & Sharing’
model, i.e. the joint use and sharing of capabilities, is often mentioned. It is
one of the key elements in the wide development of capabilities within the EU.
Even though the work is led by Member States, the physical work occurs with
the support and within the framework of the EDA. It takes no more than two
Member States to launch a project, which makes Pooling & Sharing flexible. The
activity has raised many expectations, but thus far the savings achieved through
Pooling & Sharing have been quite limited. There are several ongoing projects
and there have been discussions on a number of initiatives which, so far, have
not resulted in any concrete projects.

The concern the Member States have for the usability of shared assets in a crisis
brings its own challenges because the EU Member States will hardly rescind
national control over key capabilities. While the Pooling & Sharing concept will
achieve savings, it does not solve the structural materiel problems of the Member States’ defences.

Among other things, Finland has participated in the Maritime Surveillance networking (MARSUR) project as the lead nation, and in a helicopter pilot train

-----

ing programme in which the participating countries have pledged to organise
a certain number of exercises on a reciprocal basis. Finland is also involved in
a project aimed at developing military medicine (Medical field Hospitals). In
the autumn of 2014 Finland became the lead nation for the project ‘European
Maritime Capabilities in the Arctic’.

It would be desirable to increase cooperation between the EU’s Pooling & Sharing activity and its NATO counterpart, Smart Defence. In the conclusions of
the EU Council’s December 2013 meeting it is stated that the development of
the CSDP will continue, keeping in mind the complementarity of effort with
NATO and within the framework of the strategic partnership between the EU
and NATO, with due respect to the decision-making autonomy of both organisations.

There are expectations and possibilities associated with the EU’s capability development. This work is coordinated with that occurring within NATO. Even
though the EU’s capability cooperation is not aimed at achieving a common
defence, it does improve European capacities. Simultaneously, it also bolsters
the European NATO Member States’ ability to meet their collective defence obligations. And since many capabilities are dual-use ones they are also beneficial
for the civilian sector.

The development of the defence sector’s internal market and defence industrial cooperation offer possibilities for strengthening the European capability
base in the long run. NATO does not have any such instruments at its disposal.
Therefore, from NATO’s standpoint the strengthening of European capabilities
in this manner is a welcome development. Even though the defence industry
is at the same time concerned about competition, the strong networks between
the European and American defence industries, and sizeable joint projects must
also be taken into account.

In addition to capability development it may be possible to increase coordination in exercising and evaluating the EU’s Battlegroups and the NATO Response
Force, among other things. Up until today the EU has not organised any military
exercises or conducted exercise planning of its own. Battlegroup exercises are
organised by the participating countries in their own manner.


-----

**Strengthening Europe s defence industry**

Taskings associated with strengthening Europe’s defence industry may, in the
long term, become the most important cluster of the EU Council’s December
2013 conclusions. The goal is to develop the defence industry and open the
traditionally closed defence market.

The European Defence Technological and Industrial Base (EDTIB) is an important factor in the long-term development of capabilities. In the wider sense the
defence industry is also important to Europe’s industrial and technological base.
The turnover of the European defence industry in 2012 was approximately EUR
96 bn and it directly provided approximately 400,000 jobs. Its indirect impact
on employment was even greater, amounting to up to 960,000 jobs. In 2013 the
defence industry employed approximately 7,000 people in Finland.

The development of defence appropriations has severely impacted the branches
of industry that develop products for the armed forces. From 2001–2010 the EU
countries’ combined defence spending decreased from EUR 251 bn to EUR 194
bn. An especially large impact on the viability of Europe’s technological base
involves the decrease of funds allocated to research and development (R&D).
From 2005–2010 Europe’s R&D expenditure decreased by 14%, to EUR 9 bn.
In 2010 the United States earmarked approximately EUR 58 bn for R&D in the
defence sector.

Fragmentation in the defence and security sector market and, on the other hand,
domestic favouritism in procurements exacerbate the negative effects of decreasing budgets. The Commission’s Communications (2007, 2013) on the defence
and security sector have been aimed at presenting solutions that improve European cooperation in such a manner that the point of departure involves the
better exploitation of existing resources.

The work that occurs through the development of the internal market in the EU
(e.g. legislation on public procurements and competition) adds unique value.
When it comes to opening the defence market Finland has paid particular attention to the need of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises to access the internal
market.


-----

To a country such as Finland which imports the lion s share of its defence materiel, well-functioning defence materiel cooperation is of essential importance.
Finland found it beneficial that the EU Council decided on a roadmap for a
comprehensive EU-wide security of supply regime. In practice, this aims to
improve access to defence materiel and services from other Member States both
in normal and emergency conditions.

**Weimar Triangle cooperation**

The ‘Weimar Triangle’, i.e. the grouping of Germany, France and Poland, has,
from time to time, accelerated the development of the EU’s Common Security
and Defence Policy and defence cooperation.

This cooperation has its origins in a declaration signed in 1991 in which the foreign ministers of the aforementioned countries pledged to promote their crossborder cooperation, European integration and Poland’s EU membership. This
cooperation was re-activated in 2010, on the eve of Poland’s EU Presidency. The
foreign and defence ministers of the trio sent a letter to the EU’s High Representative, the purpose of which was to speed up the debate concerning the development of the CSDP with regard to closer EU-NATO cooperation, developing
the EU’s permanent military command and control structures and Battlegroups
as well as Pooling & Sharing between European capabilities.

At the behest of France, in 2011 Italy and Spain also joined the Weimar Triangle’s CSDP initiative (‘Weimar+’). In the autumn of 2011, in a joint letter the
expanded grouping again raised the questions associated with developing the
CSDP, which received support from the other Member States. While the group
does not schedule any regular meetings, it maintains mutual contact and, occasionally, acts together as a group.

Finland’s participation in the Weimar+ has also been discussed with the Weimar
countries on the grounds that Finland has coherently supported the development of the EU’s Common Security and Defence Policy.


-----

**The idea of a common European defence**

A common defence is already mentioned in the Maastricht Treaty as a future
possibility. At that time the Western European Union (WEU) still existed, albeit
in name only for the most part, and it was thought to have a potential role in
developing the EU’s defence dimension. In the wake of the Lisbon Treaty the
decision was made to abolish the WEU.

Under the Treaty of Lisbon the European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP) includes the gradual framing of a common defence policy which in time will lead
to a common defence if the European Council acting unanimously so decides.
However, most Member States seem to agree that the development of CSDP is
not about establishing a common defence for the Union.

The EU has no structures for a common defence such as defence planning,
contingency planning, command and control arrangements or other resources
required by a common defence. There is not much desire to establish such structures because NATO will continue to be the basis of most Member States’ collective defence for the foreseeable future. The Member States’ different historical
experiences still deeply affect their views on military security, and the roles they
themselves, the EU and NATO play in European security.

Capability development matters when it comes to Europe’s defence capacity.
The essential thing is that the EU’s and NATO’s capability development efforts
complement each other.

For its part, the unlikely materialisation of a common defence is epitomised by
the fact that no progress has been made regarding the EU’s permanent Operational Headquarters for crisis management activities – mostly because of the
United Kingdom’s opposition. Permanent structured cooperation facilitated by
the Lisbon Treaty, i.e. the possibility for certain Member States to strengthen
their cooperation in military matters, has also stalled. Cooperation has advanced
without the launching of permanent structured cooperation[12].

12 All countries do not participate in capability projects; tangible projects have typically been
implemented in groups consisting of 5-15 countries.


-----

When it comes to collective defence, the difference between the EU and NATO
is unmistakable and there is no change in sight. Collective defence is the most
important task of NATO. Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty stands for security guarantees for which NATO and its Member States have the structures,
instruments and plans. The Union, in contrast, is not a defence alliance. The implementation of the EU’s mutual defence clause would, for the most part, entail
each Member State’s individual action. When it comes to non-NATO Member
States, the provisions of the Treaty do not provide the framework for tapping
into NATO structures in the implementation of the mutual defence clause.

The worsening of the security environment has not raised any debate in the EU
on having a common defence. However, it has highlighted the need to improve
defence cooperation by widely relying on the resources available to the EU. The
implementation of the decisions which the EU Council took in December 2013 is
considered to be of central importance in this. As a result of the crisis in Ukraine
NATO, in turn, has taken steps to strengthen and adapt its collective defence
to the most recent challenges. The EU’s capability development and, in a wider
sense, enhancing defence cooperation also serve NATO’s goals according to
which its European Member States should shoulder a heavier burden.

**On the importance of the EU to the security of Finland**

Membership of the European Union is a fundamental value-based choice for
Finland. It also includes a strong security dimension. As a Member State of the
European Union Finland is politically an inseparable part of Western Europe.
As a Member State of the European Union Finland is not neutral.

Membership of the European Union also strengthens Finland’s international
status and security. It provides a channel for international and global involvement in questions which have both short-term and long-term impact on Finland’s security and well-being. In the EU Finland is one of the countries which
aim to strengthen the Common Foreign and Security Policy and the Union’s
international role.

The EU’s internal cohesion and its strong institutions are of essential importance
to Finland. The Union’s significance is particularly clear in questions associated with comprehensive security. Key questions include energy security, cyber


-----

security, terrorism, the threat of extremism, communicable diseases as well as
corruption and international crime. The EU’s role in, among other things, maintaining and reforming international free trade and its standards is also of key
importance to Finland. It can be expected that the challenges associated with
comprehensive security and hybrid threats will only grow. From the Finnish
perspective the European Union, with its wide range of instruments, is the key
actor in meeting these threats. Even so, a more determined and goal-oriented
EU approach would be appreciated.

The EU projects significant power in its neighbourhood, among other things,
through its enlargement policy. The strong and attractive Union has a stabilising
effect. The membership process boosts the applicant countries’ economies and
societies. Furthermore, applicants are required to resolve any open and enduring disputes with their neighbours. Then again, the EU’s actual or imagined
incoherence and problems may cause uncertainty in the Union’s immediate
neighbourhood. Finland supports the EU’s continuing enlargement policy.

The sphere-of-influence thinking which Russia upholds has resulted in a situation in which the European Union is forced to re-evaluate the best practices
of its Eastern Partnership policy, even if the basic goals of the policy remain
unchanged. While the EU has only limited capabilities in influencing the developments in its Southern Neighbourhood, in the long run the prospects that
the EU offers for economic cooperation and more rapid social development
are important. Finland deems it important that the EU resolutely continue the
European Neighbourhood Policy, which aims at improving stability and wellbeing in its adjacent areas.

The solidarity clause and the mutual defence clause included in the Treaty
of Lisbon are expressions of solidarity among the Member States, and they
strengthen the character of the Union as a security community. The Union’s
mutual defence obligation carries strong political significance and is a matter
of principle. However, the Union has no arrangements in place for its practical
implementation, nor are any such arrangements in sight.

Nevertheless, it is clear that the EU or its Member States would not remain
passive should one of the Member States become the victim of an armed attack.
When needed, the EU has a variety of instruments available, such as sanctions,


-----

for the purpose of exerting political influence and pressure in defending the
interests of its Member States.

The Treaty of Lisbon provides the option of establishing a common defence.
Still, from the standpoint of NATO Member States the Alliance continues to be
the organisation for their collective defence and the commitment of the United
States indispensable to the defence of Europe. Therefore, the EU will hardly
proceed towards a common defence in the foreseeable future.

Finland wants to strengthen the role of the EU as a security community. Reforming the European Security Strategy can be one instrument in this; the current
Strategy dates to 2003. In 2008, following the war in Georgia, Report of the Implementation of the European Security Strategy was published, but drafting an
entirely new Strategy was considered to be too demanding an effort. For a long
time already Finland has advocated updating the Strategy. Before this summer
the EU’s High Representative, tasked by the EU Council, will present an estimate on the EU’s challenges and options. This is hoped to promote the drafting
of a new European Security Strategy. Since the current Strategy was published,
the changes in the EU’s security environment and threat scenarios have been
so profound that the need for a new Strategy is evident. A new Strategy would
also promote the EU’s efforts in improving its role as a security community and
a plausible actor in foreign and security policy.

The EU’s Common Security and Defence Policy and defence cooperation also
have positive impacts on Finland’s national security and defence capabilities.
From the Finnish perspective the development of the CSDP is important in bolstering the Union’s external action in a situation in which the EU’s neighbourhood is significantly destabilised.

Finland actively participates in the EU’s crisis management operations and,
from time to time, Finland has been the largest contributor to civilian crisis
management missions per capita. Through operations and by preparing for them
Finnish personnel can improve their competence and draw lessons from field
operations. Among other things, Finland has contributed to EU operations with
an infantry (Jaeger) platoon, a boarding team and a minelayer, and by dispatching instructors and staff officers to operations. The operations have included
demanding assignments such as being the lead nation in Operation Althea in
Bosnia and Herzegovina from 2005–2006.


-----

Also participation in the EU Battlegroups, despite not being deployed, has had
a positive effect for the development of Finland’s national defence. Equipping
the personnel selected for the contingent as well as training and joint exercises
have improved skills and operational effectiveness, and the concurrent evaluation of personnel has demonstrated the level of troops, including any needs
for improvement. Finland has mainly participated in the rotations with Army
troops and by assigning special forces and niche capabilities. During the first
half of 2015 Finland will participate with a helicopter detachment in the Sweden-led Battlegroup; the detachment was evaluated in accordance with NATO
standards in June 2014. Furthermore, Finland will participate in the UK-led
Battlegroup in 2016.

From the Finnish perspective Pooling & Sharing within the EU makes sense,
even though its cost benefits and impacts on the development of national defence have been quite marginal. The significance of capability cooperation may
grow in line with the EU’s defence cooperation, which is still very much in
progress. It contains new opportunities, especially for strengthening the base of
Europe’s defence in the long term. It is likely that defence-related questions will
be discussed more thoroughly in the EU in the near future. The decisions of the
EU Council, such as the measures for improving security of supply and securing
the preconditions of the defence industry, are beneficial for Finland’s defence.


-----

#### 4 Cooperation under NATO partnership and cooperation with the United States

Finland has been engaged in cooperation with NATO since 1994 when the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization set up its Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme.
The core area of this partnership involves the development of military capabilities and interoperability for the purposes of international crisis management and
national defence. The partnership also entails civilian cooperation in security of
supply and civil protection, to name but a few sectors.

During this decade NATO has twice reformed its partnership policy: in 2011 in
Berlin and in 2014 in Wales. From NATO’s standpoint its partners play a significant role in generating stability and security. The reforms of partnership policy
intended to guarantee the partners’ input in meeting global security concerns
in ever-changing conditions. The reforms help harmonise different partnership
programmes while also aiming to increase flexibility in a manner which takes
into account the partner countries’ different backgrounds, needs and goals. At
present, NATO has fifty or so partner countries or countries under other cooperative arrangements.[13]

In 1997 the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC) was established for NATO
partners. However, it has not convened at the political level for years. The heterogeneous character of its many members has diminished the viability of the
EAPC. In practice, Finland and many other partner countries interact politically
with NATO through other cooperative fora. Of these, the most important ones
are the meetings in which troop contributing countries participate.

In 2002 the NATO-Russia Council (NRC) was established, replacing the Permanent Joint Council (PJC) which was set up in 1997. In response to Russia’s ac
13 NATO has different kinds of partnership structures. The Mediterranean Dialogue (MD)
was launched in 1994 and it comprises seven Mediterranean countries (Algeria, Egypt, Israel,
Jordan, Mauritania, Morocco and Tunisia). Under the Istanbul Cooperation Initiative, launched
in 2004, cooperation continues with the countries belonging to the Gulf Cooperation Council.
The NATO-Georgia Commission, established in 2008, engages in political consultations and
practical cooperation to improve Georgia’s NATO capabilities. The NATO-Ukraine Commission was established in 1997. It has become more significant in the wake of the crisis in Ukraine.


-----

tion against Ukraine NATO has suspended all military and civilian cooperation
with Russia. However, there is still a desire to keep the door open for political
dialogue.

**Response to the termination of Operation ISAF and to the**
**increasingly tense international situation**

Ambassador Antti Sierla’s ‘Report on the Effects of Finland’s possible NATO
membership’, published in 2007, stated that NATO has changed considerably
since the Cold War days and that “Preparing against a threat of a massive attack
from the outside has become considerably less important.” In 2014 the situation looks quite different. Owing to the strained international situation (e.g.
Ukraine, Syria, Iraq) NATO has shifted its focus back towards the original task
of the Alliance. The significance of NATO’s primary purpose, i.e. defending its
Member States, is once again emphasised. Ambassador Sierla’s assessment on
NATO’s development proved correct: “In the future as well, NATO is expected
to adapt to changes in its operational environment in accordance with its own
security interests”.

In recent years, anticipating the end of the crisis management operation in Afghanistan (ISAF), NATO has prepared approaches which aim at maintaining
the interoperability achieved both within the Alliance and with its partners. In
order to improve operational effectiveness and maintain interoperability the
NATO Response Force and the associated training and exercises become all
the more important. The Connected Forces Initiative (CFI) is in the core of the
new approach; its key elements comprise training, exercises and leveraging advances in technology. Through this initiative the Alliance aims to achieve the
‘NATO Forces 2020’ goal, published at the 2012 Chicago Summit. The goal set
for NATO forces is: “modern, tightly connected forces equipped, trained, exercised and commanded so that they can operate together and with partners in
any environment”.

While the partner countries are not formally included in the CFI, certain partners have been able to provide their views and input into it. On the initiative of
Sweden the CFI Advisory Task Force (CFI TF) was established in the autumn
of 2013. Sweden and Belgium co-chaired the Task Force for a year. At present,
Belgium and Finland are the co-chairs of this unofficial Task Force operating


-----

outside NATO structures. The purpose of the CFI TF is to generate concrete
proposals on developing partner participation in the CFI. In addition to Finland
and Sweden, Austria, Ireland, Switzerland, Australia and New Zealand have
participated in the TF.

As a result of the crisis in Ukraine and Russia’s behaviour the Alliance is facing
yet another challenge. Its response includes immediate action as well as decisions regarding the Alliance’s long-term action. NATO has increased its presence, visibility and security support in its eastern Member States. At least thus
far, the ‘reassurance policy’ does not envisage establishing any new permanent
bases. Rather, it is about having a stronger presence based on troop rotation,
increased exercises and intensified air surveillance.

The most important result of the NATO Wales Summit was the adoption of the
new Readiness Action Plan (RAP). The purpose of the plan, in addition to the
reassurance policy, is to carry out adaptation measures to enhance the mechanisms for implementing the Alliance’s collective defence. It has been said that
the plan is the single most significant action in strengthening NATO’s collective
defence since the end of the Cold War. The Summit also confirmed measures associated with the CFI, particularly those related to training and exercises which,
for their part, support the implementation of the RAP.

Establishing the Very High Readiness Joint Task Force (VJTF) is an element of
raising readiness, as are increasing exercises, updating the contingency plans
and reforming the defence infrastructure. As a reaction to the altered security
situation NATO Member States have also committed to maintaining their defence budgets at least at the present level. In order to foster an equitable sharing
of the burden the Member States aim to increase their defence expenditure to
2% of GDP within a decade. They also aim to devote 20% of the annual defence
spending to investments.

The Readiness Action Plan (RAP), and the associated reassurance policy, is for
the members of the Alliance only. Therefore, Finland, as a partner country is
not a party to it. Finland, at its discretion, may participate in exercises open to
partners and in the development of different sectors. This participation will occur within the framework of the PfP policy.


-----

At the Wales Summit NATO called attention to the changing character of warfare. In the future NATO intends to make certain that it has the required skills
and resources to meet the multifaceted and partly indistinct challenges of hybrid
warfare. Cyber defence was recognised as an element of collective defence.

The Wales Summit approved the new NATO Framework Nations Concept in
the development of capabilities. According to this concept a smaller grouping
of countries can develop troops and capabilities for themselves and the Alliance which the Alliance as a whole can utilise. The goal is to improve especially the European Member States’ capacities. A designated Member State, i.e.
a framework nation, leads the action of the grouping. For example, a ten-country
grouping led by Germany develops, among other things, logistic capabilities
and CRBN defence capabilities. A UK-led seven-country grouping is developing
a rapidly deployable operational unit. The partner countries– status vis-à-vis the
framework nations concept is yet to fully crystallise.

NATO has enlarged six times, and now the number of its Member States is more
than twice the original number: in 1949 there were 12 Member States, now there
are 28. The most recent enlargement took place six years ago when Albania and
Croatia acceded to the Alliance. While no new enlargement decisions were made
at the Wales Summit, the Alliance declared that the ‘Open Door Policy’ was still
in effect. This means that, pursuant to the North Atlantic Treaty of 1949, the parties to the Treaty may, by unanimous agreement, invite any state meeting the
criteria to join the Alliance.

Three countries from Western Balkans, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro
and (the former Yugoslav Republic of) Macedonia, as well as Georgia from the
South Caucasus have applied for NATO membership. For years already, Macedonia has participated in the MAP process (Membership Action Plan) which
helps prepare a country for NATO membership. The MAP process, however,
is not a guarantee of eventual membership. Macedonia’s membership has been
blocked by its dispute with Greece concerning its name. Montenegro, too, participates in the MAP process. NATO has stated that the preconditions of Montenegro’s membership will be evaluated by the end of 2015. In 2010 Bosnia and
Herzegovina was invited to join the MAP process, but thus far the process has
not been formally launched.


-----

In the 2008 Bucharest Summit Georgia and Ukraine were promised NATO membership. The formulation of the promise was a compromise; it did not include an
exact schedule. Whereas Georgia has applied for NATO membership, Ukraine
has not. Because of Russia’s unequivocally negative attitude, and concrete actions, the handling of these countries’ prospective memberships will be a difficult challenge for NATO to solve. On the one hand NATO does not want to
remove the prospect of membership because of Russia’s behaviour, but, on the
other hand, the Alliance does not wish to escalate the situation. Furthermore,
meeting the membership criteria will be taken seriously. In the Wales Summit
the Alliance endorsed its support measures for Georgia, such as defence institution building as well as training and exercises.

**Reforming the partnership policy**

The Wales Summit launched the new ‘Partnership Interoperability Initiative’
which, much like the previous partnership policy, aims at developing interoperability between NATO and its partners in, among other things, potential
crisis management operations, and in providing opportunities for its partners
to develop their military capacities. The new initiative also makes it possible
for very dissimilar partner countries to flexibly tap into the different forms of
partnership, in line with their particular needs.

The new initiative comprises three parts in which the partner countries can participate, subject to their capacities and NATO decisions. The first level is open
to all partner countries and applies to already existing partnership programmes
and mechanisms[14]. There are 24 partner countries, Finland included, that are invited to the ‘Interoperability Platform’, i.e. the second level. These countries have
already used the partnership instruments of the first level, and demonstrated a
desire to improve their interoperability with NATO.

‘Enhanced Opportunities’, the third level of the initiative, applies to countries
which have significantly participated in NATO crisis management operations,
exercises or capability development. At present, this partnership extends to

14 The Planning and Review Process and the Operational Capabilities Concept are instruments through which the partner countries’ capabilities and interoperability with NATO Member States are improved and evaluated. The partner countries can also declare troops to the
NATO Response Forces Pool.


-----

Australia, Georgia, Jordan, Sweden and Finland. Increased predictability is the
essential element because these cooperation opportunities are offered for three
years at a time. Moreover, it provides an option for closer political dialogue with
NATO. The third level includes the possibility of self-differentiated, far-reaching
cooperation. In other words, rather than developing the partnership within a
country grouping, it is tailored on a country-by-country basis. The initiative
launched in Wales resonates well with the previous proposals made by Finland
and Sweden regarding partnership policy development.

The full details and significance of the new partnership will take shape as cooperation develops. The substance will depend on each partner country and NATO.
The initiative also provides an opportunity for new openings in partnership policy
with partner countries selectively. Nevertheless, the core activities associated with
collective defence will remain the sole purview of NATO Member States; they will
not be opened to the partner countries because the Alliance does not want to rely
on partners when it comes to collective defence. Still, NATO provides increasing
opportunities for the partner countries to voice their opinion and engage in dialogue; in this respect there are no clear-cut boundaries. This being the case, the
new partnership initiative is an indication of NATO’s willingness to improve and
open its activities to earnest partners. The partnership policy has evolved and will
continue to do so, meeting NATO’s overall priorities and changes in the operating
environment. It is important for Finland to actively influence the formulation of
the contents of the new partnership initiative.

The partner countries’ freedom of choice remains the basic principle. Nonetheless, the new partnership initiative reflects the underlying principle in all
international cooperation, i.e. mutual benefit. It makes it possible for the partner countries to link with NATO’s myriad activities in a wide-ranging manner
under the principle of ‘self-differentiation’. Consequently, NATO benefits from
its partner countries’ skills and operational effectiveness.

The new partnership initiative reflects the growing overall importance of the
partner countries to NATO. When considering the new security challenges, the
partner countries’ significance becomes highlighted. States that take care of their
national defence and respect democracy, human rights and the rule of law create stability in their regions and are capable of participating as key partners in
international crisis management operations and in creating cooperative security.


-----

This being said, NATO clearly realises that the status of a partner country, its
rights and obligations in relation to the Alliance, is completely different than
that of a Member State. The partner countries are not under the umbrella of
collective defence, nor do any security guarantees apply to them. The Alliance
does not want to blur this distinction.

**Military crisis management operations and exercises**

Finland’s participation in NATO’s military crisis management derives from the
same principles which apply to Finland’s military crisis management participation in general. The participation encompasses foreign and security policy goals,
and it serves the development of national defence.

By participating in operations mandated by the UN and led by NATO (such as
the International Security Assistance Force/ISAF in Afghanistan, the Kosovo
Force/KFOR in Kosovo as well as the Implementation Force/IFOR and the Stabilization Force/SFOR in Bosnia and Herzegovina) Finland has tried to promote
international security and conflict resolution and create the conditions for social
development on the ground. This activity has also been important for the military capacity and international interoperability of the countries that participate
in crisis management operations.

Finnish military personnel and civilians have been able to utilise and improve
their skills in demanding conditions and serving important purposes. In Afghanistan Finland participated in Operation ISAF from the very outset to its end (20022014); the size of the Finnish contingent peaked at approximately 200 soldiers.
Finland participates in Operation ISAF’s follow-on NATO-led advice, training
and assistance mission, called Resolute Support, with approximately 80 soldiers.
Finland has participated in Operation KFOR since 1999. At its maximum, over one
thousand Finnish troops were serving in the operation. At present, the personnel
strength of the Finnish contingent is approximately 20 persons. In operations
KFOR and SFOR Finland also had the role of a framework nation.

The significance of international exercises in Finland’s defence development has
grown. Annually Finland participates in scores of international exercises. NATO
is indirectly associated in all of them because NATO standards and operational
models are the predominant ones as regards exercises and, even to a larger ex

-----

tent, in European defence cooperation. This also applies to EU Battlegroup and
Nordic exercises. The trend seems to be that said standards are also followed
in especially demanding UN missions. The share of official NATO exercises
represents approximately one third of Finland’s international exercise roster.

Overall, the focus of Finland’s exercise activity lies on NATO’s NRF exercises,
EU Battlegroup exercises and other multinational exercises organised in Northern Europe. By participating in exercises with NATO and NATO Member States
Finland can also receive training which otherwise would be out of reach because
of non-existent capabilities of our own (such as air-to-air refuelling or anti-submarine warfare) or because of the sheer scope of the exercises.

Some NATO exercises include the Article 5 element, and it is likely that the
collective defence aspect will be accentuated in NATO exercises as a result of
the prevailing international situation. NATO’s point of departure is the fact
that the Article 5 defence obligation only applies to NATO Member States. Still,
irrespective of this, it can open exercises that include the Article 5 element to
non-members.

Finland participates both as a partner country and according to its own interests
in NATO exercises that develop international interoperability. Finnish participation is largely determined by the added value any given exercise can bring to
Finnish national defence. On these grounds Finland, at the outset, does not rule
out participation in any exercises to which NATO and its Member States wish
to invite their partner countries that serve the development of Finland’s defence
and are in line with Finland’s position.

**The PARP process as a catalyst for improving the national**
**defence**

In 1995 Finland joined the PfP Planning and Review Process (PARP) which aims
to promote the development of forces and the interoperability of partners. The
process is based on voluntary participation and self-differentiation; the partner
countries, together with NATO, choose concrete Partnership Goals (PG) which
they deem beneficial. Since 2010 Finland has chosen its PGs, first and foremost,
from the perspective of national defence requirements. Meeting the goals also
improves Finland’s international crisis management capacity.


-----

The goals and their materialisation are evaluated every two years. The PGs are
no more legally binding international obligations than participation in voluntary, mutually beneficial partnership cooperation is, for that matter. However,
it is only natural that the goals are there to be met.

A topical example of a concrete PG which, for its part, bolsters Finland’s own
planning, involves drawing up a Host Nation Support MOU (Memorandum
of Understanding) for Finland. The MOU is a framework document which includes uniform modes of operation and standards which facilitate international
cooperation. In all conditions Finland, naturally, decides for itself whether it
takes any action that requires implementing the MOU. The MOU per se does
not obligate either party to engage in such action. This being the case the MOU,
among other things, does not obligate either party to provide or accept troops for
any purpose whatsoever. Another example of a concrete PG involves Finland’s
air surveillance and command system which is, for the most part, structured
along the lines of NATO standards based on the objectives set by Finland.

The PARP process aimed at the partner countries is less demanding and less
obligating than the defence planning process involving NATO Member States,
which aims at harmonising the Member States’ Capability Targets with the overall goals of the Alliance.

Alongside the PARP the Operational Capabilities Concept (OCC) is yet another
key instrument for partnership and capability development. In the OCC the
troops’ operational effectiveness and interoperability is evaluated in exercises
through a four-level process. Finnish forces have been evaluated since 2005 and
units from each service branch have made it to the top level of the Evaluation &
Feedback (E&F) process. The European Union does not have any similar process
at its disposal. Instead, its Member States utilise the Operational Capabilities
Concept.

**NATO Response Force (NRF) and Smart Defence**

The NATO Response Force (NRF) is primarily an instrument which was created
for NATO’s European Member States in the early 2000s. It helps develop NATO
Member States’ military capabilities and, simultaneously, their crisis management capacity. In 2006 NATO made it possible for partner countries meeting


-----

certain criteria to participate in activities supplementing the NATO Response
Force. The term ‘supplementing’ means that the implementation of potential
NATO operations does not hang on the participation of partner countries. Elements of the NRF have been deployed a few times in, among other things, support of the presidential election in Afghanistan in 2004 and in providing disaster
aid in Pakistan following an earthquake in 2005.

In 2008 Finland informed NATO of its willingness to participate in activities supplementing the NRF and since 2012 Finland has participated in its activities. In
practice this translates into declaring capabilities for a finite time to the Response
Forces Pool (RFP). This activity systematically involves the same forces which
have also been made available to the EU and the UN. Of the partner countries,
in addition to Finland, also Georgia, Sweden and Ukraine participate in activities supplementing the NRF. The NATO Council has also approved Jordan’s
participation in these activities.

In 2014 a Finnish Air Force readiness unit was declared to the RFP. In 2015
Finland will contribute with a Navy coastal Jaeger unit, in 2016 with an Army
helicopter detachment and a Jaeger company, and in 2017 with a naval vessel
and with the Army’s deployable CBRN laboratory. Declaring units to the Response Forces Pool, however, does not mean that they will be placed on high
readiness pursuant to the Act on Military Crisis Management.

NRF cooperation fundamentally bolsters the development of operational effectiveness and interoperability, for NATO Member States and partner countries
alike. The forces involved in this activity participate in a multinational exercise
programme and go through an arduous E&F process which ultimately leads to
certification. A Finnish Air Force fighter squadron passed the evaluation in 2013.
Participation and success in the E&F process is also a vehicle for letting others
know the high standard of one’s own forces as well as utilising it in domestic
training and development.

In September 2014, at the Wales Summit NATO decided to reform the NRF and
establish the new Very High Readiness Joint Task Force (VJTF) as an element of
the NRF. It is not known whether any new openings will be made available for
partners in the VJTF’s activities.


-----

Alongside the Connected Forces Initiative, another initiative supporting the
NATO Forces 2020 goal involves the ‘Smart Defence’ initiative launched at the
2012 Chicago Summit, which primarily focuses on more efficient maintenance
of capabilities and on creating new ones. It reflects the ever-increasing technological advances and cost of defence materiel which make it either difficult or
altogether impossible for the Member States to develop, procure, maintain or
use all of the capabilities on an individual basis. Through cooperation the Member States can obtain the required capabilities. Furthermore, owing to lower unit
costs, joint procurements can achieve savings in some cases.

NATO also views Smart Defence as a way to more equally share the burden
between the United States and its European allies. In other words, the European
NATO Member States are expected to participate in the initiative. An example
of the benefits which the Smart Defence initiative aims to achieve is the joint
procurement of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, involving joint utilisation and costsharing. Most projects are also open to partners. The projects do not exclusively
focus on joint acquisitions; rather, most projects are associated with training,
logistics and the development of operational models.

There is some coordination between NATO’s Smart Defence and the EU’s Pooling & Sharing. Cooperation has been planned for devising countermeasures
for Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs), i.e. ‘roadside bombs’, and Weapons
of Mass Destruction (WMD), among other things. Both in Smart Defence and
in Pooling & Sharing the countries that developed the capabilities ultimately
decide on their use.

**The importance of PfP policy to Finland**

Even though Finland is not a member of NATO, the Alliance has in many ways
influenced Finland’s security and continues to do so. NATO’s decisions and
activities significantly impact Finland’s security environment. NATO is the basic
pillar of the Euro-Atlantic security community. The possibility for engaging in
dialogue and tangible cooperation with NATO is valuable for Finland’s security.
The increasingly tense security related situation in Europe and in Finland’s near
environs only highlights this fact.


-----

NATO is a political and military alliance, and its security impact is of central
importance to its Member States. In military terms NATO remains the most
important actor in Europe for the foreseeable future. NATO is also significant
to its partner countries and to the international community, such as the UN,
the EU and the OSCE. While NATO is also paying more attention to questions
associated with comprehensive security, from Finland’s standpoint its role in
comprehensive security is not as fundamental as that of the EU, apart from cyber
defence, in which new vistas are about to be opened to partner countries as well.

Partnership cooperation – primarily its exercise roster with its E&F and PARP
processes and the NRF – comprises a tangible instrument for Finland in developing its capabilities and interoperability. The Partnership Goals included in the
PARP process are selected on the basis of national defence development needs
and, for all practical purposes, they cover the whole spectrum of the defence
system. Goal-setting is systematic action, and each service branch has goals
which, by their scope and depth, are important.

As a non-member of a military alliance, situated in its particular geographical
position, Finland sustains all capability areas and critical capacities of its defence system. From the national defence perspective international cooperation,
including PfP cooperation with NATO, is of the utmost importance.

Finland’s NATO PfP cooperation also improves its preparedness in the defence
cooperation which occurs under the auspices of the EU or the Nordic countries;
after all, NATO standards, modes of operation and capability requirements set
the overall benchmarks in European defence cooperation. The same applies to
international military crisis management.

Partnership cooperation also provides an opportunity for Finland to monitor
NATO’s development, and engage in a dialogue on questions important to Finland. NATO PfP cooperation differs from other international defence cooperation fora in which Finland participates in that it also includes the United States
and Canada. The commitment of the USA to the security of Europe, through
NATO, is still one of the cornerstones of European security. Alongside bilateral
cooperation the PfP cooperation offers Finland an important security and defence policy channel to the United States.


-----

Despite its importance, from the viewpoint of Finland s national defence the
added value achieved through NATO cooperation is supplementary at best.
Finland uses it, much like other international cooperation, to strengthen the
national defence. Even if the cooperation expands it does not alter the basic
principles of Finland’s defence solution, nor does it solve Finland’s defence
materiel related challenges. It is also clear that even in the future the partnership,
should it deepen, will not provide any security guarantees to Finland, and that
Finland is not obliged to participate in defending the Alliance or allow it to use
Finnish territory.

Partnership cooperation is not a road that leads to membership of the Alliance.
Rather, in order to become a member a country must first apply for membership
and then be unanimously accepted by each NATO nation. Nonetheless, the interoperability achieved through PfP cooperation for its part helps eliminate any
practical obstacles to potential membership. This, as such, enhances Finland’s
options and possibilities in influencing its security policy position.

It is safe to assume that the benefits of PfP cooperation will continue and evolve
in the future as well. When it comes to said cooperation, the options associated
with capability improvement are quite open and the partner countries’ own
desires are also taken seriously in the development of cooperation. Still, the
partner countries do not have access to all fora at which NATO Member States
improve their capabilities. This being said, under the present PfP terms Finland
can access most of the capability development sectors it is interested in and
which NATO has to offer. However, particularly in new capability sectors (e.g.
missile defence, cyber, Alliance Ground Surveillance (AGS) system) Finland
cannot fully tap into all competencies of NATO. The limitations in this regard
are of national origin, rather than deriving from the Alliance.

Continued success in partnership cooperation requires that it not only benefit
the partner countries, it must also serve the interests of the Alliance. The impacts
of international cooperation are always reciprocal. In simple terms, in NATO
cooperation this means that the partner countries’ forces must be effective and
interoperable with NATO. Moreover, there must be sufficient political will to
cooperate and deploy the capabilities. Participation, i.e. investing in cooperation,
is yet another conduit to deeper cooperation.


-----

It has been important to Finland to be one of the more advanced partner countries so as to be able to maximise benefits from the partnership. Finland has also
benefited from the fact that Finland and Sweden, in general, have implemented
their PfP cooperation with similar intensity, even though there have been clear
differences in participation as regards individual partnership activities or operations. It behoves Finland to remain an advanced partner in the future as
well. Close cooperation with Sweden within the PfP framework will also serve
Finland’s interests. At the same time the goals of partnership will, naturally, be
defined on a national basis and from Finland´s perspective.

As the crisis management operation ISAF has terminated, the focus of PfP policy
will shift. NATO’s adaptation measures in response to the knock-on effects of
the crisis in Ukraine will also bring about changes to the context in which certain
partnership activities, such as exercises, will be carried out. Finland does not see
any need to change its central premises or goals.

**Bilateral cooperation between Finland and the United States**

The Finnish Security and Defence Report 2012 states that “Despite the global
change the United States will retain its world leadership and it plays a key
role in solving many global problems and in responding to challenges”. In the
post-WWII era the United States has created a global network of allies and partners in matters relating to security and defence. It also believes that democratic
countries, owing to the shared value base, establish the nucleus of an open and
collaborative international order.

Emphasising the strategic importance of the Asia-Pacific region has been a noteworthy foreign and security policy guideline drawn by President Obama. This
does not mean that the United States would rescind its NATO obligations or its
role as the underwriter of security for its European allies. In the era of global
challenges the United States continues to consider European states and the EU
as its closest partners.

In the area of military security the United States has for several years voiced critical opinions about the dwindling resources of European states and systematically upheld the theme of burden sharing in NATO’s discourse. The permanent
goal of the United States is to prod its allies and partners into improving their


-----

military capabilities and interoperability. For instance, the goal is discernible
in the context of NATO’s capability development and in the ongoing missile
defence projects with its allies in the Asia-Pacific. At the same time the United
States wants to preserve and improve the global power projection capacity of
its forces through its worldwide network of bases and logistic arrangements.

In spite of federal government savings pressures the United States has retained
its status as the most important military actor. Its increasingly polarised domestic
policy situation has resulted in a state of affairs where it is progressively more
difficult to anticipate what the level of defence expenditure in future years will be.
The more than decade-long operations in Iraq and Afghanistan have exhausted
the US armed forces. Whereas the centre of attention in the near future will likely
fall on reforming its forces and materiel, the emphases and the implementation
schedule of the reform substantially depend on the trend of defence spending.

The United States is the principal developer of military capabilities. It tries to
swiftly anticipate and adapt to changing security threats. The advent of terrorism in the 2000s and the operations in Iraq and Afghanistan raised the need to
develop capabilities for counter-terrorist action and low-intensity warfare. In the
post-Afghanistan situation the United States will probably focus attention on
containing the effects of Russia’s and China’s military build-up, on countering
the threat of the proliferation of WMDs and ballistic missiles, and on creating
capabilities needed in the cyber domain. The modernisation of the US strategic
nuclear triad and associated infrastructure will require sizeable investments
during the coming decades.

The United States also aims to retain its primacy in military technology. The
defence industry is networked and international, and the American industry has
spearheaded this development. The United States engages in close and wideranging defence materiel cooperation with several big European countries as
well as with Japan and Israel, to name but a few. At the same time the USA is
a very attractive partner for smaller actors such as Finland because technology
cooperation, among other things, can open a venue to projects which otherwise
would be completely out of their reach due their sheer scale.

The United States is also an important partner for Finland, both bilaterally and
through NATO partnership. The United States has supported the development


-----

of NATO s PfP policy in a direction which has opened new cooperation options for partners in the manner which Sweden and Finland, among others, had
hoped. Bilateral defence cooperation encompasses frequent reciprocal visits and
an established milieu for talks regarding the development of mutual cooperation. The goals of bilateral cooperation with the United States are associated with
interoperability and capabilities, exercises and training cooperation as well as
research and development (R&D).

In addition to defence policy cooperation, materiel cooperation is yet another
important dimension of Finnish-US defence cooperation because much of Finland’s critical wartime materiel originates in the United States. Because of its
scale the F-18 project, mid-life updates included, is Finland’s single most important defence procurement project in recent decades; during the project close
contacts were established between the Finnish Defence Forces, Finnish industry
and their American counterparts. Owing to assembling the Hornet fleet and
carrying out its mid-life updates in Finland, the capacity of Finnish industry to
maintain and update critical components of the air defence system has evolved
to a high level. When it comes to the Defence Forces’ strike capability the Air
Force’s ongoing air-to-ground capability project, one of its most important capabilities, relies on weaponry to be procured from the United States.

It is important that Finland maintain well-functioning relations with the United
States, both bilaterally and through different international cooperative frameworks.


-----

#### 5 Nordic cooperation and cooperation with Sweden

**Cooperation that builds on shared values and traditions**

The Nordic countries are a community based on shared values, approaches,
history and tradition as well as established, wide-ranging practical cooperation. The Nordic countries are bonded together by a communal sense, mutual
trust and for the most part parallel interests. An expression of this communal
interaction, devoid of problems, is the exemption from the requirement to carry
passports, adopted as early as the 1950s.

The significance of Nordic cooperation and togetherness is profound for Finland
and Finland’s security. The Nordic identity, the social structure based on Nordic values and association with Nordic cooperation, provided an opportunity
for Finland to strengthen its international status in the post-war era. Finland’s
Nordic identity continues to be an irreplaceable cornerstone of Finland’s international role. Its security policy inference, in its own way, is shining brighter in
the light of recent events, such as the crisis in Ukraine.

During the Cold War foreign, security and defence policy cooperation was largely excluded from Nordic cooperation. In recent years, particularly this sector
has developed the most. The Nordic countries have a very similar outlook
on the preconditions and challenges of security. In the joint statement of the
Nordic foreign ministers (04/2014) it was mentioned that, as a starting point,
their “efforts to further enhance cooperation in foreign and security policy are
based on a [shared], comprehensive concept of security”. The Nordic countries
were said to be “strong advocates of multilateral cooperation and institutions
and international law [because], in today’s world, characterized by increasing
interdependence, effective multilateralism remains a key in order to achieve
sustainable development and address challenges to comprehensive security”.
By working together the Nordic countries can strengthen security in their region
and increase their influence in promoting international security.


-----

Nordic foreign policy cooperation is close and in security and defence policy
it has only intensified. Whereas Norway and Denmark are members of NATO,
Finland and Sweden are not. Sweden, Finland and Denmark belong to the European Union; Iceland and Norway are outside of it. When it comes to the CSDP
Denmark has an opt-out, in other words, Denmark does not participate in CSDP
military matters. Even though the Nordic countries’ security and defence policy
solutions are dissimilar, they can increasingly engage in pragmatic, tangible
cooperation, both in the international arena and with each other.

One incentive for developing cooperation took place in 2008 when Thorvald
Stoltenberg, the former Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Norway, was
asked to draw up proposals for closer foreign and security policy cooperation
between the Nordic countries. His report, published in February 2009, included
13 specific proposals on civilian and military cooperation, many of which have
since been for the most part implemented.

The foreign ministers did not issue a Nordic declaration of solidarity according
to Stoltenberg’s own verbiage, nor does Nordic cooperation include any idea of
mutual security guarantees. Instead, in 2011 the foreign ministers agreed on a
declaration of solidarity which states, among other things, that “should a Nordic
country be affected by a natural or man-made disaster, cyber or terrorist attack,
the others will, upon request from that country, assist with relevant means”.
According to the solidarity declaration, “The intensified Nordic cooperation will
be undertaken fully in line with each country’s security and defense policy and
complement existing European and Euro-Atlantic cooperation.”

In addition, Sweden, with its unilateral declaration of solidarity, said that it
would “not remain passive should a disaster or an attack afflict another [EU]
member country or Nordic country” and that Sweden expects that “these countries will act in the same manner should Sweden be afflicted”. While the declaration does not precisely detail the forms of assistance, it states that Sweden
should be able to both give and to receive military support.

**The evolution of Nordic defence cooperation**

Norway, Sweden, Finland and Denmark share a history in peacekeeping which
harks back to training cooperation, launched in the 1960s. However, it took until
the 1990s and 2000s for defence cooperation to expand in a noteworthy manner.


-----

In 1994 the defence ministers of Norway, Sweden, Finland and Denmark agreed
on Nordic Armaments Cooperation (NORDAC). In addition, the Nordic Coordination Arrangement for Peace Support (NORDCAPS) was established for the
purpose of improving crisis management cooperation. It builds on the foundations of the NORDSAMFN structure which was formerly used in UN peacekeeping cooperation. In 2008 the cooperation extended to the capability development sector when the Nordic defence ministers signed a MOU establishing
the Nordic Supportive Defence Structures (NORDSUP).

In 2009 the Nordic countries agreed on streamlining and deepening defence
cooperation. The then signed MOU on the establishing of NORDEFCO (Nordic
Defence Cooperation) created a uniform framework, under which the functions
of the aforementioned structures were merged.

The NORDEFCO structure includes political and military cooperation levels. Political cooperation is based on regular meetings and contacts between the defence
ministers, permanent secretaries of defence ministries, defence policy directors
and experts. NORDEFCO is chaired on a rotating basis; Finland held the Chairmanship most recently in 2013. Preparation for ministerial meetings occurs in the
Policy Steering Committee (PSC), represented by Policy Directors. The Military
Coordination Committee (MCC) manages the armed forces’ cooperation.

The NORDEFCO structure is a cooperation structure; it is not an international
organisation or a command structure. Pursuant to NORDEFCO’s MOU “The
purpose of the Nordic Defence Cooperation (NORDEFCO) is to strengthen the
Participants’ national defence, explore common synergies and facilitate efficient
common solutions”. The actual participation in and realisation of commonly
agreed joint projects remain national decisions. The objective of NORDEFCO is
to promote the more effective generation of military capabilities, support the development and maintenance of nationally important capabilities, and to jointly
produce assets for crisis management.

According to NORDEFCO’s ‘Vision 2020’, adopted during Finland’s Chairmanship in 2013, by 2020 political and military dialogue on security and defence
issues, and information sharing between the Nordic capitals will be established
practice, and enhanced cooperation and coordination in capability development
and armaments cooperation will be a natural element in Nordic capability and
materiel projects. Training and exercises, the pooling of capabilities and deep

-----

ening cooperation in the area of life-cycle support of defence inventories are
expected to intensify.

NORDEFCO’s military cooperation takes place within the framework of five
Cooperation Areas (COPAs), subordinate to the MCC comprising representatives of the armed forces. The COPAs can decide to start working groups for
specific activities in which countries participate if they so decide. While there
are approximately 80 ongoing project-specific working groups, the scope of
many of them is quite limited and precisely defined. The countries can also tap
into NORDEFCO cooperation in their other defence cooperation. NORDEFCO’s
Cooperation Areas are: Capabilities (COPA CAPA), Armaments (COPA ARMA),
Human Resources & Education (COPA HR&E), Training & Exercises (COPA
TR&EX) and Operations (COPA OPS).

COPA CAPA addresses the Nordic nations’ long-term development plans with
the aim of identifying new areas for capability cooperation. This is a key Cooperation Area because, in the long run, it enables the Nordic countries to compile
a comprehensive picture regarding each country’s defence related goals and
available options. The aim of COPA ARMA is to achieve benefits within the field
of acquisition and life-cycle support. Through the mutual exchange of information on planned national procurement it is also possible to carry out common
procurement projects. Among other things COPA HR&E and COPA TR&EX will
address questions associated with individual training, courses and veterans´ issues. The Nordic crisis management training centres have cooperated for years
already and their curricula are also open for third country participation. The
Combined Joint Nordic Exercise Plan (CJNEP) was drawn within the framework
of COPA TR&EX; in 2013 it was also expanded to cover the exercises of the Baltic
States (CJNBEP). The aim of COPA OPS is to create and support the capabilities
needed in crisis management operations. The exchange of information facilitates
declaring a potential Nordic Force for UN-led operations.

**The grounds for the Nordic countries’ national defence**
**solutions, and the view ahead as regards defence cooperation**

All Nordic countries have reformed their defence systems. The overall drivers
of change have been very similar: the effects of the changing character of warfare on critical defence capabilities, ageing and increasingly expensive defence


-----

materiel as well as the need to balance the armed forces operations with the
defence budget. It is safe to assume that changes in the international situation
affect, in some manner, all Nordic armed forces’ development principles at the
practical level.

Once the ongoing Finnish Defence Forces Reform is concluded, its wartime
strength will have decreased from 350,000 to 230,000 troops. Decisions concerning the Navy’s most important combat vessels should be taken by the end of this
decade. The Air Force’s Hornet fighters are to be decommissioned as planned by
the end of the 2020s. Decisions on securing the air defence system’s effectiveness
have to be taken in the early 2020s. During the next 15 years Finland must take
exceptionally many significant decisions regarding its defence system.

Sweden continues the profound structural reform of its defence system, which
has proven more difficult and expensive than expected. As a result of the reform,
launched in 2009, wartime strengths have been dramatically cut. Even so, Sweden
continues to maintain relatively strong air and maritime defences, and a smaller
ground defence which is, however, in high readiness. While its practical defence
solution resembles that of Norway and Denmark, the crucial difference is that it
does not gain any added value from collective defence because it is not a member
of NATO. Then again, it does not have any concomitant obligations. The Swedish
defence industry will remain strong, able to produce top-quality equipment for
all services. The single most important acquisition programmes are the JAS-39 E
Gripen multi-role fighter and the A-26 submarine. In the near future the personnel shortage bedevilling every service branch will be a challenge for Sweden. Due
to the strained international situation the Baltic Sea is increasingly important in
strategic terms, and miscellaneous re-evaluations concerning defence readiness
have been launched. Sweden places strong emphasis on Nordic-Baltic (NB) cooperation, in the context of which Sweden underscores its solidarity policy.

NATO membership is a cornerstone of Norway’s defence policy. Norway’s
healthy state economy has made it possible to carry out a defence reform, supported by solid financing. Like Sweden, Norway has also increased the share
of professional military personnel without, however, abolishing general, albeit
selective, conscription. In 2013 the legislation was changed and general conscription was also extended to women. Still, in practice only 9,000 Norwegian
men and women enrol in national service annually. The armed forces’ most


-----

important procurement programme is the acquisition of 52 Lockheed Martin
F-35 fighters for the air force from 2017–2024. The plans include new submarines
for the Navy in the 2020s. It is also likely that the Navy’s Fridtjof Nansen-class
AEGIS-frigates will be furnished with a naval missile defence system in the coming years. Norway has bolstered the ground defence of Northern Norway – the
North and the Arctic region being strategically the most important sectors. Norway’s defence solution is based on high-readiness forces and on NATO support.
A concrete expression of, among other things, the latter is the pre-positioning of
materiel for the US Marine Corps in Norway.

Likewise, NATO membership is a cornerstone of Denmark’s defence policy.
Pursuant to the Danish Defence Agreement 2013–2017 “Denmark’s sovereignty is secured in a strategic perspective through NATO’s Article 5 commitment
to collective defence of Alliance territory. At the same time, NATO provides
a framework for the participation of the Danish defence in international missions”. Denmark intends to continue to be one of the core Member States of
NATO which pioneer the development of future military capabilities. Denmark’s defence appropriations are expected to be sufficient as regards facilitating the development measures for the duration of the Defence Agreement
which extends until 2017. According to the Agreement all services must develop
capabilities suited to international operations. The most important procurement
programme in the coming years concerns replacing the air force’s F-16 fleet with
new fighters. Denmark participates in the development of the F-35 fighter, and
it is considered to be the favourite when Denmark selects its new fighter. SAAB
pulled out of the competitive process in July 2014. Like Sweden and Norway,
Denmark also intends to preserve its general conscription legislation at least
until 2020. In practice, however, the significance of professional military personnel continues to grow. The importance of the Baltic Sea is also becoming
more important for Denmark, and Denmark is expected to actively participate
in NATO’s increased activities in the area.

Iceland is a member of NATO. However, it does not have any armed forces of
its own. When it comes to defence, Iceland is totally dependent on NATO and
other NATO Member States’ capabilities.

As a result of even a short analysis, it can be stated that the Nordic countries’
geographical positions, defence solutions and correlated capabilities are dispa

-----

rate. Norway and Denmark strongly rely on NATO s collective defence, which
they intend to develop with their own input. Sweden concentrates on improving
its air and sea defences, and the development of its ground defence focuses on
a high-readiness Army, albeit a smaller one. Sweden systematically improves
the networking of its defences, and bilaterally cooperates with different European countries and the United States. Nordic cooperation is but one form of
defence cooperation for Sweden. Finland’s emphases differ from those of the
other Nordic countries. The territorial defence system covering the entire area
of the country entails that the focus be placed on ground defences. Safeguarding
the vital sea lines of communication during a crisis and the significance of the
air defence will be ever-growing challenges for Finland.

When it comes to their basic defence policy solutions the Nordic countries differ from each other, which, for its part, brings about the fact that a traditional
military alliance, security guarantees included, is not a shared ambition in their
defence cooperation. Nor do they intend to contribute their core capabilities
to the framework of this cooperation. Alongside other forms of collaboration,
Nordic defence cooperation can only be supplementary at best.

Neither does Nordic defence cooperation in any shape or form replace Finland’s
or Sweden’s national defences or other defence cooperation which they engage
in within the framework of multinational and bilateral arrangements. For example, Sweden’s most recent defence policy report (Försvarsberedningen 2014)
states that cooperation with NATO plays a crucial role in developing the Swedish defence forces’ capabilities for national defence and international operations.

Nordic cooperation is widely supported by the citizens of all Nordic countries.
Nordic defence cooperation has also received much positive attention internationally, even if regional defence cooperation is not a unique international
phenomenon.

The Nordic countries estimate that, through their defence cooperation, they can
develop such forms of military cooperation which can facilitate their national
development and the maintenance of military capabilities. This cooperation is
also estimated to improve the preconditions for the Nordic countries’ common,
top-quality input for the future needs of international crisis management.


-----

Nordic defence cooperation provides them a supplementary interface with
defence cooperation between other countries. An example of this is the Baltic
States’ interest in Nordic defence cooperation. Since the 1990s the Nordic countries have supported the development of the Baltic States’ defence capabilities,
and it is only natural that defence cooperation be seen as an element in the
comprehensive Nordic-Baltic (NB) cooperation. Contacts are also kept with the
Baltic States within the framework of NORDEFCO.

The NB cooperation in the defence sector is also natural from the viewpoint that
the security environment is shared by all, and interdependence is great. As all
NB countries are either Member States of the European Union or NATO, this
also bonds them together from a security policy perspective. At the same time
there are clear differences on the justifications of defence sector cooperation
between the Nordic countries, and within the NB context. While Norway keeps
emphasising the significance of the Arctic region, for Sweden the Baltic Sea is
the most important strategic sector. Sweden’s most recent defence policy report
states that Sweden should contribute to the deepening of political, economic and
military cooperation among the Nordic countries, the Baltic States as well as Poland and Germany.[15] Denmark, Norway and the Baltic States are in many ways
connected with NATO’s northeastern sector defence planning and operations,
as are Poland, Germany, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands.

The possibilities for wider North-European cooperation have been discussed
within the framework of the ‘Northern Group’ (NG: Nordic countries, Baltic
States, Poland, Germany, the UK and the Netherlands). The NG does not have
structures similar to those in NORDEFCO. Rather, the intention was to keep it
an informal grouping within which topical issues in the EU, NATO or regional
cooperation could be discussed, while keeping the parallel development of work
which is being carried out under various structures as the point of departure.
While there is no concrete project cooperation, it has not been ruled out.

15 Försvaret av Sverige. Starkare försvar för en osäker tid. Regeringskansliet, Ds 2014:20, p.
21.


-----

**Bilateral cooperation between Finland and Sweden**

The implementation of joint projects through case-by-case tailored compositions
is a characteristic feature of Nordic cooperation. From this standpoint SwedishFinnish bilateral cooperation is seen as an element of Nordic defence cooperation, but at the same time it is proof positive of the countries’ exceptionally
close relations. Owing to their similar security policy solutions and geographical
proximity the militarily non-aligned Finland and Sweden are natural partners.
The close and confidential foreign, security and defence policy dialogue has
become an important part of their bilateral relations.

The Finnish and Swedish defence forces have engaged in practical cooperation
for several decades already. The notion of closer defence policy cooperation
crops up from time to time, and includes changing emphases. The cooperation
has materialised through, among other things, acquisition programmes, joint
crisis management participation (e.g. ISAF, the EU’s Nordic Battlegroup), and
training and exercises.

The development of Finnish-Swedish defence cooperation has entered a dynamic phase. The options for deepening bilateral defence cooperation will be evaluated under the Action Plan for Deepened Defence Cooperation between Sweden
and Finland, signed by the defence ministers on 6 May 2014. The introduction of
the Action Plan states that “cooperation will be realized both bilaterally as well
as within existing fora such as Nordefco (sic), the EU, Nato (sic) or the UN”.
This being the case, the ambition level of the Action Plan is fully analogous with
that, for example, of NORDEFCO, supplementing them. Bilateral cooperation
is limited to activities in peacetime.

The inclusion of potential defence cooperation as early as the planning phases
of defence development programmes could lay a good foundation for the further development of Finnish-Swedish defence cooperation regarding inter alia
training and exercises, maritime and air surveillance, the joint use of ports and
air bases and command environment system cooperation. The development of
cooperation on logistics arrangements and acquisition programmes could possibly generate cost savings and synergies. Sweden, for instance, has shown interest in studying whether it could apply the Finnish Army’s materiel life-cycle
maintenance concept itself. Similar maintenance concepts, when implemented,


-----

would facilitate closer cooperation and generate synergies for both countries.
An example of potential logistics cooperation is the contract on the Nordic NH90 helicopter maintenance centre, signed between Patria and NH Industries in
2013, under which Patria, as NHI’s designated Nordic maintenance centre, can
be in charge of logistics, spare parts and maintenance services. This arrangement also applies to Norway which is the third Nordic member in the NH-90
user community.

The point of departure for deepening defence cooperation always entails a political consensus on how far the parties want to proceed in harmonising their
defence systems. The question is whether the goal of cooperation is to facilitate
defence capability development or should it extend all the way to Pooling &
Sharing. Because of Norway’s and Denmark’s strong NATO emphases it seems
unlikely that the progress in the Nordic framework would lead to Pooling &
Sharing. Exceptions to this might be the formation of a possible Nordic Force for
crisis management and Nordic cooperation on Tactical Air Transport pursuant
to the MOU signed in December 2013. It is possible for Finland and Sweden, on
a bilateral basis, to deepen their cooperation, especially to advance the interoperability of air and maritime defences, and to take initial steps towards pooling
and sharing, for example, by compiling joint maritime and air pictures.

The benefits reaped from the expansion of defence materiel cooperation in Nordic and bilateral Finnish-Swedish cooperation are normally mentioned as the
key drivers of change. In reality, the expansion of defence materiel cooperation
is challenging, among other things, because of country-specific requirements
and procurement schedules. Decisions and timetables regarding major acquisitions rarely meet in such a manner that joint procurements can even be considered. Improving the exchange of information on long-term defence planning
and materiel related projects can improve the possibilities of future cooperation.
Moreover, one must take into consideration that the Nordic countries use several weapon systems of equal type whose life-cycle updates and maintenance
provide potential opportunities for industrial cooperation.

When it comes to the defence materiel sector, Sweden is by far the most important actor among the Nordic countries; it is committed to maintaining its position as a manufacturer of advanced weapon systems, such as combat aircraft
and submarines. Sustaining a viable defence industry is an important objective


-----

for Sweden s defence economy. Maintaining the competitiveness of the Swedish
industry requires wide-ranging technological networking among international
businesses and close cooperation with countries that procure Swedish technology. For example, comprehensive industrial cooperation is an integral element
of Brazil’s JAS-39 E programme which makes it possible to integrate Brazilian
systems into the aircraft at an early stage. From the Swedish perspective the
maintenance of the defence industry’s competitiveness and capacity to cooperate with others calls for the widest possible defence policy network. From the
viewpoint of industry the United States plays a crucial role in Swedish foreign
and defence policy because the Swedish defence industry incorporates so many
American sub-systems and components in its products.

Judging by the present guidelines neither Finland nor Sweden have set pooling
and sharing of defence capabilities in wartime conditions as their common goal.
The goal of peacetime cooperation is to more efficiently produce capabilities
for the national defence, and to partly share some capabilities in order to reap
mutual benefits. Bilateral cooperation supplements the totality of both countries’
international defence policy cooperation.

In principle, the development of tangible joint projects for conflicts and wartime
conditions is not ruled out. For such a purpose arrangements and agreements
concerning access to and availability of capabilities would naturally be important. As the opportunities for closer cooperation are being evaluated, alongside
any benefits to be achieved, it is important to mutually assess the legal and
financial implications and preconditions. Different contractual arrangements
might prove valuable in any aforementioned cooperative arrangements.

It is possible to gradually advance bilateral cooperation and goal-setting between Finland and Sweden. The development of cooperation may advance further even without including or excluding a defence alliance as a goal. In order
to enter into an actual defence alliance both countries would have to sign a State
Treaty. A defence alliance between the two countries would also result in deeper
cooperation in other foreign and security policy.


-----

**Abbreviations**

CDP Capability Development Plan

CFE Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe

CFI Connected Forces Initiative

CFI TF Connected Forces Initiative Task Force

COPA Cooperation Area

CJNEP Combined Joint Nordic Exercise Plan

CJNBEP Combined Joint Nordic Baltic Exercise Plan

CRBN Chemical, Radiological, Biological, Nuclear

DCB Defence Capability Building

DDR Disarmament, Demobilisation, Reintegration

EAPC Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council

EDA European Defence Agency

EDTIB European Defence Technological and Industrial Base

EU European Union

EUFOR European Union Force

EULEX European Union Rule of Law Mission

EUPOL European Union Police Mission

EUTM European Union Training Mission

GCC Gulf Cooperation Council

ICI Istanbul Cooperation Initiative

IED Improvised Explosive Device

IFOR Implementation Force

INF Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty

ISAF International Security Assistance Force

KFOR Kosovo Force

MAP Membership Action Plan

MARSUR Maritime Surveillance

MCC Military Coordination Committee

MD Mediterranean Dialogue

MOU Memorandum of Understanding

NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organisation

NB Nordic-Baltic

NG Northern Group


-----

NORDAC Nordic Armaments Cooperation

NORDCAPS Nordic Coordination Arrangement for Peace Support

Nordefco Nordic Defence Cooperation

NORDSAMFN Joint Nordic Committee for Military United Nations Matters

NORDSUP Nordic Supportive Defence Structures

NPT Non-Proliferation Treaty

NRC NATO-Russia Council

NRF NATO Response Force

NUC NATO-Ukraine Commission

OCC Operational Capabilities Concept

OSCE Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe

PARP Planning and Review Process

PG Partnership Goal

PII Partnership Interoperability Initiative

PJC Permanent Joint Council

PSC Policy Steering Committee

RAP Readiness Action Plan

RFP Response Forces Pool

SFOR Stabilization Force

SKJL Finnish crisis management force in Lebanon

SSR Security Sector Reform

START Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty

UNIFIL United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon

VJTF Very High Readiness Joint Task Force

VD Vienna Document

WEU Western European Union

WFP World Food Programme


-----

-----

-----

### THE MINISTRY FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 3 / 2015

ISSN 0358-1489 (print)
ISSN 2341-8230 (pdf)
ISBN 978-952-281-288-9
PDF ISBN 978-952-281-289-6
e-pub PDF 978-952-281-290-2


-----

