# Government Report on  Finnish Foreign and  Security Policy

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32 **vn.fi/en**


-----

-----

Publications of the Finnish Government 2020:32

### Government Report on Finnish Foreign and Security Policy

Finnish Government, Helsinki 2020


-----

Finnish Government

ISBN PDF: 978-952-287-892-2

ISBN printed: 978-952-287-888-5

Layout: Government Administration Department, Publications

Helsinki 2020


**PEFC-certified**

The wood used to make
this printing paper
comes from sustainably
managed, monitored
forests.

PEFC/02-31-151 www.pefc.fi


-----

###### Description sheet

|Published by|Finnish Government|Col3|29 October 2020|
|---|---|---|---|
|Authors|Ministry for Foreign Afafirs of Finland|||
|Title of publication|Government Report on Finnish Foreign and Security Policy|||
|Series and publication number|Publications of the Finnish Government 2020:32|||
|ISBN (printed)|978-952-287-888-5|ISSN (printed)|2490-0613|
|ISBN PDF|978-952-287-892-2|ISSN (PDF)|2490-0966|
|Website address (URN)|http://urn.f/iURN:ISBN:978-952-287-892-2|||
|Pages|50|Language|English|
|Keywords|foreign policy, foreign and security policy, security policy, defence policy, report|||
|Abstract The Government Report examines the Finland's foreign and security policy environment, which is in an intense state of fulx, and defnies the goals and priorities of Finnish foreign and security policy. By implementing it, the Government strengthens Finland's security and prosperity. The goals include promoting foreign and security policy cooperation, strengthening multilateral cooperation, sharing global responsibilities and peacebuilding. These goals are implemented by the following means: enhancing the European Union's coherence and capacity to act, emphasising our special relationship with Sweden and Nordic cooperation, developing NATO partnership, maintaining bilateral relations and partnerships, enhancing our security by means of high crisis resilience, supporting the rules-based international system, striving for a more efefctive UN system, defending open and fair trade, seizing the opportunities of digitalisation, emphasising the importance of Arctic cooperation, emphasising human rights as foundation of foreign and security policy, producing security by mitigating climate change, taking action to strengthen global health security, promoting sustainable development, responding to migration in a comprehensive manner, strengthening our mediation competence, creating stability by means of crisis management, and generating predictability by means of arms control and disarmament.||||
|Publisher|Finnish Government|||
|Printed by (place and time)|PunaMusta Ltd., 2020|||
|Distributed by/ Publication sales|Online version: julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi Publication sales: vnjulkaisumyynti.fi|||


-----

|Kuvailulehti|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|Julkaisija|Valtioneuvosto||29.10.2020|
|Tekijät|Ulkoministeriö|||
|Julkaisun nimi|Valtioneuvoston ulko- ja turvallisuuspoliittinen selonteko|||
|Julkaisusarjan nimi ja numero|Valtioneuvoston julkaisuja 2020:32|||
|ISBN painettu|978-952-287-888-5|ISSN painettu|2490-0613|
|ISBN PDF|978-952-287-892-2|ISSN PDF|2490-0966|
|URN-osoite|http://urn.f/iURN:ISBN:978-952-287-892-2|||
|Sivumäärä|50|Kieli|englanti|
|Asiasanat|ulkopolitiikka, ulko- ja turvallisuuspolitiikka, turvallisuuspolitiikka, puolustuspolitiikka, selonteko|||
|Tiivistelmä Selonteossa arvioidaan Suomen ulko- ja turvallisuuspoliittista toimintaympäristöä, joka on voimakkaassa muutoksessa, ja määritellään ulko- ja turvallisuuspoliittiset tavoitteet ja painopisteet. Toimeenpanolla valtioneuvosto vahvistaa Suomen turvallisuutta ja hyvinvointia. Tavoitteita ovat ulko- ja turvallisuuspoliittisen yhteistyön edistäminen, monenkeskisen yhteistyön vahvistaminen, globaalin vastuun kantaminen ja rauhan rakentaminen. Näitä toteutetaan vahvistamalla Euroopan unionin toimintakykyä ja yhtenäisyyttä, korostamalla erityistä suhdetta Ruotsiin ja pohjoismaista yhteistyötä, kehittämällä Nato-kumppanuutta, hoitamalla kahdenvälisiä suhteita ja kumppanuuksia, lisäämällä turvallisuutta vahvalla kriisinsietokyvyllä, tukemalla sääntöpohjaista kansainvälistä järjestelmää, tavoittelemalla tehokkaampaa YK-järjestelmää, puolustamalla avointa ja oikeudenmukaista kauppaa, hyödyntämällä digitalisaation mahdollisuudet, peräänkuuluttamalla arktisen yhteistyön tärkeyttä, painottamalla ihmisoikeuksia ulko- ja turvallisuuspolitiikan perustana, tuottamalla turvallisuutta ilmastonmuutoksen hillinnällä, toimimalla globaalin terveysturvallisuuden vahvistamiseksi, edistämällä kestävää kehitystä, vastaamalla muuttoliikkeeseen kokonaisvaltaisesti, vahvistamalla rauhanvälitysosaamista, luomalla vakautta kriisinhallinnalla sekä tuottamalla ennakoitavuutta asevalvonnalla ja aseriisunnalla.||||
|Kustantaja|Valtioneuvosto|||
|Painopaikka ja vuosi|PunaMusta Oy, 2020|||
|Julkaisun jakaja/ myynti|Sähköinen versio: julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi Julkaisumyynti: vnjulkaisumyynti.fi|||


-----

###### Presentationsblad

|Utgivare|Statsrådet|Col3|29.10.2020|
|---|---|---|---|
|Författare|Utrikesministeriet|||
|Publikationens titel|Statsrådets utrikes- och säkerhetspolitiska redogörelse|||
|Publikationsseriens namn och nummer|Statsrådets publikationer 2020:32|||
|ISBN tryckt|978-952-287-888-5|ISSN tryckt|2490-0613|
|ISBN PDF|978-952-287-892-2|ISSN PDF|2490-0966|
|URN-adress|http://urn.f/iURN:ISBN:978-952-287-892-2|||
|Sidantal|50|Språk|engelska|
|Nyckelord|utrikespolitik, utrikes- och säkerhetspolitik, säkerhetspolitik, försvarspolitik, redogörelse|||
|Referat Redogörelsen innehåller en bedömning av Finlands utrikes- och säkerhetspolitiska omvärld, som genomgår stora förändringar, och prioriteringarna och målen för Finlands utrikes- och säkerhetspolitik. Genom de utrikes- och säkerhetspolitiska åtgärderna stärker statsrådet Finlands säkerhet och välfärd. Målen består i att främja utrikes- och säkerhetspolitiskt samarbete, starkt multilateralt samarbete, globalt ansvar och fredsbyggande åtgärder. Främjandet sker genom att stärka Europeiska unionens funktionsförmåga och enighet, betona det särskilda förhållandet till Sverige och det nordiska samarbetet, utveckla partnerskapet med Nato, värna om bilaterala relationer och partnerskap, öka säkerheten genom en stark krishanteringsförmåga, stödja ett regelbaserat internationellt system, främja ett efefktivt FN, försvara öppen och rättvis handel, utnyttja digitaliseringens möjligheter, poängtera vikten av det arktiska samarbetet, betona mänskliga rättigheter som grund för utrikes- och säkerhetspolitiken, främja säkerhet genom bekämpning av klimatförändringen, stärka global hälsosäkerhet, främja hållbar utveckling, hantera migrationsfrågor helhetsmässigt, stärka fredsmedlingskompetensen, skapa stabilitet genom krishantering samt sörja för förutsägbarhet genom vapenkontroll och nedrustning.||||
|Förläggare|Statsrådet|||
|Tryckort och år|PunaMusta Ab, 2020|||
|Distribution/ beställningar|Elektronisk version: julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi Beställningar: vnjulkaisumyynti.fi|||


-----

-----

#### Contents

###### 1 Introduction ............................................................................................................................................................... 9

 2 The foundation and goal of foreign and security policy..................................................... 10

 3 Operating environment characterised by great power competition....................... 11

3.1 Global challenges and change phenomena......................................................................................... 12

3.2 Rules-based international system.................................................................................................................... 16

3.3 Trends in the neighbouring areas of Finland and Europe....................................................... 19

###### 4 Goals and priorities – strengthening Finnish security......................................................... 25

4.1 Promoting foreign and security policy cooperation..................................................................... 27

4.1.1 We enhance the European Union’s coherence and capacity to act............................................ 27

4.1.2 We emphasise our special relationship with Sweden and Nordic cooperation...................... 29

4.1.3 We develop NATO partnership ........................................................................................................... 30

4.1.4 We maintain bilateral relations ......................................................................................................... 32

4.1.5 We enhance our security by means of high crisis resilience ...................................................... 35

4.2 Strengthening multilateral cooperation .................................................................................................. 36

4.2.1 We support the rules-based international system ........................................................................ 36

4.2.2 We strive for a more effective UN system ........................................................................................ 37

4.2.3 We defend open and fair trade ........................................................................................................... 38

4.2.4 We seize the opportunities of digitalisation .................................................................................. 39

4.2.5 We emphasise the importance of Arctic cooperation .................................................................. 40

4.3 Sharing global responsibilities............................................................................................................................ 41

4.3.1 We emphasise human rights as foundation of foreign and security policy............................ 41

4.3.2 We produce security by mitigating climate change...................................................................... 42

4.3.3 We take action to strengthen global health security ................................................................... 43

4.3.4 We promote sustainable development in our foreign and security policy.............................. 44

4.3.5 We respond to migration in a comprehensive manner................................................................. 46

4.4 Peacebuilding....................................................................................................................................................................... 47

4.4.1 We strengthen our mediation competence ................................................................................... 47

4.4.2 We create stability and bear responsibility by means of crisis management........................ 48

4.4.3 We generate predictability by means of arms control and disarmament .............................. 49


-----

-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

## 1 Introduction

The Government submits its Foreign and Security Policy Report to Parliament. The Report
lays the foundation for steering Finland’s foreign and security policy. It analyses Finland’s
operating environment and presents the key goals and priorities of Finland’s foreign
and security policy. By implementing the goals the Government strengthens Finland's
security and prosperity. In accordance with the Government Programme, the analysis of
Finland’s operating environment in the Foreign and Security Policy Report also steers the
preparation of the Government's Defence Report.

Parliament has arranged the parliamentary monitoring of the Foreign and Security Policy
Report and will give its statement on the report. When preparing the report on foreign
and security policy, the Government has taken into account Parliament’s comments on the
Government report on foreign and security policy during the 2016 parliamentary session.
The Government reports and the comments given by Parliament define Finland's foreign
and security policy.


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

## 2 The foundation and goal of foreign and
 security policy

The basic line of Finland's foreign and security policy remains stable and predictable. The
policy is based on bilateral relations, cooperation and influencing within the European
Union, and the rules-based international system and multilateral cooperation under
international law.

The goal of Finland's foreign and security policy is to strengthen Finland’s international
position, to secure its independence and territorial integrity, to strengthen Finland's
security and prosperity and to ensure that the society functions efficiently. An important
objective of the Finnish foreign and security policy is to take national action and to
engage in international cooperation in order to prevent the emergence of armed conflicts
and situations endangering Finland's security and society's ability to act, and Finland
ending up a party to a military conflict. As a Member State of the European Union, Finland
could not remain an outsider should threats to security emerge in its vicinity or elsewhere
in Europe.

The key elements of the set of values Finland applies in its foreign and security policy
include the promotion of human rights, the rule of law, democracy, peace, freedom,
equitable treatment and equality in all its international activities. The Finnish foreign and
security policy is based on human rights, which means that the human rights impacts of
all actions taken in foreign and security policy are assessed.

By means of its foreign and security policy, Finland produces security, addresses global
challenges and acts for a safer and fairer world, viewing security from a wide perspective.
Finland participates in international cooperation with an aim to secure peace and human
rights and to promote societal development, the ultimate goal being a more stable,
predictable and safer world.


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

## 3 Operating environment characterised by
 great power competition

The operating environment of Finnish foreign and security policy is in an intense state
of flux. Global challenges, such as climate change and pandemics, affect our operating
environment as independent phenomena and they exacerbate the impacts of trends
identified earlier.  The relations between great powers have changed rapidly, which has
significantly complicated cooperation within the rules-based international system, and, for
its part, deteriorated the security in the areas in the vicinity of Finland and Europe.

The great power relations show elements of intensifying competition and juxtaposition,
but also of interdependence. China's rapid rise among the global actors has shifted the
great power dynamics. At the core of it lies the competition over the global primacy
between the United States and China, which affects the relations between states
worldwide. The strained relationship between the United States and China forces other
states and actors, such as the EU, to examine their own position in the novel political,
economic and ideological competition. China and Russia continue to deepen their
cooperation based on shared interests.

Due to the speed of change in Finland’s foreign and security policy operating
environment, the increasing interdependence between global trends and phenomena
and various actors, and the magnitude and complexity of challenges, it is necessary for
Finland to have a robust ability to understand our operating environment, to influence it
and to prepare for changes.


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

#### 3.1 Global challenges and change phenomena

_Awareness on global problems affecting the whole world is growing. No state or group of_
_states is capable of solving large-scale global challenges on its own. Global solutions that_
_respect human rights, international solidarity and strong commitment are required to_
_address these challenges. The factors that connect such issues as climate change, migration,_
_demographic trends, terrorism and the threat of violent radicalisation and various questions_
_related to new technologies are their large scale and multidimensional nature. These global_
_problems are interlinked, and they are connected to wars and conflicts. They may create_
_inequality, diminish trust in the future, draw dividing lines and increase the attraction_
_of populist movements. Epidemics and pandemics are also included among the global_
_challenges._

The biggest global challenges include climate change, biodiversity loss, the destruction
and fragmentation of habitats, and the overconsumption of natural resources. The
security threats related to them are becoming more widely recognised. Natural disasters
intensified by climate change, extreme weather phenomena and the environmental
degradation are often deteriorating the living conditions and respect for the human
rights of those already in vulnerable situations. According to the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC), global warming of 1.5 °C would significantly accelerate the
extinction of species, render more and more regions uninhabitable, and pose a threat
to access to water, food production and functioning of ecosystems. The upheaval of the
basic essentials of life for hundreds of millions of people would lead to migration forced by
circumstance, increased instability and conflicts.

The mitigation of climate change requires urgent measures, but the steps taken
worldwide have remained insufficient. One of the key measures is to increase the use of
emission-free sources of energy. At the same time, the reduction in the demand of fossil
fuels will shift the balance of power, which may lead to economic and political instability.
Partly due to the withdrawal of the United States from the Paris Climate Agreement, the
debate on climate change has become deeply divided.

Throughout history, infectious disease epidemics have at intervals escalated into
pandemics that threaten the whole world. The fast connections of trade and travel,
urbanisation and the destruction of natural habitats enable the spread of infectious
diseases, thus causing epidemics and pandemics. Climate change and its impacts
accelerate the destruction of natural habitats, which may also create favourable conditions
for the emergence and spread of infectious diseases.

In addition to health effects, epidemics and pandemics may have major impacts on the
stability and resilience of societies, therefore underscoring the importance of societal


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

preparedness, good governance, strong institutions and basic services relying on these.
Also, security of supply and food security play an important role. For authoritarian actors,
the restrictions and states of emergency declared for the purpose of containing diseases
may open up opportunities for misuse of power, which in turn may lead to violations of
human rights, weaken the operating conditions of the media, and undermine democracy
and the rule of law if they are used as an excuse, for example, for preventing the action of
the civil society or postponing elections.

The Covid-19 pandemic has shown us the vulnerability of the cross-border mobility of
people and goods. It has impacted the world economy and the financial market in a
manner never seen before, and efforts are now being made to find a balance between
stability and support measures. The pandemic has underscored the importance of the
freedom of speech, open flow of information, science and international cooperation when
responding to any global challenges. Both in the pandemic situation and in overcoming
its long-term consequences, those groups of people who have already ended up in a
vulnerable situation are in the most exposed position. In recent years, certain actors have
made efforts to curtail the rights of women and people belonging to minority groups all
over the world, also in western societies.

The power constellations changed by globalisation and economic inequality have, for
their part, also fuelled the rise of exclusive nationalism and provided a sounding board
for populist movements, some of which have also adopted features of exclusion in their
activities. The efforts to prioritise national interest become emphasised, at times even at
the expense of international cooperation or the rights of minority groups. Sometimes,
national sovereignty is used as an excuse to withdraw from international commitments
and rules. Good governance, trust in authorities and the positive experiences of citizens of
their opportunities to influence matters are sustainable solutions for curbing the trend, in
which the increasing inequality within and between societies deepens the dividing lines
and deteriorates the conditions for economic and societal development.

In the global scale, migration is a significant and multifaceted phenomenon that entails
issues related to the prosperity and security of individuals and societies. Migration is
mostly regulated and predictable and it may have favourable impacts on the situation and
development in both the country of origin and the country of destination. For example,
labour migration of competent workforce may be part of the solution for maintaining the
dependency ratio in ageing societies.

Some of the migrants are refugees fleeing due to circumstances such as prolonged
conflicts, human rights violations – including persecution – or other similar reasons.
Climate change is also becoming a significant cause of migration forced by circumstance.
The Covid-19 pandemic has endangered the favourable development that has continued


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

for several years in reducing worldwide poverty. It is possible that its repercussions on the
other root causes of migration, such as food security, reduced economic opportunities or
growing social inequality, continue to further increase migration. Today, the number of
refugees is already higher than ever before in the world, and the humanitarian needs have
increased rapidly. Most of the refugees stay near their place of departure.

If not regulated, migration may cause instability within and between states. Attitudes
towards the various forms of migration also cause division in society. Insufficient measures
to integrate immigrants and their insufficient ability to integrate may cause social
exclusion and even lead to the emergence of shadow societies on the fringes of society.
This phenomenon would weaken internal security and social cohesion.

The root causes of migration are addressed in accordance with the UN's 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable Development Goals by, for example,
such means as development cooperation. The EU Member States employ many methods
in their efforts to mitigate climate change, to enhance adaptation to it, and to support
socially fair transition to carbon neutrality. Furthermore, the EU Member States have
taken measures both jointly and nationally to intensify the control of the external border
of the European Union and to enhance their cooperation for the eradication of human
smuggling and organised crime.

The importance of conflict prevention, peacebuilding and mediation becomes
emphasised, since prolonged conflicts are one of the biggest reasons for people to seek
refuge. Military and civilian crisis management have, for their part, promoted peace
and stability, and created foundations for democracy, good governance, the rule of
law and the respect for human rights. Still, the need for crisis management continues
in Africa in particular. The crisis management tasks have diversified, and the operating
environment has become more challenging than before because of, for example, the rise
of international terrorist movements and the new challenges of counterterrorism.

Hybrid influencing has increased and become more varied, which makes it a bigger
security threat than before. In hybrid influencing, a state or other external actor
systematically employs a variety of methods, concurrently or sequently, with an aim to
influence the target's vulnerabilities to reach its own goals. The range of methods is wide,
including political, diplomatic, economic and military methods, and informational and
cyber influence. The influencing is injurious, and the actors strive to implement it in such a
manner that their involvement in the actions can be denied.

State actors frequently use third-party actors, such as extremists or organised criminal
gangs, for their influencing activities. Migration, refugees or the culpable countries’
citizens residing abroad may also be used for the purposes of hybrid influencing.


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

Epidemics and pandemics may similarly be used as a pretext for practising hybrid
influencing. Influencing elections and related attempts to undermine democratic
structures constitute a growing hybrid threat. Technological development and the
changed operating environment, such as various social media platforms, offer new
opportunities for influencing. Deliberate manipulation of social debate and politically
motivated reinterpretation of history are common practices used in disinformation and
influencing campaigns. Critical infrastructure is also a target of hybrid influencing.

Cooperation aimed at understanding and preventing hybrid influencing and improving
crisis resilience has been increased. The European Centre of Excellence for Countering
Hybrid Threats, established at Finland's initiative and based in Helsinki, is an important
cooperation platform that supports the EU, NATO and their Member States in countering
hybrid threats. Some social media companies have also taken measures to prevent hybrid
influencing.

Due to technological development a profound transition is taking place which penetrates
almost all areas of society. Technology offers new instruments and increases opportunities
to enhance flow of information and interaction. Solutions based on digitalisation can be
employed for enhancing global security, prosperity and health. Disruptive technologies,
such as artificial intelligence (AI) systems, are used for purposes like mapping various
threat scenarios. Healthcare and educational solutions using new technologies make it
possible for services to be provided in an increasingly equal manner, so, they can also
be used for enhancing the respect for human rights. At the same time, it is increasingly
important to comprehensively understand the security threats, opportunities for
exploitation, human rights issues, economic opportunities and interdependencies related
to such development. Technology has also become an arena for competition between
states.

The risks and threats related to the security of communications networks and the
vulnerabilities of the critical infrastructure of society have grown. Societies are increasingly
being built upon new-generation communications networks, such as 5G. They combine
things and systems, such as energy networks and other critical infrastructure. The
importance of information security issues becomes emphasised. The electrification and
further networking of societies may make them more efficient but, at the same time,
network vulnerabilities may also enable injurious activities. Disturbances or hostile
activities in networks may affect the transfer of information, data integrity, the functioning
of telecommunications, and the ability of states to act in times of crisis. Furthermore,
development in technological issues contributes to the increased concentration of power
in the hands of commercial actors. Cybersecurity is a topic of wide international debate,
and solutions are being sought to manage security risks and to reduce dependencies.


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

Technological development, particularly in the areas of digitalisation, AI, machine
autonomy, sensor technologies and new operational environments, also has an impact
on every area of national defence. It generates growing demands and creates new
opportunities for the development of defence capability, such as supporting decisionmaking with provision of more accurate data more rapidly than before. New technologies
and especially the US expertise in them has become emphasised in the development
of military capabilities. The evaluation of the prospects and threats of new technologies
from the perspective of comprehensive security requires constant anticipation and
preparedness.

#### 3.2 Rules-based international system

_The rules-based international system lays foundations for responding to global challenges_
_and defines the rules for interaction. It strengthens cooperation, burden-sharing and_
_human rights, and enhances security, stability and prosperity. The system, however, is under_
_growing pressure. Traditionally, the great powers have borne a significant share of the_
_burden of maintaining the system. However, in recent years, the differing objectives of the_
_great powers and their actions have escalated into competition, and the deliberate efforts_
_to impair the system have made cooperation difficult and weakened the system itself. A_
_growing number of governments share Finland’s concern about the state of the rules-based_
_international system._

The rules-based international system is based on the universal values of the United
Nations (UN) Charter. The set of norms and institutions, mostly built after the Second
World War, provide the framework for international cooperation. The UN Charter and the
multilateral agreements drawn up in the UN regulate the use of force and its instruments,
the realisation of human rights and the rule of law, and the promotion of economic and
social development, and provide means for managing environmental risks. The European
Union's legislation is of special importance for Finland due to the wide range of the set
of norms and the principle of the primacy of Community law. Key European norms also
include the agreements drawn up at the Council of Europe and the documents of the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) regulating security and
cooperation of Europe.

The differing objectives of the great powers and the great power competition have made
cooperation more difficult. With its increased economic and military strength, China aims
to change the universally agreed rules-based international system from within to make
it conform to its own views. The United States intends to remain the leading superpower,
but it has become more selective than before when assessing the benefits of multilateral


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

cooperation, and has withdrawn from many of its international commitments. Russia, on
the other hand, has weakened security by taking actions in violation of the international
law and having employed military force.

In addition to the great powers, many other actors are also challenging the strength of the
rules-based international system. With exclusive nationalism and populism on the rise, the
established modus operandi and the benefits of global interdependence are questioned
with growing vigour, in addition to which attention is being called to the unequal
distribution of those benefits. Extremist factions are undermining security by using such
means as acts of violence, network jamming and spreading of fake news. The universality
of human rights and the equality of all population groups are being increasingly
challenged. Authoritarian societies are using coercive measures to narrow the freedom of
action of the civil society and media.

The difficulties in the cooperation between the permanent members of the UN Security
Council have weakened the whole UN system. So far, the attempts to reform the system
to meet the present-day requirements have failed. On the other hand, some initiatives are
being taken to improve the cooperation between the permanent members, and, in recent
years, some progress has also been made in strengthening the international normative
basis. The 2030 Agenda and Paris Climate Agreement are significant achievements. Human
rights agreements have become more comprehensive in terms of both content and
geographic reach. In spite of the pressures it has been subjected to, the UN Human Rights
Council has been able to address various human rights issues, even though the efficiency
of its actions depends on the composition of the council at any given time.

In international law, the focus is on defending former achievements and agreements.
Some states strive to free themselves of such agreements or otherwise neglect
their international obligations. Governments do not always respect the decisions of
international courts of law. Stemming from national premises, some states may weaken
the operating conditions of the courts. The courts may also experience external pressure.
Instead of concluding new multilateral agreements, the focus has been on developing
international law through interpreting and clarifying it. In recent years, expressions of
mutual understanding over new regulation have often been recorded in the form of
different documents of declaratory nature. The challenges of work against impunity and
the enforcement of criminal liability become emphasised in conflicts, where most serious
international crimes, such as war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide, are
committed.

In arms control, recurring violations of agreements, withdrawing from agreements and
the selective commitment of the great powers weaken the agreement-based system.
Furthermore, the juxtaposition of the United States, China and Russia hampers the


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

cooperation in international fora. In nuclear arms control, the bilateral agreements
between the US and Russia have played a key role with a view to European security.
With the bilateral agreements possibly lapsing, there are no signs of the emergence of a
new multilateral agreement, which increases uncertainty in the arms control sector and
beyond. In absence of contractual controls, China will continue the rapid development of
its capabilities.

New technologies and changing operating environments, including cybersecurity and
the growing security role of space, and the overlapping of conventional and nuclear
weapon systems upset the strategic balance and set new requirements for arms control
agreements, national legislation and preparedness. The debate about biological threats
and preparing for them continues. In spite of the challenges, nuclear non-proliferation and
prevention of nuclear terrorism have maintained their status as factors combining great
powers. Some constructive cooperation is also carried out through concrete initiatives.

Trade barriers have been dismantled and the international trade system bolstered under
the auspices of the World Trade Organisation (WTO). However, the WTO and its dispute
settlement mechanism are in a difficult situation. The great power competition fought
in the form of trade wars is shaking its structures. Protectionism and uncertainty have
increased in the international economy. Trust in the stability of the international financial
system is at stake. Some states are using more lending, investments, economic sanctions
and trade policy measures for exerting political influence than before, and, in this sense,
trade policy has also become a part of the security policy range of instruments. The WTO's
operations are also characterised by the tension between the developing countries
and industrial countries. Bilateral and multilateral agreements enable progress in trade
liberalisation among parties ready for that. The EU trade agreements have, for their part,
promoted rules-based international trade.

As Finland, many other governments and actors are also concerned about the state of
the rules-based international system, and concrete initiatives and programmes have
been drawn up to support it. Support for the rules-based international system has been
provided not only by the UN system but also by various European and Euro-Atlantic
structures. The key structures include the EU, functioning as a deeply integrated union
and wide-ranging security policy actor; NATO, as a party responsible for the collective
defence of its member states; and the OSCE, acting as an organisation of cooperationbased security with a wide geographical reach. The Council of Europe plays a key role in
the promotion of human rights, democracy and the rule of law in Europe.


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

#### 3.3 Trends in the neighbouring areas of Finland and Europe

_The security situation in the neighbouring areas of Finland and Europe is unstable and_
_difficult to predict. The increasing competition between the great powers and their_
_weakening commitment to the rules-based international system and international law_
_have increased tensions in the international situation. Tensions have also been increasing in_
_Finland's vicinity due to such contributing factors as the weakening of the agreement-based_
_arms control system, the development and diversification of influencing methods, and the_
_growing importance of cyber operating environment. Finland's security environment has_
_become more unstable, and the change is expected to be long-lasting._

From the great power perspective, Finland is located in a strategically important area, on
which changes in the international security situation are directly reflected. The security
in Northern Europe is increasingly interlinked and any shifts in the security situation in
the Baltic Sea region, the Arctic neighbourhood of Finland and on the North Atlantic are
closely connected. The development in Europe’s neighbourhood also remains unstable.

The European Union is a successful peace project, a unique economic and political
alliance and a significant global economic actor. Its basic values include respect for human
dignity and human rights, freedom, democracy, equality and the rule of law. The EU
advocates these values, and promotes peace and compliance with and the development
of international law. Based on common values and objectives, and to advance its own
interests, the EU is developing a joint foreign and security policy and defence cooperation.
In its external relations, it strives to utilise its economic power better than before to
become the political actor equal to its size.

The EU has remained united when facing challenges such as Brexit. Similarly, the EU has
been consistent on the sanctions against Russia. After the early stages of the Covid-19
pandemic, the Member States have been coordinating their actions and showing mutual
solidarity. The EU has launched large-scale measures to respond to the impacts of the
pandemic and supported also third countries in this respect. The pandemic is yet another
example of a crisis encountered by the EU that may, in the best-case scenario, enable
the EU to become stronger both internally and externally. In addition, it gives the EU an
opportunity to show the kind of leadership it is expected to display in several other global
issues as well.

In certain issues, it has become more difficult to establish a common position of the EU
Member States. The Member States have differing views, for example, on the direction
where the EU should develop, migration issues, human rights issues and the activities
in the Middle East. Within the Union, there are shortcomings in the compliance with the
basic values of the EU, such as the rule of law. Brexit may have an impact on the Union's


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

role as an international actor. The great powers are challenging the unity of the Union. All
these development trends are reflected on the EU's global influence.

Many Member States call for more concerted and effective action from the EU. The
European Commission's response to this is to emphasise a geopolitical outlook, meaning
a more determined promotion of the EU's interests and values at the global level,
together with the EU's partners and in relation to its competitors. The aim is to take a
more comprehensive and strategic approach to managing external relations. The issue of
increasing the effectiveness of EU's Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) is being
debated based on various initiatives. As part of the debate, it has been proposed that
qualified majority decision-making be applied more extensively in certain areas of the
CFSP, such as the human rights policy and sanction decisions.

The EU continues to develop its common foreign and security policy and enhance its
defence cooperation in a manner that will strengthen the capabilities at the disposal of
EU Member States. The Member States are developing defence by national measures
and Permanent Structured Cooperation and by promoting, for example, military mobility.
The European Defence Fund will be used for enhancing the EU defence cooperation. The
cooperation between the EU and NATO aimed at strengthening European security has
been intensified, for example, in issues related to hybrid influencing and military mobility.
European security is also strengthened through cooperation done within smaller country
groupings.

Through its enlargement policy, the EU has promoted peace, prosperity, security and
stability in Europe, and the EU is committed to the EU perspective for the Western Balkans.
The NATO enlargement to the Western Balkans has, for its part, already enhanced stability
and development in the area, where also Russia, China and Turkey have been increasing
their influence in recent years. The development of Serbia-Kosovo relations will be of
key importance for regional stability. The agreement found in the naming dispute of
North Macedonia shows that even difficult issues can be resolved motivated by the EU's
Convergence objective.

Because of its membership in NATO, the OSCE and the Council of Europe, Turkey has close
links to the European security. The EU cooperates with Turkey in various compositions.
In recent years, however, Turkey has turned increasingly authoritarian, and it continues
to distance itself from European values. Turkey's internal development, foreign and
security policy operations and ambitions to gain a regional great power status are causing
concern, as Turkey's actions are affecting the security of Europe and its vicinity.

The strategic importance of eastern partner countries and Central Asia for the EU has
grown. Energy routes and labour mobility further increase the interdependence. The EU


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

supports reforms in these countries, and the strengthening of their societal resilience,
stability and democracy. Russia has traditionally played a strong role in these countries
through both political and economic cooperation. In recent years, China has strengthened
its positions in Central Asia in particular.

The foreign and security policy cooperation and defence cooperation between Finland
and Sweden has been deepened without any pre-set restrictions. The cooperation with
Sweden is intense and wide-ranging and it covers all sectors, so Sweden's position as
Finland's closest bilateral partner is strong. Another feature the countries have in common
is that they do not belong to a military alliance.

Finland has developed its bilateral relations with Norway as well. Cooperation between
all the Nordic countries is also close. In the security and defence policy cooperation, the
security issues of the Baltic Sea region and, increasingly, also of the Arctic neighbourhood
are highlighted. Finland cooperates with the Baltic countries particularly in matters related
to the security of the Baltic Sea region.

The Province of Åland Islands has a recognised status under international law. This does
not prevent Finland from intensifying its defence cooperation with various actors.

NATO’s focus is back on the core task of collective defence, which manifests itself in the
form of intensified defence and deterrence. The debate about the transatlantic burden
sharing continues. The increased operations and presence of NATO and the US in the Baltic
countries and Poland have enhanced stability in the Baltic Sea region. The US commitment
to the European defence is of great importance for the security of the whole of Europe.
The EU and the United States will continue their wide-ranging cooperation.

The level of commitment of each US Government to multilateral cooperation is also
reflected on the transatlantic cooperation. In recent years, political divisions have
deepened in the United States, and it is to be expected that the polarisation of the
political field will continue. In the US, the primary focus is on domestic challenges. In
the US foreign policy, the strong pursuit of national interests and drawing away from
international cooperation have become increasingly emphasised.

Russia has weakened the security of our neighbouring areas and Europe by illegally
annexing Crimea and by keeping up the conflict it started in Eastern Ukraine. Russian
operations in areas like Georgia, Ukraine and Syria show that the country has lowered its
threshold to use military force. Because of Russian actions, the security policy situation has
become more tense, and the EU-Russia relations have deteriorated. Russia is still aiming at
a sphere-of-influence-based security regime in Europe.


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

Russia’s internal development has moved towards tighter government control. Legislative
changes are being made to weaken democracy. The freedom of action of the civil society
and free media has been narrowed down. Regional disparities are growing within the
country, and the economic development is slow due to lack of structural reforms. Even
though Russia is no match to the US and China in terms of economic resources, it still
seeks recognition as a superpower and uses significant amounts of its resources for
military buildup and external influencing.

The impacts of Russian power politics are reflected on the Baltic Sea region, where the
negative cycle created by Russia has intensified tensions and increased military activity.
The military strategic importance of the region has increased, and more technologically
advanced and higher performance weapon systems are being deployed in the vicinity
of Finland. Russia is raising the readiness level of its troops and enhancing its capacity
to rapidly concentrate additional forces to an area. The countries in the Baltic Sea region
continue to increase their defence expenditure, raise their preparedness and enhance
their defence cooperation.

The temperature in the Arctic region is rising faster than world average. The resulting
melting of the sea ice cover and the temptation to exploit the region in an unsustainable
manner constitute a huge risk to the biodiversity of the region. It also enables taking
advantage of the Arctic region in a new way, which has, for its part, increased the strategic
importance of the region and increased tensions in the area. Any tensions in international
politics or military tensions elsewhere in the world are reflected also on the Arctic area.
Great powers, including China, are showing growing interest towards the region, and
military activity in and geopolitical and economic interests towards the region have
increased. Constructive cooperation related to, for example, climate and environmental
issues is practised in regional cooperation structures.

The Middle East and the Persian Gulf region will remain at the core of international politics.
The region is subject to great power politics and a terrain for various competing regional
actors. The conflicts between the states competing over dominance, the concentration
of power to authoritarian regimes and the conflicts of interest between great powers
make it more difficult to develop any regional security arrangements. Only a share of the
current difficult tensions in the region are open conflicts between states, while the rest
involve different proxy actors and terrorist organisations. The fight against ISIS has united
the international community widely. Israel and certain Arab countries have enhanced
their cooperation by means of agreements that normalise mutual relations between the
countries.

The US role in the region has turned more difficult to predict and has also narrowed
down to some extent, of which other actors, such as Russia, Turkey and China, are taking


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

advantage. The US-Iran confrontation, and Iran's own operations reflect on the stability
of the whole region, including that of Iraq. It is essential that Iran keep its international
commitments.  The impacts of climate change are increasingly affecting the development
of the region.

The unstable situation in the Persian Gulf may have global consequences, including the
potential of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The conflict in Syria has
created one of the world's most extensive humanitarian crises and the biggest refugee
crisis of our time. No solution has been found to the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, and the
peace process has stagnated. The very different standings of the parties involved create an
asymmetric frame of reference for any attempts to find a solution.

The affluent states in the region in particular have woken up to the need to diversify
their economic structure and to offer new prospects for young people. The interest of
the countries to engage in different partnerships is increasing. The developments in the
Middle East and Persian Gulf regions have a direct impact on the European security and
economy as well.

The strategic, commercial and economic importance of the African continent and its states
has grown. The African Union has strengthened its positions as an international actor
and partner. The economic growth has been robust, and the states have enhanced their
cooperation by means of, for example, the African Continental Free Trade Agreement.

However, the economic prosperity and democratisation have advanced unevenly. The
Covid-19 pandemic will slow down the economic development in Africa, which will
not be rapid enough to respond to the needs of the population growth. The pandemic
may also hamper the implementation of the Agenda2030, cause instability, weaken
democratisation and raise the need for humanitarian aid to a record-breakingly high
level. The problems in access to education and working life and in healthcare may dim
particularly prospects among young people, increase the experience of inequality and
domestic destabilisation, and create breeding ground for violent extremism and terrorism.
Even before the Covid-19 pandemic, this was strongly visible, for example, in the Sahel
region, where, alongside Al-Qaeda, also ISIS has been gaining ground, and both have
expanded their operating areas.

Among the great powers, China, and also Russia in the extent allowed by its resources,
have enhanced their cooperation with African nations. China is exercising its economic
power in Africa and has thus created relationships of dependence. The competition
between the great powers and regional actors, such as the Persian Gulf countries and
Turkey, over influence and resources increases instability. India has also intensified its
economic activities on the continent.


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

The African continent has become a more integral part of the EU neighbourhood, but it
is not self-evident that the EU will maintain its status as Africa's biggest trade, investment
and development partner. The EU continues to diversify its relationship and partnerships
with African countries, and several EU countries have increased their presence on the
continent. The EU has made systematic, long-term efforts to promote the stability and
development in Africa through such actions as crisis management operations and
development cooperation, and by supporting the building of African crisis management
and conflict prevention capacity. The security of Africa is also linked to Finnish security,
when the repercussions of, for example, the political instability and the conflict being
further exacerbated by the various operators involved in Libya as well as the situation in
the regions of Sahel and the Horn of Africa are reflected even on Europe.


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

## 4 Goals and priorities – strengthening
 Finnish security

The main objective of the Finnish foreign and security policy is to strengthen security in
Finland, in our vicinity, in Europe and in the world. All these levels are important, and they
are interlinked. Security is strengthened by national measures and through international
cooperation. The meaning of cooperation and joint burden-sharing is increasingly
important as the challenges grow.

The key elements of Finland's security are societal crisis resilience – security of supply
included – strong national defence capability, the united and operational European
Union and close international foreign, security and defence policy cooperation. Finland
maintains its crisis resilience through wide-ranging collaboration with various sectors
of society, strengthens the capabilities of authorities and raises a preventive threshold
against external influencing targeted against the Finnish society.

Finland examines security from a wide perspective that observes not only the military
threats, competition between great powers and hybrid influencing but also the impacts
of the global challenges currently in sight, such as climate change, health threats,
human rights violations, migration, economic crises, increasing inequality, terrorism and
international crime. Many of the global phenomena affecting security are characterised by
their ever closer interconnectedness.

Finland is a militarily non-aligned state which maintains a credible national defence
capability. By maintaining its defence capability, Finland prevents the use of military force
against Finland, shows readiness to respond to the use or the threat of use of military
force, and the capacity to repel any attacks against our country. To strengthen its own
defence capability, Finland participates in international foreign, security and defence
policy cooperation, which has been increasing and getting deeper in recent years.

We engage in foreign, security and defence policy cooperation with Sweden in particular.
Cooperation with other Nordic countries and with the EU Member States and NATO


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

countries – including the United States and the United Kingdom – is also important and
in line with Finland's long-term foreign and security policy and it is based on Finland’s
own political interests. From the perspective of Finland's security, it is essential that NATO
continue its Open Doors Policy, i.e. that NATO keep its membership open to all the states
that meet the NATO requirements. Well-functioning neighbourly relations with Russia are
important to Finland.

Despite the increasingly tense international situation, Finland is not under any immediate
military threat. Nonetheless, Finland must prepare for the use or the threat of use of
military force against it. Considering the prevailing state of Finland's foreign and security
policy operating environment and its potential developments, Finland does not have the
option or desire to isolate itself.

Finland pursues an active policy of stability to prevent military threats and reduce
tensions. Finland follows the mutually agreed principles of European security based on
the goals of the United Nations. If subjected to an armed attack, Finland will defend itself
in accordance with the UN Charter. Finland will not allow the use of its territory for hostile
purposes against other states. Close international defence cooperation and the option
to provide and receive international assistance will remain an important part of Finland's
defence capability.

External economic relations and development policy are an integral part of the Finnish
foreign and security policy. The Paris Agreement on climate change, the Agenda 2030
defining the Sustainable Development Goals and other key agreements and action plans
provide the foundations for international cooperation and Finland's actions in the coming
years.

The effectiveness of Finland's actions will be intensified by securing sufficient operational
resources for foreign and security policy and by ensuring the coverage of the Finnish
network of diplomatic missions, including the provision of consular services in crisis
situations.


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

#### 4.1 Promoting foreign and security policy cooperation

##### 4.1.1 We enhance the European Union’s coherence and capacity to act

_The European Union is the key reference framework, channel of influence and security_
_community for Finland’s external relations. By enhancing the EU's coherence, external_
_capacity to act, and global leadership, Finland also strengthens its own security._

The EU must remain an influential foreign, security and defence policy actor which
promotes peace, democracy and human rights, and provides security and socially,
economically and ecologically sustainable prosperity. The EU must show global leadership
in defending the rules-based international system, the mitigation of climate change and
the promotion of human rights.

To strengthen its global status and influence, the EU must take a more strategic approach
and show stronger coherence, stronger consistency in EU's internal and external policies,
more efficient decision-making and better capacity to act. Increasing the use of qualified
majority decision-making and the principle of 'constructive abstention’ may, for its part,
enhance the efficiency, speed and credibility of the Common Foreign and Security Policy.
With a view to ensuring the EU's capacity to act, it is important that common policies are
adhered to. Internal coherence is bolstered by respecting the common values, the rule of
law included. It is important that the Member States stand united as the EU is negotiating
with the UK.

Finland considers the strengthening of the EU's global role and more purposeful
promotion of Europe's interests and values important and supports the Commission's
geopolitical approach. The creation of a globally more influential EU requires seamless
cooperation between its institutions and Member States. The High Representative of the
Union for Foreign Affairs & Security Policy should have a strong mandate to promote the
EU's foreign policy goals, the achievement of which can also be advanced by delegating
high-representative tasks to the foreign ministers of Member States on a case-by-case
basis. In the great power game, the EU must be able to efficiently establish its own stands
based on its own goals and, if necessary, to protect its interests and Member States against
external pressure. From the EU, this demands actions that support the safeguarding of
EU's own competence and competitiveness in international competition in a manner that
reduces harmful dependencies.

Finland supports the strengthening and development of the EU’s common foreign,
security and defence policy. The EU must be capable of taking responsibility for the
security of its own territory and its neighbouring areas. When developing the EU's defence
cooperation, it is essential that the Member States keep their commitments under
Permanent Structured Cooperation and that the relevant cooperation projects produce


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

concrete added value. The joint EU financing for security and defence must promote the
development of the European defence industry, and the enhancement of the EU Member
State's capabilities, military mobility and the strengthening of the peace and security
in partner countries. Finland supports the process of strategic reflection on EU security
and defence. It is important to develop security and defence cooperation and a common
strategic culture between the European countries. The EU provides an excellent framework
for such cooperation, which should be primarily used. However, the collaboration may
also take place outside the EU structures in different country groupings, in a manner that
enhances the European security but does not draw dividing lines in Europe.

The EU-NATO cooperation must benefit both parties and be of complementary nature.
The development of the EU security and defence cooperation benefits also NATO as it
enhances European security and capabilities. Particularly beneficial areas of cooperation
include the hybrid and cyber matters, issues related to digitalisation and disruptive
technologies, such as AI, and the promotion of military mobility.

The EU must continue the implementation of a credible enlargement policy based on
clear criteria. The Enlargement and Neighbourhood Policies promote peace, prosperity,
stability and security in Europe and its neighbouring areas.

The European Union's Solidarity Clause (article 222, TFEU) and Mutual Assistance Clause
(article 42(7), TEU) strengthen the Union as a security community and increase solidarity
among the Member States. The prerequisite for the application of the Solidarity Clause
is that a Member State becomes the object of a terrorist attack or the victim of a natural
or man-made disaster. The Mutual Assistance Clause is intended to be used when a
Member State is the victim of armed aggression on its territory. The debate within the
EU and between the Member States about the issues related to the application and
implementation of the Solidarity and Mutual Assistance Clauses continues. The flexible
nature of the clauses must be preserved, which allows their application, for example, to
responding to serious hybrid influencing.

Solidarity is of high security policy importance for Finland, and Finland bears responsibility
for the European security in concert with the other EU Member States. Here, solidarity
means that Finland will receive aid and assistance at its request, and that Finland will
provide aid and assistance to another Member State or the European Union if necessary.
The request for or provision of aid and assistance is always based on a decision made at a
national level. Finland's readiness to provide or request military or other aid or assistance
has been clarified by legislation, and the development of the ability to receive military
assistance continues.


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

The EU must increase its preparedness and security of supply with a view to large-scale
crisis situations, such as the Covid-19 pandemic. Furthermore, it is necessary to identify
the areas in which coordinated action on top of national solutions would be possible in
future crises. It must be possible to secure the progress of defence cooperation initiatives
even in case of exceptional circumstances.

Strengthening the EU's preparedness and the EU as a security community also promotes
the objectives of national security of supply. A smoothly functioning EU internal market
and open and rules-based trade policy enable security of supply both at the EU and
national levels. The crisis resilience of the EU internal market must be strengthened in such
a manner that the cross-border delivery, supply and value chains function properly.

Comprehensive guidelines for the Finnish EU policy will be laid down in the Government
Report on the EU Policy.

##### 4.1.2 We emphasise our special relationship with Sweden and Nordic
 cooperation

_The building of deeper cooperation with Sweden will continue without any predetermined_
_limitations. In an unstable international operating environment, wide-ranging Nordic_
_cooperation is increasingly important._

Sweden is the most important bilateral partner for Finland. Finland and Sweden, which
do not belong to any military alliances, share the same assessment of how their operating
environment is developing, which lays strong foundations for cooperation. Finland will
continue to build deeper foreign and security policy cooperation and defence cooperation
with Sweden without any predetermined limitations. The objectives of the cooperation
with Sweden are to strengthen the security of the Baltic Sea region as well as the defence
capacities of Finland and Sweden. By collaborating with each other, Finland and Sweden
lay foundations for taking joint action in any situation in accordance with decisions made
on a case-by-case basis. Common operations also raise the threshold against incidents
and attacks.

The defence cooperation between Finland and Sweden covers times of peace, crisis and
war. Areas of cooperation include but are not limited to situational awareness, joint use
of logistics and infrastructure, Host Nation Support arrangements and cooperation for
strengthening the monitoring and safeguarding of territorial integrity. The purpose of
cooperation is to lay foundations for joint action and operations of Finland and Sweden
under any circumstances.


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

The already close Nordic cooperation is being developed further based on shared values
and interests, and common views concerning societal development. The key objective
is to enhance security and stability in our neighbouring areas in Northern Europe, on the
Baltic Sea and in the Arctic region. Nordic cooperation under the auspices of NORDEFCO
(Nordic Defence Cooperation) is being developed, among other things, in the fields of
situational awareness cooperation, military mobility and training and exercise activities.
In accordance with the vision set at NORDEFCO, cooperation will be improved with a view
to times of peace, crisis and conflict. Collaboration with Norway will be enhanced both
bilaterally and together with Sweden.

In concert with the other Nordic countries, we seek ways to strengthen the rulesbased international system. Together, we promote sustainable development and seek
solutions to key global challenges, such as the mitigation of and adaptation to climate
change, and issues related to technological development. In climate policy, the Nordic
countries can set a global example, and their close cooperation in, for example, climate
and environmental issues helps access of Nordic companies providing new technologies
to international markets. Security of supply cooperation will be intensified. The Nordic
countries increase their international influence by making joint appearances and
initiatives, by arranging events together, and by cooperating at all levels in international
issues in different fora. The Nordic countries must be the most closely integrated area in
the world.

The Nordic countries promote the security of the Baltic Sea region also in collaboration
with the Baltic countries. In a Nordic-Baltic composition, the countries engage in dialogue
on international issues of current interest and coordinate their views on international
fora. The shared security challenges underscore the importance of this composition.
Finland continues its close bilateral cooperation with Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. The EU
Strategy for the Baltic Sea Region is another essential framework for regional cooperation
for Finland.

##### 4.1.3 We develop NATO partnership 

_NATO is the key actor for advancing transatlantic and European security and stability._
_Finland develops its partnership cooperation with NATO from its own premises and interests._

The fact that NATO now focuses on its core task has also affected the way the partnership
cooperation has developed. In the changed security environment, the strategic
importance of Northern Europe has increased, for which reason NATO has opened new
cooperation opportunities for Finland and Sweden. The cooperation between Finland and
NATO has been deepened.


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

Finland effectively employs the partnership tools and cooperation programmes provided
by NATO to strengthen its national defence capabilities, and engages in wide-ranging,
pragmatic and mutually beneficial partnership cooperation with NATO. It is important that
Finland is able to cooperate with other partners in a flexible manner, taking account of
the competence, needs and goals of each partner country. Finland considers it important
that it can convene and collaborate, for example, in the ‘30+2’ composition that includes
Finland, Sweden and NATO countries.

The strengthening of political dialogue enhances Finland's opportunities to influence its
security environment, such as the Baltic Sea region. Cooperation increases predictability
and stability in the region. The debate needs to be continued to cover such issues as
the security situation, arms control, technological development, civilian readiness,
enhanced resilience of societies, and issues related to hybrid threats, as well as the
situation of Europe's Southern Neighbourhood. It is also in Finland's interest to engage in
dialogue with NATO on the security of the northern region and on keeping it outside any
international tensions.

In pragmatic cooperation, one of the key priorities is the development of a shared
situational awareness and situational understanding in the Baltic Sea region between
Finland, Sweden and NATO countries. Other priorities include the development of
capabilities, continued participation in crisis management cooperation and training
and exercises, which Finland will participate in regularly and in many different ways. The
participation in demanding NATO exercises and crisis management develops Finland's
own capabilities and interoperability with partners. Finland participates in these activities
by separate decisions made by the President of the Republic and the Government’s
Ministerial Committee on Foreign and Security Policy. Participation in crisis management
also promotes Finland's wider objective to enhance international security and stability.
Efforts to intensify cooperation in civilian readiness and security of supply issues, in the
fields of cyber defence and countering hybrid threats and in arms control will continue.
In Finland-NATO cooperation, it is taken into account that partnership cooperation
neither includes any Article 5 based security guarantees nor obligations, and that when
participating in any NATO Article 5 exercises Finland's role is only that of a partner country.
Finland promotes the EU-NATO cooperation aimed at strengthening the European security
and transatlantic cooperation even in global issues, such as improving health security.

Maintaining a national room to manoeuvre and freedom of choice are also integral parts
of Finland's foreign, security and defence policy. This retains the option of joining a
military alliance and applying for NATO membership. The decisions are always considered
in real time, taking account of the changes in the international security environment.
Interoperability achieved through cooperation ensures the elimination of any practical
impediments arising to a potential membership.


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

##### 4.1.4 We maintain bilateral relations

_In Finland's foreign and security policy operating environment, the significance of well-_
_functioning bilateral relations and partnerships becomes emphasised. They are being_
_developed comprehensively over a wide range of issues._

**The United States is an important and close partner for Finland. The wide-ranging**
cooperation includes foreign and security policy cooperation and defence cooperation.
The close and comprehensive bilateral relations are strengthened at various levels and
through an extensive network of cooperation and regular high-level dialogue. In addition
to bilateral topics, the dialogue covers EU-US issues, current international issues, hybrid
threats, and matters related to European security, such as the situation of the Baltic Sea
and Arctic regions. New opportunities are being sought in commercial and economic
cooperation, and Finland is seeking partners also at the state level. Finland will continue
its defence cooperation, including defence materiel cooperation, with the US with an aim
to strengthen the national defence and interoperability, and to secure military security of
supply.

The US commitment to Europe, both through bilateral arrangements and through NATO,
is of key importance for the European security and for Finland as well. Transatlantic
cooperation is also an important part of the Nordic security and defence cooperation. It is
important for Finland that the US commits itself to the principles of and the cooperation
central to the rules-based international system. The US plays a key role in international
crisis management and the fight against terrorism, and Finland continues its concrete
cooperation with the US in these issues as well. Finland contributes to maintaining a close
EU-US partnership in the future as well. The maintenance of the transatlantic relationship
requires active measures on both Finland and the EU's part, and, on the other hand,
between them and the US. It is important to preserve the shared set of values based on
democracy, human rights and respect for the rule of law. Common interests and a shared
historical set of values support close cooperation.

Finland maintains functioning and close relations with Russia in sectors of key importance
for Finland and the EU. Finland cooperates and engages in dialogue with Russia on
bilateral issues, the international situation and security, global challenges, such as climate
and environmental issues, and Baltic Sea and Arctic region issues, and promotes the
economic relations between the countries. The stability of Russia and the respect for
human rights in the country are important to Finland, and the dialogue on human rights
issues will be continued. Direct contacts between citizens, supported by functioning
cooperation in the arenas of, for example, traffic, tourism and culture, are an important
part of the relations between Finland and Russia.


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

For Finland, it is important that the EU stands united in issues related to Russia. In
response to Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea, Finland pursues the EU's joint nonrecognition policy and implements sanctions against Russia.  Full implementation of the
Minsk Agreements, aimed at finding a solution to the conflict in eastern Ukraine, is the
prerequisite for the reassessment of the EU-Russia relations, including the lifting of the
sanctions against Russia.

Cooperation with Russia continues at the practical level trough the Northern Dimension
policy and the EU-Russia cross-border cooperation. The Northern Dimension policy and
the partnerships operating under its auspices provide opportunities for constructive
regional cooperation that benefits citizens, and for supporting the civil society and direct
contacts of citizens. Environmental partnership enables cooperation in the protection
of water systems, and in nuclear safety, environmental technology and the mitigation of
climate change. The transport and logistics partnership offers opportunities for logistics
and digitalisation solutions crossing national borders. The social and health partnership
covers, among other things, the prevention of the spread of infectious diseases. The
cultural partnership promotes projects in the creative sector and connections between
cultural actors in the relevant regions.

For Finland, it is of high importance how Russia positions itself in relation to the United
States and China. Finland must be able to assess Russia's internal development and
foreign and security policy actions with high accuracy. This requires the maintenance of
robust expert knowledge on Russia.

Finland is aware of China's determined endeavours to strengthen its global status. In
issues related to China, Finland will enhance the national coordination and situational
awareness. Finland engages in dialogue with China on bilateral and international
issues, such as the mitigation of climate change, in which China plays a major role.
The economic prospects will be examined on a broad scope. The efforts to enhance
Chinese commitment to the collectively adopted rules-based international system will be
continued. Finland is concerned about the deteriorated human rights situation and the
narrowing of the freedom of media in China resulting from internal developments. Finland
will highlight these matters in its national and EU-level dialogue with China.

It is important for Finland that the EU pursues a uniform and consistent China policy.
For the EU and Finland, China is, at the same time, a cooperation partner, an economic
competitor and a systemic rival. Finland strengthens cooperation and exchange of
information on issues related to China.


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

For Finland, the United Kingdom is a close partner with whom Finland as a part of the EU
is building a new relationship. In the future relations, Finland is primarily seeking EU-level
solutions. Finland considers it important that the foreign and security policy cooperation
and defence cooperation between the EU and the United Kingdom remain as close as
possible. Alongside the EU-level solution, the bilateral relations and commercial and
economic cooperation will be strengthened.

Finland expands and deepens its political and economic cooperation with African nations
and regional organisations and builds partnerships based on equality and common
interests. Finland uses its reputation as a good partner and a trailblazer in technological
development, education and the rights of women and girls. Finland participates in crisis
management work and takes action to strengthen the security sector of the countries
of Africa. Africa will remain the geographical focus area of Finland's development
cooperation, and the goal is to enhance sustainable development on the continent.

Finland provides strong support for the development of a comprehensive EU partnership
with African countries and the African Union. The EU-Africa relations should be developed
in such a manner that they are increasingly based on political dialogue, reciprocity and
trading. The EU has instruments for supporting development and security that should
be put to extensive and efficient use. The EU is an important supporter of the regional
integration of Africa, and African countries are natural partners for the EU and Finland
in defending the rules-based international system. In the cooperation, the emphasis
is on the mitigation of climate change and responding to its impacts, migration issues
and the achievement of the Agenda2030 goals. All actions must support ecologically,
economically and socially sustainable change.

Finland will specify its comprehensive goals concerning Africa in a separate Strategy on
Africa.

**India is undergoing a major transition period, and it continues to increase its global**
weight. Finland promotes cooperation and dialogue on issues both countries consider
important, including environmental and climate issues, economic cooperation, research
and technology, and the support for the rules-based international system. In this dialogue,
human rights issues will also be taken into account.

Finland intensifies the development of partnerships with the South-East Asian countries,
which have a growing strategic importance for the EU and Finland in an environment
characterised by the rivalry between the great powers. Finland shares values with Latin
**American countries in multilateral questions. Cooperation with countries in both areas**
will be developed in commercial and economic issues, and regional questions and in
responding to global challenges, such as climate change.


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

##### 4.1.5 We enhance our security by means of high crisis resilience

_The importance of societal crisis resilience for the Finnish security is becoming emphasised_
_in the rapidly changing operating environment. The key to strengthening resilience is_
_the maintenance of strong national defence capability and internal security, which are_
_enhanced by means of foreign and security policy._

The crisis resilience is strengthened by means of wide-ranging preparedness against
multifaceted threats against society's well-being and security, including but not limited
to the increase and diversification of hybrid influencing, the impacts of climate change,
natural or man-made disasters, and the consequences of epidemics and pandemics.
Joint preparedness, planning, training and execution are implemented in accordance
with the principle of comprehensive security, where the vital functions of society are
secured through extensive cooperation between various stakeholders. Ensuring the
security of supply under any circumstances is an important part of crisis resilience, and
it is maintained and developed taking account of the identified development needs. In
military security of supply, the emphasis lies on securing the operational capacity of the
key capabilities. The development of international search and rescue readiness will be
continued as part of the EU and in collaboration with UN agencies. The changes in our
operating environment underscore the need to develop not only cyber defence but also
data defence, which means wide-ranging development of methods for rectifying false
information and guaranteeing integrity of data.

Hybrid influencing is linked with the deteriorated security situation in Europe. It must be
taken into account that rapid technological development and digitalisation will continue
to provide new tools for injurious activities as well. Finland is prepared for the hybrid
influencing to continue and acknowledges that it is necessary to react to hybrid actions,
such as hostile cyber activities, through public attribution. Finland must also be prepared
for hybrid influencing practised under the guise of, for example, migration, and different
crisis situations or reinterpretations of history. It must be ensured that no such internal
dividing lines emerge in society that external actors could exploit. Similarly, it must
be ensured that external influencing does not create new dividing lines. Preparedness
for diversified hybrid threats requires a shared situational picture and comprehensive
development of foresight.

The Finnish foreign and security policy supports the national work for countering hybrid
threats. Cooperation at the EU or international level often provides the framework for
Finland's activities and contributes to establishing a situational picture, detecting and
understanding hybrid threats, and creating shared resilience. Cooperation strengthens
security-enhancing unity and reacting to hybrid measures. In the capacity of the
host country and member, Finland supports the operation of the European Centre of
Excellence for Countering Hybrid Threats, located in Helsinki, in such a manner that the


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

centre can produce new operating models for its member states, the EU, NATO, and the
cooperation between them.

With a view to identifying, preventing and fighting against the various forms of
international crime, and serious organised crime in particular, it is necessary that
the partners share knowledge and best practices between them and participate in
international crime prevention. From Finland, international terrorism requires measures
because of its spillover effects on international security, stability and conflicts and because
international terrorism constitutes a threat to national security and crisis management.
Finland continues its international cooperation for the prevention of terrorism, violent
extremism and violent radicalisation as part of national preventive action.

Any potential efforts of foreign states to influence or attach themselves to targets or
services of critical importance for Finland's security are monitored closely and any
such influencing attempts are repelled. In addition, it will be ensured that legislation
concerning export control, monitoring of corporate acquisitions, network security, and
other issues related to national security and national defence remains up to date.

The new intelligence legislation provides improved opportunities to detect threats
against national security and military defence. Finland maintains its ability to operate
both independently and, if need be, in collaboration with others to fight against threats to
national security, to enhance security and to improve societal crisis resilience.

#### 4.2 Strengthening multilateral cooperation

##### 4.2.1 We support the rules-based international system

_Global challenges can only be solved within the rules-based international system. Finland_
_defends the system and strengthens it through its own actions, both bilaterally and as part_
_of the EU._

Finland underscores the importance of the rules-based international system, the respect
for its obligations, and the universal and binding nature of human rights. Finland takes a
pro-active and constructive approach to strengthen multilateral cooperation and to bring
down dividing lines that weaken it. Finland takes part in the arrangements established
in defence of the multilateral system and modus operandi, such as the Alliance for
Multilateralism initiative of France and Germany, which has won extensive support. For
Finland, the EU is the key framework for defending multilateral cooperation. The mere
existence of the Union and its activities strengthen the rules-based international system.


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

It is important to acknowledge the impact of the actions of and the rivalry between the
great powers and their mutual relations on the rules-based international system. Finland
continues a constructive dialogue with great powers and other actors, with the aim of
strengthening their commitment to the collectively approved system and its rules.

Any infringements of the rules of international law, such as violations of territorial
integrity, must be addressed with determination. Potential needs to reform the rulesbased international system must be examined from the perspective of increasing
efficiency. Initiatives have been taken to seek new partnerships to support the system, and
cooperation is increased with countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America in particular.

Finland strengthens and develops international law and the multilateral treaty system.
Finland continues its work against impunity and supports the fulfilment of criminal
responsibility for the most serious international crimes. Finland also supports effective
implementation of the responsibility to protect to prevent the most serious international
crimes and participates in the activities of the International Coalition for the Responsibility
to Protect. All counter-terrorism activities and sanctions must be in line with international
law, and efforts must be made to avoid their potential negative impacts on humanitarian
operations.

Finland continues to provide strong support for the key structures of international law,
including the International Court of Justice (ICJ) and the International Criminal Court
(ICC). Important complementary arrangements to international criminal courts of justice
include the UN's IIIM[1] mechanism concerning the most serious crimes committed in the
conflict of Syria, and the UNITAD[2] investigation team, which helps all national authorities
bring ISIS and any individuals who have operated as part of it to justice for the crimes ISIS
committed in Iraq.

##### 4.2.2 We strive for a more effective UN system

_Finland strongly supports the UN system and endeavours to strengthen the world_
_organisation's status, effectiveness and ability to take action._

Finland promotes the reform efforts aimed at making the operations of the UN more
effective. Such measures include the revision of the work of the Security Council
by limiting the use of the veto power and broadening its composition to be more
representative of the African countries in particular. The effectiveness can also be

1 International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism

2 United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/ISIS


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

improved by developing the working methods of the Security Council and the
General Assembly. The importance of human rights must be taken into account in all
UN operations. Finland supports the work of the UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Human Rights Council, and takes action to ensure that the reform and
development of the work of the Human Rights Council will continue. The civil society must
be given more opportunities to operate within the UN.

The EU can be a strong actor within the UN by taking more unified action and seeking new
partnerships. The Nordic cooperation carried out within the UN system promotes common
Nordic values and objectives. Finland contributes to international security and stability
and takes responsibility for global peace by maintaining its readiness to participate in
UN peacekeeping missions. Finland supports the UN's conflict prevention measures and
invests in mediation and peacebuilding in particular.

Finland takes advantage of its position as a leading country of the implementation
structures of Agenda2030 and as a forerunner in the field of technology. Finland also aims
to enhance the operating conditions of UN agencies in Finland. Efforts will be made to
increase the number of Finns in the UN system and other key international organisations.

Finland's candidature for a non-permanent seat in the UN Security Council for the term
2029–2030 will be comprehensively promoted in our international activities. In the
national preparation, investments will be made in securing wide and comprehensive
political-level commitment to the process and ensuring the necessary resources at a
sufficiently early stage.

##### 4.2.3 We defend open and fair trade

_Finland defends the multilateral trading system and the rules-based foundations of_
_managing the global economy, and promotes the dismantling of barriers to trade and the_
_prevention of discrimination through the common EU trade policy._

Finland continues its activities for strengthening the multilateral trading system and
supports the EU's strong role in defending the system and open and fair trade. Finland
promotes the efforts to reform the WTO system and seek versatile conciliatory solutions.
Finland underscores that a functional WTO system with its dispute settlement mechanisms
is in the best interests of all contracting states, the major economies included. Finland
makes efforts to foster fair treatment of states in the international trading system. In its
actions, Finland also takes into consideration the promotion of the Agenda 2030 goals and
highlights the observation of, inter alia, human rights, equality and environmental criteria
in any contract negotiations. In addition to multilateral cooperation, it is important that, if
necessary, cooperation can be promoted multilaterally in smaller country groupings.


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

External economic relations are an integral part of the Finnish foreign and security policy.
Trade policy is linked to global issues, and offers, for its part, an opportunity to support
development and the respect for human rights. With an aim to foster national prosperity
internationalisation efforts, exports and investments of Finnish companies are supported
through external economic relations and assisted by the government’s sales promotion
network Team Finland. Increasingly systematic efforts will be taken to highlight the
competence of Finnish companies in the UN and other international organisations of key
importance. The monitoring of the procurement processes of such organisations will be
intensified.

Respect for human rights, the enhancement of labour rights and the observation of
climate goals are some of the measures aimed at developing a more predictable business
environment. Finland helps companies identify the human rights and environmental
impacts of their actions and meet their appropriate due diligence obligations in
accordance with the OECD guidelines and the UN Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights.

##### 4.2.4 We seize the opportunities of digitalisation

_Finland takes advantage of the opportunities offered by digitalisation and minimises the_
_relevant risks. It takes part in and influences the international debate concerning new_
_technologies and digitalisation._

The opportunities offered by technological development, digitalisation, AI and other
disrupting technologies must be utilised diversely. The development produces solutions
that can be used for responding to global challenges, fostering security and development,
and supporting the respect for human rights. As necessary, the EU-level regulation
must be used for creating required practices and responsibilities for the transparency
of technological systems and for strengthening the capacity to assess risks caused by
technologies.

As societies become increasingly digitalised, it is especially important to ensure that
the cyber operating environment remains secure. Finland aims at an open, free and
safe cyber operating environment, where ethical aspects, and privacy protection and
freedom of speech issues are also taken into consideration. It must be possible to secure
the accessibility of digital services, the usability of infrastructure and the returnability of
data in any circumstances. This objective is being promoted within the EU, and through
close international cooperation and efficient coordination. At the same time, these
actions also build national and European-level competencies. The EU must also continue
to develop methods for responding to hostile cyber activities, sanctions included.
Finland emphasises the importance of complying with international law and following


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

responsible governmental conduct in the cyber environment as well. In addition, it must
be acknowledged that being excluded from the latest technological development may
create security risks.

As new-generation communications networks, such as 5G and the following
network generations, are adopted to wider use, it is important to proactively ensure
the security and resilience of the networks, including the network capacity in
exceptional circumstances. The EU must adopt a uniform approach to cyber security in
communications networks, and the Member States must effectively execute the jointly
agreed measures. In its own solutions, Finland underscores the importance of trust, which
applies to both hardware suppliers and the stakeholders behind them. The national
solutions must support the building of trust in Finland as a cooperative international
partner. For the policy to succeed, we must find a balance between security aspects and
free mobility of data and the barriers to trade hindering this.

##### 4.2.5 We emphasise the importance of Arctic cooperation

_As the geopolitical, environmental and economic significance of the Arctic region is_
_growing, Finland promotes the stability of the Arctic region and works against tensions_
_building up in Finland's Arctic neighbourhood and on the North Atlantic._

The compliance with international law and jointly agreed principles play a key role with
a view to stability of the Arctic region. The stability is further increased by sustainable
economic cooperation and investments that support prosperity. Prosperity can be
enhanced, for example, through various partnership cooperation projects of the Northern
Dimension policy.

It is important to deepen understanding and situational awareness of the North Atlantic,
northern sea areas and the Baltic Sea region which, from a security policy perspective,
constitute one entity. Key part in the process is played by the foreign and security policy
cooperation and defence cooperation, and increased exchange of information with the
close partners, within the EU and with NATO. The security of northern sea areas can be
enhanced by means of closer cooperation between the authorities of the countries of the
area. This also underscores the importance of national coordination of activities.

Finland supports the strengthening of the Arctic Council. The work done by the Arctic
Economic Council is promoted. All activity in the Arctic region must be based on
the nature's carrying capacity, climate protection and the principles of sustainable
development, as well as the respect of the rights of indigenous people. The participation
of the local people in cooperation and decision-making concerning the region must be
secured.


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

Finland will continue to play a central role in strengthening the EU's Arctic policy. The EU
must understand the importance of Arctic issues for the whole Union, and the EU must, for
its part, support the stability of the Arctic region. Finland considers it important that the
EU's Arctic policy be updated to meet today's needs.

Finland is one of the five nations that acts as a decision-maker in matters concerning both
the Arctic and the Antarctic regions. This provides Finland with an opportunity to take full
advantage of its expertise, competence and Arctic characteristics. Finland will specify its
long-term goals concerning the Arctic region and its operational resources in its strategy
for Arctic policy.

#### 4.3 Sharing global responsibilities

##### 4.3.1 We emphasise human rights as foundation of foreign and security
 policy

_The Finnish foreign and security policy is based on human rights. Finland is strongly_
_committed to defending human rights and is seeking a seat in the UN Human Rights Council_
_for the term 2022–2024 to promote human rights._

The respect for and promotion of human rights, democracy and the rule of law provide
the value-based foundations for the actions Finland takes in its foreign and security policy.
Finland promotes human rights as an EU Member, bilaterally and in multilateral fora.

Finland's policies are based on equality in the implementation of civil and political rights,
as well as in the implementation of economic, social and educational rights. Finland
underscores the rights of women and girls and supports the international efforts aimed at
enhancing gender equality. Increasing the political and economic participation of women
and girls and giving them a stronger role in peace processes and crisis management are
among the key goals. Finland supports UN agencies mandated to promote equality. The
respect for human rights must be taken care of as part of enhancing international peace
and security.

Special attention is paid to the respect for the human rights of persons and groups
in vulnerable situations and exposed to discrimination. In dialogue with various
stakeholders, Finland highlights the pivotal role of the enforcement of human rights
obligations and the freedom of speech, freedom of opinion and freedom of assembly for
stable and successful societies. If the situation so requires, Finland has the readiness to
take action with like-minded countries and as part of the EU so as to ensure that acute,
country-specific human rights incidents are appropriately addressed. The provision of


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

political and practical support for defenders of human rights will be continued to allow
them to carry on their activities safely.

Technological development offers new prospects for enhancing, for example, equality. At
the same time, it must be ensured that it does not undermine democracy, the freedom
of speech or protection of privacy.  It is important to take account of the connection
between climate change and human rights, and to continue action aimed at ensuring that
climate change causes as minimal a threat to the realisation of human rights as possible
The right to participate and the right of access to information and to protection of law
play a key role as we are seeking solutions to global challenges.

Human rights enhance peace, stability and prosperity. Finland participates in the political
and mandatory normative work of the Council of Europe to safeguard the rule of law,
democracy and human rights in the whole of Europe. The Lisbon Treaty obliges the EU to
join the European Convention on Human Rights. Finland promotes EU accession to the
treaty with an aim to enhance the protection of fundamental rights and human rights. The
work to promote the accession of the EU and its Member State to the Istanbul Convention
on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence will be
continued. The work aimed at strengthening the human rights and democracy activities of
the OSCE will also be continued.

The comprehensive guidelines for the Finnish human rights policy will be laid down in the
Government Report on Human Rights Policy.

##### 4.3.2 We produce security by mitigating climate change

_Finland will become carbon neutral by 2035. This national objective shows our strong_
_commitment to global burden-sharing in the mitigation of and adaptation to climate_
_change, and sets an example for others._

Finland promotes the mitigation of and adaptation to climate change in all sectors of
foreign and security policy, trade and development policy included. Finland and the EU
must foster the effective implementation of the Paris Agreement, and carbon pricing
worldwide.

In its bilateral relations and in international fora, Finland promotes a global transition to
carbon neutral and climate resilient societies, and demands action for the mitigation of
and adaptation to climate change. When seeking long-term solutions to responding and
adapting to climate change and its impacts on safety and security, the role of science and
cross-sectoral cooperation becomes emphasised. Finland takes account of the adverse
impacts of climate change not only on environmental issues but also on, for example,


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

resource questions, and people's livelihoods, living conditions and health. Finland
underscores the prevention of the global and regional environmental impacts of black
carbon, and the significance of polar regions and carbon sinks for the mitigation of climate
change, and promotes the transition to clean renewable energy and other emission-free
energy solutions.

The EU must show global leadership in combating climate change. The long-term plan
for a climate neutral Europe by 2050, the European Climate Law and the European Green
Deal provide good starting points for such efforts. Finland endorses the EU climate
diplomacy aimed at ensuring that major economies do their own share and thus help
distribute the burden for climate action more evenly. Finland participates proactively in
the debate within the EU on the links between climate change and security, and considers
it important that the EU engage in dialogue about these matters within the UN as well as
with NATO and the African Union. Climate change mitigation is also integrated into the
EU's defence agenda. Finland continues the Nordic climate and energy cooperation for the
achievement of carbon neutrality.

Finland strives to yield influence to have the UN Security Council include the topic on its
agenda and produce a necessary knowledge base on the security risks of climate change.
Environmental issues and the importance of climate change must also be taken into
account in the work of the security and defence sectors, and when assessing the needs of
and modes of operation in crisis management.

The goal of the global Coalition of Finance Ministers for Climate Action, established by
Finland and Chile, is to generate system-level changes by harnessing fiscal policy tools
– such as taxation, budgeting, financing and public procurement – for the purposes of
climate action. The efforts to deepen the coalition's work and expand the membership
base will continue.

Many of the solutions chosen by Finland in the industrial sector as well as in agriculture
and forestry set an example for others. Opportunities for economic cooperation will be
sought in the areas of climate change, environment and circular economy, on which
Finland has extensive expertise and technological competence.

##### 4.3.3 We take action to strengthen global health security

_The foreign and security policy strengthens the readiness to prevent, prepare for and_
_respond to cross-border health threats of natural origin or spread intentionally in the world_
_and, therefore, also in Finland._


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

The prevention of cross-border health threats requires efficient international cooperation
aimed at developing the preparedness for pandemics and crisis resilience. By supporting
especially the readiness of less-well prepared countries to respond to epidemics,
pandemics and biological threats, Finland also effectively bolsters its own safety and
security.

Finland is involved in the action of the EU, the World Health Organization WHO, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Organisation for Animal
Health and other key organisations to combat cross-border health threats and to enhance
the readiness of developing countries. Finland promotes the strengthening of the roles
of the UN and the WHO and is an active participant in international networks, such as
the Global Health Security Agenda (GHSA). Cross-administrative cooperation and timely
exchange of information and experiences play an important role.

The emergence of epidemics and pandemics must be prevented by affecting their original
causes, including the circumstances that enable the transfer of animal viruses to humans.
This requires an understanding of the connections between the health of humans, animals
and habitats. The monitoring systems for early detection of epidemics must be improved.
Attention should be paid to the prevention of drug resistance, such as antibiotic
resistance, because it is becoming a major challenge in both developing and developed
countries. The mitigation of climate change and the relevant adaptation measure should
be enhanced to protect natural habitats and prevent the spread of diseases.

Robust health systems, functional institutions and cooperation between various societal
actors are among the key elements of health security. These are all fields in which Finland
has world-class expertise and competence to offer.

Health security is promoted also through other international cooperation within
the health sector as well as through arms control measures aimed at preventing the
proliferation of biological weapons and countering chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear (CBRN) threats.

##### 4.3.4 We promote sustainable development in our foreign and security
 policy

_Finland aspires to reduce poverty and inequality by implementing sustainable development_
_goals in its foreign and security policy. This is effected through the implementation of the_
_UN Agenda 2030 aimed at promoting sustainable development and eradicating poverty._

According to various international comparisons, Finland is among the leading countries
in the implementation of sustainable development goals. This shows Finland's strong


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

commitment to the implementation of the Agenda 2030 and provides strong foundations
for Finland's international actions in these issues. Finland also bears global responsibility
for supporting sustainable development in other countries and regions, and uses its
trailblazer position in sustainable development and the international interest towards its
national implementation model for strengthening its international status.

The development policy is an essential part of Finland's value- and human rights-based
foreign and security policy. The objective is the international implementation of the
Agenda2030 and the Paris Agreement to eradicate poverty, reduce inequality, mitigate
climate change and adapt to it. This will strengthen respect for human rights, enhance
stability and strengthen global security. Finland pays special attention to the respect
for the rights of minorities and persons in vulnerable situations, and their inclusion in
the preparation of development policies. The specific expertise of these groups will be
employed in the implementation.

Sustainable development goals are implemented in the development policy in the areas
of priority based on Finland's values and strengths. Finland promotes the rights and
status of women and girls, strengthens the well-being in the developing countries – jobs,
education and democracy included – and enhances climate resilience in developing
countries. The overarching goals to be observed in all activities include gender equality,
equitable treatment, climate resilience and low-carbon development. The implementation
and effectiveness of the development policy is enhanced through multilateral
cooperation. In development policy, the geographical focus is on Africa.

Relying on its own robust competence in education, Finland has an important role to play
in development cooperation and international cooperation when solutions are being
sought to the global learning crisis. Combined with the development of and enhancing
the quality of education, this is an important strength in the Finnish development policy.

Finland is known as a strong advocate of the rights of persons with disabilities. The rights
of persons with disabilities is an important priority in Finland's human rights policy and
development policy and an important part of the implementation of the principle ‘Leave
no one behind’ of the Sustainable Development Action Plan.

Finland will continue to exert strong and purposeful influence in the EU development
policy in accordance with its own priorities. The EU’s status as an international actor must
be strengthened by means of increased observation of the EU development policy in the
EU External Action and enhanced development policy coordination between the Member
States.


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

The development policy guidelines extending across parliamentary terms will be specified
in a separate government report.

##### 4.3.5 We respond to migration in a comprehensive manner

_Finland underscores the need to address the root causes of migration to reduce migration_
_forced by circumstance, and emphasises global sharing of the burden for, for example,_
_refugee crises._

There are many ways to address the root causes of migration. Conflict prevention,
crisis management, development policy, climate policy and commercial and economic
cooperation are foreign and security policy tools which can be employed in versatile
and comprehensive ways to affect the root causes of migration and to support regional
stability and development in order to reduce migration forced by circumstance. When
managing migration issues, international law must be complied with and the respect for
fundamental rights and human rights must be secured.

The external action instruments of the European Union should be used for reducing
unregulated and unforeseen migration and addressing the causes behind it. The EU
must establish comprehensive partnerships and engage in dialogue on migration issues
with the countries of origin and transit. Opportunities for legal migration should also be
developed.

Finland considers the implementation of the UN's Global Compacts on Refugees and
Migration important. The burden for refugee crises must be shared globally. It is important
to support the host countries of refugees and to address the root causes of migration.
Refugees must not be used as instruments of exerting political influence or for the
purposes of destabilisation.

The impacts of climate change on migration must be comprehensively taken into account
within the EU and in international fora. Finland is a solutions-oriented and responsible
actor, which takes account of the importance of climate change mitigation and adapting
to it and other factors causing migration in its development cooperation, for example. In
broad terms, the development cooperation done by Finland also affects the root causes
of migration. Even humanitarian aid may indirectly enhance the stability of countries and
regions and thus reduce migration. The aid and assistance provided is always based on
the recipient's needs.


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

#### 4.4 Peacebuilding

##### 4.4.1 We strengthen our mediation competence 

_Finland promotes peace and stability by means of conflict prevention, mediation and_
_peacebuilding. In this work, Finland uses its whole mediation capacity, which will be further_
_strengthened._

Finland bears responsibility for international peace and stability also through conflict
prevention, mediation and peacebuilding. The objective is to promote lasting peace
and stable societal development around the world. Long-term efforts are being taken to
develop the Finnish mediation competence, and the conflict prevention and resolution
capacity of the foreign service.

Finland responds to the international interest in the Finnish competence by providing
expertise or good services, such as creating favourable circumstances for confidential
dialogue to resolve prolonged conflicts. Finland's good international reputation, and
experience in mediation and water issues offer, for example, an opportunity to combine
elements from mediation, diplomacy and transboundary water cooperation to find
solutions to international water conflicts.

To strengthen Finland's national mediation competence and capacity, a Centre
for Mediation has been set up at the Ministry for Foreign Affairs. It will be used for
coordinating the Foreign Ministry's own activities and making them more systematic, as
well as for coordinating cooperation with other actors. This enables us to put our extensive
mediation competence to even more efficient use.

Finland also aims to enhance the significance of conflict prevention and mediation in
international organisations, including the UN, the OSCE and the African Union. Finland
promotes a comprehensive role for the EU in mediation and conflict prevention.
Cooperation with traditional civil society actors and, for example, religious actors supports
Finland's actions. Networking and partnerships with the key actors will be intensified both
nationally and internationally.

Peacebuilding, humanitarian aid and development cooperation measures will be
coordinated in a more comprehensive way than before. This enables responding to
conflict situations in an efficient and sustainable manner.

In its activities, Finland highlights a human rights-based approach, inclusion and gender
equality. In accordance with the UN Security Council Resolution 1325 on women and
peace and security, Finland continues its work to strengthen the role of women in peace
processes and high-level decision-making fora. The Finnish women peace mediators


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

network is operating in the same manner as the Nordic Women Mediators Network to
promote this goal. Finland endeavours to increase the participation of young people in
conflict prevention and resolution and in post-conflict situations in accordance with the
Security Council Resolution 2250 on youth, peace and security, and will draw up a national
action plan on the implementation of this resolution.

##### 4.4.2 We create stability and bear responsibility by means of crisis
 management

_Finland produces security and bears international responsibility for the maintenance of_
_peace and security by participating in international crisis management._

Crisis management is a central foreign and security policy instrument used for supporting
conflict resolution, stabilisation of post-conflict situations and building of safe societies.
The starting points are the strengthening of the security and stability of the conflict
area, and the protection of civilian population. By participating in crisis management
operations, we contribute to the promotion of democracy, good governance and human
rights, including the rights of women and girls, and the prevention of sexual violence
in conflict situations. The security provided by crisis management extends beyond
the borders of the target countries, and by being involved we bear responsibility for
international peace and security. The recent years have shown increasingly clearly that
instability in Africa and the Middle East is having more direct impacts on the security of
Europe and Finland than before. The Finnish participation in crisis management, therefore,
also enhances the security of Finnish people.

Finland maintains and develops its readiness to participate in international civilian and
military crisis management missions together with other international actors. In many
operations, the participation in military crisis management develops the capabilities,
preparedness and compatibility of the Finnish Defence Forces. Finland will strengthen its
participation in international military crisis management in UN operations. Participation in
both military and civilian crisis management missions must be increased in a manner that
enhances our effectiveness and strengthens our role as a responsible international actor
in situations where the need for international crisis management and the Finnish civilian
crisis management competence is great. Finland intends to increase its participation
in crisis management in Africa in particular. In civilian crisis management, the level of
annual participation will be raised to at least 150 experts. The objective is to ensure
the participation of women and human rights competence in Finnish civilian crisis
management.


-----

GOVERNMENT REPORT ON FINNISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

In crisis management, Finland applies a comprehensive approach, which takes account
of the development stages of conflicts, and the combined effects of different instruments
and policies. Crisis management, mediation and post-conflict reconstruction must
constitute a logical entity. It is important to identify the target country's needs, based
on which support can be targeted for strengthening, for example, the development of
the rule of law or the capacity of security authorities. By strengthening stability and
the capacity to act of security-sector authorities, we also help prevent terrorism and
international crime.

Finland is a forerunner in the development of civilian crisis management. Within the EU,
the work is based on the Civilian Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) compact, or
the commitment through the execution of which the EU develops its capabilities, rapidreaction capacity and the cooperation between EU actors.

Guidelines for the goal-oriented and efficient application of comprehensive crisis
management policy will be laid down in the policy on the goals for crisis management
extending across parliamentary terms.

##### 4.4.3 We generate predictability by means of arms control and disarmament

_Finland endeavours to strengthen the agreement system on arms control and disarmament,_
_to secure the functioning capacity of the treaty organisations, and to enhance security._

Finland underscores adherence to arms control agreements and the implementation
of confidence building measures in the neighbouring areas of Finland in particular. The
agreement system must be reformed based on the existing agreements, complementing
them as necessary. The most important methods for enhancing the system include
supporting the implementation of agreements, securing the functioning capacity of
the treaty organisations and reacting to breaches of agreements. Finland promotes
these goals by political means and practical support measures at a national level, in
collaboration with partners and within the EU.

Finland works for the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Finland
participates in initiatives aimed at accelerating nuclear disarmament as part of the
implementation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Finland
participates in the dialogue on the Nuclear Weapon Ban Treaty and monitors the progress
made in the entry into force of the treaty. Finland offers its comprehensive national
competence for the purposes of non-proliferation of nuclear, biological, and chemical
weapons, promotion of nuclear safety, and the fight against chemical, biological,
radioactive, and nuclear (CBRN) threats. With the help of the expertise of the Radiation and
Nuclear Safety Authority and the Finnish Institute for Verification of the Chemical Weapons


-----

PUBLICATIONS OF THE FINNISH GOVERNMENT 2020:32

Convention (VERIFIN), Finland supports the implementation and verification of these
treaties all around the world.

Finland promotes the global regulation of autonomous weapon systems and, in relation
to that, monitors the use of AI in arms technology. International regulation must keep
abreast of technological development. We need mutually agreed rules to which also
the states developing these technologies are committed. The rules and regulations of
international law must be complied with under any circumstances, also when developing
and using new arms technologies. Fully automated weapon systems operating totally
beyond human control must not be developed even in the future.

Finland continues its work for intensifying the implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT) and increasing the number of signatories of the treaty. The ATT is a key instrument
for increasing transparency in international arms trade and for combating illegal trading
in arms. Finland promotes the implementation of the treaty also with pragmatic support
projects.

Finland will meet its international commitments related to export of military equipment.
The export of defence materiel in compliance with international obligations supports, for
its part, military security of supply. Responsible export control is based on careful caseby-case consideration. Finland does not export defence materiel to countries at war or
countries which suppress human rights.

By preventing illegal proliferation of small arms and supporting humanitarian anti-mine
operations, Finland promotes the stabilisation of societies and sustainable development in
its partner countries in Africa and the Middle East, for example.


-----

-----

SNELLMANINKATU 1, HELSINKI
PO BOX 23, 00023 GOVERNMENT, FINLAND
valtioneuvosto.fi/en/
julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi

ISBN: 978-952-287-892-2 PDF
ISBN: 978-952-287-888-5 printed
ISSN: 2490-0966 PDF
ISSN: 2490-0613 printed


-----

