## Government Report
 on Finnish Foreign and
 Security Policy

##### Prime Minister’s Office Publications   9/2016


-----

-----

# Government Report on Finnish Foreign and Security Policy

###### Prime Minister’s Office Publications | 9/2016


-----

-----

### CONTENTS

1 INTRODUCTION.......................................................................................................... 5

2 VISION FOR THE FUTURE: FINLAND 2025.................................................................. 6

3 THE GOAL OF FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY........................................................ 7

4 THE OPERATING ENVIRONMENT OF FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY..................... 8

4.1 Global trends.................................................................................................... 9

4.2 The situation in Finland’s vicinity.................................................................... 11

4.3 States and other international actors............................................................. 13

4.4 Rules-based international cooperation........................................................... 15

5 PRIORITIES AND GOALS........................................................................................... 17

5.1 Strengthening the European Union as a security community......................... 19

5.2 Deepening cooperation with Sweden and the other Nordic countries............ 21

5.3 Deepening cooperation with the United States.............................................. 22

5.4 The importance of relations with Russia......................................................... 22

5.5 Bilateral relations in foreign and security policy............................................. 23

5.6 Developing the relationship with NATO.......................................................... 23

5.7 Focus attention on the future of the Arctic region.......................................... 24

5.8 Sustainable development as a goal for foreign and security policy................ 25

5.9 Emphasising the relationship between external and internal security............ 26

5.10 Make the measures more effective on the root causes of migration

and fragile states............................................................................................ 26

5.11 Equality and human rights as a point of departure......................................... 27

5.12 More effectiveness in conflict management................................................... 27

5.13 Mediation as an increasingly important focus area........................................ 28

5.14 Strengthening rules-based action................................................................... 29

5.15 Strengthening crisis resilience........................................................................ 30

3


-----

-----

### 1 INTRODUCTION

The Government submits its Foreign and Security Policy Report to Parliament.
The Report lays the foundation for steering Finland’s foreign and security
policy. It analyses Finland’s operating environment and the drivers of change,
presenting the key priorities and goals of Finland’s foreign and security policy.
By implementing the goals the Government strengthens Finland’s security
and promotes Finland’s prosperity in the rapidly changing and unpredictable
international operating environment.

The Government report builds on earlier reporting. However, the scope of
this Report differs from its predecessor (VNS 6/2012vp). The present report
covers the whole of foreign and security policy. The Government will prepare a
separate report on defence along the guidelines of this Report. The Government
report on internal security (VNS 5/2016vp) was presented to Parliament on
19 May 2016. The Government report on Finland’s development policy (VNS
1/2016vp) has also been presented to Parliament.

When preparing the reports on foreign and security policy, defence policy and
internal security, the Government took into account Parliament’s comments
on the Government report on security and defence policy (EK 6/2013vp UaVM
1/2013vp) during the 2013 parliamentary session.

The scope of this Report extends beyond the present Government’s term in
office, reaching into the mid-2020s.

5


-----

### 2 VISION FOR THE FUTURE: FINLAND 2025

Finland’s foreign and security policy is predicated on the values and rights
enshrined in the Constitution, and it promotes them. Shared values, democracy,
accountable governance and well-functioning institutions lay the foundation for
stability, internal security and wellbeing, supported by sustainable economic
growth. A safe society based on trust is an important part of credible and
successful foreign and security policy.

The Government Programme is based on Finland’s long-term vision which
states that “In 2025, Finland is an inventive, caring and safe country where we
all can feel important. Our society is based on trust.”

According to the vision “Finland is open and international, rich in languages
and cultures. Finland’s competitiveness is built on high expertise, sustainable
development and open-minded innovations based on experimentation and
digitalisation.”

As a part of the European and Nordic communities Finland exerts goal-oriented
influence in its operating environment. As an active, pragmatic and resultsoriented Member State of the European Union, Finland participates in the
safeguarding of peace, security, prosperity and the rule of law in Europe.
Finland bears its global responsibility as an independent state, a member of
international organisations and an actor in the international community.

Finland’s security and prosperity require a secure and stable international
operating environment in which the activities of states, businesses and people
are governed by international law and subsequent commonly agreed rules,
rights and obligations.

6


-----

### 3 THE GOAL OF FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

The goal of Finland’s foreign and security policy is to strengthen Finland’s
international position, to secure its independence and territorial integrity, to
improve the security and wellbeing of Finns and to ensure that the society
functions efficiently. The primary aim of Finland’s foreign and security policy is
to avoid becoming a party to a military conflict.

Finland actively implements bilateral and multilateral foreign and security
policy. In a world of global interdependencies Finland promotes international
stability, peace, democracy, human rights, the rule of law and equality.

7


-----

### 4 THE OPERATING ENVIRONMENT OF FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY

The operating environment of foreign and security policy, both in the immediate
vicinity of Finland as well as globally, is in an intense state of flux. Nation
states and other actors are increasingly interlinked and interdependent. Many
drivers of change in our operating environment are opening opportunities for
advancing our international objectives.

The recent changes in our operating environment have also created new
threats and instability. From the European perspective the international security
situation has deteriorated in recent years.

The number and range of significant international actors is growing continuously.
There is a constant ebb and flow in their relative position. Respect for universal
values is diminishing.

People are becoming more aware of problems that affect the whole world. New
global commitments have been made to solve questions involving sustainable
development and climate policy. However, in relation to the expectations the
capabilities of international institutions are often more limited. There are
pressures concerning compliance with the rules-based international order.

Changes in the foreign and security policy environment also strongly impact
the way Finland develops internally. They bring new uncertainties to internal
security, testing the overall resilience of society.

Rapid and unpredictable changes are the hallmark of Finland’s transformed
foreign and security policy environment.

Foreign and security policy goal-setting, decision-making and exerting influence
depend on knowledge about the operating environment. It is important to
continually gather and analyse information on the variables in the operating
environment as well as the subsequent prospects and threats. There must be
a readiness to adjust activities and, if necessary, the priorities of foreign and
security policy based on new information and analysis. The most important
external variables in Finland’s foreign and security policy environment are
global trends, political and security development in areas important to Finland,
actors in foreign and security policy as well as international rules.

8


-----

#### 4.1 Global trends

In an interdependent world, global trends are an integral part of Finland’s
operating environment. While they entail risks and threats, being able to
anticipate and utilise them and adapt to them can provide opportunities for
Finland worldwide.

The threat of climate change is universally recognised and measures to limit
global warming have been adopted. The Paris Agreement sets a long-term
goal of keeping the increase in global average temperature to below 2°C.
In addition to reducing emissions the goal is pursued by strengthening the
parties’ climate adaptation capacity and their ability to deal with the impacts
of climate change. Yet another goal is to channel climate financing towards
supporting low-carbon and climate resilient development. The transformation
process from fossil fuels to renewables, expedited by the Paris Agreement, will
significantly impact the balance of economic and political power in the world.

Population growth, accelerating urbanisation, migration between and within
states, poverty, youth unemployment, food security, scarce natural resources
and the change in the nature of conflict are examples of interlinked issues.
Epidemics and pandemics are also security threats. Authoritarian and semiauthoritarian governments and many fragile democracies around the world
hamper the operation of democratic institutions and limit basic freedoms
and human rights as well as the right of expression and social media. At the
same time the lives of millions of people around the world have improved and
poverty has been reduced owing to better educational opportunities, longer
life expectancy and technological progress. This progress, however, has been
inequitable.

The mounting polarisation of societies is a risk that keeps growing. This
also increases the vulnerability of western democracies and undermines the
foundation of international cooperation.

Globalisation and digitalisation are replacing traditional industrialisation as the
central momentum for change in the global economy. New technologies are
expected to become cheaper and increasingly accessible well into the future.
This makes it possible to integrate these technologies in the production of
goods and services, eroding the importance of geographic location.

Globalisation will continue through, among other things, automated
production, robotics, 3-D printing, digitalisation, the Industrial Internet and
artificial intelligence; together they form a trend which is often called the

9


-----

‘fourth industrial revolution’. In addition to industrial and service production
these phenomena also have wide-ranging impact on societies in such areas
as employment and taxation systems as well as on the international status
of states and their mutual relations. Economic interdependency will further
increase.

Rather than a cheap workforce and capital, it is predicted that ideas will be
the drivers of success. The actors and societies that are able to generate
innovations, new products, services and business models will benefit from
digitalisation. In the new model for growth those who come up with the best
ideas will also reap the main benefits; this has already occurred in the field
of integrated digital platforms. Others must cope with a smaller share, which
will test societies’ capacity to adapt. In addition to the public authorities and
businesses technological development also benefits other non-state actors.
Questions associated with the cyber domain, digitalisation and cyber-security
included, have become increasingly pivotal in foreign, security and defence
policy.

Social media has rapidly become an inclusive and interactive instrument which
is reaching all corners of the world as fast as technology permits. Among other
things, social media is used to create cross-border communities, organise
campaigns, monitor and influence electoral processes, arrange crowdfunding
and challenge those in power. In social media individuals quickly rally around a
single issue – for and against it. Social media will gain increasing prominence
and this development will have entirely new kinds of impacts, both within and
across national borders.

Many global trends accelerate, especially, migration around the world. Different
combinations of increasing disparity in standards of living, unsatisfactory
respect for human rights, deteriorating living conditions and conflicts combined
with strong population growth, particularly in Africa, are the backdrop for the
refugee problem as well as migration in a wider sense. Migration to Europe is
on the rise. When uncontrolled, it also entails significant internal radicalisationinduced risks for the receiving countries, such as terrorism, xenophobic
extremism and crime. This, too, is concrete proof of the indivisibleness of
internal and external security.

There is the danger of increasing inequality caused by social and technological
reasons. It may contribute to social exclusion, the willingness to move abroad,
radicalisation and problems in the functioning of political systems.

10


-----

The elements that influence the dynamics of the world order include the
resolve of the United States to maintain its primacy, Russia’s ambition to regain
a strategic balance with the United States as well as China’s aim to achieve a
political status which corresponds to its economic power in Asia and globally.
The European Union strives to strengthen its global role. Emerging nations
across the continents want to have the global status they consider justified.

The Nordic social model has international appeal, and it provides a sound
foundation for the ever-strengthening Nordic cooperation in international
politics.

Changes in the international security environment, the return of Russia to
thinking in terms of power politics, including its internal development, the
growth of its military potential and increasing military activity challenge the
very foundations of the European security regime and create instability in
Finland’s operating environment.

#### 4.2 The situation in Finland’s vicinity

During the past decades the foundation of the security system in our
neighbourhood has been cooperation that was based on the principles of
shared security as well as arms reduction treaties and confidence-building
measures. During the past ten years or so Russia, through its actions and
interpretations, has challenged the essence of the security regime to an extent,
and has destabilised it. The West and Russia have very different opinions on
how to restore stability to the security regime.

The security of Europe and the Baltic Sea region has deteriorated. Russia
annexed the Crimean Peninsula and created the crisis in eastern Ukraine. A
vicious circle has evolved, resulting in increased tension and military activity
in the Baltic Sea region. In recent years Russia has also increased its military
footprint and activity in the Arctic, where the situation, so far, has remained
relatively stable. Russia uses a wide range of military and non-military
instruments in advancing its interests.

The security policy environment of Finland, a member of the western
community, has transformed. A more tense security situation in Europe and
the Baltic Sea region will directly impact Finland. The use or threat of military
force against Finland cannot be excluded.

11


-----

The Province of Åland Islands has a recognised status under international law.
This does not prevent Finland from intensifying defence cooperation within the
European Union, with international organisations and in the Nordic context.

Nordic cooperation is of central importance to Finland and its security. Finland
and Sweden, sharing a value basis and the same security environment, are
ever more cooperating in security policy. The security and prosperity of Estonia,
Latvia and Lithuania are important to Finland.

The European Union is the central frame of reference of Finland’s foreign and
security policy, and an important security community. The European Union
which emerged as this continent’s internal peace movement supports a rulesbased international order and global governance in its external action.

The European Union is a significant actor in the areas defined in its founding
Treaties, such as the EU’s Single Market, the free movement of people as well
as the Economic and Monetary Union. It is very active in the fields of trade
policy, foreign and security policy, the Common Security and Defence Policy
and internal security, especially in combating terrorism and organised crime
and in border security.

The European Union faces external pressure such as migration, which tests the
strength of the Schengen Agreement, as well as terrorist strikes and internal
centrifugal forces arising from the Member States’ internal development.
Despite many internal challenges in the European Union the Member States
have conducted a coherent foreign and security policy and through it have
managed to respond to different security challenges. It has become necessary
and possible to implement the mutual assistance clause included in the Treaty
of Lisbon.

In its agenda, the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, NATO, now places priority
on deterrence and collective defence. In response to the deteriorated security
situation NATO aims to stabilise the Baltic Sea region through its measures
while continuing to prepare for a possible outbreak of a military crisis. Russia,
in turn, claims that it is NATO’s action which sustains the tensions. NATO has
placed more emphasis on strengthening the defence capability of the Baltic
States and the other eastern NATO nations and supporting their defence. This
also impacts the evolution of Finland’s and Sweden’s NATO partnerships.

The presence and action of NATO brings security to the region. As a result of
the changing environment cooperation in transatlantic and NATO contexts as

12


-----

well as Nordic consultation and, in particular, cooperation between Finland and
Sweden are intensifying.

Social instability in Europe’s neighbourhood and conflicts in North Africa, the
Middle East and Eastern Europe have altered the security of our continent
where Finland, too, as a part of the European Union advances its interests
and international goals. The phenomena affecting the security situation in
Europe also include organised crime, facilitation of illegal entry, cyber-crime,
information operations and terrorism. There are features associated with the
deterioration of European security which can be described as hybrid activities.
Hybrid influencing is generally understood to mean deliberate action where a
state or a non-state actor can simultaneously utilise different kinds of military
means or, for example, economic or technology-based instruments of pressure
as well as information operations and social media. The goal is to have an
impact on the Achilles’ heel of the targeted state and to achieve one’s own
objectives. Finland, too, is a target of means which are included in hybrid
influencing.

#### 4.3 States and other international actors

States, and the economic, political or security coalitions they form, are still
the most important global actors. The strongest and most influential among
state actors as well as our geographically closest neighbours are among the
most important state actors for Finland. The use of force or an increased risk
thereof, a fragile or failed government, widespread violations of human and
basic rights or large disasters accentuate the importance of even more distant
regions or states to Finland.

In addition to the United States, China and Russia as well as the European
Union are competing for global power and status, while many other countries
are trying to achieve regional dominance.

Every state’s foreign and security policy strategies and goals are based on its
internal situation, self-image and analysis of the surrounding world as well as
threats and prospects that arise from it. The state’s political system influences
the manner by which it sculpts its internal goals and its economic, cultural and
other resources into foreign policy goals.

Russia’s leadership aim to strengthen a superpower status for their country. On
the whole they perceive international relations a geopolitical zero-sum game.
Their view is that the West has largely ignored Russia’s considerations and

13


-----

security interests, and that it has opposed Russia by challenging it through
many actions. Russia has mostly abandoned the cooperation-based security
thinking. Rather, it now challenges the European security system. Russia has
publicly promoted its goal of a sphere-of-influence-based security regime and
demonstrated the will and capacity to employ military force in prosecuting its
objectives. Russia’s leadership try to avert internal disorder, and have been
unable to reform the economy, which, in the short term, will suffer from energy
price fluctuations and, in the long term, from different structural problems.

Finland, for the sake of its security, must carefully monitor the military capabilities
and aspirations of the actors that impact our immediate surroundings, in
particular.

The picture of war has become more complex. In order to achieve political
objectives, political, economic and military pressure, forms of information and
cyber warfare, combinations of all of the above and other forms of hybrid
influencing, among other things, are used in a coordinated fashion on top of
the constantly developing military means. Influencing can rapidly begin already
in normal conditions. The goal is to instigate pressure, damage, uncertainty
and instability on the target. The line between internal and external security
becomes blurred and the early-warning period becomes shorter.

Nuclear weapons and their role in the use of force have returned to the security
policy agenda. Yet another threat is the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction as well as associated hazardous materials and know-how. New
weapon technologies, especially missile defence systems and conventional
precision-guided weapons, and their significance receive increasing attention
in international relations.

A growing number of non-state actors have emerged alongside states. The
goals and modi operandi of some non-state actors pose a threat to international
security or the security of individual countries and their inhabitants, Finland
included. While terrorist organisations and networks are adept in changing
form and in taking advantage of other cross-border crime, they are also able to
utilise new technology such as IT networks and materials used in weapons of
mass destruction. Extremist ideologies such as violent extremism are often their
lifeblood. They breed in conditions plagued by social exclusion, unemployment
and negligible prospects for the future, a fragile or failed government, the
absence of a security structure which respects basic freedoms and human
rights as well as violence and inequality. The history and practices of the
ISIL (Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant) founded in Syria and Iraq are
characteristic examples of this.

14


-----

Some of the non-state actors can also be strong partners to governments. Many
a theme that makes its way to the intergovernmental agenda originates within
the sphere of non-state institutions or non-governmental organisations. NGOs,
foundations and business organisations are already active in development
cooperation and humanitarian action or in promoting sustainable development
and human rights, and are increasingly active in other foreign and security
policy. It is vital to intensify cooperation with them.

#### 4.4 Rules-based international cooperation

The set of norms and institutions created by the United Nations following
the 2[nd] World War continue to lay a strong foundation for managing the use
of force and its instruments, human rights and international cooperation.
They are needed to advance democracy, the rule of law, economic and social
development, and to reduce environmental risks.

In recent years, as the disagreements buoyed by power politics and ultranationalistic views have become increasingly vocal, international rules-based
cooperation has faced growing pressures. At the same time many new
challenges associated with non-state actors and advances in technology
demand strengthening the rules for cooperation and systems, and the
development of new implementation mechanisms.

The global risks for peace and security, economically, socially and environmentally
sustainable development as well as risks in the fields of democracy and human
rights keep growing. Alongside states other actors also participate in risk
management. The private sector is increasingly committed to the principles of
corporate social responsibility, for example.

The UN Security Council has been active in questions associated with terrorism
as well as conflicts in Africa, in particular. Nevertheless, when it comes to
conflicts where its permanent members are either directly involved or have
vested interests, such as the conflicts in Ukraine or the Middle East, the Council
remains powerless. The UN Human Rights Council has dealt with these conflicts
within its mandate. With the exception of the Arms Trade Treaty, multilateral
arms control has progressed better outside the UN than within it.

On the other hand the UN has been able to develop a set of norms by adopting
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in 2015. As part of the Agenda
the UN was also able to agree on development financing. Also the Paris
Agreement at the climate conference in 2015 is a remarkable achievement.

15


-----

Human rights agreements, both in terms of scope and regional coverage,
continue to be more and more comprehensive.

In international trade, there have been efforts to complement multilateral
solutions to liberate markets, among other things, through extensive regional
and bilateral agreements. The wide-ranging regional arrangements have also
been justified through geopolitics. The international monetary system, with
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank as its core, managed
to remain viable even in the aftermath of the global financial crisis of 2008.
Nonetheless, the need for stronger global cooperation as well as more robust
supervision and crisis management has been recognised.

The primary security structures in Europe include the European Union as a
comprehensive security policy actor; NATO, which sees to the collective defence
of its member states; and the OSCE, a cooperative security organisation. The
Council of Europe has a role within Europe’s shared value base.

16


-----

### 5 PRIORITIES AND GOALS

In its foreign and security policy Finland makes choices on the basis of its
national interests which promote its security and prosperity. Foreign and security
policy is predominant in strengthening the international status of Finland,
guaranteeing its independence and territorial integrity, and in improving the
security of Finns. For its part, a sound economy increases security. This is also
the foundation upon which the wellbeing of Finland and Finns is laid. In order
to sustain this, Finland also needs the capacity for internal reform as well as
trust in its shared values, democracy and collective institutions.

Active participation in international cooperation advances Finland’s interests
and is a part of Finland’s global burden-sharing. Finland is a country which does
not belong to any military alliance. Finland actively and extensively intensifies
its international networking. Finland maintains the option to seek membership
in a military alliance.

A world which is based on cooperation, respect for international law and the
UN Charter is important to Finland’s goals for foreign and security policy and
prosperity. There are many issues where cooperation faces roadblocks. Yet,
there are areas of cooperation that are unhindered by tension, for example, in
issues associated with the Baltic Sea and the Arctic region.

When it comes to the present state and the potential of Finland’s foreign
and security policy environment, Finland does not have the option or desire
to isolate itself. As a Member State of the European Union Finland could not
remain an outsider should threats to security emerge in its vicinity or elsewhere
in Europe.

Finland actively improves the stability of security in its vicinity. Since a potential
conflict would directly impact Finland’s security, such a possibility must be
prepared for. Finland pursues an active policy of stability to prevent military
threats. In order to implement the policy Finland endeavours to prevent
violations of democracy and rules-based order as well as military threats
through foreign and security policy and wide-ranging cooperation. To prevent
armed attacks, Finland maintains a national defence capacity tailored to its
security environment and continues defence cooperation with others. Finland
also maintains a credible national border security system. Preparedness for
the demands posed by the security environment and strengthening security
in Finland’s immediate vicinity requires intensified cooperation and actively

17


-----

influencing various actors. Close cooperation in normal times makes it possible
to continue it in emergency conditions as well.

Bilateral and multilateral defence cooperation is an important part of
maintaining, developing and using Finland’s defence capacity, and deterrence.
Also the capability to receive military assistance is an important part of defence
development. The measures needed for receiving assistance will be extensively
considered in developing the government’s preparedness. Correspondingly,
Finland will improve its ability to provide military or other international
assistance.

International training and exercises serve the development of international
crisis management and Finland’s national defence. Finland selects the exercises
it chooses to participate in from its own perspectives and interests.

Finland is not immune to the global transformation. Finland can influence
global trends by intensifying multilateral and bilateral cooperation with other
actors. By anticipating the winds of change and by efficiently and flexibly
tapping into its own strengths Finland can prosper and strengthen its status.
Finland can be a trailblazer and it must be able to respond to even surprising
developments in its operating environment.

The goal of Finland’s foreign policy is to strengthen Finland’s international
status. This requires sufficient resources. Finland’s own network of missions is
an irreplaceable source of information and a means of influence which adds to
Finland’s security and wellbeing. Therefore, the network of missions will not be
curtailed. For their part, strategic membership goals in different organisations
and high-level recruitments support this goal.

In order to advance Finland’s foreign and security policy goals decisions must
constantly be taken. Taking into account its own strengths Finland must be
able to anticipate the demands posed by the transformation of the operating
environment and meet the requirements. In order to realise the strategic goals
in an environment in flux, coordination in other policy sectors associated with
foreign and security policy such as internal security and energy policy, is also
needed.

Finland’s foreign and security policy goal-setting is a response to degrading
cooperation-based security in Europe and the development towards a balanceof-power regime, the deteriorating security situation in the Baltic Sea region
and Russia’s unpredictable internal and foreign policy development as well as
the threats and possibilities included in global trends.

18


-----

Finland will make its security policy choices, including decisions regarding
membership in organisations and alliances, and cooperation between them or
individual states, independently and from its own perspectives and interests.

These three questions determine the way in which Finland strengthens its own
security:

 - How to influence the development of the unpredictable operating
environment?

 - How to intensify cooperation in foreign and security policy?

 - How to prepare to respond to global risks and, on the other hand, how to
prepare to take advantage of the opportunities generated by the trends?

The Government has outlined the following focus areas for Finland’s foreign
and security policy into the mid-2020s.

#### 5.1 Strengthening the European Union as a security community

The European Union is Finland’s value community. Finland aims at bolstering
the EU as a security community that cultivates cooperation among its Member
States. Strengthening the Common Foreign and Security Policy increases
security and stability in Europe and the influence of the Union. Finland is an
active, pragmatic and solution-oriented Member State.

Finland advances the EU’s capability to transform itself and meet both internal
and external needs. In the coming years the Union must solve several
fundamental issues. Among other things, these issues are associated with
migration to Europe, the coherence of the Union in the deepening maelstrom
of colliding geopolitical interests, slow economic growth and the stability of
the Eurozone. They are both associated with each other and also connected
to the increasingly interlinked external and internal security that is affected by
unemployment and social exclusion. The impacts of the UK’s EU referendum
will require a longer-term evaluation.

Finland emphasises the need to find a common position on the crises at hand
because strengthening Europe’s relatively weakened status demands strong
capacity and coherence from the EU as well as the trust of its citizens. Finland
respects the common regulations and expects the other Member States to do
likewise.

19


-----

Finland promotes the development of defence cooperation within the EU so
that the Union and its Member States can be better prepared to meet the
security requirements of the future and to improve their crisis resilience. The
Union has a role in defending the citizens of its Member States and its territory.
It carries out this role by supporting the Member States’ defence development
and by complying with the founding Treaties.

Maintaining and developing capabilities demands a sufficient technological and
industrial base as well as arrangements for security of supply. The European
military security of supply arrangements will be deepened with the aim of
facilitating rapid and efficient defence materiel delivery procedures among the
Member States in all circumstances. Finland’s interests must be taken into
account in the development of the European Defence Market.

Hybrid influencing has increased the need to act by taking into account both
internal and external security requirements. The means of hybrid influencing
between states have increased and in the early phase they are difficult to
recognise. Sufficient capabilities are needed for correctly-timed recognition of
hybrid influencing as well as guaranteeing the state’s decision-making and the
protection of territorial sovereignty.

EU’s solidarity clause (Article 222, TEU) and the mutual assistance clause
(Article 42.7, TEU) strengthen the Union as a security community and increase
solidarity among the Member States. Implementing the solidarity clause at the
EU level improves the coherent employment of all of the Union’s instruments
in trying to respond quickly to a Member State’s need for help, be the event
a terrorist attack or a natural or man-made disaster. If requested, in such
circumstances the other Member States shall give it aid and assistance by all
the means in their power, military resources included. Finland believes that
the mutual assistance clause holds strong security policy significance, both in
principle as well as in practice. The clause calls for the Member States to be
prepared to provide concrete assistance to each other, and it supports their
action in preventing threats. The mutual assistance clause is equally binding
on all Member States. Finland will establish the required preparedness for
implementing the obligations of both clauses, and for providing and receiving
international assistance.

The European Union must continue to further develop its common
preparedness and arrangements for closer defence cooperation. The
foundation for this includes the arrangements created for the implementation
of the Common Security and Defence Policy as well as the capacity of the
Union to comprehensively combine different policy sectors and instruments.

20


-----

It is important to develop the EU’s defence cooperation in concert with NATO,
which also serves Finland’s interests.

Finland fully participates in the development of the CSDP in crisis management
as well. Progressively more emphasis is placed on conflict prevention and preemptive action. The coherence of the EU’s external policies is improved by,
among other things, taking into account the connection of the CFSP to the
requirements for sustainable development and the implementation of the 2030
Agenda. The internal and external action of the EU must better complement
each other. Finland promotes the realisation of the EU’s climate and Energy
Union targets.

#### 5.2 Deepening cooperation with Sweden and  the other Nordic countries

Sweden enjoys a special status in Finland’s bilateral cooperation. The
cooperation builds on a long historical bond, shared values, multidimensional
contemporary ties and the widely integrated economies. Foreign and security
policy cooperation with Sweden is wide-ranging and it is promoted on the basis of
shared interests without any limitations. Nonetheless, the bilateral cooperation
does not replace or exclude either party’s other cooperation activities. For the
most part Finland and Sweden evaluate their respective security environments
from similar points of departure. On this basis, deepening foreign and security
policy and defence cooperation with Sweden serves Finland’s interests.

Defence cooperation with Sweden aims at strengthening the security of the
Baltic Sea region as well as the defence capacities of Finland and Sweden. Joint
action also raises the threshold against incidents and attacks. It contributes to
more robust security in the region. Defence cooperation will be developed to
cover operational planning for all situations. Examples of this may include the
defence of territorial integrity or exercising the inherent right of collective selfdefence pursuant to Article 51 of the UN Charter. It is also important to prepare
for the joint use of civilian and military resources.

Cooperation under the auspices of NORDEFCO (Nordic Defence Cooperation)
will be intensified. In 2017 Finland will assume the presidency of NORDEFCO
and it will advance the further intensification of Nordic cooperation as well as
measures promoting regional security.

Nordic foreign and security policy cooperation is of key importance to Finland.
By acting in unison the Nordic countries can strengthen security in their

21


-----

neighbourhood, and increase their influence in international questions. Likewise,
by acting in unison they, among other things, intensify their relationship with
the United States.

#### 5.3 Deepening cooperation with the United States

The United States is an important partner for Finland. It plays a key role
in global questions and in regional issues that are vital to Finland, as well
as bilaterally. Finland will intensify its cooperation with the United States in
international questions associated with security and defence, migration, topics
associated with the climate, energy and the Arctic as well as economic growth
and global development. Increasing trade and investments serve Finland’s
interests.

The commitment of the United States to NATO and its military presence in
Europe continue to be essential to Finland’s security. Cooperating with the
United States, both bilaterally and within the framework of NATO, is needed for
Finland’s national defence. Finland will intensify its security policy and defence
cooperation with the United States: the goal is to strengthen the national
defence capacity by especially developing interoperability, materiel cooperation
as well as training and exercise cooperation.

#### 5.4 The importance of relations with Russia

In its relations with Russia Finland promotes cooperation and maintains a
dialogue on the international situation and issues associated with the Baltic
Sea region and bilateral topics. The EU’s common positions on Russia form the
basis for Finland’s action. Improved cooperation between the EU and Russia
would strengthen the security and economy of all of Europe; Russia’s isolation
does not serve anyone’s interests. The precondition for such improvement is,
however, that Russia comply with international law and its other international
obligations. The implementation of the Minsk Agreement is vital for better EURussia relations.

Russia is Finland’s neighbour, and its democratic development and stability are
important. Finland aims to maintain stable and well-functioning relations with
Russia. In addition to economic cooperation, collaboration in Arctic and climate
questions, for example, remains important. Finland’s energy cooperation with
Russia is broad and must be interconnected with the development of the EU’s
Energy Union. Regional and cross-border cooperation with Russia in northern

22


-----

Europe continues at the practical level, which is in the interests of Finland. It
is important to support the civil society and direct contact between citizens. In
the changed environment Finland must be able to carefully evaluate Russia’s
development. This calls for more versatile and in-depth knowledge of Russia.

#### 5.5 Bilateral relations in foreign and security policy

Finland continues to develop its relations with its partners as part of the EU
and bilaterally. Participation in international cooperation in this form supports
the achievement of Finland’s foreign and security policy objectives. From
the standpoint of Finland’s prosperity it is important to strengthen all-round
economic and trade relations by, among other things, securing international
prospects for Finnish companies. These also matter in terms of security policy.

Finland further develops its bilateral economic and political relations with China
and promotes increasing Sino-EU cooperation in the EU. Finland intensifies its
relations with China, especially, in fields that interest Finland and are essential
to the development of China such as environmental technology and renewable
energy as well as topics associated with good governance and rule of law.

It continues to be important to Finland to intensify its relations with Japan.
Finland sees remarkable growth potential in its interaction with India and other
emerging countries. In these relationships political contacts can support the
development of economic relations.

The European neighbourhood, such as the Middle East and Africa, is increasingly
important for Finland, both in terms of foreign and security policy as well
as the economy. Intensifying bilateral relations with the countries in these
regions strengthens Finland’s international position, supports the countries’
development and, for its part, also creates preconditions for strengthening
trade relations.

#### 5.6 Developing the relationship with NATO

NATO is the key actor in advancing transatlantic and European security and
stability. Finland’s partnership with NATO is wide-ranging and enhanced. It is
important to Finland that NATO continue its Open Doors Policy, i.e. that NATO
membership remains open to all those European states that have the capacity
and qualifications to advance the goals of the North Atlantic Treaty.

23


-----

NATO’s Enhanced Opportunity Programme (EOP) is a useful instrument for
Finland in maintaining and developing its NATO partnership. It is important
for Finland to develop regular political dialogue and practical cooperation in
the coming years. The latter includes, among other things, pre-approval as
a partner to crisis management operations, participation in the initial phases
of NATO’s operational, training and exercise planning and cyber-defence
cooperation.

The continual development of military cooperation with NATO is one of the key
elements through which Finland maintains and develops its national defence
and the capabilities for defending its territory. Finland continues to extensively
participate in NATO exercises and training activities. The participation of partner
countries in NATO exercises takes place under the auspices of partnership
policy.

As Finland-NATO cooperation is being deepened it must be kept in mind
that partnership cooperation neither includes any Article 5 based security
guarantees nor obligations. Nevertheless, interoperability achieved through
cooperation, for its part, ensures the elimination of any practical impediments
to a possible membership in a military alliance. While carefully monitoring the
developments in its security environment, Finland maintains the option to seek
NATO membership.

According to the assessment of the effects of possible NATO membership,
commissioned by the Government, NATO is a stabilising influence in the Baltic
Sea region. Therefore, it is only logical that the assessment emphasised that
Finland and Sweden share the same security environment with NATO. The
security policy choices of Finland and Sweden are closely connected. According
to the assessment NATO membership would fundamentally impact the security
policy situation in the Baltic Sea region. A membership application would be a
fundamental and far-reaching decision in Finland’s foreign and security policy,
and would, therefore, require wide-ranging debate and careful consideration.

#### 5.7 Focus attention on the future of the Arctic region

Finland is an important actor in the Arctic region. Finland, bilaterally and
multilaterally, promotes stability and security in the Arctic region. Finland aims
at achieving wide-ranging cooperation in the Arctic Council and the Barents
Euro-Arctic Council, which builds on shared norms. The commitments to
sustainable development will be taken into consideration in the utilisation of
the economic growth potential in the Arctic region. Finland contributes to the

24


-----

strengthening of the European Union’s Arctic policy. Finland promotes the EU’s
infrastructure projects aimed at utilising Arctic prospects and allocating R&D
funds to Arctic topics. Finland develops its cooperation on Arctic issues both
bilaterally with its key partners and in the Arctic Council. Finland maintains
and advances the participation of indigenous peoples in Arctic cooperation.
Promoting the rights of indigenous people is a core element in Finland’s Arctic
and human rights policy.

During its 2017–19 presidency of the Arctic Council Finland will emphasise the
importance of implementing the Paris Agreement on climate change and the
goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in Arctic cooperation.
Finland will strengthen Arctic cooperation and its continuity during its
presidency, also at the highest political level.

#### 5.8 Sustainable development as a goal for foreign and  security policy

When responding to the threats caused by global trends or when utilising the
prospects of them, Finland draws on tried and tested, solution-oriented models
and develops them. They are based on Finnish know-how, Finnish values and
cooperation. Finland also engages in closer cooperation with civil society and
the private sector.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, adopted by the member
states of the UN, establishes an international set of goals for dealing with
many global threats and challenges. The 2030 Agenda applies to all states.
Finland’s policy will be in line with the Agenda. The most important sustainable
development goals from the perspective of Finland’s foreign and security policy
are: gender equality and empowering women and girls; reduction of inequality;
fighting against climate change and its impacts; promoting peaceful societies;
guaranteeing legal services for everyone; and accountable institutions.

While participating in solving international problems Finland simultaneously
strengthens its foreign policy and economic status, and its international
influence. Safe living conditions, human rights and the possibility for people
to make a difference in their affairs, sufficient livelihoods and safe living
environments are important global objectives for Finland. Finland promotes
these aims nationally and as a member of the UN and the EU along the lines
of the focus areas and modi operandi presented in the Government Report on
Development Policy, among other things. Development policy is an important
element of Finland’s foreign and security policy.

25


-----

#### 5.9 Emphasising the relationship between external and internal security

In its international cooperation, and for its internal security as well, Finland
prepares to counter the international activities of many non-state actors, and
their consequences. Among these actors there are many terrorist organisations
and networks and their violent acts cannot be excluded from Finland either.
Finland strengthens the counter-terrorist capacity of local actors, as in training
participation in the coalition to counter the ISIL.

Cooperation within the framework of the EU and bilaterally will be strengthened
to counter terrorism and prevent violent extremism and radicalisation, to
respond to hybrid influencing, and to prevent criminal activity associated with
the arrangement of illegal immigration.

In line with comprehensive security thinking Finland strengthens its capacity
to identify wide-ranging hybrid influencing against society, the capabilities
to counter it and to improve cyber security. As part of the EU’s efforts to
counter hybrid threats Finland studies the possibilities to establish a centre
of excellence which focuses on hybrid threats. The centre would support the
EU and its Member States and strengthen EU-NATO cooperation in countering
said threats.

The capabilities required by cyber security will be strengthened, among
others, in the European Union, with NATO, and bilaterally. In its international
cooperation Finland aims at seizing some of the lucrative prospects offered by
the cyber domain and digitalisation.

#### 5.10 Make the measures more effective on the root causes  of migration and fragile states

Especially in the Middle East, Afghanistan and Africa, Finland influences the
root causes that force people to migrate. Finland participates in seeking
political solutions and in military and civilian crisis management activities in
the countries of origin and transit of migration.

Finland can influence the root causes of migration by strengthening human
rights, good governance and the rule of law by combating human trafficking
and trade in human beings, and through trade policy and climate policy.
Finland allocates its support specifically to the refugees’ and asylum seekers’
countries of origin in order to strengthen peace and security and to improve

26


-----

human rights and sources of livelihood. This support will be provided through
humanitarian assistance and development cooperation. Finland strengthens
the capacity of international organisations that are important actors in issues
associated with migration.

Finland emphasises the comprehensiveness of foreign and security policy and
development policy in fragile states which are often the countries of origin as
regards migration. In order to recognise and tackle the risks associated with
fragile states early on, Finland must sustain local familiarity, both through the
network of its foreign missions and by networking with other actors. Finland
underscores the prevention of economic, social and security threats as well as
peacebuilding and statebuilding.

#### 5.11 Equality and human rights as a point of departure

In its foreign and security policy Finland extensively promotes the realisation
of women’s and girls’ rights, and women’s equal political and economic
participation. This is included in Finland’s action aimed at achieving the human
rights aspect, equity and equality, and at strengthening the rule of law in
foreign and security policy. Finland also offers its human rights and rule-of-law
expertise in international crisis management. Finland intensifies its efforts to
counter violence against women.

Finland supports a strong international and regional human rights monitoring
system and measures against impunity when humanitarian law and human
rights violations are committed during war and conflict. In crisis prevention
Finland focuses attention on the realisation of the rights of those that often
become the victims of violence such as minorities and other particularly
vulnerable groups of people. Finland also supports the intensification of efforts
to protect civilians and to realise humanitarian law. Finland endorses the
maintenance and development of international law and norms to meet the
requirements of global trends.

#### 5.12 More effectiveness in conflict management

Finland continues its active participation in international crisis management. It
is a part of Finland’s foreign and security policy influencing and international
cooperation. By participating in military crisis management Finland
simultaneously improves the Defence Forces’ capabilities and capacities.
Civilian crisis management is also an important focus area because crisis

27


-----

management participation focuses on supporting local capacity, rule of law
and good governance. Training activities and support that focus on security
sector reform are highlighted when the aim is to improve the effectiveness of
crisis management operations and achieve sustainable results.

Changing circumstances and international needs mean that Finland, too, must
regularly evaluate the effectiveness and extent of its participation, operation
by operation. In international cooperation Finland aims at strengthening the
goals of comprehensive crisis management. Security risks are increasingly
more often encountered and will be taken into consideration in participation.
Likewise, the increasing multifariousness of crisis management will be taken
into account. In addition to the more traditional operations, even very limited
and short-term missions will be implemented or those executed by country
groupings–an example of such being the maritime operations carried out in
the Mediterranean to destroy Syria’s chemical stockpiles. Moreover, operations
entailing both military and civilian crisis management will be seen.

The European Union implements different, even new, kinds of crisis
management operations which may be small in scope but focused in terms of
impact. It is important for Finland to participate in the EU’s missions.

Finland advocates the increasing participation of women in establishing peace
and security. More attention will be paid to the implementation of UNSC
Resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and Security in crisis management as well.

#### 5.13 Mediation as an increasingly important focus area

When it comes to conflict prevention and resolution, the significance of diplomacy
as well as national and interfaith dialogue processes, alongside mediation,
grows. Mediation and dialogue processes encompass a progressively important
focus area in Finland’s foreign and security policy. Mediation and dialogue
pave the way for longer-term peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction;
the ultimate objectives being a lasting peace, rule of law and stable societal
development.

Finland develops and strengthens its national mediation and dialogue capacity.
The objective is that the mediation capacity support the achievement of
Finland’s foreign policy goals. Finland actively participates in dialogue and
mediation processes.

28


-----

Finland continues strengthening the mediation capacity of international actors
– first and foremost within the UN and the EU. Sufficient prerequisites will
be guaranteed for Finland’s increasingly effective and prompt support to or
participation in mediation, and the facilitation thereof, and in national dialogue
processes as well as in providing advice and support to the rule of law through
development cooperation appropriations.

When it comes to the proper utilisation of mediation Finland’s own expertise
and local knowledge is important in detecting weak signals and in identifying
local actors. Close networking with the actors of civil society supports the
flexibility which is required by mediation.

#### 5.14 Strengthening rules-based action

Finland fosters the core values of the UN Charter and the principles of
intergovernmental interaction. Together with different countries and country
groupings Finland works to enhance the effectiveness and influence of
international organisations.

Being a country that relies on foreign trade Finland finds it important to
strengthen the multilateral trade regime. Strengthening and developing
the rules-based system also supports Finland’s development policy goals
to integrate the developing countries into the international trade and value
chains. This development must take into account the manner in which trade is
developing. Finland supports a successful outcome in the negotiations for fair,
equal and sustainable trade and an investment agreement between the EU
and the United States, i.e. the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership
(TTIP).

Finland wants to improve the capacity of international organisations to also
tackle new global challenges, such as cyber issues. Finland underscores
the importance of arms control in strengthening predictability and stability.
Finland taps into its time-honoured expertise in projects associated with arms
control and disarmament, and in new challenges. Through policy and export
control Finland promotes the prevention of proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction as well as associated hazardous materials and know-how, and the
illicit arms trade. Finland supports the status of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty in nuclear disarmament. Finland strengthens the monitoring of fissile
material and nuclear safety, and monitors the effect of the development of
weapon technology vis-à-vis national and international security.

29


-----

#### 5.15 Strengthening crisis resilience

Finland develops its national crisis resilience across the board. Preparations
and contingency plans are made for situations which threaten or harm security
or wellbeing so as to anticipate or prevent such situations in advance. Attention
will be focused on adapting to, or recovering from, a range of disruptions and
disturbances.

Improving the national crisis resilience covers a wide variety of activities ranging
from maintaining the defence capacity and internal security to countering
information operations as well as from fighting pandemics to surviving manmade and natural disasters. Developing cooperation between the different
sectors and actors of society is an integral element in strengthening crisis
resilience and preparedness against disruptions. This preparedness will be
implemented in concert through the principle of comprehensive security. The
relevance of preparedness legislation, a prerequisite for strengthening crisis
resilience, will be reviewed. The Security Strategy for Society will be updated
to meet the changing security environment. The relevance of the forms and
structures of cooperation among the authorities will be certified. Foreign and
security policy supports the strengthening of national crisis resilience.

30


-----

-----

**SNELLMANNINKATU 1, HELSINKI**

**PO BOX 23, 00023 GOVERNMENT,**

**FINLAND**

**Tel. +358 9 16001, +358 9 57811**

**Fax +358 9 1602 2165**

**julkaisut@vnk.fi**

**www.vnk.fi/english**

**ISBN Print 978-952-287-270-8**

**ISBN PDF 978-952-287-271-5**

**ISSN Print 0782-6028**

**ISSN PDF 1799-7828**


-----

