# Government’s
 Defence Report 

###### Prime Minister’s Office Publications  7/2017


-----

Prime Minister’s Office Publications 7/2017

### Government’s Defence Report

Prime Ministers’s Office, Helsinki 2017


-----

Prime Ministers’s Office

ISBN:978-952-287-374-3

Helsinki 2017


-----

###### Description sheet

|Published by|Prime Ministers’s Office|Col3|16.2.2017|
|---|---|---|---|
|Authors|Publication type Government’s Defence Report Commissioned by Government Programme|||
|Title of publication|Government’s Defence Report (Statsrådets försvarpolitiska redogörelse)|||
|Series and publication number|Prime Minister’s Office Publications 7/2017|||
|ISBN (printed)|978-952-287-373-6|ISSN (printed)|0782-6028|
|ISBN PDF|978-952-287-374-3|ISSN (PDF)|1799-7828|
|Website address (URN)|http://urn.fi/URN:ISBN:978-952-287-374-3|||
|Pages|36|Language|english|
|Keywords|report, defence policy|||
|Abstract The Government's Defence Report to Parliament contains the defence policy guidelines for the maintenance, development and utilisation of Finland's defence capabilities. The Defence Report and its implementation ensures that Finland’s defence capabilities are appropriate for the the demands of the security environment. The Defence Report was drawn up after the Parliamentary study group’s report (Parliamentary Office Report 3/2014) and after the Government’s Foreign and Security Policy Report (Prime Minister’s Office publications series 7/2016). The Foreign and Security Policy Report evaluates Finland’s operating environment and also presents the areas of focus and the objectives of Finland’s foreign and security policy. The Defence Report takes note of the changes in the military operating environment. The time span covered by the report exceeds the term of this Government and extends to halfway through the 2020s. The Defence Report and its implementation will ensure Finland’s defence capability in a changing security situation, will create the conditions for maintaining a credible defence system that covers the whole of the country, will set out the guidelines for implementation of strategic capability projects, improve the preparedness of the armed forces and steer the deepening of defence collaboration as well as the development of national legislation.||||
|Publisher|Prime Ministers’s Office|||
|Printed by (place and time)|Lönnberg Print & Promo, 2017|||
|Publication sales/ Distributed by|Online version: julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi Publication sales: julkaisutilaukset.valtioneuvosto.fi|||


-----

##### Contents

###### SUMMARY ...................................................................................... 5

 1 INTRODUCTION ...................................................................... 7

 2 THE MILITARY OPERATING ENVIRONMENT ....................... 8

 3 THE PRESENT STATE OF DEFENCE .................................. 11

 4 MAINTAINING AND DEVELOPING THE DEFENCE CAPABILITY .......................................................................... 14

 4.1 Defence policy grounds for the span of the Defence Report .................. 15

 4.2 Development of defence cooperation ...................................................... 16

 4.3 The focus areas of using and maintaining the defence system .............. 19

 4.3.1 Land defence ....................................................................................................... 21

 4.3.2 Maritime defence .................................................................................................. 22

 4.3.3 Air defence ........................................................................................................... 23

 4.3.4 Joint defence capabilities ..................................................................................... 24

 4.3.5 Strategic capability programmes .......................................................................... 26

 4.4 The Defence Forces’ processes and personnel ...................................... 27

 4.5 Conscription ............................................................................................. 28

 4.6 The will to defend the country and voluntary defence activities .............. 28

 4.7 Infrastructure ............................................................................................ 29

 4.8 Research and development ..................................................................... 29

 4.9 Military security of supply ......................................................................... 30

 4.10 Legislation ................................................................................................ 30

 4.11 Resources ................................................................................................ 31

 5 SUMMARY ............................................................................. 32


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

## SUMMARY

The Government Report on Defence to Parliament provides the defence policy

guidelines for the manner in which Finland’s defence capability is maintained,

developed and used. The Defence Report and its implementation will ensure that

Finland’s defence capability meets the requirements of the security environment.

The Defence Report was written following the publication of the Final Report of the

Parliamentary Assessment Group (Publication by the Parliamentary Office 5/2014)

and the Government Report on Finnish Foreign and Security Policy (Prime Minister’s

Office Publications 09/2016). The Foreign and Security Policy Report analyses

Finland’s operating environment and presents the key priorities and goals of Finland’s

foreign and security policy. The Defence Report takes into account the changes in the

political-military operating environment. Its scope extends beyond the present

Government’s term in office, reaching into the mid-2020s.

Implementing the Defence Report guarantees Finland’s defence capability in a

constantly changing security situation, creates the conditions for maintaining a

defence system that covers the entire territory of the country, provides guidelines for

the execution of strategic capability programmes and improves the Defence Forces’

readiness. It also guides the deepening of defence cooperation and the review of

national legislation.

Finland’s military operating environment has changed. Military activity and military

tensions have increased in the Baltic Sea region. The early-warning period for military

crises has become shorter and the threshold for using force has lowered.

As a result of the increasingly complex nature of war a wide range of measures could

be used against Finland. The demands on defence have grown. Finland must prepare

for the use of military force, or threat thereof, against it.

5


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

Procurements have been curtailed and postponed due to the appropriation cuts

imposed on the Defence Forces, and it has become necessary to shift resources from

defence materiel acquisitions to cover operating expenses.

Finland strengthens its national defence and intensifies international defence

cooperation. Land, maritime and air defence, as well as joint capabilities, will be

developed in line with the requirements of the operating environment. New

capabilities will be created for the cyber domain. The Defence Forces’ strategic

capability programmes will be implemented so as to safeguard Finland’s defence

capability in the long term. The defence system will be developed without creating any

practical impediments to a potential membership in a military alliance.

Defence cooperation is important to Finland’s defence capability and from the

standpoint of threat prevention. Bilateral defence cooperation with Sweden enjoys a

special status and the United States is an important partner for Finland. Finland

purposefully promotes the development of defence cooperation within the European

Union and the development of its defence policy. This will strengthen the foundation

of the European defence capability and the Union as a security community and a

global actor.

By sustaining the level of investment in new materiel that will begin in 2021, as rec
ommended by the Parliamentary Assessment Group, most troops can only be

equipped and trained for their tasks to a satisfactory level. On top of this, the im
provement of readiness will require additional resources starting from 2018. Finland’s

credible defence rests on the guidelines and resources presented by this Report.

6


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

## 1 INTRODUCTION

The Government Report on Defence to Parliament provides the defence policy

guidelines for the manner in which Finland’s defence capability is maintained,

developed and used. The Defence Report and its implementation will ensure that

Finland’s defence capability meets the requirements of the security environment.

The Defence Report is a continuum on the Final Report of the Parliamentary

Assessment Group (Publication by the Parliamentary Office 5/2014) and the

Government Report on Finnish Foreign and Security Policy (Prime Minister’s Office

Publications 09/2016). The Foreign and Security policy Report analyses Finland’s

operating environment and presents the key priorities and goals of Finland’s foreign

and security policy.

The Defence Report builds on the estimates and guidelines presented in the Foreign

and Security Policy Report and concentrates on the changes in the military operating

environment and the development of defence. Its scope extends into the mid-2020s.

7


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

## 2 THE MILITARY OPERATING ENVIRONMENT

The security situation in Finland’s vicinity has deteriorated following the occupation of

Crimea and the conflict in eastern Ukraine. Military tension has risen in the Baltic Sea

region, and insecurity has grown far and wide.

The military-strategic importance of the Baltic Sea region has risen and military

activity has intensified in the area. Simultaneously, the military footprint in the Arctic

region has grown. As it is a base with strategic weapons, the Kola Peninsula retains

its importance to Russia.

The states in Finland’s vicinity have reacted to the transformation of the security

environment by improving their military readiness, by procuring new materiel, and by

increasing their defence spending. Member States of the EU and NATO intend to

intensify and deepen their defence cooperation. Sweden has returned the focus of its

armed forces’ development from crisis management to defending its own territory.

Materiel and troops have now permanently been based in Gotland. Lithuania will

reinstitute general conscription.

Russia aims to strengthen its great-power status, and it has expressed the goal of a

sphere-of-influence based security regime. It has demonstrated the ability to take swift

strategic decisions and to employ coordinated military force and a wide range of other

instruments in pursuing its objectives.

Alongside the protracted conflict in Ukraine, Russia has specifically demonstrated its

sophisticated and wide-ranging air power in the Syrian War. Russia is developing the

capabilities of its armed forces and is also maintaining the capacity to manage a

major military crisis. All security authorities’ capabilities can be used for military

purposes. Russia has bolstered its western defences as well as its response and

8


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

readiness in the Arctic. Much as in the West, Russia focuses the material

development of its armed forces on long-range strike capability and precision-guided

weapons, manned aircraft and unmanned aerial vehicles, robotics, nuclear weapons,

air and space defence as well as digital command & control and intelligence systems

(C4ISR).

Russia aims to challenge NATO’s capability to defend the Baltic States and eastern

Europe should a military crisis flare up. Russia employs long-range weapon systems

capable of destroying targets and creating anti-access/area-denial (A2/AD) exclusion

zones in airspace and sea areas. All services’ high-readiness formations stationed

around the country can be rapidly deployed to the desired theatre without early

warning, to occupy a limited area and challenge the sovereignty of the targeted state,

among other things.

NATO has reinstated the defence of the territory of its members as its core task; most

NATO nations are now investing more in their own defence. NATO has stepped up its

Article 5 related exercises and keeps developing its military readiness with the aim of

stabilising security in its own area. NATO’s presence is increasing in the Baltic Sea

region as the United States and certain other NATO nations are aiming at

strengthening the defence of the Baltic States and eastern Europe by positioning

troops and materiel in the region.

The European Union is strengthening the Common Security and Defence Policy

(CSDP) and intensifying defence cooperation. The goal is to be able to manage

security challenges, external and internal alike. The mutual assistance clause (Article

42(7), TEU) of the Treaty of Lisbon improves the possibilities for developing defence

cooperation among the Member States. Even though most EU Member States rely on

NATO with regard to defending their territory, the Union still plays an important role in

enabling European defence cooperation and as an actor of comprehensive security.

The cyber domain is becoming increasingly important. The use of cyber operations for

the purpose of pursuing political objectives cannot be excluded. The digitalisation of

society, the dependency of technical systems on trans-border IT networks as well as

the interdependencies and vulnerabilities of systems expose society’s vital functions

to cyber-attacks. Both cyber-attacks and psychological operations (PSYOP) have

targeted, among other things, critical infrastructure, industrial plants, political decision
making systems and citizens in our neighbourhood as well as in Finland. Scientific

and technological advances also pose other kinds of challenges to preparedness

against threats. Wide-ranging chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN)

threats persist.

9


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017


**FACTORS AFFECTING FINLAND’S DEFENCE INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING:**

- The early-warning period for military crises has shortened and the threshold for using
force has become lower. At the same time society’s vulnerability has increased.

- Military activity has intensified in the Baltic Sea region.

- A conflict in the Baltic Sea region would inevitably impact Finland’s security.

- It is questionable whether access to the airspace and sea area of the Baltic Sea region
would be free during a potential crisis. Interference of shipping and blocking Finland’s sea
lines of communication to the west would impact the whole of society.

- The use or threat of military force against Finland cannot be excluded.

- As the nature of war is becoming more complex, the range of instruments employed
against Finland would be wide and include both military and non-military means.

- The defence of Finland calls for the ability to carry out land, maritime, air and cyberspace
operations. The requirements imposed by the operating environment highlight, among
other things, intelligence capability, agility from different administrative branches in
rapidly developing situations, defence against long-range weapon systems and a cyberdefence capability..


10


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

## 3 THE PRESENT STATE OF DEFENCE

The Finnish Defence Forces reform, carried out from 2012–2014, adapted the size

and the basic structure of the Defence Forces to meet stringent financial demands

and the then lower threat level of the security environment. The defence budget was

cut by approximately 10 per cent. The reform’s savings goals were met. During the

defence reform the number of salaried personnel was reduced to approximately 12

000 employees. The Defence Forces’ service activities and logistics were

concentrated. The wartime strength was reduced to 230 000 troops.

During the implementation of the reform a financing shortfall on the Defence Forces

operating expenses was created. This was generated by additional cuts and

obligations imposed on the Defence Forces as well as cost increases, and from

having to react to the transformation of the security environment. These resulted in

postponing and curtailing defence procurements. It has become necessary to shift

resources from defence materiel acquisitions to cover operating expenses.

The reduced volume of the Defence Forces’ exercises, owing to the cost-cutting

measures, was reinstated to an acceptable level as of 2015. In line with Prime

Minister Juha Sipilä’s Government Programme financing for materiel investments,

slashed during the Defence Forces reform, has gradually been increased to the level

proposed by the Parliamentary Assessment Group (2014). Preparations for replacing

the Navy’s vessels and the capability of the Air Force’s multi-role fighters have begun

in the form of capability programmes. They require separate financing decisions.

The Defence Forces’ readiness is created in normal conditions. It must be possible to

launch the actions required by defence with the Defence Forces’ existing materiel and

resources. The capability to repel an attack exists in the immediately available troops

11


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

and systems. Sizeable defence preparations and supplementary defence acquisitions

are more difficult to complete during a rapidly escalating crisis. The present financial

resources set a limit on the Defence Forces’ preparedness for a drawn-out crisis or

warfare.

At present the Army’s capability to carry out its mission is adequate. When it comes to

maintaining the Army’s capability it is essential to be able to complete the planned

projects. While the procurements that replace the Army’s ageing equipment do

improve its capability, it will be impossible to fill all existing capability gaps through

acquisitions.

At present the Navy’s capability to carry out its mission is good. The capability and

readiness of vessel and coastal units are maintained and in part developed to suit the

tasks of normal and emergency conditions. In the 2020s the capability of the vessel

classes that will be decommissioned will be replaced in a manner that maintains the

capability for monitoring and securing territorial integrity, and for protecting merchant

shipping and repelling attacks from the sea.

At present the Air Force’s capability to carry out its mission is good. The capability of

the Hornet multi-role fighters has been sustained through mid-life updates. An air-to
ground (AG) capability, which supports the battle of the Army and the Navy, has been

created as planned. Ground-based air defence (GBAD) missile systems have been

procured to improve the air defence of society’s vital targets and Army troops. A great

deal of GBAD equipment will be phased out in the mid-2020s and the service life of

the Hornet system will come to an end at the same time. Replacing the equipment will

be critical for monitoring and securing territorial integrity, fighter defence and the AG

capability.

Carrying out the tasks of the Defence Forces requires higher readiness in land,

maritime, air and cyberspace operations as well as better long-range strike capability.

There are shortcomings in the regional coverage and survivability of intelligence and

surveillance, command and control, and logistic systems. The changed security

environment and technological advances, among other things, have highlighted the

need for legislative review as regards the authorities being able to carry out their

duties.

12


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017


- There lies an imbalance between the requirements for defence development and the
present level of resources. Without any corrective action Finland’s defence would
degrade.

- The defence capability must be developed as a whole, taking into account all services
and capability areas.

- The Defence Forces’ key equipment that is to be phased out will be replaced in order to
maintain land, maritime and air defence capability, and to safeguard Finland’s overall
defence capability.


13


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

## 4 MAINTAINING AND DEVELOPING THE DEFENCE CAPABILITY

The defence capability will secure Finland’s independence and territorial integrity; it

comprises of military capabilities and collaboration among the national authorities as

well as international defence cooperation. The defence capability will be maintained

and developed in an operating environment that is in constant flux.

Finland is a country which does not belong to any military alliance. It carries out

practical cooperation with NATO and continues to maintain the option to seek NATO

membership. Finland strengthens its national defence and intensifies international

defence cooperation as a militarily non-aligned country. Participation in international

cooperation serves Finland’s interests. Cooperation is increasingly important from the

standpoint of maintaining, developing and utilising the national defence. The demands

posed by the operating environment require an effective and rapidly deployable

military capability which, for its part, strengthens stability in the Baltic Sea region.

The systematic development of the defence capability builds on decisions taken over

the course of decades. Readiness which meets the demands of the operating envi
ronment’s transformation as well as rapidly deployable forces and systems and a

large, trained reserve improve Finland’s chances to respond to a rapidly developing or

a drawn-out military crisis.

14


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

#### 4.1 Defence policy guidelines 

The increasingly tense security situation in Europe and the Baltic Sea region has

repercussions on Finland. Despite the increasingly tense international situation

Finland is not under any immediate military threat. Nonetheless, Finland must prepare

for the use or threat of military force against it. As a Member State of the European

Union Finland could not remain an outsider should threats to security emerge in its

vicinity or elsewhere in Europe.

Finland’s foreign and security policy guidelines have been determined in the

Government Report on Finnish Foreign and Security Policy (Prime Minister’s Office

Publications 9/2016). The primary aim of Finland’s foreign and security policy is to

avoid becoming a party to a military conflict. Finland will independently make

decisions on security and defence policy. Finland pursues an active policy of stability

to prevent military threats. This policy is supported by maintaining a national defence

capability. Finland will actively and extensively strengthen its international defence

cooperation and other networking as well as develop the abilities to provide and

receive international assistance.

The Foreign Affairs Committee of Parliament has submitted a report on the

Government Report on Finnish Foreign and Security Policy (UaVM 9/2016). In its

report the Committee states that the aim of Finland’s foreign and security policy is to

avoid becoming a party to a military conflict. The Committee agrees with the guideline

of the report, according to which Finland implements an active policy of stability to

prevent military threats. It also agrees with the annotation that Finland does not have

the option or desire to isolate itself from its operating environment, and that Finland,

as a Member State of the European Union, could not remain an outsider should

threats to security emerge in its vicinity or elsewhere in Europe. In its report the

Committee considers that Finland will not allow the use of its territory for hostile

purposes against other states. On the basis of the Government Report on Finnish

Foreign and Security Policy this does not limit Finland’s prospects to provide and

receive international assistance or to intensify defence cooperation.

Finland’s defence is being developed to satisfy the growing demands of the operating

environment. Finland must be able to resist military pressure and a rapidly escalating

military threat, and repel a large-scale attack.

In addition to traditional military threats Finland prepares to meet increasingly complex

challenges which amalgamate both military and non-military means. External and

internal security are ever more distinctly intertwined. Preparedness will be

15


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

implemented in line with the concept of comprehensive security and by reviewing

legislation. The defence capability which is maintained against external threats is an

element of Finland’s comprehensive security and one of society’s vital functions. The

maintenance of the defence capability requires close cooperation among the different

actors of society. The rapid deployment of the resources and capabilities of the

authorities and partners is ensured through partnership and security agreements,

memoranda of understanding and joint exercises.

The Defence Forces will provide executive assistance to the authorities responsible

for internal security and to other authorities in accordance with requests for executive

assistance and contingency plans. Finland’s general conscription system and the

citizens’ strong will to defend the country bolster society’s crisis resilience.

Deterrence relies on the kind of readiness and capability to repel attacks which is

appropriately tailored to its operating environment. Finland prepares to repel military

threats by maintaining its present-day defence solution which relies on effective

weaponry and a large reserve. Immediately available national military capabilities are

required to manage rapidly escalating crises.

Finland will create the ability to provide and receive military assistance. The ability to

receive military assistance is one element of the national defence capability. The pro
vision and reception of military assistance will be taken into account in the central

government’s preparedness and exercises, and in defence planning. This calls for

collaboration in planning, shared situational awareness, compatible C2 and surveil
lance systems as well as training and exercise cooperation, and interoperability.

#### 4.2 Development of defence cooperation

Defence cooperation strengthens defence in normal and emergency conditions. It also

enhances deterrence and improves the chances of receiving political and military

assistance when needed. However, defence cooperation does not provide any

security guarantees to Finland akin to those given to a member of a military alliance.

Peacetime cooperation lays the foundation for cooperation during crises. Trust, a

necessary requisite for defence cooperation, is established through tenacious and

enduring action. By means of a wide network of partners Finland develops such

arrangements that can be utilised to receive all possible assistance already at the

onset of a potential crisis.

16


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

Finland continues to participate in international training and exercises, military crisis

management and in other international activities. The focus of training and exercises

is on participation in demanding international exercises. Finland continues to invite

international partners to its national exercises, which can be combined with partners’

exercises.

Participation in military crisis management is part of conducting Finland’s foreign and

security policy and international cooperation. The goal is to develop national defence

capability. Finland participates in increasingly complex crisis management in ever

more demanding and high-risk operating environments. Finland takes into account the

changes in international crisis management and evaluates its participation in military

crisis management from the standpoint of effectiveness and national goals.

For Finland the European Union is a security policy choice and a value community.

Finland actively participates in the development and implementation of the CSDP.

The EU’s solidarity clause (Article 222, TFEU) and the mutual assistance clause

(Article 42(7), TEU) strengthen the Union as a security community and increase

solidarity among the Member States. Sectors important to Finland include, inter alia,

crisis management, providing and receiving assistance, responding to hybrid threats,

developing defence cooperation and capabilities, creating arrangements for security

of supply as well as strengthening the defence industrial and technological base.

Finland promotes the development of defence cooperation within the European Union

and supports the Union’s permanent structured cooperation and strengthening its

crisis management planning and C2 capability. Cooperation with NATO is important in

developing the European defence cooperation. Finland must be active in advancing

any opportunities for cooperation in the EU and NATO.

NATO is an actor in advancing transatlantic and European security and stability.

Finland promotes the deepening of cooperation under the auspices of NATO’s

Enhanced Opportunity Programme (EOP) and the ’28 (NATO) +2 (Finland & Sweden)’

meetings, by utilising the possibilities open to partner countries in, among other

things, training and exercises and in the development of shared situational

awareness. While carefully monitoring the developments in its security environment,

Finland maintains the option to seek NATO membership. As Finland keeps

developing its defence capability, it continues to take into account the prospects for

defence cooperation and interoperability, and ensures the elimination of any practical

impediments to a possible membership in a military alliance.

17


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

Nordic Defence Cooperation (NORDEFCO) will be intensified, among other things, in

situational awareness cooperation and in training and exercises. Finland aims to

increase the Nordic use of naval and air bases and training areas so as to generate

flexible and efficient exercises. In the field of defence materiel, Nordic materiel

projects will continue and industrial cooperation will be further developed. Finland

supports the cooperation among NORDEFCO and the Baltic States as well as that

among the respective defence establishments within the ‘Northern Group’.

Sweden enjoys a special status in Finland’s bilateral cooperation. Defence

cooperation with Sweden aims at strengthening the security of the Baltic Sea region

as well as the defence capabilities of both countries. Finland and Sweden will deepen

their mutual cooperation which is being developed to facilitate operational planning in

all situations. Examples of these may include the protection of territorial integrity or

exercising the inherent right of collective self-defence pursuant to Article 51 of the UN

Charter. No predetermined limits will be set on deepening the bilateral defence

cooperation. Finland will actively participate in this cooperation.

The United States is an important partner for Finland and defence cooperation with it

improves Finland’s defence capability. Finland continues its close materiel

cooperation and deepens other defence cooperation and collaboration with the United

States according to the Statement of Intent on bilateral defence cooperation. This

includes, inter alia, deepening bilateral dialogue on defence policy, exchanging

information, enhancing defence capability, readiness and interoperability, training and

exercise cooperation as well as materiel and research collaboration.

Important bilateral defence cooperation partners for Finland also include the

Netherlands, the United Kingdom, Norway, Poland, France, Germany, Denmark and

Estonia. Latvia and Lithuania are also close partners for Finland. Bilateral frameworks

will be set up to facilitate bilateral cooperation; they will make defence cooperation

easier to steer and more systematic.

International materiel cooperation lays the foundation for developing the material

capability of defence. International materiel cooperation will be deepened among the

Nordic countries, between the European Union and NATO, and bilaterally. Finland

participates in international arms and export control cooperation as well as in

confidence and security building measures, including their development.

The defence establishment maintains and develops the capability for innovation and

anticipation, ensures sufficient support for capability development and the precondi
tions for international research cooperation as well as the competency required for

18


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

defence. The Defence Forces will gradually increase the total level of financing for

research and development.

#### 4.3 The focus areas of using and maintaining the defence system

Finland’s defence requires an entirety consisting of land, maritime and air defence

and joint capabilities supporting them, all tailored to the operating environment, and

the ability to receive international assistance. The units and systems in highest

readiness will be used nationwide. The large reserve provides regional coverage for

the defence and sustainability during a drawn-out or wide-ranging crisis.

The rapid reaction units (RRU) that include all services’ troops, equipped with

effective and modern systems, will primarily aim to prevent the escalation of a

situation into an attack against Finland. When required, a centre of gravity will be

established for the defence and the attack against Finland will be repelled. If the crisis

draws out or intensifies, more forces can be mobilised, if necessary.

The transformation of the security environment demands that the defence system be

capable of higher readiness and joint operations. Readiness is regulated on the basis

of continuous monitoring of the surroundings and on early-warning, both of which

make it possible to launch actions at the correct time. The Defence Forces must be

able to regulate readiness flexibly and rapidly, use military force in different situations

and create and reposition the centre of gravity of the defence everywhere in Finland.

The actions of the Army, Navy and Air Force as well as the Defence Forces’ joint

capabilities are coordinated in joint operations, led by Defence Command Finland.

The military services make use of the Defence Forces’ shared C4ISR and logistics.

The Defence Forces prepare to carry out military defence according to the concept of

comprehensive security, in concert with the other authorities and partners.

On the basis of their usage the Defence Forces’ forces are divided into manoeuvre

(operational), regional and local forces. The regional forces are used for creating

regional defence coverage. The manoeuvre forces create the centre of gravity of the

defence and fight the decisive battles. The local forces participate in battle and

provide security, surveillance and support to the manoeuvre and regional forces in

their area and assist them in maintaining contact with the other authorities. In terms of

19


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

deployability the Defence Forces maintain troops in different stages of readiness.

Figure 1 illustrates the basic grouping of troops.

**Figure 1: Basic grouping of the Defence Forces´ troops**

The Border Guard participates in national defence. The Border Guard’s high

readiness, powers and capabilities will be utilised to support the defence system in

monitoring and securing territorial integrity. Should the situation so require, Border

Guard units will be attached to the Defence Forces; they will be used in land and

maritime defence as a part of the defence system. The Border Guard’s defence

planning and associated preparations will be carried out in close cooperation with the

Defence Forces.

20


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

The focus areas of maintaining and using the defence system during the span of the

Defence Report are:

− All services’ readiness.

− Replacing the capabilities to be phased out, and

− Intelligence, cyber-defence and long-range strike capability.

The full mobilisation of wartime forces requires supplementary materiel procurements

as well as resources commandeered from society. Finland will improve the capability

to defend the entire territory of the country by intensifying the use of the forces which

are not presently included in the wartime strength of 230 000 troops. The wartime

mobilisation organisation will be merged into the local forces, and conscripts having

reached a sufficient degree of training will be used to raise readiness and in military

tasks during times of crisis. The Border Guard units attached to the Defence Forces

will also be included in the overall strength, should this become necessary in times of

crisis. This being the case, the total wartime strength will rise to 280 000 troops.

##### 4.3.1 Land defence

Land defence will prevent and repel a land attack against Finland. Land defence will

create the required nationwide, regional and local coverage, prevent the occupation of

territory, support the other authorities in securing the vital functions of society and,

with the support of air and maritime defence, defeat the aggressor on the ground.

Territorial defence and its implementation, the Army Land Warfare doctrine, will be

developed to measure up to the changes of the security environment. Development of

readiness, agility and mobile operations along with being able to concentrate striking

power on key targets are highlighted in the activities of the Army.

During this decade the focus of developing the Defence Forces is on the Army and,

especially, its rapid reaction units (RRU).

In rapidly escalating situations the Army’s immediately available readiness formations

and units will carry out demanding tasks of executive assistance, provide security for

the critical targets of the Defence Forces and those of society, and be used in

situations where the threat of using military force exists. The role of salaried personnel

and conscripts is highlighted in the early stages of a crisis.

When necessary, the Army will mobilise rapid reaction units to boost the deterrence of

defence. If necessary, more forces will be mobilised with which the Army will create

21


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

the capability to repel the attack, defeat the aggressor as part of the Defence Forces’

joint operations and meet the requirements of managing a drawn-out crisis.

The Army’s ability to repel a large-scale attack will be retained. The doctrines of the

Army’s regional and local forces, including their capability and equipment, will be

tailored to the demands of and resources for their planned areas of operation. The

relative share of light troops will increase.

Among other things, the Army’s mobility, firepower and striking power will be

improved by modernising the BMP-2M armoured combat vehicles, carrying out the

mid-life update of the CV9030 Infantry Fighting Vehicle and by procuring Leopard 2A6

main battle tanks. The Army’s surveillance and targeting capability will be improved

and new generation anti-tank weaponry and munitions will be purchased. A new self
propelled artillery system, possessing great firepower, will replace ageing artillery

systems.

The deterrent effect which was lost through the elimination of infantry landmines will

be replaced through other means. The Defence Forces will study the options and

feasibility of domestic defence industrial innovations. The deadline for the study is the

end of 2017.

##### 4.3.2 Maritime defence

The integrity of Finland’s territorial waters and the vital sea lines of communication will

be protected through maritime defence. Attacks from the sea will be repelled with the

support of land and air defence. The changed security environment of the Baltic Sea

and Finland’s dependency on shipping require versatility, survivability and high

readiness from the maritime defence. These help prevent and limit the possibility of

isolating Finland by sea, and of the aggressor being able to concentrate his weapons

effect on our vital targets or functions.

The prerequisites of maritime operations in normal and emergency conditions are a

recognised maritime picture (RMP) from below and above the surface and from the air

generated with fixed and mobile maritime surveillance systems and vessels, and the

ability to use fire at all times. The integrity of territorial waters is monitored and

protected with maritime surveillance systems and vessels capable of repelling

territorial violations as well as anti-submarine warfare, in concert with the other

maritime authorities. The sea lines of communication are secured by protecting the

appropriate sea areas, channels and waterways with anti-submarine warfare, sea

22


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

mines as well as anti-ship and anti-aircraft weapons systems. When necessary, sea

areas will be protected through mine laying.

Attacks from the sea will be repelled with concentrated fire, the key elements of which

are anti-ship and coastal missiles, and sea mines. Sea mines will protect our own

operations and limit those of the adversary and deny his access to our vital areas.

Fleet units and mobile coastal troops with effective firepower will create the centre of

gravity of defence in the desired sector. If necessary, the aggressor will be defeated

with the support of the Defence Forces’ joint capabilities and the other services. The

Navy will support land and air defence, among other things, through fire support and

by participating in air surveillance.

The maritime defence will be developed for higher-tempo and more mobile maritime

operations. Through the capabilities that will be procured the Navy can rapidly and

flexibly regulate readiness, carry out surveillance and use fire, and create a centre of

gravity of defence in sea areas and the littoral zone.

The anti-ship missile system of the Hamina-class fast-attack craft, scheduled for

overhaul, will be replaced and the ships will be equipped with anti-submarine warfare

systems and torpedoes. The mine laying and transport capability will be retained with

the overhauled Pansio-class minelayers. A new class of vessels will supersede the

combat vessels that will be decommissioned in the 2020s. The mine countermeasures

capability will be retained with Katanpää-class minehunters and anti-mine combat

diver units.

The backbone of the coastal troops consists of a mobile coastal battlegroup equipped

with ample firepower as well as new anti-ship missile units and fire support units. The

firepower, mobility and C4 systems of the coastal troops will be developed.

The capability of the fixed surveillance system will be ensured by maintaining the pre
sent surface surveillance systems and by launching the modernisation of the under
water surveillance system.

##### 4.3.3 Air defence

Air defence will prevent and repel air attacks against Finland and limit the aggressor’s

possibilities for using his air power without warning and from afar.

The Air Force maintains a recognised air picture (RAP) and the readiness to

immediately react in the manner required by the operating environment. The

23


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

nationwide command and control of air defence and the centralised control of fighter

defence will be made possible by means of a networked C4ISR system. The air

defence will protect the raising of readiness and mobilisation and, for its part, facilitate

land and maritime defence by denying the aggressor air supremacy. Air operations

are supported by land and maritime defence.

The Air Force’s high readiness and capable multi-role fighters enable air defence over

the entire territory of Finland. Multi-role fighters carry out the monitoring of territorial

integrity and engage targets in the air, on land and the sea, and supplement the

Defence Forces’ command & control and intelligence system (C4ISR). A multi-layered

ground-based air defence (GBAD) system protects sites and troops, and incurs losses

to the adversary both regionally and locally. The networked air defence system,

comprising the Air Force and the GBAD, is able to engage different kinds of threats,

ranging from manned aircraft and unmanned air vehicles to cruise missiles. The Air

Force provides air-to-surface fire support to land and maritime defence.

A sufficient network of air bases and mobile troops will be maintained to improve

survivability. The self-sufficiency of the multi-role fighters and GBAD will be secured

by maintaining sufficient stockpiles of weaponry and spares as well as domestic

know-how.

During this decade the maintenance and servicing of aircraft and GBAD systems will

be secured, air bases will be furnished with special materials, and their structures will

be improved in accordance with the requirements of the operating environment. The

goal of GBAD development is to achieve a sufficient high-altitude defence capability

and regional cover. In order to maintain the defence capability, the Hornet fleet’s

capability, which is to be phased out in the mid-2020s, will be replaced in full to meet

the requirements of the security environment.

The capability of the air surveillance systems which are about to be phased out will be

replaced at the end of the next decade. The development of low-observable aircraft

and drones warrants a study of new surveillance technologies.

##### 4.3.4 Joint defence capabilities

Early warning of military threats against Finland calls for sophisticated intelligence and

surveillance capability and international cooperation. Military intelligence information
gathering methods will be developed for these threats. The Defence Forces will create

an entirety of military intelligence, surveillance and targeting support.

24


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

The Defence Forces will continue developing a cyber-defence capability in

accordance with the national Cyber Security Strategy. The Defence Forces will

establish the capability for compiling cyber situational awareness, for planning and

implementing cyber operations, and for protecting and monitoring our own systems in

the cyber domain.

The ability to rapidly engage targets at a distance embodies the essence of military

deterrence in the 2020s. More munitions will be procured for long-range weapon

systems and targeting will be improved. The capability of the Special Forces to carry

out reconnaissance and raids will be retained. Mid-life updates on the helicopter fleet

will guarantee the mobility and reaction capability of Special Forces and readiness

units, and the provision of support to the services’ other forces.

The functioning of the restructured logistic system will be consolidated on the basis of

lessons learned from exercises and from crisis management. Competency and

access to critical materiel and information resources will be guaranteed nationally.

The functioning of the Defence Forces’ international acquisition channels and

contacts as well as the availability of materiel will be secured. The explosives

production and life-cycle management model will be developed.

Combat Service Support will be developed in accordance with readiness requirements

to sustain the troops during a drawn-out crisis. The ability to receive assistance will be

taken into account in the development of logistics.

In its telecommunications the Defence Forces will utilise the security authorities’

network and continue to conjoin and streamline the defence telecommunications

network. The technical structure will be developed to meet the Defence Forces’

readiness requirements and serve exercises, territorial surveillance and other

operations. Off-the-shelf equipment will increasingly be used to support command and

control. The Defence Forces’ own IT systems will primarily support battle

management.

As part of multinational cooperation, such technical and functional solutions will be

developed which, when necessary, will enable the coupling of different countries’ C2

systems together.

The compositions, doctrine and defence materiel of Border Guard units will be

developed as part of the defence system, together with the Defence Forces. The

development will particularly take into account higher readiness requirements.

25


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

##### 4.3.5 Strategic capability programmes

In the 2020s Finland’s defence will face an exceptional situation when the main

systems of two services will be phased out almost simultaneously. The Navy’s vessel

project and the Air Force’s fighter programme, which replace the capabilities to be

decommissioned, are indispensable strategic programmes for the defence of Finland.

In accordance with the Government Programme, preparations for replacing the Navy’s

vessels (Squadron 2020 project) and the capability of the Air Force’s multi-role

fighters (HX programme) have been launched. Both programmes are based on

research and analysis on the future operating environment.

Maritime and air defence are a prerequisite for the functioning of the entire defence

system, for carrying out the Defence Forces’ tasks in normal conditions, for monitoring

and securing territorial integrity and for preventing and repelling a possible attack. The

programmes are of great importance to Finland’s security and defence policy.

###### Squadron 2020 project

The Rauma-class fast-attack craft and Hämeenmaa-class minelayers will reach the

end of their service lives by the mid-2020s. The maritime defence capability will be

preserved through the Squadron 2020’s vessels and the Hamina-class fast-attack

craft, scheduled for overhaul. The Squadron 2020 project entails replacing and

modernising the capabilities of the seven vessels which will have been or are

scheduled to be decommissioned against contemporary threats.

The four vessels of Squadron 2020 will be capable of year-round, long-endurance

patrols in all weather and ice conditions of the Baltic Sea, mobile protection of

territorial integrity, command and control of maritime operations and ASW, mine

laying as well as anti-surface warfare (ASUW) and anti-aircraft defence. The tasks

require that the vessels have the ability to generate a recognised maritime picture

(RMP) from the air and from below and above the surface.

The capability of the Squadron 2020’s vessels is planned to be viable into the 2050s.

The estimated cost of the project is EUR 1.2 billion.

###### HX programme

The planned service life of the Hornet fleet will come to an end between 2025 and

2030. There are three major factors that limit the service life of the fleet: the

26


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

weakening comparative capabilities of the Hornets, structural fatigue and challenges

in obtaining system support. Nationwide air defence and the maintenance of

deterrence necessitate replacing the Air Force’s key defence system with capable

multi-role fighters from 2025 onwards.

The multi-role fighters carry out territorial surveillance, engage targets in the air and

on land and sea, and supplement the Defence Forces’ C4ISR system. Anti-aircraft

defence capabilities will complement those of the multi-role fighter. It is not possible to

substitute the Hornet fleet’s capability with GBAD systems or with any unmanned

aerial vehicles already in operational use or on the design board; they would cover but

a part of the Hornet fleet’s capability. The need and possibilities of procuring

supplementary capabilities will be analysed as part of the HX programme.

The capability of the new multi-role fighter is planned to be viable for at least 30 years,

i.e. into the 2060s. The projected cost of the programme is EUR 7—10 billion. The

procurement decision will be made in the early 2020s.

#### 4.4 The Defence Forces’ processes and personnel

The Ministry of Defence is presently implementing an internal savings programme

which aims to achieve the approved cuts in spending limits and curb mounting costs

and expenses.

In developing their processes and personnel system the Defence Forces are focusing

on the essential while aiming at cost-effectiveness. The goal of partnerships is to

secure support services and readiness in all conditions in a cost-effective manner.

Ultimately, the wartime force structure determines the Defence Forces’ personnel

structure. Furthermore, the Defence Forces’ spending limits, tasks, the development

of new capabilities and the central government’s processes also play a role in this.

Human resources will be allocated to the Defence Forces’ core tasks such as

readiness and conscript training as well as to tasks required for maintaining and

developing the new capabilities.

Changes in the military pension system and the action required by the attrition of insti
tute officers, intended to secure sufficient numbers of professional military personnel

in the reserve, will impact the personnel structure. The personnel structure and the

27


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

reservist training system will be changed to suit the requirements of crisis conditions.

As the personnel system is being developed, the requirements for international coop
eration and military crisis management will be taken into account. Following the De
fence Forces reform the number of salaried personnel, approximately 12 000 people,

is the minimum needed for carrying out the Defence Forces’ present statutory tasks.

#### 4.5 Conscription

General conscription and training the entire able-bodied annual intake of men produce

the Defence Forces’ wartime troops in a cost-effective manner. Women’s voluntary

military service will be developed as part of the system. The goal is to increase the

number of women serving in crisis management duties. Call-ups will be improved by

developing digital information services and processes, and by taking into account the

conscripts’ special skills and abilities.

Conscript training will be cost-effectively developed to meet the changed readiness

requirements by utilising networks, virtual reality and simulations, among other things.

New training arrangements will be gradually phased in. Digital services will be used in

managing the conscripts’ affairs.

The reservist training system is an entirety which comprises the Defence Forces’

refresher exercises and voluntary exercises as well as the courses organised by the

National Defence Training Association of Finland. Reservists are encouraged to

maintain physical fitness and to participate in internet-based training opportunities.

Wartime forces will increasingly utilise the reservists’ civilian expertise.

#### 4.6 The will to defend the country and voluntary defence activities

The transformation of the operating environment underlines society’s resilience,

where the will to defend the country plays a central role. Voluntary defence is a theme

shared by the entire population and the strong defence will of the Finns lays the

foundation for the defence capability. Voluntary defence training organisations are

partly responsible for sustaining this strong will.

The will to defend the country is maintained through top-notch training and by

supporting voluntary defence training. The National Defence Training Association of

28


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

Finland is developed as a strategic partner of the Defence Forces, in line with the

Nordic concept. The goal is to strengthen the role of voluntary defence activities in

local defence arrangements and in executive assistance. The prerequisites of

voluntary defence will be safeguarded.

#### 4.7 Infrastructure

The network of garrisons will be maintained at the level required by peacetime training

and wartime needs. The Defence Forces’ premises management strategy, extending

until 2030, evaluates the key internal and external factors of change for premises

management, including the needs for development.

Premises management adjustments seeks cost savings by the year 2020 which would

stabilise potential cost rises. The adjustments will continue through actions that

improve the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of the premises.

#### 4.8 Research and development

Developing and maintaining the Defence Forces’ capabilities requires systematic

planning as well as steadfast, correctly-timed and sufficient resource allocation for

research and development (R&D) for the entire service life of any given capability.

The Defence Forces’ R&D resources must meet the requirements of the operating

environment by guaranteeing the organisation’s capacity for innovation and

anticipation, support for capability development, the preconditions for international

R&D cooperation, and the volume of critical expertise for the defence.

Domestic technology expertise supports the entirety of the defence system. The

industry’s role as a partner is based on competency and technological expertise.

Research and development is needed for creating knowhow and maintaining the

industrial production and innovation capability in Finland. Cooperation among the

defence establishment, the industry and research and innovation funds in the public

sector will be intensified.

29


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

#### 4.9 Military security of supply

The Defence Forces’ wartime capabilities are largely based on resources allocated by

the rest of society. Moreover, Finland is dependent on the availability of defence

materiel from abroad.

Military security of supply safeguards the functioning of the Defence Forces’ critical

systems during disruptions in society. Technological expertise is developed to secure

the functioning of these systems. The close international cooperation which serves

this goal will be intensified among the authorities and the domestic and foreign

defence industries. The export conditions of the domestic industry and its entry into

the international marketplace will be supported. In its defence materiel exports Finland

adheres to its international obligations.

The technology areas that are critical to Finland’s defence were defined by the

Government Resolution on Securing the Finnish Defence Technological and Industrial

Base (MoD 2016); expertise pertaining to said areas shall be developed in Finland.

#### 4.10 Legislation

Legislative projects improve readiness, inter-authority cooperation, territorial

surveillance and information gathering. Furthermore, the development of legislation

facilitates the provision and reception of international assistance, and participation in

other international activities.

The most important legislative project underway concerns military intelligence and,

particularly, communications intelligence, systems intelligence and human

intelligence. Moreover, the need for developing legislation for unmanned aerial

vehicles and drones will be studied. Legislation concerning the provision and

reception of executive assistance, the status of those possessing dual citizenship, and

legislation that applies to buying land and real estate will be reviewed. When it comes

to the preconditions of the authorities it is important to study the need to review the

Emergency Powers Act.

30


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

#### 4.11 Resources

A defence capability which meets the demands of the changes in the operating

environment and the preconditions for developing its capability will be safeguarded.

The identified sectors in maintaining and developing the capabilities for the span of

the Defence Report include, in particular, readiness, intelligence, cyber defence, joint

fires and replacing the capabilities that will be phased out.

It is estimated that additional annual financing of EUR 55 million from 2018 onwards is

needed to improve readiness so as to be able to respond to the changes in the

security environment.

As per the recommendations of the Final Report of the Parliamentary Assessment

Group, additional annual financing of EUR 150 million from 2021 onwards, on top of

index adjustments, is needed to maintain the level of the Defence Forces’ materiel

investments.

Preparations for the strategic capability programmes of the Navy and the Air Force

(Squadron 2020 and HX) will continue, and the capabilities to be phased out will be

replaced. The programmes will be financed through budgets from 2019-2031. The

strategic capability programmes will be prepared in such a manner that their future

maintenance and operating costs can be covered from defence budgets without the

need for separate funding.

The detailed financing decisions will be taken in connection with general government

fiscal plans and budgets.

31


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

## 5 SUMMARY

1. The military operating environment is in flux. The consequences of this

change are estimated to continue for a long time.

2. The concept of comprehensive security lays an appropriate foundation for

intersectoral cooperation in the management of wide-ranging threats. Due to

the increasingly complex nature of conflicts, the requirements for the Finnish

concept of comprehensive security and for society’s crisis resilience must be

thoroughly assessed during the next update of the Security Strategy for

Society.

3. The operating environment requires maintaining and developing the national

defence capability. This will be supported through legislative projects and

intensifying defence cooperation.

4. Defence readiness will be improved.

5. By implementing the guidelines of the Defence Report Finland’s defence will

remain viable well into the coming decade.

32


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

**Term** **Definition**

**Air defence** Air defence means the activities which are used to carry out air
surveillance both within and near the national borders, secure the
integrity of airspace, protect the vital functions of society against air
attacks, wear down the enemy in the air and repel his air attack. All
services and civilian authorities as well as the Border Guard
participate in air defence.

**Border Guard forces** Troops made up from the Border Guard’s regular personnel and
conscripts serving in the Border Guard pursuant to the
Conscription Act or those in voluntary military service. Border
Guard troops, or parts thereof, can be attached to the Defence
Forces when readiness is raised or when the national defence
capability so requires.

**Build-up forces** Defence Forces’ troops which create the ability to manage a
drawn-out crisis by augmenting the forces that were mobilised
earlier.

**Crisis resilience** The capability to sustain functions in changing conditions and the
ability to cope with disruptions and crises, and to recover from
them.

**Cyber defence** The national defence related sector of cyber security which
incorporates the capabilities of intelligence, surveillance, cyberattack and cyber defence.

**Defence capability** Finland’s defence capability comprises the defence system’s
military capabilities and the resources attained through domestic
and international defence cooperation.

**Defence cooperation** Defence cooperation means such international defence policy and
military cooperation which supports and strengthens Finland’s
defence capability.

**Defence system** An entirety comprising the Defence Forces’ command echelons as
well as forces and systems, divided into subordinate systems. The
subordinate systems contain the personnel, materiel and doctrines
required to carry out the tasks of military defence.

**Early warning** Early warning provided by military intelligence on such
developments which could jeopardise Finland’s security or pose a
threat.

**Joint operation** A joint operation is one in which the operations of at least two
services are coordinated to reach the military objective. The
Defence Forces’ joint fires and capabilities can support joint
operations.

33


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

**Term** **Definition**

**Land defence** Land defence means the activities which help safeguard society’s
vital functions and carry out territorial surveillance over the land
area making it possible to slow down and wear out the aggressor’s
land attack in selected terrain and ultimately defeat him. All
services and civilian authorities as well as the Border Guard
participate in land defence.

**Local forces** Wartime troops which create nationwide coverage in defence
through surveillance, protecting targets, mobilising forces and by
providing support to the other authorities.


**Manoeuvre (operational)**
**forces**


Wartime troops trained and equipped for nationwide combat,
suitable for being used in versatile and demanding battle conditions
in different operating environments.


**Maritime defence** Maritime defence means the activities which are used to protect
the vital functions of society at sea, carry out maritime surveillance,
secure the integrity of the sea area and the sea lines of
communication, wear down the enemy at sea and repel his sea
attack. All services and civilian authorities as well as the Border
Guard participate in maritime defence.

**Military capability** Military capability comprises plans, manuals and doctrines,
sufficient and competent personnel, the required materiel, the
necessary infrastructure as well as a basing system operated by
the Defence Forces or provided by society.


**Psychological operations**
**(PSYOP)**


Action aimed at producing changes in the information environment.
For example, changes can appear in system performance, access
to information or in human behaviour. Methods used in PSYOP
include electronic warfare, cyber-attacks, psychological operations
and the physical destruction of targets.


**Readiness forces** Troops intended for countering rapidly emerging threats. Their new
elements include the following:



- Readiness formations, which are primarily used for
managing serious disruptions in normal conditions. They can
also be used in military defence.

- Readiness units, which are primarily used in military defence.
They can also be used for executive assistance tasks.

- Rapid Reaction Units (RRU), which create a deterrent effect
on the use of military force against Finland. The RRUs facilitate
the execution of vigorous and pro-active operations.


**Regional forces** Wartime troops trained and equipped for regional battle as per the
conditions of their intended area of deployment.

34


-----

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE PUBLICATIONS 7/2017

**Term** **Definition**

**Security of supply** The ability to sustain the population’s basic economic functions for
the purpose of safeguarding their livelihoods, the viability and
security of society, and the required materiel for national defence
during serious disruptions and emergency conditions.

**Special Forces** Troops that are specially trained and equipped for versatile and
unconventional operations; they usually operate in small teams.

**Targeting support** Targeting support is used to prioritise, order and execute the
acquisition and analysis of intelligence information required to carry
out an attack.

35


-----

**SNELLMANNINKATU 1, HELSINKI**
**PO BOX 23, 00023 GOVERNMENT,**
**FINLAND**
**Tel. +358 295 16001**
**vnk.fi/english**
**info@vnk.fi**

**ISBN: 978-952-287-374-3 PDF**
**ISBN: 978-952-287-373-6 printed**
**ISSN: 1799-7828 PDF**
**ISSN: 0782-6028 printed**


-----

