# TheFrench WhitePaper onDefence andNational Security

#### Forewordby
## NicolasSarkozy

#### PresidentoftheFrenchRepublic


-----

Copyright © 2008 by Odile Jacob Publishing Corporation, New York.
www.odilejacobpublishing.com
Copyright © 2008 by Odile Jacob, Paris/Documentation Française.

All rights reserved. Printed in France.

No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including storage and retrieval systems, except in the case
of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews.

F I R S T E D I T I O N

Printed on acid-free paper.

Library of Congress Control Number: 2008932118.

ISBN: 978-0-9768908-2-9

Translation by ALTO


-----

###### CONTENTS

Foreword by Nicolas Sarkozy,
President of the French Republic ............................................. p. 9

Introduction................................................................................ p. 13

###### I

FROM GLOBALISATION TO THE NATIONAL
SECURITY STRATEGY

Chapter 1: The impact of uncertainty ...................................... p. 19

Chapter 2: Consequences for France and Europe................... p. 41

Chapter 3: The National Security strategy............................... p. 57

###### II

EUROPEAN AND INTERNATIONAL AMBITION

Chapter 4: France’s ambition for Europe ................................ p. 75

Chapter 5: Renovating the transatlantic partnership.............. p. 93

Chapter 6: Collective security in the XXI[st] century................. p. 105

###### III

A NEW STRATEGY FOR ACTION

Chapter 7: What operations?..................................................... p. 119

Chapter 8: Knowledge and anticipation................................... p. 125

Chapter 9: Prevention ................................................................ p. 143


-----

Chapter 10: Deterrence .............................................................. p. 161

Chapter 11: Protection............................................................... p. 167

Chapter 12: Intervention............................................................ p. 191

Chapter 13: The force structure................................................ p. 211

###### IV

A ROADMAP FOR CHANGE

Chapter 14: Professionals serving the nation .......................... p. 225

Chapter 15: Government reorganisation.................................. p. 241

Chapter 16: Industry and research ........................................... p. 251

Chapter 17: Financing the strategy........................................... p. 273

Chapter 18: Rallying the nation ............................................... p. 287

Executive summary ................................................................... p. 301

Members of the French White Paper commission ................ p. 309

Glossary ..................................................................................... p. 313

Appendicies ................................................................................ p. 319

Table of maps and charts.......................................................... p. 327

Table of contents ....................................................................... p. 329


-----

###### FOREWORD BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC

France’s defence and security policy is once more at a crossroads.
Fourteen years since the publication of the previous White Paper
on Defence, globalisation has profoundly changed the economy,
everyday life and international relations. New powers have emerged
and new vulnerabilities have been exposed. The traditional distinction
between domestic security and foreign security has blurred.
At the same time, France has taken on the challenge of creating an
all-professional army. France has made a considerable effort to build
up the armed forces the country needs, but it has also encountered
undeniable obstacles. The guiding force behind this transformation,
the model army for 2015, is today both ill-suited and out of reach. As
Commander in Chief of the French armed forces, I have a duty to protect the vital and strategic interests of our nation. It is my responsibility to choose the strategy and assets France needs at the dawn of the
XXI[st] Century, to take on the security challenges facing us, with confidence and clear understanding. My two goals are to ensure that France
remains a major military and diplomatic power, ready to take on the
challenges congruent with our international obligations, and that the
State has the capacity to guarantee the independence of France and
the protection of all French citizens.
To fulfill this ambition, we must all work together in making the
necessary efforts.
It was for this reason that I requested a wide-ranging review, not
circumscribing defence-related questions to the armed forces alone or
security issues to the domestic security forces alone.


-----

It was for that reason also that I entrusted responsibility for this
review to a commission drawn from all professional and political
backgrounds, including from the armed forces and the defence and
security administrations. Leading figures from all areas of expertise
and all origins were invited to give their views, including representatives of the political parties, researchers, trade unionists,
philosophers and, of course, members of the defence and security
community.
For the same reason too, the French Parliament was involved in
the process in unprecedented ways. For the first time, members of
both houses sat on the White Paper Commission. For the first time,
the parliamentary committees were consulted before strategic choices
were made. And, for the first time, the White Paper will be presented
to Parliament and our defence and security policy will be debated
there.
From this process a new concept has emerged: that of a national
security strategy that treats defence policy, domestic policy, foreign
policy and economic policy as part of a whole, while not losing
sight of their distinctive characteristics. This strategy serves as the
framework for the European and international ambition that is the
bedrock of France’s global calling. I truly believe that this new
doctrine and the corresponding assets will guarantee the security of
the French people and our capacity to shoulder our international
responsibilities.
But to bring this strategy to life, far-reaching reforms are now necessary. These will break down institutional barriers, speed decisionmaking and our response to crises, and create new room for
manoeuvre. All this will release funds to be reinvested in our defence
structure, enabling us to modernise our equipment and reinforce the
operational capabilities of our armed forces.
The goal I have set for the entire defence and national security
community, military and civilian, indeed the goal I have set for the
entire nation, is to successfully adapt our defence structure to address
the challenges of the XXI[st] century. This represents a major step forward for the French people, as they continue to devote substantial
resources to defence and security. It will place heavy demands on all of
the personnel concerned, and I am confident they will commit unstintingly to the reforms presented here. This reform is vital to enable
France to live up to its ambitions. It will provide the State with the
means to guarantee our national independence, and enable our armed
forces, as well as our domestic security and civil security forces, to
guarantee France’s freedom of action and its independent capacity to
decide for itself.


-----

The post cold-war world is rapidly giving way to a more shifting,
more uncertain, less predictable world, exposed to new forms of vulnerability. In tomorrow’s world, France’s national security will be
assured, and France will play its role to the full in the defence of peace
and its values.


Nicolas SARKOZY


-----

-----

###### INTRODUCTION

In 1994, following the demise of the enforced division of Europe
by the “Iron Curtain”, France embarked on a major overhaul of its
strategy and defence organisation. It opted in 1996 for a wholly professional army; it also decided to dismantle its surface to surface ballistic
nuclear missiles and to create a power projection capacity geared to
the new strategic situation. Nearly fifteen years later, in 2008, the
world has changed radically. Now that the post-Cold War era is over,
and globalisation shapes international relations, a new strategy is
needed.

**An ever more unstable environment**

Globalisation is transforming the very foundations of the international system, and the distribution of global power is gradually shifting
towards Asia. New and powerful non-State actors are competing with
States and their strategies. The typology of threats and risks is forcing
us to redefine the conditions of national and international security.
The role and place of military instruments has been modified.
Complexity and uncertainty are unquestionably major features of
this new environment. No single analytical framework can suffice to
grasp in all their dimensions the economic, strategic political and
cultural dynamics shaping globalisation, or flowing from it.
Examples of this complexity abound. The spectacular enrichment
of a hitherto impoverished portion of the planet is taking place side by
side with the impoverishment of whole countries or regions. The
number of conflicts between States is in decline, but the degree of violence can be extreme and new health or ecological risks are producing
consequences for collective security. Major strategic upsets may occur


-----

at any time, as witnessed by terrorism’s change of scale and its consequences. Economic interdependence is creating ties of solidarity
contributing to the stability of the planet, yet at the same time the balance of power between States remains as important as ever in international relations. While there is a need to codify new rules of global governance, they are difficult to formulate and hard to enforce.
This list by no means embraces all of the uncertainties of the world
we have now entered, a world not necessarily more dangerous, but cer_tainly less predictable, less stable and more contradictory than the one_
_that emerged in 1994, at the time of drafting of the previous White_
_Paper. In this volatile environment, the French territory and popula-_
tion are vulnerable in new ways that must now be treated as key factors in adapting our defence and security. They are the result of both
global phenomena, such as damage to the biosphere or the risks of
pandemics, and of the direct threats to France from terrorist networks,
the long-term consequences of ballistic proliferation around the continent of Europe, and attacks on information and communication
systems.
_It is the ambition of France to be in a position where it does not have_
_to submit to the effects of uncertainty; its ambition, rather, is to have the_
_capacity to anticipate, respond to and influence international develop-_
_ments. This ambition has resulted in the formulation of a new national_
_security strategy. Our task is to leverage the revolutions in knowledge_
and information, to prevent or deter the risk of war, to guarantee the
security of our citizens as effectively as possible, both on French soil
and beyond, wherever the security of France, the defence of Europe
and world peace may come under threat.

**A change in procedures**

When setting up the Commission responsible for drafting the
_White Paper on Defence and National Security on August 23, 2007, the_
President of the French Republic asked that the Commission conduct
its proceedings without taboos, taking a broad, transparent approach
to the choices confronting France. The Commission has made full use
of this freedom. Its composition was deliberately broad, being made
up of representatives of the Civil Service and the armed forces, as well
as members of both chambers of Parliament drawn from both the governing majority and the opposition, qualified personalities from the
academic community and strategic research institutes, representatives
of industry, and independent experts.
_The Commission took several unprecedented initiatives for an exer-_
_cise of this kind. It held 40 public hearings, broadcast on the Parlia-_
mentary TV channels. It interviewed 52 French and international per

-----

sonalities representing 14 nations from five continents, including
political leaders, generals and other officers, actors in the field,
experts, and representatives of civil society. Numerous consultations
were held with representatives of the French and foreign government
departments concerned, civil and military experts, members of the representative committees of defence and security personnel, business
leaders, trade union representatives, representatives of associations,
academics and journalists. These took place within a more restricted
framework, given the necessary confidentiality of certain discussions.
_The dialogue with French parliamentarians comprised regular dis-_
cussions with the parliamentary committees, followed by a series of
hearings behind closed doors with Government ministers on the draft
_White Paper even before the President of the French Republic gave his_
seal of approval to the text. This was a radically new approach from
previous White Papers’ proceedings.
_A website set up for the occasion attracted more than 250,000 hits_
since its opening, indicating keen public interest in the shaping of
French security and defence policy. To encourage dialogue, the Commission also opened a series of forums on its website to discuss most
of the issues raised in the White Paper, including the place of France in
the world, nuclear deterrence, the European defence capability, the
concept of national security, the links between the armed forces and
the nation, relations with NATO, the status of reservists, interventions
abroad, etc.
The Commission members naturally also went out to meet professionals working in the service of the defence and security of the nation.
Around forty visits were made to the forces or to theatres of operation,
to gauge hopes, aspirations and difficulties, notably with regard to the
quality and availability of equipment. These visits systematically
included roundtable discussions between members of the Commission
and all categories of personnel. At the European level, discussions
were held with our main partners and with eminent European Union
and Atlantic Alliance personalities providing an opportunity to present
the Commission’s work and learn the views of our partners.

**Reinventing our strategy**

The resulting White Paper introduces a major innovation in the def_inition of French strategy, in that it spells out a strategy not only for_
_defence, but also for national security._
_Its aim is to ward off the risks and threats detrimental to the life of_
_the nation. The threats may come from States or transnational non-_
State groups. The risks may arise from natural or health disasters
calling for a global response. The life of the country may be affected


-----

either as a result of hostile intentions or of accidental breakdowns.
Whatever the case, the possibility of a threat to national security
demands foresight, prevention, and a swift response, harnessing all of
the means at the government’s disposal and the activation of European
and international co-operation. This strategy therefore embraces both
external and domestic security, military means as well as civil ones,
defence policy in the strict sense of the term and domestic security
policy and civil security, together with foreign policy and economic
policy.
The definition of an overarching security strategy is a response to
a new necessity, namely the need to adapt to the upheavals resulting
from globalisation. This is incumbent not only on France but also on
all of its allies and partners.


-----

##### I

### FROM GLOBALISATION TO THE NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY


-----

-----

CHAPTER 1

###### THE IMPACT OF UNCERTAINTY

Globalisation is a new situation in which the spread of information
and knowledge, the transformation of trade and changing international power relationships have an immediate global impact. It is
creating a general, uncontrolled interaction and interdependence
between all States. It is enabling a multitude of new non-State actors
and individuals to reap maximum benefit from the possibilities of
faster international movements of people as well as data and goods,
both material and immaterial.
Globalisation therefore is shaping international security. It is one
of the most far-reaching changes to have occurred since the end of the
Cold War, the event that served as the backdrop to the 1994 Defence
_White Paper. We have entered a new era, driven by very different and_
contradictory forces that no longer comply with the institutional,
social, cultural and military logic that fashioned our post-Cold War
outlook.

##### Positive developments since 1994

The number of democracies has increased over the past 20 years.
They represented 63% of States in 2007 from 40% in 1987[1]. Admittedly, this trend is neither global nor irreversible and is confined
mainly to Europe. Authoritarian regimes continue to dominate more
than half of the world’s population, and certain States are democratic
only in name. But the demise of the logic of confrontation between

1. Source: Freedom House, 2007.


-----

two antagonistic political and economic systems, the universal spread
of the free-market economy model embodied in the democracies, and
the relative reduction of poverty in the fast-growing regions, notwithstanding wide disparities between States or within countries themselves, have helped ease the tensions characteristic of the previous
period.
In absolute terms, an unprecedented reduction in poverty since the
middle of the 1990s has allowed nearly 400 million people, in China
essentially, to rise above the extreme poverty threshold symbolised by
an income of less than one dollar per day.
The growing interdependence of the world’s markets and economies is abating the risks of acute confrontation between States. When
major climate or health accidents occur, as on the occasion of the tsunami on December 26, 2004, the SARS epidemic in 2002/03, or again
this year in Myanmar and China, we are witnessing a growing capacity
for international mobilisation and co-operation. There is a growing
awareness of the common responsibility for dealing with world risks,
even if it remains difficult to implement global solutions.
The Internet boom has revolutionised modes of communication,
training, and access to knowledge. Around 16 million people were
using it in 1996, but by 2006 the number had grown to 1.1 billion, and
it continues to grow exponentially. This revolution is creating a more
transparent, border-free world (although the Internet is under close
surveillance in certain countries) based on the concept of exchange.
Time is being compressed in a way never seen before. The cost of telecommunications is falling spectacularly, and this deep transformation
holds out unprecedented potential for the economic powerhouses and
developing countries alike, for both groups and individuals.
In this benign context, there has been a decline in the number of
_armed conflicts. Numbers have fallen steadily between 1990 and 2006._
This applies to Europe, with the end of the armed conflicts that caused
so much bloodshed in the Balkans in the 1990s, as also in Africa, in
Angola, Liberia and Rwanda. Other examples illustrate this trend in
Asia, with the solution to the armed conflicts afflicting Indonesia, in
Aceh, in the wake of the tsunami disaster and the intervention of European mediation, and in East Timor.
_International society’s capacity for mobilisation is making progress,_
thanks to the aspiration of a growing number of States to play a
regional or global role, and to shoulder greater responsibilities in their
bid for international status. The desire to prevent, limit or halt wars
can be put down to the new instruments of prevention spawned by globalisation. International co-operation in the management or prevention of crises is reaching spectacular proportions: in 2008, nearly
90,000 men and women were deployed in UN peacekeeping opera

-----

**Number of internet users – 1991-2008**
**(in millions)**


Source: Ministry of Defence (open sources).

tions. Each operation aimed at stabilising or supporting peace now
involves several dozen States or organisations.
At the same time, important States, like the ones that emerged
from the break-up of the Soviet Union, South Africa or Libya, have
renounced their nuclear status, weapons or ambitions, depending on
the case.
_Europe is in the process of completing its unity. The historic_
enlargement of the European Union is already a considerable source of
strength. It is now the world’s leading economic and trading power
and the largest contributor to development assistance. It possesses diplomatic, financial, economic and military resources essential to the
stabilisation of the international system. For its Member States, many
security questions now find their solution at the European level: this


-----

-----

applies to health and environmental safety, to the reconstruction of
post-conflict crisis zones, and the fight against major organised crime
networks.
From a security point of view, the enlargement of the Atlantic Alliance has bolstered that of the European Union. NATO evolved from a
military structure organised to cope with a Warsaw Pact that threatened it directly, to a security organisation offering the United Nations
multinational military capabilities based on a close relationship and
co-ordination between American and European means.

##### Worrying trends

###### GLOBALISATION’S DOWNSIDE

Although globalisation has greatly expanded exchanges in all areas,
it also has a downside. Faster means of transport are leading not only
to increased risks of the spread of pandemics, and the Internet allows
the propagation of more than just computer viruses. Means of communication are bringing forth an increasingly transparent world, but the
resulting immediacy is contributing to the rapid spread of all kinds of
_crises—political, economic and financial._
Internet users are expected to account for around 22% of the world
population in 2011. The instantaneous nature of communication can
be measured also in terms of the volume of messages exchanged electronically each day—estimated at between 100 and 200 billion. The
_staggering acceleration of the speed of circulation of information, and_
with it the speed of action everywhere, is making management of these
crises infinitely more complex. This is in turn undermining States’
capacity to regulate, and is proportionally increasing the capacity for
action by businesses, organisations and networks on the global scene.
In view of the foregoing, defence and security strategies need to
address new problems: not only the defence or control of defined areas,
but also the explosion of unchecked movements of people, goods and
ideas. The responses themselves can only be global, combining all of the
means at the disposal of the authorities and civil society; it implies
mobilisation at every level, national, European and international.
Communication on a global scale is also making the dissemination
of economic, political and cultural models more perceptible, which is
seen as an attempt to diminish the world’s diversity. The rejection of
_uniformity is breeding a proliferation of identity-centred responses,_
sometimes violent, bringing with them the risk of new fractures on a
planetary scale.


-----

Consequently, and paradoxically, globalisation goes hand-in-hand
with rising nationalism, religious fanaticism and authoritarian backlashes. Some people are exploiting the opportunities to disseminate
their ideas via the Internet and other means of information and communication. Others seek to establish ways to compartmentalise the virtual world, means of control and prohibition, or even ways to manipulate communication.
Globalisation is also fuelling flagrant economic and social inequalities. Whole regions are failing to share in the benefits of world growth,
and instead of narrowing, the gap between richest and poorest is widening. At a time when the spread of information and news is raising the
visibility of these inequalities, this situation is fraught with dangers for
_international stability. It could breed revolt and extremism. The posi-_
tive effects of globalisation have passed by much of Africa, Asia, and
_even Latin America._


-----

The economic growth of the new powers goes hand-in-hand with
rising energy consumption, as well as a growing demand for natural
_resources and strategic raw materials. This is contributing to two types_
_of disorder._
The first concerns damage to the biosphere, including global
_warming, which between now and 2025 is forecast to produce effects_
that are still difficult to measure on the equilibrium of the polar zones,
the level of the oceans, the geography of human migrations, food security, and the expansion of the areas affected by certain diseases. The
spread of microbial agents seems set to accelerate. These new risks can
only be tackled and dealt with on a global scale, by new organisations
and forms of action. Their impact on security needs to be measured
long in advance.
The second of these is the growing pressure on strategic supplies.
Global energy consumption could double between now and 2030. The
European Union countries are currently more than 75% dependent for
their oil consumption on production zones located in the Middle East,
Africa and Russia. The figures for gas are comparable. The fastgrowing economies such as India, and above all China, are scouring
the planet in search of new sources of supply. Excessive and unregulated pressures in this regard could breed competition, and possibly
even conflict.
Over-exploitation of natural resources could stoke up tensions on a
_planetary scale, and on a scale hitherto unseen in the race to satisfy_
_demand for energy, water, food and raw materials. These issues demand_
regulatory strategies also on a global scale.
By accelerating exchanges of every kind, globalisation is facilitating programmes for the proliferation of weapons that are either
_banned or regulated by international treaties. These developments are_
no longer solely the result of State policies but also the result of initiatives taken by private and clandestine networks. Nuclear arms proliferation is taking on a new dimension, with nuclear tests by India and
Pakistan in 1998, North Korea in 2006, and grave suspicions surrounding Iran’s nuclear programme. This trend is a major threat, one
that could drastically affect international security in the coming years.
Simultaneously, technologies for the fabrication of ballistic mis_siles, cruise missiles and drones have become widespread. Several_
countries, Iran and Pakistan notably, have crossed the 1,000-km
threshold for ballistic missiles since 1994, or now have access to distinctly greater ranges (as in the case of India and North Korea).
In the field of chemical warfare, the implementation of the 1993
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) is unsatisfactory, no unannounced inspection of chemical sites (“challenge” inspections as provided for in the international convention) having been carried out. In


-----

-----

the biological sphere—one of the hardest to monitor and benefiting
from spectacular progress in the life sciences—no instrument exists to
control the application of the 1972 Biological and Toxin Weapons
Convention (BTWC).

###### CHANGING FORMS OF VIOLENCE

_Terrorism crossed an historical threshold and underwent a change_
of scale on September 11, 2001. It caused trauma in the United States,
and prompted a military operation leading to the intervention in
Afghanistan to overthrow of the Taliban regime in 2001, undermined
Pakistan and, indirectly, led to the war in Iraq. The 2001 attacks and
those that followed, in Europe notably (Madrid 2004, London 2005),
marked a turning point in the scale, spread, modes of operation and
effectiveness of terrorist networks. Terrorism is now capable of
striking at the heart of any country, with unprecedented violence, with
a degree of international preparation and intensity of action never
before achieved by terrorist groups.

**_Jihadism, Islamism, Terrorism_**

In Europe, Jihad is often translated as “holy war”. Etymologically,
though, Jihad signifies “an effort towards a specific goal”, i.e., on the
one hand, the effort to defend or spread Islam, and on the other, an
effort on the part of the believer to conform to the rules of the Koran.
This reference appears in various verses of the Koran in different forms:
spreading Islam by persuasion, fighting to repulse an attack on Islam, etc.
Just as one distinguishes Islam from its political exploitation (“Islamism”),
one needs to distinguish the religious notion of Jihad from “Jihadism”,
which is a deformation of it through terrorist action.

This radicalisation of violence on a global scale makes it one of the
major threats for the coming years, requiring a radical overhaul of
defence and security strategies.
The wars in Afghanistan and subsequently Iraq, and those that
have caused bloodshed in Africa, have dominated the international
scene. The first two, after phases of high-intensity military action,
employing the full spectrum of the most advanced technologies, are
being prolonged in the form of guerrilla warfare and are spreading
among the civilian populations. In Iraq, a new focal point of international terrorist violence aimed at civil populations has taken root. In
Africa, war remains a reality or a potential threat in too many regions.


-----

-----

In certain African countries, the share of military expenditures in
national budgets is still far too high and is hampering development. In
others, control of the territory is and will be an acute problem.
_The privatisation of armed violence is spreading. Alongside the wide-_
spread phenomenon of militias, private military firms are springing up
on the fringes of or alongside regular forces. These companies provide
security for firms working in unstable regions such as Africa. But they
play an increasingly prominent direct role in the stabilisation phases
following international military interventions. This trend runs counter
to the principle of the legitimacy of the State monopoly of armed
force. The soldier in uniform is no longer immediately identifiable
with a combatant acting within a multinational framework. In addition to the confusion resulting from the proliferation of militias there
is now, with such a trend, the added blurring of the identity of forces
with an international mandate.

###### THE RISE IN GLOBAL MILITARY SPENDING

After declining significantly in the 1990s, global military spending
has risen continuously since then. Global defence spending, which in
1998 amounted to US$ 867 billion (in constant 2007 dollars) had risen
to US$ 1,204 billion in 2006, reverting to its level at the beginning of
the 1990s.
The main cause of this increase is North American spending. The
United States sharply increased its spending in 2002, and this has outpaced GDP growth ever since. This is the main factor in the global
upward trend. US spending, and in Europe that of the United
Kingdom, have also risen significantly as a result of the war effort in
Afghanistan and Iraq.
Yet even outside these countries, worldwide spending has risen significantly since 1998 (see box). South Asia and East Asia, with an additional US$ 40 billion since that date, have seen a pronounced increase.
China is continuing to modernise its equipment, with substantial purchases from Russia (combat aircraft and submarines) and has
expanded its nuclear and ballistic capabilities. India’s spending has
grown at the same fast pace as its GDP growth. This has resulted in a
substantial increase in the military resources of both countries, and
especially China.
Europe and South America have increased their military spending
the least since 1998, proportionally.
Official comparisons should be treated with caution, due to the
limited transparency of certain major countries’ expenditures, such as
China.


-----

-----

-----

###### MAJOR UNRESOLVED CRISES

The case of the Balkans deserves to be treated separately, though
the situation there remains fragile. But the war that marked the countries of the former Yugoslavia throughout the 1990s is over.
On the other hand, contrary to the hopes aroused during those
1990s, a major geography of conflict is emerging, stretching from the
_Eastern Mediterranean to India._
In the Near and Middle East, peace is under constant threat from
at least four sources of conflict. The deadlock in the peace process
between Israel and the Palestinians initiated in 1993 is fuelling radicalisation, in which social, religious and security factors are inextricably
linked. Lebanon is prone to repeated crises, largely manipulated by
outside actors, from Syria and Iran notably. The continuing hostilities
in Iraq give reason to fear a general escalation in the antagonism
between Shiite and Sunni Muslims, and are nurturing a hotspot of violence pervading the region as a whole. In addition to its nuclear and
ballistic programme, as well as its external activities, Iran is openly
threatening the very existence of Israel. Although originally governed
by distinct logics, these crises are increasingly interlinked directly and
indirectly. They now carry a risk of a chain reaction fuelled by the
inability of the international institutions and the great powers to set in
motion a peaceful settlement, and that of the countries in the region
themselves to overcome their divisions.
At the same time, the stabilisation operations in Afghanistan are
becoming protracted, creating the impression that Western power is
exposed and vulnerable. The situation in Pakistan appears to be more
and more fragile: the border areas with Afghanistan are destabilised,
uncontrolled and serve as sanctuaries for Al Qaeda and affiliated
groups. The latter could affect the security of Pakistan, that of the international forces in Afghanistan, and could also be preparing terrorist
actions in the West. The Kashmir question remains unresolved despite
renewed dialogue with India. This situation as a whole is unfolding
within the context of a strengthening of Pakistan’s ballistic and nuclear
capabilities.
The distress of the populations in these regions is creating new
generations whose sole horizon is armed violence.
Resistance to the presence of foreign troops, even under international mandate, is hardening, even as recourse to military force
alone appears inappropriate.
Other crises to which there is no solution at present are affecting
international security. In Africa many conflicts and guerrilla situations
persist. These are becoming increasingly complex due to the proliferation of actors and the extension of these conflicts to the regional level.


-----

This is the situation in the Horn of Africa, in the Great Lakes region,
and in the region of the Sahel.
In Asia, the risks of unresolved conflicts rooted in history could
threaten international security on a large scale if they are not headed
off: these include the Korean question, the Taiwanese question, and
the question of Kashmir. With at least three declared nuclear powers
(China, India and Pakistan) and the presence of two other major
powers in the Far East (Russia and the United States), these risks are
a cause for concern.

##### The new strategic situation and instability

_Globalisation is creating a world that is neither better nor more dan-_
_gerous than two decades ago. It does, on the other hand, foreshadow the_
_outlines of a distinctly more unstable international system, more out of_
control and hence more disquieting, calling for both more global and
highly specific responses.

###### THE PROGRESSIVE SHIFT IN THE CENTRE
OF STRATEGIC GRAVITY TOWARDS ASIA

Looking to 2025, Asia will be one of the major centres of international life, alongside Europe and America. New powers will have
emerged, China and India foremost among them.
More than half of the world’s population will be of Asian origin at
that date, representing around 4.7 billion people. China is expected to
become the world’s number one importer and exporter. Barring a
major internal or international upset, China’s gross domestic product
(GDP) and that of India could triple over the next two decades, and
Asia could by then account for half of global oil consumption.
This growing power, coupled with that of other emerging countries, foreshadows the outlines of a reshaped global economic and geopolitical system. The relative importance of the new powers, the scale
of the interests at stake, and the competition for access to markets and
resources, are modifying the global strategic equation.
Asia’s rise is not without its fragilities, as is witnessed by the risks
of economic overheating, the persistent underdevelopment of whole
swathes of the population, and its exposure to major natural risks or
ecological disasters. Nor is it irreversible, should one of the causes of
potential conflict lead to war, which given the region’s conditions,
could prove devastating. Consequently, Asia is one of the main regions


-----

where rivalries or conflicts could destabilise the international security
system.

However, the rise of these new powers is unquestionably one of the
outstanding features of the future strategic landscape.

**Strategic issues in Asia**

Asia is now one of the most dynamic regions of the world, where
growth is fastest, the population most numerous, and the transformations most impressive. It is also home to a large number of unresolved
conflicts (Kashmir, the Korean peninsula, and the Taiwanese question),
and interstate tensions (India-Pakistan, India-China, China-Japan), and
where three of the world’s most important countries have strategic
interests and a military presence (Russia, China, and the United States).
It is the only region where three nuclear powers have common frontiers
that are not internationally recognised (India-Pakistan-China). Meanwhile North Korea, which carried out a nuclear test in October 2006, and
which is continuing to develop its ballistic technologies, is giving
concern to its neighbours, Japan in particular. Its role in global proliferation is a destabilising factor.
Against this background, military spending is rising steeply. In China
especially, the military budget has been growing at publicly-announced
10% average annual growth rate between 1989 and 2007, and 17% for
the two years 2007 and 2008. This is all the more disquieting inasmuch
as these spending figures lack transparency where China is concerned,
as the region possesses no system of collective security, and as little is
being done to build confidence.

###### THE RELATIVE DECLINE OF THE WESTERN POWERS

The Western world (i.e., essentially Europe and America) no longer
has a monopoly of economic and strategic initiative in the sense that it
still did have in 1994.
Economically speaking, in 20 years time the countries of Europe
and North America will produce only around 40% of global wealth and
Asia will have been caught up with them.
In population terms, projections highlight the decline in the West’s
relative share. In 2025, the United States and Europe will represent no
more than 9% of the world’s population.
While the models of governance and the values promoted by these
States are sometimes envied, increasingly they are radically rejected,
on ideological and religious grounds, sustained by the spread of


-----

jihadism via the Internet and the public media. Western power, its
obsession with security since 2001 and its practical manifestations, are
often perceived as aggressive. Economic globalisation has indeed
prompted a process of opening up and unification of international
society without precedent. But it has yet to generate universal acceptance of a common world view. On the contrary, opposition to
declared Western ambitions is fuelling new tensions and violence.
America’s and Europe’s technological and military superiority will
remain considerable, but it will have rivals. The development by the
new powers of military capabilities will enable them to maintain a
stronger and broader presence in their zones of interest. Many of
them, particularly in Asia, are acceding to comparable levels of technology in certain key areas such as communications, information and
space technologies.
However, these underlying trends should not be overestimated.
The Western countries themselves harbour diverse views of the
world and cannot be reduced to a single “model”, nor would they allow
themselves to be dragged into a binary vision of international relations. The technology gap remains in their favour, especially when
they invest in leading-edge science and technologies.
The United States will continue to set the pace in that respect.
Over the coming fifteen years, it will hold on to the advantages that
have made it the leading economic, technological and military power
in the world, namely vigorous population growth, a dynamic private
sector, a decisive lead in the knowledge and communications economy,
and technological and military pre-eminence. 80% of all of the world’s
computer servers are American.
It is their determination to continue to be open societies, to organise together, to invest in knowledge and to uphold their values that
will allow the other Western countries to play their role in international security in a world where the balance of powers and world
governance is set to evolve in any case.

###### THE FRAGILITIES OF THE SYSTEM
OF COLLECTIVE SECURITY

The collective security system appears to have been weakened.
Most of the instruments and institutions of international society such
as the UN, the WTO, the IMF, etc. and the multilateral arms-control
instruments are in the throes of a dual crisis of legitimacy and efficacy.
The crisis of legitimacy flows in the first place from the absence of
agreement over of the reform of the UN Security Council. This organ,
which has prime responsibility for international peacekeeping and


-----

security, remains the capstone of international relations. But it is now
insufficiently representative, and this is a cause of growing weakness
in the gathering international rebalancing of power.
Moreover, despite new developments, arms-control and nonproliferation instruments are coming under challenge either as a result
of the failures of the fight against proliferation, or due to the nonparticipation of important States. Meanwhile some States are challenging or withdrawing from treaties that long organised arms-control,
disarmament and non-proliferation (for example the American withdrawal from the ABM treaty, announced in December 2001, Russia’s distancing itself from the Treaty on Conventional Forces in Europe, or
North Korea’s withdrawal from the Non-Proliferation Treaty in 2003).
Contrary to the hopes aroused at the end of the Cold War, the logic
_of power is not on the wane. The globalisation of the economy has not_
led to the emergence of a new more democratic and more peaceful
world order. The States exposed to Al Qaeda-inspired terrorist violence
are tempted to break free from the multilateral framework governing
the use of force, or from the legal norms of international law. Power
relationships between States and their divergences of interests are


-----

shaping international relations as much as the new forms of economic
and financial interdependence.
Thus Russia, for example, is seeking to consolidate its return to the
international scene and its status as a major power by taking an offensive line in dealing with certain European countries, notably those in
its immediate vicinity (the so-called “near-abroad”). It gives the
impression of having difficulty adjusting to the political changes that
have taken place since the end of the Warsaw Pact, and in taking on
board the full implications of the democratic process initiated in the
1990s. It is tempted to test the effects of putting pressure—economic at
least—on its neighbours.

###### FRAGILE STATES AND LAWLESS AREAS

Contrary to the foregoing situation, a growing number of States
lack all the attributes of sovereignty, or are progressively losing them.
They are incapable of discharging their sovereign prerogatives in terms
of ensuring the security of their territory and their population in terms
of the distribution of resources or preparing for the future. But these
fragile States, which are highly vulnerable to both domestic crises and
external shocks, are often incapable of combating trafficking, rebellions or the activities of terrorist groups utilising their territory. Consequently, lawless areas are springing up in many regions of the world,
particularly in Africa (as in the Sahara/Sahel zone) and in Asia (as in
northern Pakistan, for example).
Preventing the outbreak of crises or wars in these States has
become one of the major challenges facing the international security
system.

###### STRATEGIC SURPRISES AND UPSETS

Those that reject the influence of the West will seek to circumvent
its technological advantage and military power, while fiercely competing with its economic might. The quest for the most effective strategies that avoid head-on confrontation with our capabilities and
attempts to test our societies’ vulnerabilities will intensify.
Consequently, we must be prepared for strategic upsets resulting
from the scale of violence of attempts to thwart the normal functioning
of our societies, in places not normally expected by our military and
security means. Interruptions to the flows of goods, people, assets, or
again information that are the lifeblood of national and international
life today can take unforeseen forms and trigger an unexpected regres_sion in various parts of the world, Europe included._


-----

_The most serious currently identified scenario is the combination of_
_a major terrorist attack on European soil, using non-conventional_
_nuclear, chemical or biological-type means, together with a war situation_
_in one of the strategically important zones for Europe. With that in_
mind, our strategy should allow for the possibility of an outbreak of
_major conflicts in the Middle East and Asia._
But upsets can take other forms.
A breaking of the nuclear taboo itself is no longer improbable. Circumstances have changed since the balance of deterrence reached in
the 1960s. New nuclear powers have emerged whose doctrines, where
they exist, are little understood. Nuclear weapons are present in several sensitive regions with persistent territorial disputes. In addition,
certain terrorist groups are known to be seeking access to radiological
or nuclear materials or devices.


-----

-----

-----

CHAPTER 2

###### CONSEQUENCES FOR FRANCE AND EUROPE

France and Europe belong to a group of democracies whose situation has grown more vulnerable than it was at the end of the Cold
War.

##### Four critical regions

###### THE ARC OF CRISIS, FROM THE ATLANTIC
TO THE INDIAN OCEAN

This region is not a homogenous ensemble. Each country in it has
its own identity and history, and its political, social, economic and
human wellsprings. Each part of the region has its own logic: that of
the Sahel area, from Mauritania to Somalia, is clearly different from
the Mediterranean littoral, the Near East, the Arabian-Persian Gulf, or
from Afghanistan and Pakistan.
But essential changes now taking place are modifying the security
situation for France and Europe in this part of the world, which lies in
Europe’s neighbourhood and is central to global security strategic
interests. The upsurge in radical Islam, the antagonism between Sunni
and Shiite Muslims, the Kurdish question, and the fragility of political
regimes in the region, form an explosive mixture. The establishment
and networking of terrorist groups are becoming a permanent fact of
life. Iran’s nuclear and ballistic programmes by themselves threaten
to upset the balance right across the Middle East and beyond. The
region’s oil and gas reserves remain central to the energy supplies of
the European continent.


-----

_A new risk now emerging is that of a linking up of the conflicts, from_
the Near and Middle East to the Pakistan-Afghanistan region. The
existence of mainly clandestine nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons programmes is aggravating this danger, at time when the
countries of these regions are openly or covertly acquiring large-scale
military capabilities with aircraft and missiles. The destabilisation of
Iraq, notably the division between Shiite and Sunni Muslims, could
spread to the rest of the Middle East.
The instability of this geographical arc could therefore affect our
interests directly or indirectly. European countries have a military
presence in varying capacities in Chad, Palestine, Lebanon, Iraq and
Afghanistan. Given these conditions, there is every likelihood Europe
and France will be called upon to become still more involved in the
region as a whole, to help prevent crises and to resolve them.


-----

###### SECURITY IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA

France and Europe cannot turn their backs on the continent
closest to them. Africa possesses numerous strengths and has a considerable human and economic potential. In the long term, these capacities could enable it to play a leading role in global economic growth
and security. Nevertheless, continuing population growth, the weakness of its state structures and poor governance are liable to hinder
development and the fair redistribution of its gains for a long time to
come.
Security in Africa will suffer in the first place from poor living
conditions due to urban growth, the lack of adequate health structures
and increasingly scarce local food resources. Climate warming is
aggravating the situation. France and Europe must contribute to the
fight against worsening conditions in order to curb migratory trends
driven by economic and social distress. These conditions are also
encouraging the transit of illicit goods via this continent towards
Europe, and their eradication is a prime objective. This is especially
vital in view of the spectacular growth in the flow of drugs originating
from Latin America.
Sub-Saharan Africa continues to suffer from endemic wars, both
internal and international. Because of their regional dimension, some
conflicts (Somalia, the Democratic Republic of Congo, or Darfur)
could affect the security of the continent. Africa aspires to develop its
own capacity to settle disputes, prevent crises and keep the peace.
France and Europe have a major interest in contributing to the establishment of these means. To that end, they should continue to support
the efforts of the African Union (AU), regional organisations and the
countries of Africa themselves.
The continent’s abundant strategic raw materials and energy
resources should be exploited, in the first place for the benefit of the
African populations themselves. These constitute an essential resource
for Africa. Moreover, they can also contribute to the promotion of
European technologies. A European strategy built around a balanced
partnership with the countries concerned, for equitable access to these
resources, should therefore be implemented.


-----

-----

Developments in Russia and trends in its policy vis-à-vis its immediate neighbours, the former members of the Soviet Union, or vis-à-vis
adjacent countries, along with its partnership with the Europeans and
the Atlantic Alliance, will continue to be important factors for the
security of the continent and peace in the world. Russia has not yet
completed the changes begun in the 1990s. Its attitude towards some
of its neighbours is cause for concern. Forging a balanced relationship
will therefore remain a major objective in the coming years.
Moreover, rather than distancing ourselves from the Balkans now
that the situation there is in the process of stabilisation, we should be
redoubling our attention. We need to support a process of reconciliation and integration into the European and Transatlantic polity. The
region’s persistent fragilities, arising from history and nationalistic
urges, called for vigilance. All of Europe’s countries have a direct
interest in maintaining a substantial commitment in this region.


-----

###### THE EFFECT OF MAJOR CONFLICTS IN ASIA

Major conflicts in Asia would directly affect the interests of France
and Europe. The sources of still unresolved conflicts inherited from
the second half of the XX[th] century create an especially serious risk
inasmuch as three major nuclear States have common frontiers that
are not recognised internationally (the line of control between India
and Pakistan, and the line of actual control between India and China),
and inasmuch as Asia still does not have multilateral institutions for
the prevention or settlement of conflicts. The constitution in June 2001
of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, bringing together the


-----

Heads of State of its six member countries (China, Russia, and the
Central Asian States) and observer states (India, Iran, Mongolia and
Pakistan), or again the development of ASEAN, are evidence of a
growing awareness among the region’s countries of the need for collective consultation on security problems. But as Asian leaders themselves admit, these efforts fall short of what is needed.
_The prevention of major conflicts in Asia is therefore a central objec-_
_tive for all actors on the international scene. Europeans should take the_
following key factors into account: the impact of war on strategic maritime routes; the potential economic and financial fallout of a major
conflict on a continent that plays a growing role in the world economy;
the impact of any war in regions where the Asian powers obtain energy
supplies or strategic raw materials; our links with the United States,
guaranteeing the security of several States in the region. Europe and
France increasingly perceive the importance of what is at stake in Asia.
As a result, the countries of Europe should build their approach on an
effort to explain these issues and to familiarise public opinion, government and their leading citizens with them.

##### New vulnerabilities for Europe’s territory and its citizens

Europe’s population and territory are now more vulnerable than in
the 1990s, in the sense of being more exposed to direct threats.

###### TERRORISM

France and Europe are direct targets of jihadism and those
claiming allegiance to it. This source of terrorism will remain one of
the main physical threats directed against Europe and its citizens
around the world for many years to come. In response to the terrorist
threat, in June 2006 France adopted the Government White Paper on
Domestic Security against Terrorism. This Paper argues that terrorist
groups will modify their modus operandi depending on their perception of Europe’s weaknesses and vulnerabilities. At present terrorism
mainly uses conventional means and explosives. These attacks have
taken an extreme form with suicide bombings.
But several groups are seeking to use non-conventional weapons,
albeit rudimentary ones. If this proves successful, it will represent a
dramatic step in the destabilisation of the national and European
community.


-----

Given the scale of possible attacks, urgent action is needed to put
an end to the current inadequacy of detection, analysis and response
capabilities, as well as of the means of protection available to our
domestic security forces, civil security and armed forces in contexts
where radiological, biological or chemical weapons are being used.
Other potential targets include infrastructures critical to the working
of the economy, society or institutions, both on national territory and
abroad, along with the oil and gas production and transport system,
other modes of energy production, the food supply chain, together with
information systems, which are now essential to all human activities.
State-supported terrorist acts cannot be ruled out any more than
attacks by jihadist groups in the coming years. France has already had
experience of this in the past. Our territory and our population could
again come under this type of threat in the future.
Consequently, terrorism will be the subject of constant attention
and monitoring. By raising our defence thresholds, the reinforcement
of our intelligence and preventive capabilities will seek to forestall any
occurrence and limit its impact.

###### MISSILE THREATS

The threat of ballistic and cruise missiles to the continent of
Europe has grown sharply and France and several other European
countries will come within range of new ballistic capabilities between
now and 2025. This direct exposure, regardless of the intentions of the
governments that acquire these capabilities, represents a new factor
for which France and Europe must be prepared.

###### MAJOR CYBER ATTACKS

Information systems, which are the nerve system of our economic
and social life, as well as of the operations of the public authorities, of
the major energy, transport or food producers, or again the organisation
of our defence, have made our societies and their defence vulnerable to
accidental breakdowns or intentional attacks on computer networks.
The current daily level of cyber attacks, whether from State
sources or not, points to a very high potential for the destabilisation of
everyday life, paralysis of critical networks for the life of the nation, or
denial of access to certain military capabilities.
Society and government are still ill-prepared for the risks of massive attacks, and these should therefore be the subject of fresh attention, both in terms of strengthening defences and enhancing our
capacity to hit back.


-----

-----

-----

###### ESPIONAGE AND STRATEGIES OF INFLUENCE

Globalised exchanges and the emergence of new power centres are
conducive to offensive intelligence activities targeting France and Europe
as well as to the development of strategies of influence aimed at undermining our role in the world and in world markets.
Factors guaranteeing technological superiority, like the French scientific, economic and military assets, will continue to be the target of
external manoeuvres. These manoeuvres will seek to obtain protected
or secret information about the French security strategy, diplomacy,
civil and military technologies, and businesses’ strategies.
In certain cases, action from foreign sources to get this information will concentrate on cyber attacks. In others, manoeuvres may seek
to undermine a company or person by spreading disinformation in the
media and via the Internet. Such action could also target French communities abroad, and foreign communities in France.
These risks are leading France and Europe to build up the capabilities of their services in charge of countering foreign interference. An
effort will also be made in the field of influence-building, with means
of “soft power”, notably through a presence in the media and on the
Internet, corporate culture, and the prior mobilisation of senior
leaders in the private and public sectors.

###### SERIOUS CRIMINAL TRAFFICKING

The big organised crime networks, notably drug trafficking networks, could seriously harm national and European security. Consumption of cocaine-base synthetic drugs and ecstasy has doubled in France
since 2002. Cocaine is increasingly arriving in Europe from Latin
America, transiting via Africa.
Criminal organisations such as the drug cartels now have financial
and logistic resources comparable to those of certain states (between
700 and 1,000 billion dollars annually according to the IMF). Mafias
are formidable powers in Europe itself. Criminal organisations are also
becoming involved in trafficking in counterfeit goods, controlling the
production side (child exploitation, illegal working, non-compliance
with health and safety protection rules), the means of transport (smuggling imports) and the distribution channels (sales over the Internet,
the use of parallel channels, penetrating the big retailers). Trade in
counterfeit goods amounted to an estimated US$ 200 billion in 2007,
or 5 to 7% of global trade, according to the OECD.
The rapid growth in these groups is a threat to both domestic security and international stability.


-----

-----

###### NEW NATURAL AND HEALTH RISKS

Natural risks and health risks have become factors of massive
destabilisation for the population and government.
_Health risks have the capacity to disrupt trade and business. The_
cost of prevention and protecting against them is very high. The spread
of new viral or bacterial strains, or the reappearance on the continent
of Europe of old strains, are resulting from the opening up of borders,
the fluidity of transports and the speed of international exchanges.
Similarly, the territory and population are exposed to the possi_bility of natural disasters whose effects are progressively changing in_
_scale. The French overseas possessions (DOM-COM, see glossary) are_
particularly vulnerable to this type of event. But Metropolitan France
is not exempt from them either, as witnessed by the storms in 1999 or
the Mediterranean region’s exposure to seismic risks.
The widespread social disruption the new types of epidemic or violent climate accidents are capable of causing are part of the new scale
of the risks to which the national community is subject.

###### HEIGHTENED TECHNOLOGICAL RISKS

The same is true for technological and industrial risks. The impact
of a disaster could be all the greater now that demographic trends have
concentrated populations in urban areas, bringing with it the risk of a
greater number of victims and major difficulties in evacuating and
bringing aid to the injured.

###### EXPOSURE OF CITIZENS ABROAD

1.5 million French people are recorded as living abroad. Their
numbers on the African continent are declining, but they are
increasing on all the others. The expansion of French and European
communities abroad, their new geographical distribution, and the
instability of certain host countries, is making them more vulnerable
to risks—notably health risks—and to attacks.
They may be exposed to attacks and hostage-taking by terrorist
groups or by combatant forces engaged in regional conflicts, or they
may be victims of natural disasters or health crises.
The extreme sensitivity of this problem implies a need for special
planning at the national level, and for more concerted action and
greater solidarity among Europeans.


-----

**high**

**severe**

**high**

**medium**

**medium**

**low**

**low**

probability scale


##### The new parameters of security

In view of the foregoing, several new factors should inspire our
defence and security strategy.


-----

###### THE GROWING CONNECTIVITY
OF THREATS AND RISKS

This connectivity is a direct effect of globalisation, with its capacity
to de-compartmentalise conflicts as well as accelerating exchanges.
Consequently, under the influence of Al Qaeda and those inspired
by it, formerly segmented terrorists groups governed by national or
regional logics now plan acts of war from many points on the globe.
They base their strategies on their contacts in a wide range of countries. They are waging global ideological warfare and are seeking to
link up conflicts with profoundly different roots.
Risks of contagion are resurfacing in many parts of the world,
including the Middle East, from Afghanistan to Pakistan, and in several parts of central Africa, East Africa, and around Sudan.
This risk of geopolitical interconnectedness should not be overestimated, however, and will be countered in the first place by preventive
policies.
But sudden surges in tension, driven by the speed with which
information, images and ideas travel—as we have seen in the religious
sphere in recent years—are creating a particularly unstable environment conducive to flare-ups of violence.
Foreseeable tensions over strategic resources such as energy,
water, and strategic commodities—notably food and energy—can also
directly fuel major crises across one or more of the world’s regions.
The same is true of the long-term effects of climate warming if they
are not prevented soon enough.
Connectivity and the risk of a chain reaction of crises call for a
wide-ranging response closely combining economic, social, environmental and security policies.

###### THE CONTINUITY BETWEEN INTERNAL
AND EXTERNAL SECURITY

The traditional distinction between internal and external security
is no longer relevant. Terrorism targets the territories of European
countries from many points around the world while seeking to infiltrate French and European society. Organised crime exploits the benefits of globalisation and the weakening of frontiers. Energy security is
no longer conceivable other than on a global scale. The vulnerability of
information systems knows neither territories nor frontiers. The same
goes for natural and health risks.
This continuity has now acquired a strategic dimension and France
and Europe must urgently draw all the appropriate conclusions.


-----

This entails the need to define over-arching strategies integrating
all the different dimensions of security into a single approach.

###### THE POSSIBILITY OF SUDDEN STRATEGIC UPSETS

The uncertainty and instability of international trends give plausibility to scenarios implying a sudden break relative to the risks for
which our defence and public security and civil security systems are
currently prepared.
In addition to terrorism, proliferation and computer warfare, the
emergence of new weapons in connection with faster technological or
scientific developments, or again the deployment of weapons in outer
space, lie at the heart of these scenarios.
The exploitation of the revolutions in biotechnology, nano sciences
and intensive computer calculation capabilities, or an unforeseen vulnerability in space-based systems, could also lead to sudden shifts in
the definition of what kinds of defences are effective.

###### CHANGES AFFECTING MILITARY OPERATIONS

The traditional foundations of military and security action in the
XX[th] century (with broad terrain and spaces for military action, airland
battles, naval and air warfighting) have undergone a rapid change.
International stabilisation and peace-keeping operations are frequently
being carried out in an urban setting. This situation could become
more widespread given worldwide population growth trends.
_Where crisis management is concerned, the expected revolutions in_
_the 1980s and 1990s as a result of technological superiority have failed to_
_provide the hoped-for guarantees of victory. The human factor remains,_
and will remain, decisive. The complexity of international crises calls
for strategies embracing all of the different instruments—diplomatic,
financial, social, cultural and military—not only in the crisis prevention and management phases proper, but also in the stabilisation and
post-conflict reconstruction phases.


_The changing international situation is modifying some of the tradi-_
_tional foundations of defence and security policy, while reinforcing the_
uncertainties surrounding the security of France and Europe. A new
approach to the security of the nation has become necessary.


-----

CHAPTER 3

###### THE NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

##### The place and responsibilities of France

The defence and security of France are rooted in a long history,
which has left a profound mark on a territory that has been invaded on
several occasions. France also has a demanding geography, at the
extremity of the continent of Europe, bordered by three seas and at the
crossroads of most of the air routes linking Europe to America, Africa
and the Middle East.
Thanks to its overseas possessions, France has a worldwide reach
and a presence in several strategic parts of the globe. It has the world’s
second-largest exclusive economic zone after the United States, covering 11 million square kilometres.
Its strategy needs to take account of the specific features of its
international status. It has been a permanent member of the United
Nations Security Council since the organisation’s creation in 1945, and
in that respect it is committed to the mission entrusted to that body of
the “primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
_and security”. As a founding member of the Atlantic Alliance in 1949,_
and of the European Union since the founding of the European Communities born of the Treaty of Rome in 1957, it has played and plays
an essential role in the construction and maintenance of peace, and in
the progressive unification of Europe, on a continent that gave rise to
two world wars.
As a nuclear power recognised by the Non-Proliferation Treaty of
1968 and a space power, it has one of the finest scientific and technological capabilities in the world.
With 64 million inhabitants today, and 66 million in 2025, France
has one of the fastest-growing populations in Europe.


-----

The quality of its armed forces is acknowledged and these have
been successfully professionalised, starting in 1996. Its domestic security and civil security forces are continuously being adapted in
response to new missions.
These strengths, this history and these capabilities must be used to
protect citizens, and to serve the country’s interests and responsibilities. But the framework within which this is carried out needs to be
transformed and adapted to the far-reaching changes born of globalisation, and to the resulting hopes and concerns.

##### National Security strategy: definition and objectives

_The aim of France’s National Security strategy is to ward off risks or_
_threats liable to harm the life of the nation._
Its first aim is to defend the population and French territory, this
being the first duty and responsibility of the State. The second aim is
to enable France to contribute to European and international security:
this corresponds both to its own security needs, which also extend
beyond its frontiers, and to the responsibilities shouldered by France
within the framework of the United Nations and the alliances and treaties which it has signed. The third aim is to defend the values of the
“republican compact” that binds all French people to the State, namely
the principles of democracy, and in particular individual and collective
freedoms, respect for human dignity, solidarity and justice.
These aims are served by:
— Defence policy. This is required to ensure the security of the
nation against the risks of armed aggression, to uphold our international defence commitments, France’s contribution to international
peacekeeping and security, and contributing to the protection of the
population on French soil and abroad in support of the domestic security and civil security organisations;
— Domestic security policy for everything not concerning the
everyday and individual security of people and property, and civil security policy. Coming under the heading of national security, domestic
security policy and civil security policy are required to provide permanent protection of the population, to guarantee the regular functioning
of government and to maintain the normal life of the country in the
event of a crisis, and to defend the security interests of the country
against all non-military threats liable to be detrimental to them;
— Other public policies, primarily diplomacy and economic policy,
that directly contribute to national security.


-----

French security may be endangered by the action of States or
groups ignoring frontiers and using all the resources of globalisation.
It may be affected by natural or health disasters requiring a response
on a global scale.
French security, like that of Europe, therefore needs to be
conceived more globally. The National Security strategy embraces both
external security as well as domestic security, military as well as civil,
together with economic and diplomatic means. It needs to take into
account all of the phenomena, risks and threats that could prove detrimental to the life of the nation.
There is a difference in kind between attacks on national security
resulting from hostile initiatives and ones implying no malevolent intent,
such as natural disasters. But the demand for anticipation, preparation
and speedy response is the same for our fellow citizens in either case.
In view of this, a number of principles should guide National Security strategy, and with it our defence policy, domestic security policy
and the other public policies associated with National Security.

###### ANTICIPATION AND RESPONSIVENESS

Given the uncertainties weighing on our international environment
and the high degree of unpredictability, we have no option but to make
allowance for the risk of surprise or strategic upset. Strategic surprises
are events or developments that are unexpected in terms of their
nature or scale, and that modify or inflect the international security
situation. Certain events may constitute genuine upsets which, when
they occur, radically transform the foundations of the States exposed
to them. To allow for this risk it is necessary to develop the capacity
for anticipation and knowledge, together with the capacity for rapid
adaptation and response. All of these capabilities must constitute the
foundation of our strategy and be given very high priority in the
nation’s defence and security effort.
The same imperatives implied developing the all-round capabilities
of our armed forces and those of our domestic security and civil security means. Military or security means must be capable of being
deployed in very different contexts and capable of responding at short
notice to changes in the intensity of risks to which they may be
exposed when they are committed.

###### RESILIENCE

Resilience is defined as the determination and the capacity of a
country, a society and a government to withstand the consequences of


-----

a major aggression or disaster, and then rapidly to restore their
capacity to function normally or at least in a socially acceptable
manner. This concerns not only government, but the whole of civil
society and all actors in the economy.
The nature of possible crises in the coming years requires inclusion of the objective of resilience in the National Security strategy. The
State has a duty, after all, to prepare to respond to those situations
that could threaten the life of the population or the normal functioning
of the economic, social or institutional life of the country.
This presupposes that government organises in time of peace to
allow for the eventualities of times of crisis, and that it prioritise its
intelligence, analysis and decision making capabilities. Resilience also
presupposes organising co-operation between the central government
_and local governments, to ensure their means are complementary, and_
between the State and private enterprises in strategic sectors, i.e.,
energy, communications, healthcare, and foodstuffs production and
distribution.
Increasing the resilience of democratic institutions, of society and
of economic life, will therefore represent a fundamental objective of
National Security strategy to be implemented by the State and by all
levels of Government.

###### A CAPACITY FOR BUILD-UP

While the prospect of high intensity major conflict is not the most
probable, it is nevertheless plausible. A worsening of international relations combined with political or strategic upsets could lead to the reemergence of a global threat, especially a military one, to Europe and
France.
France’s strategic choices must therefore preserve the country’s
capacity for build-up and to adapt its military and civil forces, its
industrial capacity and its means of training, in the light of such
developments.

##### Redefining the key strategic functions

The 1972 White Paper’s central theme was deterrence. That of the
1994 White Paper on defence was “projection” and action at a distance
from national territory. This White Paper defines a national security
strategy for the era of globalisation, based on a new balance between
five broad functions.


-----

In the face of the uncertainties surrounding the coming fifteen
years, the function of knowledge and anticipation ranks foremost. Citizens expect Government to be capable of understanding international
developments, of preparing for them and guiding the means of defence
and domestic security and, wherever necessary, assisting French
society in adapting to them. The capabilities corresponding to the
knowledge and anticipation function are useful to all missions, to
those of the armed forces as well as to those of the domestic security
and civil security forces.
_Prevention and deterrence: the former is expected to prevent or_
limit the occurrence of threats or wars that could target France
directly or via a chain reaction, while the latter is expected to prevent
any State from thinking that it could attack the vital interests of
France without incurring unacceptable risks for itself.
_Protection and intervention are expected to enable the State first to_
ensure, primarily on the national soil, the security of its citizens, of
society and the economic life of the country. The latter is expected to
provide our national security, in close co-ordination with our European partners and our allies, with the necessary depth, adaptability
and mobility inherent to any defence strategy in the XXI[st] century
world.
_It is the combination of these different functions that ensures_
_national security. The way in which they are combined with each other_
must remain flexible. Knowledge and anticipation, for example, are
factors of prevention as well as an aid to deterrence, protection and
intervention. Similarly, intervention, particularly within the framework
of humanitarian action, may be intended to avert wider conflict. In the
same spirit, protection of the territory and the population, preparation
for crises and surveillance of the approaches are all preventive actions
and can contribute to deterrence. Indeed, and more generally, all capabilities and resources—human and technological, military and civil—
contribute to the deterrence of potential adversaries from acting
against the security of France.

###### KNOWLEDGE AND ANTICIPATION

Developing France’s knowledge and capacity for anticipation is our
first line of defence. This must be the object of a significant and priority effort permeating all of the activities of the public authorities,
civil and military. The battle for the XXI[st] century will be fought in the
first place in the field of knowledge and information, for people as well
as societies. This also happens to be an area of excellence for French
scientific, technological and industrial capabilities.


-----

This function spans five major areas:
— Intelligence;
— Knowledge of theatres of operation;
— Diplomacy;
— Forward planning;
— Knowledge management.
This function is just as important in the political and strategic
spheres as in all theatres of action, external and internal. Political
leaders must be in possession of all facts required in order to make
their decisions and assess situations in full sovereignty. Knowledge and
anticipation are one of the keys to the strategic autonomy of France in
the world. Military commanders must have access to all of the information they need to formulate and adapt their military strategy, and to all
of the necessary capabilities enabling them to guide the manoeuvres
dictated by their missions within a given theatre of operations and at
the tactical level, with full knowledge of the situation.
Finally, society as a whole can benefit from this effort and gain in
resilience if it has clear understanding that Government is doing its
utmost to look to the future, analyse risks, seeks to avoid them, and
prepare the means for dealing with them.

###### PREVENTION

One of the best ways to guarantee security in the face of risks of
conflict or crisis is to prevent the occurrence, by acting on their causes
in a timely fashion. Consequently, National Security should be
founded upon a strategy of prevention, itself based on diplomatic, economic, financial, military, legal and cultural means. The European
Union and the United Nations play a central role in this, for France.
France’s strategy of prevention rests on three key pillars:
— Before crises, improving the international security system in
order to reduce the risks of conflict or crisis, whether military, humanitarian, technological or natural; this implies acting on the origins of
these risks and settling disputes peacefully, as quickly as possible
before they break down into armed conflict;
— During a crisis, by endeavouring to limit its effects, if necessary
by military means; this may also lead, in the case of natural risks, preventing their extension or aggravation;
— At the end of a crisis, by supporting the stabilisation or reconciliation process by economic, diplomatic means and through co-operation.
Improving the international system entails better correlation
between development assistance and international and national security systems. Development assistance contributes to prevention. It is


-----

also up to the international institutions to create a favourable environment for the management of tensions and disputes. With that in mind,
France should contribute to forging a better-balanced and more legitimate international system. It should do so by strengthening its credibility notably with regard to the instruments of international security
and, in the first place, the United Nations, the European Union and the
Atlantic Alliance. The setting up of an international criminal justice
system can help to discourage, if not the outbreak of armed conflict, at
least the most serious crimes.
Nuclear and conventional disarmament measures, along with the
fight against proliferation of chemical, biological and nuclear
weapons, and associated launch vehicles, as well as controlling the
arms trade and a ban on the manufacture, use and trade in certain
weapons, all form part of the strategy of prevention.
At the end of the crisis, the strategy of prevention returns to the
fore in order to avoid a resumption of war. Experience teaches us that
half of the countries that emerge from war are at risk of a resumption
of hostilities in the following five years.
Co-operation between States plays a part in reducing tensions and
building better-balanced and more transparent relations between
powers. In that respect, it contributes to the strategy of prevention,
regardless of whether the co-operation concerns military or security
questions, or whether it deals with areas of concern to international
security, such as trans-national resources or the environment.
Consequently, to achieve the aims of prevention, Government
needs to involve itself directly in international security through preven_tive diplomacy designed to:_
— Reduce identified sources of tension; identifying these sources
has become much easier now thanks to the extremely rapid spread of
information;
— Incorporate security concerns into development policy;
— Monitor fragile situations around the world as closely as possible and promote confidence building measures. To that end we will
be developing our capacity for understanding local situations and the
risks of crises;
— Strengthen local crisis prevention capabilities;
— Pursue the efforts being made by France in favour of reforming
the security sectors, an approach that embraces within a coherent
framework the restructuring of the armed forces, police and customs
services of the countries concerned, their intelligence services, justice
and prison administration. This action needs to be completed by support for local civil societies. For it is local actors that are in the front
line in conflicts and natural disasters.


-----

###### DETERRENCE

Nuclear deterrence remains one of the foundations of France’s
strategy. It is the ultimate guarantee of national security and independence. It is one of the conditions of France’s strategic autonomy, and
of the Head of State’s freedom of judgement, decision and action.
France no longer appears to be at risk of invasion over the next fifteen years, a risk that was one of the factors leading to the creation of
its “force de frappe” or nuclear strike capability in the early days of the
Fifth Republic.
But our security is under threat from other sources. Considerable
nuclear arsenals remain in being, and others continue to expand,
notably in Asia. The proliferation of nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons is gathering pace, together with that of ballistic and cruise
missiles. Tomorrow, technological progress may create new threats. It
is the duty of the Head of State to take such steps as are necessary in
all circumstances to shelter France, its territory, its people and its
republican institutions from aggression or blackmail placing them
directly in jeopardy.
Nuclear deterrence is strictly defensive. Its sole function is to prevent a state-originated aggression against the vital interests of the
country, from whatever direction and in whatever form. These vital
interests notably comprise the elements constituting our identity and


-----

existence as a nation-State, and in particular our territory, our population, and the free exercise of our sovereignty. The Head of State has a
duty to appreciate the limits of these vital interests in the world in
constant flux, where attempts to circumvent our means of defence and
security will take many forms.
It is on these bases that the strategy of deterrence consists in giving
any country threatening our vital interests reason to fear a French
retaliation that would wreak unacceptable damage on it, out of proportion to the objective of its aggression. Any such retaliation would
target that country’s centres of political, economic and military power
as a matter of priority.
The use of nuclear weapons would be conceivable only in extreme
circumstances of self-defence, as enshrined in the United Nations
Charter.
France cannot rule out the possibility that an adversary might miscalculate the limits of its vital interests or its determination to preserve
them. France has the capacity to deliver a nuclear warning within the
framework of its policy of deterrence.
Given the diversity of situations with which France may be
confronted, the credibility of our deterrence will depend on indepen_dent access by the Head of State to a sufficiently broad range of options_
_and an array of diversified assets. We will continue to adapt our nuclear_
forces accordingly. These will be articulated in the form of differentiated and complementary components. France will have the means to
maintain these capabilities in being for as long as nuclear weapons are
necessary to its security.
The strategy of deterrence also takes account of alliances and of
developments in the construction of Europe.
Together with the other European nuclear power, the United
Kingdom, France notes that there is no situation in which the vital
interests of one may be threatened without the interests of the other
being threatened also.
Within the Atlantic Alliance, the British and French nuclear forces
contribute to global deterrence, this contribution having been recognised since 1974. This recognition was reiterated in the NATO strategic
concept of 1999.
By its very existence, the French nuclear deterrent also contributes
to the security of Europe. An aggressor considering an attack on
Europe must be aware of this. Our commitment to the security of our
European partners is the expression of an ever closer union as
enshrined in the Treaty of Lisbon. That is why France proposes a dia_logue on the role of deterrence, and its contribution to the common secu-_
_rity, to those of its European partners that wish to take part._


-----

###### PROTECTION

The new vulnerabilities that have emerged since the 1990s place
the protection of the population and the territory at the centre of
National Security strategy, since these now appear to be more directly
exposed to events having a serious impact on the normal life of the
nation. These events differ by nature and scale from those for which
our means of defence and security were designed until recently.
Protection needs to address two types of risk, namely: intentional
aggression such as acts of terrorism, major cyber attacks, the threat of
strikes by new weapons, particularly ballistic missiles, the different
possible ways of bypassing our defences that could materialise in the
coming years; and unintentional risks such as highly lethal health
crises, natural disasters made more intense by environmental and
climate changes, and, finally, technological disasters.
The emphasis placed on protection of the population naturally
complements deterrence and intervention, and is not a form of withdrawal into our national territory. Indeed, the security of the population needs to be conceived from the outset within a European setting,
with the full benefits of an international strategy.
The major challenges with which Government could be confronted
call for a new organisation, new arrangements, and the new means.
The Government needs to reorganise in order to guarantee the best
possible co-ordination between domestic security and civil security
forces on the one hand, standing in the front line in the face of these
risks, and the armed forces on the other, whose missions, capabilities
and responsiveness need to be employed in a timely fashion in support
of the foregoing arrangements, and within the framework of their use
as defined by the Government.
At the same time, the Government needs to organise its relations in
this type of situation with public and private sector operators, as well
as with civil society. It no longer directly controls all of the levers that
it needs to be able to activate, and in particular in the fields of energy,
transport, or public health. Consequently it is necessary to step up the
preparation and capacity for response of all players liable to be
involved, mobilised or called upon for the benefit of the population.
More particularly, this new organisation needs to be prepared,
more so than is currently the case, to react to large-scale, unexpected
potentially lethal shocks that could paralyse essential networks or
infrastructures for the life of the country.
This strategic function includes among its essential aspects
training of personnel, preparation of businesses and public communication, with a view to enhancing the global resilience of French
society.


-----

###### INTERVENTION

Intervention will continue to be an essential mode of action for our
armed forces, especially outside the national territory. Our intervention capability should be such as to guarantee our strategic interests
and enable us to shoulder our international responsibilities. We should
therefore provide for the possibility of intervening across the gamut of
possible action outside the national territory.
In most cases, intervention will take place within a multilateral
framework. The only eventualities in which a purely national interven_tion remains plausible are those requiring the protection of our citizens_
abroad, the application of bilateral defence agreements with certain
States, and, finally, a possible national response to one-off actions
against our interests.
_In all other cases, France’s intervention strategy will be pursued_
_within a multinational framework, either the United Nations, the Euro-_
pean Union, the Atlantic Alliance, or another appropriate grouping
legitimised by international law.
France must avoid dispersing its military means[1], in order to be
able to act in a compact and concentrated manner in places where our
interests may be at stake. Our intervention capabilities should therefore be governed by the logic of concentration on priority geographical
_axes, realistically covering the range of possibilities of deployment or_
use of force. This principle of concentration is one of the basic pillars of
France’s national military security strategy.
The main sphere follows the contours of the principal risks, from
the Atlantic to the Gulf of Oman and the Indian Ocean, from where
extensions of our presence towards Asia are possible.
It is also essential to develop a capacity to fight trafficking threatening domestic security, which implies a sufficient presence in the
Mediterranean, in West Africa and in the Caribbean.
Finally, continuing efforts to adapt our military and security stance
in Africa are essential, half a century after decolonisation.
We will therefore undertake a progressive conversion of our prepositioned assets, in close partnership with those African countries
that so wish. The aim is to contribute to the building up of Africa’s

1. During the course of 2006, approximately 58,000 French troops carried
out at least one temporary four-month deployment outside metropolitan territory within the framework of an external operation or a short duration mission
in a French Overseas possession or foreign base (2008 report of the Haut
_Comité d’évaluation de la condition militaire – High Committee for the evalua-_
tion of military conditions).


-----

means of collective and regional security and to facilitating the fight
against forms of insecurity threatening both the continent of Africa as
well as Europe and France, which notably concerns large-scale criminal trafficking and the action of terrorist groups.
European security will be guaranteed by our capacities for action
within the framework of the European Union and the Atlantic Alliance.
The choice of these priority axes implies rationalising our military
means stationed outside Metropolitan France, in order to combine our
capacity for intervention from the national territory or along these
axes. To that end, our arrangements should ultimately comprise a
presence on the continent of Africa’s Atlantic seaboard, one or two outposts in the Arabian-Persian Gulf, and one in the Indian Ocean.
At the same time, the sovereign forces stationed in our overseas
possessions need to be configured at their level strictly necessary for
their armed missions proper. The means of the Gendarmerie and civil
security will be adapted in consequence, and co-ordination between
their capacities for civil and military action will be reinforced.
_The uncertainty of the international environment means that one_
_cannot rule out the possibility of France becoming involved in a war_
_between States. This possibility will therefore remain a central feature_
of our defence effort, both for the objectives assigned to our armed
forces and for the nature of our capabilities and equipment.
Notwithstanding this, the predominant framework for the deployment of our armed forces in the coming years will be stabilisation missions. Particular attention should therefore be paid to the adaptation
of our forces to the new characteristics of this type of operation
(chapter 12), their doctrine, their training and their equipment.
_The definition and dimensions of our intervention capabilities should_
_therefore be designed around both the possibility of a major engagement_
_and the demands of stabilisation and crisis management missions over_
_the next fifteen years. To achieve this objective, our armed forces cannot_
_be organised exclusively around stabilisation missions._
Even so, all of our external interventions must be carried out in
answer to a clear necessity; they must be legitimate; and they must be
effective. Consequently, the commitment of French forces will be
dependent on the following guiding principles:
— The assessment of threats to peace and security will be the decisive factor in the assessment of the commitment, regardless of whether
this is a collective assessment shared by France, or a national one.
Recourse to military force will be envisaged only in the event of a sufficiently grave and serious risk or threat. This question raises the issue
of direct threats to national interests justifying intervention. But it also
needs to be considered within a wider framework, from the point of
view of the preservation of peace and international security within the


-----

meaning of the United Nations Charter. For example, in virtue of its
international responsibilities and on the basis of a collective vision of
its own security interests, France may occasionally have to take part in
an intervention even though its own direct interests are not at stake;
— Before resorting to force, all other measures must have been
actively explored and can be rejected only if there are strong grounds
for thinking they would fail. This principle applies without prejudice to
decisions that may be required as a matter of urgency, on grounds of
legitimate defence, or in situations involving a responsibility to protect;
— Any intervention must be legal under international law, e.g. the
right of individual or collective self-defence as enshrined in article 51
of the United Nations Charter, a decision of the Security Council, the
application of our international commitments under our defence
agreements, alliances, or of international law;
— On each occasion, the decision to resort to armed force will
depend on the specific circumstances, which it is the duty of the
French Government to appreciate in full sovereignty. The French
authorities must therefore enjoy the freedom of action and the means
to assess the situation at all times throughout the duration of the crisis
in which our forces may be engaged. The preservation of this national
freedom of appreciation is compatible with the commitments of solidarity subscribed by France;
— The legitimacy of military intervention is not just a question of
its legality in the eyes of international law. Its democratic legitimacy is
just as important. This legitimacy will be all the greater if, for each
engagement, the objectives are transparent and if it has the explicit
support of the national community, as notably expressed through its
representatives in Parliament;
— Any decision to commit troops must be based on a capacity to
engage at a sufficient level, on national control of the deployment of
our forces, and on a political strategy seeking to achieve a lasting settlement to the crisis and not merely defining the conditions permitting
the disengagement of our forces;
— The decision whether or not to proceed with the French engagement should be assessed in the light of other current operations and
available forces. This review should give rise to a decision to commit
forces that is definite in space and, as far as possible, in time, and with
a precise evaluation of its cost.
The five strategic functions form a flexible framework, capable of
adapting to the variety of circumstances with which our defence and
security might be confronted. The emphasis on one or more of them
may change depending on the situation, and their combination must
adapt to the constantly shifting status of the key factors determining
National Security strategy.


-----

In this respect, the proposed balance should be regularly reassessed by the Head of State, the Government and Parliament, on the
occasion of the review of the White Paper and to France’s strategic doctrine that is to precede each new programme law.

##### The reform of the Ordinance of January 7, 1959

French National Security strategy, as underpinned by its defence
policy, domestic security and civil security policy and other public policies, will be expressed in a new legislative framework. The foregoing
proposals call for adaptation of the Ordinance of January 7, 1959 on
the general organisation of defence, now codified in the French
Defence Code, as well as in the future Domestic Security Code.
These texts will in effect be required take into account the objective of National Security and the definition of the different policies
contributing to it, i.e., defence policy, domestic security and civil security policy, foreign policy and economic policy. They will also have to
modify the definitions of concepts pertaining to now-obsolete situations and contexts, such as civil defence and economic defence,
notably. These concepts, which until now shaped defence to deal with
a possible land invasion from the East, now need to be transformed in
light of the risks and challenges of globalisation.
Civil defence, for example, must give way to the contemporary
notions of domestic security and civil security as spelled out in the
2002 and 2004 Acts. These notions cover protection of populations and
the safeguarding of installations and resources of general interest.
Similarly, the powers of the Minister of the Economy will be redefined around a policy on economic security, whose aim is to ensure the
continuity of economic activity, notably in the event of a major crisis
and, more broadly, the protection of the economic interests of the
nation.


-----

-----

-----

##### II

### EUROPEAN AND INTERNATIONAL AMBITION


-----

-----

CHAPTER 4

###### FRANCE’S AMBITION FOR EUROPE

Building a more unified Europe, enabling peace to put down roots
on a continent that was twice the source of world wars in the XX[th] century, has been a continuing process since the beginning of the 1990s.
With 27 members, the European Union has become the world’s premier economic and trading power, the leading demographic power
among the developed countries, the world’s number one official development assistance donor and one of the major contributors to financial stabilisation and reconstruction in post-conflict countries. On the
other hand, political union is taking longer to achieve and is still in the
making. The impetus of the 1990s appears to have been dissipated in
quarrels and nationalism, before suffering a serious setback at the time
of the outbreak of the war in Iraq in early-2003. The disappointments
born of a construction often seen as distant from the daily concerns of
citizens have hampered it. The aspiration of citizens to a Europe that
is closer to them and at the same time more readily identifiable on the
international stage is tangible.
France wants to be in the front rank of this drive for progressive
political unification, which does not mean uniformity but pooling and
sharing of our destinies, collective strength and hope. It will work for
a more unified, stronger European Union, with a greater presence in
the fields of security and defence, and notably in responding to the
risks and challenges described above, and which concern all of
humanity. Europe’s potential must be expanded, defended and upheld
collectively, the benefits of Europe’s growth and democracy must be
shared, and the countries of Europe must shoulder their responsibilities on the international scene.


-----

##### The European Union, an actor in the field of international security

The role of the European Union, both in the field of domestic security and in the management of external crises, was for many years
embryonic. Now, in just a few years, the European Union has become
an important player in helping to stabilise the international environment. Today it is the only organisation capable of mobilising from its
own resources the economic, trade, diplomatic and military instruments necessary to the resolution of crises.
Seventeen civil and military operations, admittedly for the most
part modest, have been carried out on four continents, involving the
deployment of nearly 10,000 European soldiers and 3,000 police personnel. They reflect a learning process and a gradual stepping up of
the European Union’s activities in the operational sphere. The Community budget devoted to promoting stability in the world, comprising
humanitarian aid, neighbourhood policies, development assistance,
the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP), and enlargement
support, amounted to EUR 6.8 billion in 2007, or 5% of the total
budget. In the field of domestic security, progress has been made both
in the fight against terrorism and in combating trafficking in all its
forms and organised crime.
The support of European citizens for a common foreign policy and
the affirmation of the Union’s international role has been a constant
feature over many years. 67% would like defence policy and foreign
policy to be run jointly at the European level; and indeed 81% feel likewise with regard to the fight against terrorism. French support is very
strong in these two areas, at 75% and 87% respectively[1].
The Union represents nearly 500 million citizens, which gives it
considerable weight. Its intervention in sensitive regions is generally
well accepted.
The European framework provides a degree of coherence well
adapted to modern crises, thanks to the range of possible combinations of military and civil instruments. Among others, it allows substantial means to be mobilised for the stabilisation and reconstruction
phases for post-crisis countries
Regarding its external action, the Union’s security strategy adopted
in 2003 is founded on principles whose validity has been confirmed by
recent developments, namely: an attachment to the international rule of

1. Source: Eurobarometer, December 2007.


-----

-----

law, the importance of the civil dimension, winning the support of
local populations for peace processes.
Finally, the creation of a European Security and Defence Policy
(ESDP) is closing the gap between the national security cultures of the
27, and in particular for non-members of the Atlantic Alliance.
These developments are fragile, however. On many important
issues, such as the war in Iraq, the European Union’s divisions have
prevented it from playing a role or influencing events. Until now, it has
not been able to bring its military or civil means to bear on crises
other than limited ones, or ones already partially resolved militarily by
NATO intervention. It must reinforce its capacity to manage military
and civil crises. France is in favour of giving fresh impetus to the European Union in the field of defence and security.

##### Institutional developments

The Treaty of Lisbon, signed in December 2007, contains clauses
designed to enable the Union’s foreign, security and defence policy to
take a new step forward.
The creation of a position of High Representative for Foreign and
Security Policy, who will also be Vice-President of the European Commission with his own department, will lend greater coherence to the
Union’s means of external action.
The new Treaty includes a solidarity clause that opens up the possibility of making use of the military means made available by Member
States to prevent terrorist threats and, where necessary, to assist a
Member State that suffers a terrorist attack on its soil or is the victim
of a natural or man-made disaster.
The treaty also introduces a mutual assistance clause stipulating
that in the event of an armed aggression against the territory of a
Member State, other Member States should provide aid and assistance with all the means in their power. However, the scope of this
clause is spelled out in the indication according to which, for NATO
members, NATO remains the foundation of their collective defence
and the body through which it is implemented. The clause has a


-----

-----

particular value, on the other hand, for non-allied European
countries.
The Lisbon Treaty also affords greater flexibility within the European defence and security policy, by providing an enhanced co-operation
_mechanism which, provided it is supported by at least nine Member_
States, allows certain States to act together to promote the aims of the
Union, safeguard its interests and reinforce its integration.


-----

Finally, the Member States agreed on a new departure in the
Treaty of Lisbon, with the creation of a “permanent structured co_operation” mechanism. This allows Member States that fulfil the_
highest criteria of military capability and that have subscribed the
most binding commitments in this regard, to come together to carry


-----

out the most demanding missions the European Union might engage
in. This is based on a decision of the European Council by qualified
majority. France believes it ought to urge the development of defence
capabilities in Europe.
No minimum threshold of States is required to put in place the
permanent structured co-operation. But the possibility of taking part
in this form of co-operation is subject to respect for the “convergence
_criteria” concerning military capabilities and to the readiness of partici-_
pating States to use their forces for the benefit of the European Union.
France would like this co-operation to be as inclusive as possible,
offering each partner the possibility, over and beyond quantitative criteria, to enter into commitments to participate in operations or weapons
programmes, or in terms of efforts with respect to capabilities.
Franco-German co-operation played an historical role indeed in
the building up European defence. It will represent a major source for
new initiatives.

##### Giving priority to crisis management capabilities

Drawing on accumulated experience and achievements since 1999,
France wants the Union to cross a new threshold in order to play a
more independent and more effective role in enhancing international
security as well as its own security. It plans to move forward in this
direction over the coming years.

###### EXPANDING AVAILABLE CAPABILITIES

The first priority must be given to enhancing our means of action.
Numerically speaking, Europe’s armed forces as a whole are
considerable. But this collective strength is weakened by major shortcomings, particularly concerning their command, intelligence, communications, projection and air mobility capabilities.
To enable the member countries of the Union to enhance their role
in their defence and international crisis management, France
considers that it needs, in company with its European partners, effectively and progressively to build an intervention capacity of 60,000 men,
capable of being deployed in a distant theatre, with the necessary air
_and naval components, for a year. This was already the ambition of the_
Eurocorps when it was created at the initiative of France and Germany; it was taken up on a broader basis by the European Council as


-----

the Helsinki 1999 “headline goal”. This should now be revived and
consolidated. The 1,500-man battle groups decided on the occasion of
the European Council in 2004, have been in place since January 2007
and afford real possibilities in terms of flexibility and speed of intervention. But such battle groups do not account for all of the Union’s operational needs. Crisis management operations require the availability of
a substantial pool of personnel both for the crisis phase proper, and for
the stabilisation and post-conflict reconstruction phases.
It is clearly not enough to possess these forces and make them
coherent.
The countries of the Union must be able to plan their operational
needs and assemble the necessary forces for operations decided on at
the appropriate time. The common aim should be to have the capacity
to conduct two or three peace-keeping or peace-making operations simul_taneously, for a significant duration, together with several more minor_
_civil operations, in different theatres._
Several concrete measures flow from this objective:
1. Making good the currently most obvious shortcomings in Europe’s
_capacity to intervene in distant theatres. The reviews of available means_
and operational shortcomings carried out both by NATO and by the
European defence agency show the need for increased pooling of cer_tain of European countries’ resources, and in particular in the key_
areas, namely: strategic and tactical transport aircraft, based on the A400 M aircraft and the creation of a European military air transport
command; in-flight refuelling, making the most of the French and
British means, together with the multirole aircraft programme built by
Airbus and the development of the corresponding American programme; air mobility capabilities, with the upgrading of European
means on the basis of Franco-British and Franco-German projects;
_aero-naval capabilities, by combining aircraft carriers, other aircraft_
carrying ships, seaborne air combat units, and the necessary escort
vessels.
_Enhanced pooling of support activities, in particular for jointly-built_
_weapons systems, for improved interoperability among European and_
allied forces.
_Creating more robust means for the civil management of crises, com-_
_mensurate with the growing demand for multinational operations. These_
correspond in particular to the Union’s specific capacity to provide
post-crisis support at a range of different levels. France therefore
believes the Union should have access to resources in terms of personnel capable of being rapidly mobilised for prevention or stabilisation operations, including police, Gendarmerie, judges, prosecutors,
customs officers, logistics experts, etc.


-----

_Taking into account the growing role of reserves, which is likely to_
become increasingly important, notably in managing crises on Union
territory or for dealing with the consequences of external crises on
Union territory. Europeans’ means vary widely in this area as a result
of their very diverse histories and forms of organisation. France suggests the formulation of a European statute for reservists, or at least a
means of coordinating Member States’ reserves, for both civil and military personnel liable to be deployed in Union operations.
2. Boosting capabilities for analysis and anticipation. France will
promote increased pooling of intelligence for use command and planning structures, and in support of the Union’s civil and military commitments. In this context, emphasis will be given to the identification
of intelligence themes of common interest, sharing open documentation derived from the member countries’ space observation facilities,
and exchanges of instructors and trainees. These resources will play a
key role in ensuring the strategic autonomy of the Union. Therefore
our countries need to jointly build and operate common means of
observation, transmission, geo-positioning, detection and surveillance
of missile launches, as well as surveillance of space.
_3. Significantly enhancing the capacity to plan and conduct Euro-_
_pean operations. France believes that the Union needs a permanent and_
_autonomous strategic planning capability. With respect to operational_
_planning and the conduct of operations, the Union is currently depen-_
dent on the availability either of national command capabilities that
only a small number of Member States possess, which are very much
in demand, or on NATO’s means. The growth in its external interventions therefore calls for the expansion of European capabilities in this
area. France further believes it is necessary to take steps to ensure that
_the Union’s military operations and civil missions are placed under uni-_
_fied strategic leadership in Brussels._

###### REFORMING PROCEDURES FOR THE FUNDING
OF EXTERNAL OPERATIONS

Helping to stabilise crises is a costly undertaking. France considers
that the funding of interventions should from now on reflect the principle of European solidarity if the Union is to act more swiftly and
more effectively in the management of external crises. This solidarity
presupposes:
— Overhauling the funding of military operations, by creating a separate budget for Union operations: France proposes that the existing
“contributor-payer” principle ultimately be replaced by the principle of
financial solidarity among Member States. Member States that do not


-----

take part in this or that Union operation on the ground ought to
shoulder a portion of the cost of approved operations.
— A significant budget for the Common Foreign and Security Policy,
within the new budget allocated to the High Representative, and the
creation of an operational reserve fund to be placed at his disposal.

###### TRAINING AND INSTRUCTION OF PERSONNEL

The complexity of crisis management operations requires that the
civil and military personnel of Union member countries receive
common training as far as possible, carried out in accordance with
European intervention criteria. Many initiatives are currently being
launched in these areas and will need to be carried through over the
coming fifteen years in order to create as many common training programmes as possible. Initial and continuous training, as well as general
_and specialised training, will increasingly be planned with this in view._
This is already the case with the Franco-German helicopter pilots’
_school. An advanced European jet pilots’ training school is currently the_
subject of an agreement between ten countries and could pave the way
for other pooled initiatives. European trainees will be given instruction
within the various national structures available to Europeans for operational planning and the conduct of operations, joint operations as
well as operations that are specific to each military component, i.e.,
land, naval and air forces. France stands ready to open its defence
staffs and command structures for this purpose. Similarly, the use of
new technologies in operations, network operations, cyber-defence,
surveillance of space, and the use of armed drones, will be systematically encouraged. The shared use of training capacities will also be
organised and intensified. 1,500-man battle groups will be able to utilise these facilities, according to arrangements designed to foster the
emergence of a European certification.
More broadly, France will propose a security and defence exchange
_and training programme. A common European personnel training_
policy should incorporate other considerations than those of military
action or security per se, including legal, sociological, linguistic or
political parameters, among others. A permanent European crisis man_agement training centre, finally, would be highly beneficial, and France_
stands ready to promote this.


-----

##### A streamlined and competitive European industry

A European defence also implies a major industrial, technological
and scientific capability.
Despite the mergers and alliances that have taken place among a
number of industrial groups, Europe’s armament industry remains
_excessively fragmented (chapter 16), placing it at a disadvantage relative_
to the international competition. Competing industries are now
springing up in countries with high growth and a capacity to integrate
new technologies.
_The temptation for countries to confine themselves to their national_
_bases, and the obstacles to the emergence of a common market for the_
_defence and security industries threatens to condemn the industrial and_
research capabilities of European Union countries in the long run.
Cooperation on programmes has regressed, or is bogged down in
a race between Member States to revive their industries and the quest
to satisfy the specific needs of each army, to the point where some
cooperative programmes have turned to be examples of what not to do.
Reviving industrial co-operation in Europe will to a large extent
depend on greater procurement policy co-ordination (chapter 16). This
presupposes that progress is made in the common definition of the
capabilities to be developed and of the role of the various Union
bodies.
_The joint analysis of military needs has already begun. An inventory_
of the means available in EU countries to perform its missions,
together with identification of operational needs, was carried out in
2006 and 2007.
The European Defence Agency (EDA), which is overseeing this
approach, and within which States are volunteering to participate in
cooperative projects, will play a key role in the choices to be made in
the short and long-term on the basis of these analyses.
France will work to strengthen the action of the EDA, and this
should lead to an increase in its operating budget and to a clarification
of its linkage with other European structures, foremost among them
the Organisation for Joint Armaments Cooperation (OCCAR). This
should serve as a preferred organ for the conduct of programmes,
which in turn would be decided on the basis of targets for capabilities
defined by the European defence ministers within the framework of a
common planning process.


-----

In addition, France will encourage the introduction of common
_defence equipment procurement rules. Creating these procurement rules_
also presupposes the elimination of obstacles to equipment and technology transfers between the Member States concerned, and encouraging better research co-ordination.

##### More effective protection for the citizens of Europe

A great majority of citizens (86%) in all EU Member States express
growing concern over areas relating to domestic security[1], notably
regarding the fight against terrorism and the fight against organised
crime. Progress has been achieved and new instruments are being put
in place to facilitate the emergence of common policies for the Union
as a whole.
However, the Union’s effectiveness is hampered by institutional
compartmentalisation. We know, for example, that the fight against
terrorism is split among the structures managing the external action of
the Union and the one concerned with internal policy.
_Citizens may well find this distinction incomprehensible if it came to_
_be seen as the cause of EU weakness in the event of a grave crisis. And_
yet, despite the improvements resulting from the Treaty of Lisbon
regarding the external action of the Union, there is no equivalent
bridge between the security of citizens on the territory of the Union and
the external security of the Union. Without prejudice to the powers of
the different European institutions, France will argue in favour of the
inclusion of all security issues affecting the citizens of European countries. The purpose of the Standing Committee instituted by the Treaty
of Lisbon to ensure the promotion and enhancement of operational cooperation in the field of internal security (COSI) is to assist the
Council in implementing the solidarity clause in the event of a terrorist
attack or natural disaster. France hopes that this desire for a more
coordinated approach to questions of internal security at the European
level will lead to expanded meetings of the Council of Ministers,
attended by interior ministers, as well as the High Representative,
Commissioners and the competent agencies, alongside the foreign
ministers of the Member States.

1. Source: Eurobarometer, February 2007.


-----

###### ENHANCING EUROPEAN CO-OPERATION AGAINST
TERRORISM AND ORGANISED CRIME

France considers that this is vital for the Union, because the role
that the Union can play in it will address both the demand for greater
closeness to European citizens and the very high level of risks. Cooperation between States and bilateral relations between the intelligence
services are the capstone of security for all. The Union as such also has
a role to play in this process. In order to address the expectations of
European citizens, it needs to involve itself right across the spectrum
of possible actions, including prevention, anticipation, repression and
reaction to terrorist attacks against a European partner.
The Union has created the instruments, and these now need to be
reinforced. Europol is one of the centres of European co-operation. A
visa database (VIS) is currently being set up to strengthen antiterrorist procedures. The 2005 Prüm Treaty provides for the exchange
of personal data, including DNA or fingerprints, together with the
organisation of joint patrols. The European arrest warrant is a major
step forward adopted by the Europeans in the wake of the terrorist
attacks of the September 11, 2001.
_France proposes that the European Union intensify its anti-terrorist_
_activities along the following lines:_
— Regular joint threat assessment under the aegis of the Council;
— Organising joint exercises between frontier States, involving the
entire decision-making, intervention and communications chain;
— The development by European industry of detection and protection techniques, biometrics, and research on new vaccines;
— Preparing for non-conventional terrorist attacks, e.g., surveillance of goods, detection of hazardous materials, protection of transport, and a communication policy;
— Setting up interoperable alert systems and crisis management
databases, and improving databases on terrorist networks and controls
on explosives and weapons;
— Giving consideration to specific legislation for serious crisis
situations;
— Enhancing the anti-terrorist aspect in the European Union’s
external relations (helping certain neighbouring States to fight terrorism, and also, in certain cases, making co-operation conditional on
the commitment to fighting terrorism).


-----

###### THE DEVELOPMENT OF EUROPEAN CIVIL PROTECTION

France supports the initiative of the European Commission in
favour of enhanced pooling of Europe’s disaster response capabilities,
both within the territory of the Union and outside. It proposes in particular to enhance the European mechanisms with a view to creating a
European operational centre for civil protection.
With this in view, France wants to see a reinforcement of the process of convergence and interconnection between certain civil population relief capacities. This pooling of capabilities could also involve the
creation of a European civil security force. Initially, France proposes
that States wishing to do so form European civil intervention groups.
Responsibility for the identification and pooling of the necessary assets
could be entrusted to one country each year by rotation. In addition,
France proposes the formation of a pool of fire-fighting aircraft to
combat forest fires, and the creation of a European civic service made
up of civil protection volunteers.
The training and instruction of European civil protection actors
could also give rise to close co-operation, notably via the networking of
institutes and schools for civil security with a view to setting up a
_European civil security college._
Moreover, the Union and its Member States are to coordinate their
work and share data derived from their different space capacities with
regard to the prevention and surveillance of natural risks.

###### COORDINATING EUROPE’S DEFENCES AGAINST
CYBER ATTACKS

European interests and national interests are closely interwoven in
the cyber world. France therefore believes it is indispensable to
strengthen operational cooperation among Member States within the
European Union and to make it as responsive as possible in the face of
cyber attacks. It will also propose that the Commission impose rules
on operators to toughen their networks and procedures designed to
make them far more resilient. In addition, the European Network and
_Information Security Agency (ENISA) needs to be made significantly_
more effective. In particular, this agency should contribute to the
implementation by the Commission of a cyber security strand in all
European institutions’ projects and programmes.


-----

###### INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT OF OPERATIONAL
CO-OPERATION AT THE FRONTIERS OF THE UNION

The 27 Member States’ customs agencies will be required to participate in the implementation of interconnected networks to form a
_single window for the control of goods and safety-security measures._
This is because the surveillance of frontiers is designed not only to prevent unauthorised crossing, but also to combat the different forms of
cross-border crime or terrorism financed by trafficking in narcotics,
weapons or cigarettes.
France will lend its support to FRONTEX, the European agency set
up in 2005. Maritime surveillance will constitute a natural framework
for European co-operation. The networking of existing national systems is the first step, as a prelude to the reinforcement of this agency.

###### SECURING EUROPE’S STRATEGIC SUPPLIES

Security of energy and raw material supplies will be one of the
major challenges facing the countries of Europe in the 21st century,
and is of direct concern to all citizens. Consequently, like the United
States, China, India and Japan, Europe needs to take this requirement
fully into account.
Following on from the European Councils of 2006 and 2007,
France will encourage greater co-ordination of the policy that is currently being pursued above all at the national level. This co-ordination
concerns both securing access to strategic raw materials and to energy
sources, the security of their transport, and protecting the infrastructures that process them and utilise them on the territory of the European Union.
This approach should allow Europe to deal with the main markets
in a concerted manner, and where appropriate to conclude the necessary agreements with Russia, the countries of Central Asia and the
Near and Middle East, North Africa and the rest of Africa.

##### For a European White Paper on defense and security

The adoption in 2003 of the European Security Strategy by the
European Council was a major milestone in the assertion of the
Union’s international role. The first adaptation of this document was
launched in 2008.


-----

France considers that it would be natural for the European Union to
_draw up its own European White Paper on defence and security. With_
our partners’ agreement, this could comprise:
— A common European analysis of threats and of the international
system, which could then serve as a basis for national defence and
security policy documents;
— A review of developments in the world’s major power centres,
paying greater attention to the rise of Asia;
— The definition of the European Union’s common security
interests;
— A precise delineation of the relationship, at the European Union
level, between internal security and external crisis management policy.
Continuity between external and internal aspects ought to be part of
this European strategic doctrine: terrorism and organised crime are
typical examples of internal threats whose roots often lie outside the
European Union’s frontiers; the question of energy security follows the
same logic; finally, due to their potentially global effects, health, technological and environmental risks can also imply the need for recourse
to security and defence means;
— Rationalisation of European Union missions (crisis prevention,
management and stabilisation) coupled with the identification of the
necessary instruments and capabilities for carrying out these missions;
— A doctrinal framework for external intervention and the use of
force;
— A strategy for transparent communication with citizens.


-----

-----

CHAPTER 5

###### RENOVATING THE TRANSATLANTIC PARTNERSHIP

Since 1949, the Atlantic Alliance has embodied the strategic relationship between North America and Europe. It preserved the independence and freedom of Western Europe for 40 years. It also became the
paramount channel for military co-operation among European partners themselves. Founded on a community of values and interests, it is
a democratic alliance, within which each State is free to make its voice
heard.
The Atlantic Alliance plays a central role in the security of Europe
and is essential to the security of France.
Over the past 15 years, NATO has successfully adapted to the
upheavals in the European strategic landscape and in international
security. It has 26 members today. It broadened its strategic concept
and missions on the occasion of its 50th anniversary in 1999. Since the
beginning of the XXI[st] century, new political and military developments have led to calls for a renewal of NATO, and it is in France’s
interest to contribute to this move.

##### The European Union and NATO, two complementary organisations

Renewal of NATO and strengthening of the European Union are
two aspects of a single approach. Each of these two organisations,
with its own characteristics, aims and dynamics is essential to the
security and action of France on the international stage.


-----

Relations between the European Union and NATO have suffered
from a number of misapprehensions and genuine misunderstandings.
It is important to dispel these.
Co-operation between the European Union and NATO takes place
under the so-called “Berlin Plus” agreement, which gives the Union
access to the collective assets of NATO. However, this co-operation
continues to be impeded by institutional and political difficulties
connected with the particular status of certain countries that are not
members of military alliances, and with more general political issues
such as that of Cyprus.


-----

It is necessary to avoid two extremes here.
One would see the European Union simply as the civil arm of
NATO. The Union’s aims are obviously much larger than that. It has a
global political mission and its action covers a broad spectrum,
including military affairs.
The other expects the European Union to take on the collective
self-defence of its members. However, common defence is the prime
function of NATO, as spelled out in article 5 of the Treaty of Washington. The perspectives opened up by the Treaty of Lisbon are
without prejudice to the role of NATO in the collective defence of its
European member countries.
On that basis, it should be possible to close the recurring debate
over a putative a priori division of labour between the European Union
and NATO.
It would be unrealistic to try to reserve high intensity operations
for NATO while leaving so-called low intensity conflicts, stabilisation
and reconstruction to the European Union. Analysis of conflicts shows
that the necessary means are to a large extent common and that the
different phases do not follow in linear succession.
Nor would a geographical division prove any more efficient, as
shown by the example of the Balkans, where the military engagement
of the United States entailed recourse to NATO, or that of the European mission in Aceh in Indonesia
The European Union and NATO are thus complementary, and
this strategic fit should be based on the two entities’ respective
contributions.


-----

NATO is the organisation for collective defence that unites North
America and Europe. This mission is specific to the organisation. It is
in the interest of France and its partners that it be preserved and
adapted. It is as relevant as ever, albeit in today’s different conditions,
as new global threats affecting all the Allies are rising. NATO has also
become an effective instrument for the facilitation and conduct of multinational military operations.
The Union’s contribution lies in its capacity to mobilise the full
gamut of instruments for the management of military, humanitarian,
diplomatic and financial crises, in the service of a common foreign and
security policy. This continuity has become essential for the success of
stabilisation operations in countries in conflict.
It is on the basis of the complementary nature and decisionmaking autonomy of the two entities that France intends both to reinforce the European defence capability and play an active role in the
dynamic renewal of NATO.
_The aim is to forge a renewed strategic partnership between Europe_
_and the United States: the Atlantic Alliance needs a European Union_
capable of shouldering a growing share of the burden in the stabilisation of external crises. The Union needs a NATO capable of performing
its defence missions and to strengthen the link that binds North
America to its European allies, in the face of widening threats. Experience shows that the two processes go hand in hand and that, on each
occasion, France’s attitude towards NATO has played a decisive role:
the revival of the Franco-German co-operation in the 1980s, after 20
years of deadlock, was accompanied by our country’s support for
NATO’s decision to deploy missiles in response to those of the Soviet
Union. The gestures made by France from 1995 onwards in the direction of NATO, and in particular full participation in the Atlantic
Council at defence minister level, and in the Military Committee, provided assurance as to French attitudes vis-à-vis the organisation itself.
Three years later, Britain’s new determination to strengthen the European defence capability was comforted by this context, despite the
breakdown of the negotiation between France and the United States
over the Europeanisation of the military commands. At Saint-Malo in
December 1998, the United Kingdom for the first time backed the
drive to provide the Union with the means to conduct autonomous
operations.


-----

##### NATO and international strategic developments

###### A CENTRAL INTERNATIONAL
CRISIS MANAGEMENT INSTRUMENT

The Atlantic Organisation has changed radically since 1994.
In the first place it has expanded to take in 10 new members,
Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic in 1999, and Bulgaria,
Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia in 2004.
Consequently 26 countries now sit on the North Atlantic Council, and
soon 28, with the invitation extended to Albania and Croatia at the
Bucharest Summit in April 2008.
In addition, the Alliance has formed a large number of partnerships. These include the Partnership for Peace with the countries of
Europe and Central Asia; the Mediterranean Dialogue with seven Mediterranean countries; the Istanbul Co-operation Initiative in the direction of the Arabian-Persian Gulf countries; and specific partnerships
with Russia on the one hand and Ukraine on the other. Special relations have also been established with the countries of Asia and the
Pacific (Australia, South Korea, Japan and New Zealand).
Originally created as a military alliance for collective defence,
based on article 5 of the Treaty of Washington[1], NATO has for many
years served without any a priori geographical restriction and on
assumptions of multilateral action not coming within the scope of this
article. These operations range from military intervention in stabilisation missions to the control of areas within the framework of antiterrorist actions, support for humanitarian operations, including assistance in military training in different crisis theatres.

1. Article 5 of the Treaty of Washington states: “The Parties agree that an
_armed attack against one or more of them in Europe or North America shall be_
_considered an attack against them all and consequently they agree that, if such an_
_armed attack occurs, each of them, in exercise of the right of individual or collective_
_self-defence recognised by Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations, will assist_
_the Party or Parties so attacked by taking forthwith, individually and in concert_
_with the other Parties, such action as it deems necessary, including the use of_
_armed force, to restore and maintain the security of the North Atlantic area._
_Any such armed attack and all measures taken as a result thereof shall imme-_
_diately be reported to the Security Council. Such measures shall be terminated_
_when the Security Council has taken the measures necessary to restore and main-_
_tain international peace and security.”_


-----

The Alliance has consequently modernised its military structures,
creating two “functional” strategic commands, one devoted to operations (ACO—Allied Command Operations, based at Mons and commanded by SACEUR), the other to adapting the allied armies to the
context of modern warfare, called “Transformation” (ACT—Allied
Command Transformation in Norfolk), replacing the former Cold War
commands.
It has also created new operational instruments like the NATO
Response Force (NRF), set up in 2003 to respond to a simultaneous
need for effectiveness and responsiveness in the management of international crises.


-----

-----

###### QUESTIONS FOR THE FUTURE

Instruments designed to respond to new requirements, such as the
NATO Response Force (NRF), are experiencing difficulties in spite of
the initial hopes placed in them, partly due to tensions over manpower
levels resulting from the current commitments of allied countries in
several theatres of operation. This problem arises within the European
Union also. It can only be resolved by enhancing capabilities.
The enlargement of the Alliance to new members, and its pace, are
currently a subject of divergence among Allies.
The search for new and closer partnerships with countries in other
regions, such as Asia, seems to flow logically from the gradual shift in
the centre of gravity of strategic issues. But the forging of such partnerships needs to be carefully prepared and organised in order to
avoid misunderstandings among Allies or on the part of great powers,
and dilution of the Alliance’s objectives and means.
Other questions touch on the very purpose and future of the
Atlantic Organisation. These concern the question as to how to assume
missions that are more civil than military in nature, or respond to new
threats. There is a need to define a common doctrine on these new
issues, which have a growing impact on our security.

###### RENEWING NATO

The debate on the renewal of NATO could be launched on the
occasion of the Organisation’s 60th Anniversary Summit, due to take
place in Strasbourg and Kehl, in 2009. This discussion will also provide an opportunity to draw the lessons from the reforms launched at
the Prague Summit on 21 November 2002 (regarding the place of technology, the role of the NRF, and the organisation of commands), the
operations in Afghanistan, and to broach other important questions
relating to relations among Allies, budgetary issues particularly.
In France’s view, this renewal should be guided by three aims.
On the one hand, the missions of the Alliance need to be reviewed
in a manner consistent with a shared analysis of the evolution of
threats:
— The prime mission of the Alliance is collective defence, in a
context implying the need to adjust to new risks, e.g. the spread of ballistic technologies and other vehicles capable of delivering conventional or non-conventional military payloads, mass terrorism, cyber
attacks, as well as all means of bypassing the Allied countries’ military
assets. This new vision also needs to draw the lessons from the shift in
common strategic interests toward sensitive crisis areas such as the


-----

Middle East and Asia in particular. This ought to lead us to envisage
more active partnerships with Russia, the countries of Central Asia,
Japan, South Korea and Australia;
— Another of the Alliance’s missions is management of crises or
stabilisation in conflict zones, drawing on its multinational assets and
the interoperability of allied forces. However, the specific role of the
Alliance in civil security and humanitarian aid, or its relevance to limited stabilisation and reconstruction operations, are more debatable.
On the other hand, renewal should entail a better sharing of respon_sibilities among Americans and Europeans. Once the European Union_
is recognised by the United States as a political actor in its own right
on the international scene, as a leading operator in the civil sphere and
as a military operator capable of shouldering a growing share of the
burden in missions and risks, a new balance should be pursued, one
that would guide the evolution of the Organisation. France therefore
intends to work for a renewal of transatlantic ties.
Finally, France will lend its support to current thinking within the
Alliance on how to improve planning procedures and streamline the
command structures and the International Secretariat in order to
adapt them to NATO’s missions.

##### Renewing relations between France and NATO

There is a yawning gap today between reality and perception of
France’s contribution to the Atlantic organisation, be it among our
partners or in French public opinion.
The French position has evolved since 1994 towards a greater presence in all of the Allied structures and a major contribution to the
operations decided within the framework of the Atlantic Alliance.
Today France sits within all of the Alliance’s multilateral bodies,
except for two specialised organs established after it left the military
structure in 1966, namely the Defence Planning Committee, and the
Nuclear Planning Group. It has never left its seat on the Atlantic
Council, NATO’s governing body. In 1996, after a long period as an
observer only, it fully resumed its presence in on the Military Committee of the Organisation, including its Chief of Defence Staff when
this body meets at the highest level. Since that same year, the French
Minister of Defence has attended the meetings of the Atlantic Council.
France makes a substantial contribution to NATO’s force generation procedures, whether for operations, for the NATO Response Force
(NRF), or for certain reserve forces. For example, in July 2008,


-----

France’s commitment within the NRF framework amounts to more
than 7,000 men, in addition to air and naval assets together with command assets. The effective commitment of these forces is subject to the
prior consent of France and the Atlantic Council. This contribution is
evidence of France’s involvement in the new mechanisms put in place
since the end of the Cold War.
After having been proscribed for nearly 40 years, France’s presence
in the permanent command structures is nevertheless confined to a
hundred or so officers, with a special status on the basis of an agreement signed in 2004 between the French Chief of Defence Staff and
the Supreme Allied Commander in Europe.
General de Gaulle’s decision in 1966 to withdraw France from the
integrated military organisation was intended to “restore their com_pletely national character to [France’s] armies” and to avoid any form of_
subordination of French forces to a foreign authority, along with any
foreign military presence on French territory (press conference,
October 28, 1966).
These fundamental principles continue to apply, but the farreaching changes that have taken place in the international environment, the evolution of the Atlantic Alliance, and France’s involvement
in the Alliance’s new missions, call for a rethink of their practical
implications 40 years on.
For instance, 21 of the 26 allies are members of the European
Union. All, with the exception of France, are members of the Alliance’s
military structure. All those[1] among them that are also members of the
Union, are contributing to the construction of Europe in the area of
defence and security.
It is hard to go on proclaiming the need for a difference in the
_nature of our position in NATO while, together with our European_
partners, acknowledging the Alliance as one of the keys to our
common security, and when we are seeking to promote our conception
of a united and effective European Union in matters of security and
defence.
The transatlantic co-operation fora dealing with strategic issues in
which we do not participate, such as the Defence Planning Committee,
work by consensus and in no way encroach on national sovereignty.
Participation in the Nuclear Planning Group raises a different kind of
issue since our nuclear assets are totally independent.
Our partners view the particular way in which we have distanced
ourselves from the military structure as somewhat incoherent. We are
present there in more than one capacity, each time with a customised

1. With the exception of Denmark.


-----

-----

statute and financial contribution, and we continually and substantially contribute to all operations.
Any new rapprochement with the command structure should abide
by the fundamental principles underlying our defence policy, namely:
_Full freedom of assessment by the French political authorities on_
_situations and decisions: full French participation will in no way imply_
that our country will automatically contribute to NATO interventions.
The Atlantic Alliance is an alliance of sovereign nations in which political decisions are taken by consensus. France will therefore retain its
full independence of judgement and decision in all circumstances.
_French nuclear independence: France’s nuclear assets and strategy_
of deterrence will remain outside the NATO framework. France
considers that the Ottawa Declaration of 1974 and the 1999 Strategic
Concept, which recognise the contribution of its forces and those of
the United Kingdom to the deterrent capabilities of the Alliance[1],
remain the sole documents of reference with regard to relations
between its deterrent force and NATO nuclear doctrine.
_Freedom of decision regarding the commitment of French forces. No_
_French force will be placed permanently under NATO command in peace-_
_time. Depending on its security interests and needs, France will retain_
full authority over the utilisation of its external intervention capabilities.

France must be the driving force behind major European initiatives in
all areas of security and defence.
The European Union must play a greater role in defence and security,
with an emphasis on the prevention and management of international
crises.
Relaunching the European Union in the field of defence and security,
and the renewal of the transatlantic link, are two inseparable aspects
of a single policy for the long term and must proceed in step with each
other.
There is no a priori limit to France’s commitment to NATO, as long as
the independence of our nuclear forces, our authorities’ independence
of judgement and our freedom of decision with regard to the commitment of our forces are fully preserved.

1. This declaration states that the nuclear forces of France and the United
Kingdom are “capable of playing a deterrent role of their own contributing to the
_overall strengthening of the deterrence of the Alliance”._


-----

CHAPTER 6

###### COLLECTIVE SECURITY IN THE XXI[ST] CENTURY

Collective security was conceived in order to protect future generations from war. Not only has this scourge not vanished from our
horizon, numerous other threats now also demand collective action.
These threats cannot be dealt with on a strictly national nor even
regional basis. Global collective action is required. As a result, the
international security system will be subject to increasing demands.

##### Multilateralism continues to be a founding principle

Multilateral action is going through a period of scepticism or even
pessimism due to the poor results achieved on a number of key issues
such as Cyprus, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the difficulty or even
incapacity of persuading Iran to abandon its nuclear programme, or
again food insecurity and damage to the environment. Security
Council reform aimed at creating a body more representative of the
balance of powers is still awaited. Failures such as Rwanda, BosniaHerzegovina or Kosovo have left their mark on people’s memories, due
to the United Nations’ inability to prevent ethnic cleansing. Above all,
contrary to what might have been hoped, the scope for collective security opened up by the bloodless ending of the Cold War did not prompt
sufficiently vigorous action by States to reap the benefits the world
was entitled to expect.
This scepticism is partly unfounded. The decline in the number of
civil wars is the result of the growing intervention by the United
Nations. Progress has also been made in the field of international jus

-----

tice, with the institution of the International Criminal Court, or in the
support given to regional security organisations. Moreover, the alternatives put forward to overcome the shortcomings in collective action
have not proved particularly effective. Unilateralism has shown its
_shortcomings in terms of both legitimacy and efficacy. Recent history_
shows that the legitimacy of intervention depends more than ever on
its legal foundations. Military force remains useful and even indispensable in certain circumstances, but by itself it can no longer claim to
provide a sufficient response to crises. As for ad hoc coalitions of
States, these provide flexibility, but when they lack an international
mandate they convey the impression they are circumventing rather
than supporting the international security institutions. What is more,
they are inadequate to deal with the challenges of stabilisation and
reconstruction. Finally, globalisation is raising new security issues at
the global scale, which can be neither resolved nor prevented other
than by the collective mobilisation of all actors on the international
scene.
Whatever its shortcomings and its difficulties, therefore, the multi_lateral approach appears to be not only the most legitimate, but also the_
_most promising, and strengthening it will continue to be France’s pri-_
_ority. The risks of cultural shocks or clashes between global political_
systems, which are real today, will only be avoided in the XXI[st] century
if we can build an inclusive international security system.

##### The central role of the United Nations

The Charter of the United Nations is the foundation stone of international law with regard to the use of military force, in matters both of
individual and collective legitimate defence[1], peacekeeping or action in
the event of threat to peace, breakdown of peace and acts of aggression.
Few armed conflicts have warranted a United Nations mandate,
those few cases being the Korean War in 1950, the first Gulf War in

1. Article 51 of the Charter states: “Nothing in the present Charter shall
_impair the inherent right of individual or collective self-defence if an armed attack_
_occurs against a Member of the United Nations, until the Security Council has_
_taken measures necessary to maintain international peace and security. Measures_
_taken by Members in the exercise of this right of self-defence shall be immediately_
_reported to the Security Council and shall not in any way affect the authority and_
_responsibility of the Security Council under the present Charter to take at any_
_time such action as it deems necessary in order to maintain or restore interna-_
_tional peace and security”._


-----

1991, and the military operation in Afghanistan in 2001 in the wake of
the September 11 attacks of that year. But the uncertainties surrounding the evolution of international relations, and the scale of the
dangers threatening them, argue more than ever for the Charter’s relevance and pre-eminence. In a world where the chief risk is that of
_disorder and the absence of rules, or even anarchy, the authority of the_
_Security Council when considering recourse to force must be the rule._
The changing faces of conflict—internal conflicts, private actors,
asymmetry and terrorism—should not serve as a pretext for jettisoning
collective rules. On the contrary, they make the existence and respect
for an agreed legal framework all the more necessary, whether that
framework concern the protection of civilians, the treatment of prisoners, the prohibition of torture, or the repression of war crimes.
Apart from the legality of military intervention, the question of its
legitimacy has already been raised by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and by the Security Council itself. This development
concerns not only cases of “genocide, ethnic cleansing or other grave
_violations of international humanitarian law”[1], where the “responsi-_
bility to protect” falls in the last resort on the international community. It also applies to “threats to international peace and security caused
_by terrorist acts”[2]._

###### THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE PERMANENT MEMBERS
OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

The five permanent members of the Security Council have a particular role to play in the proper functioning of collective security. It falls
to them in the first place to prevent crises rather than reacting after
they have occurred. It is their responsibility notably to narrow the divisions between adversaries when conflicts break out. It is up to them,
and above all, to take steps to ensure that hostilities do not cross the
nuclear threshold. These responsibilities are all the weightier at a time
when crises and factors of risk tend to become interconnected. France,
as a permanent member of the Council, must fully play its role.
The permanent members of the Security Council enjoy special
rights such as the right of veto solely because they have a specific duty
to preserve the peace and international security. They also have a duty
to contribute to the solution of the current crisis undermining the
international institutions.

1. Report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
2. Resolution 1368 of the United Nations Security Council.


-----

Defiance towards the United Nations and unilateralism have
marked the first years of the XXI[st] century. The commitment by all
States to multilateral processes is a prime condition for a reinstatement in international confidence. Failing which, the mechanisms of
the Charter are at risk of deadlock, which would prevent us from
implementing the responsibility to protect, for instance.

###### THE LEGITIMACY AND REPRESENTATIVENESS
OF THE UNITED NATIONS

Legitimacy is key to the success of collective management of security challenges. This multilateral legitimacy is fragile and hard to
implement. It must be rooted in the broadest possible agreement, for
the assent, support and constructive engagement of all major States
are essential in dealing with contemporary conflicts, global challenges
and transnational threats.
Whereas legitimacy and effectiveness are sometimes seen as
irreconcilable, France believes on the contrary that one is a condition
of the other, and that the two are mutually reinforcing. They must
therefore be reconciled, whatever the difficulties.
Thus the reform of the Security Council is an imperative. It should
bring together as permanent members those Member States that have
the capacity and the resolve to contribute to international peace and
security, such as Germany, Japan, India, and Brazil, as well as permitting fair representation of Africa. The membership of the Council
should also be broadened to new non-permanent members in order to
better reflect the ongoing geopolitical transformations. Finally, the
reform must go beyond the question of enlargement to improve the
way the Council and the instruments at its disposal are working, and
make them more effective.

##### Adapting to the demands of prevention, non-proliferation and disarmament

In the field of prevention, multilateral action should concentrate
on a handful of essential issues, namely political mediation, good
offices missions, management and cooperative use of natural
resources (water, gas, oil), protection of minorities (as defined by the
OSCE), transparency of stocks and purchases of conventional
weapons, implementation of rapid information and alert systems,
notably in the event of natural disasters, preventive deployment of UN


-----

troops, and non-proliferation and arms control regimes. This last calls
for special attention.
The fight against proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) and their means of delivery will continue to be a priority. The
destabilising impact of proliferation on international security is all the
more important today, when it is particularly rife in areas of tension
such as the Middle East and East Asia. This proliferation is both
sharpening these tensions and can only increase the long-term risk
that these weapons will one day be used.
To be effective, the fight against proliferation should focus on
three pillars:
1. The universal application and comprehensive implementation of
the international conventions signed by the great majority of States
(namely the nuclear weapons Non-Proliferation Treaty or NPT, the
convention on the prohibition of bacteriological and toxin weapons or
BTWC, and the convention on the prohibition of chemical weapons or
CWC);
2. Vigorous action by the suppliers regimes, whose purpose in
each area is to control the spread of technologies and materials
(Nuclear Suppliers Group or NSG, missile technology control regime
or MTCR, and the Australia Group for chemical and biological
weapons);
3. Determined operational co-operation in the field of counterproliferation, to thwart sensitive transfers in progress and combat
illicit networks. The Proliferation Security Initiative or PSI is the
most formal instrument in this area, but it is not the only one. This
operational co-operation needs to bring together within a single network all of the actors concerned, including diplomats, customs
officers, police officers, military personnel, and intelligence personnel, etc.
In the nuclear sphere, the necessary recourse to electro-nuclear
power to resolve energy problems and reduce greenhouse gas emissions calls for tougher monitoring of sensitive enrichment technologies, reprocessing and the production of heavy water. This extension
should be carried out while respecting safety, security and nonproliferation conditions; these could be enshrined in a code of conduct
for the use of suppliers (both States and industrial firms).
In the biological sector, public health surveillance and protection
measures can help by limiting the consequences of deliberate use of a
biological agent against populations. International action alone will
yield results, regarding screening, the development of new vaccines,
rapid information concerning suspicious epidemics, or more effective
diagnostic measures.


-----

-----

-----

In the chemical field, clandestine programmes are continuing with
impunity, taking advantage of the fact that this sector attracts less
attention. The aim of destroying chemical warfare agents between now
and 2012, as called for in the Convention on the prohibition of chemical weapons, is unlikely to be achieved. For these reasons, effective
implementation of this Convention should be made a collective
priority.
Finally, France is committed to nuclear disarmament. Together with
the United Kingdom it was the first State to sign and ratify the comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty (CTBT). It was the first State to decide to
close and dismantle its facilities for the production of fissile material for
explosive purposes at its nuclear test site in the Pacific. It has dismantled its land-based nuclear missiles. It has voluntarily reduced the
number of its nuclear missile-launching submarines by a third. In the
name of the principle of strict sufficiency, the number of nuclear
weapons, missiles and aircraft in its airborne component will also be
reduced by a third as from 2008 (chapter 10). With this reduction,


-----

France’s nuclear arsenal will comprise fewer than 300 warheads, which
is half the maximum number of warheads it held during the Cold War.
On March 21, 2008, moreover, France proposed an ambitious
plan for the pursuit of multilateral nuclear disarmament. It is
encouraging respect by three principles, namely sufficiency, transparency and reciprocity.

##### New collective institutions and regional security organisations

###### NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR GLOBAL SECURITY
CHALLENGES

The activity of the multilateral institutions is not confined to questions of defence, proliferation or terrorism. Collective security also
implies concerted action and regulation in the fields of international
public health, conflict prevention, development assistance and the
fight against poverty, preserving the environment and combating the
consequences of climate change, or again the stability of economic,
trade and financial exchanges.
While States are not always spontaneously thus inclined, multilateral action is desirable because it is best able to provide a comprehensive response. The global challenge does not necessarily require a
global response, but at the very least wide-ranging, convergent and
coordinated action on the part of all States, whether in fighting against
pandemics, acting against trends such as climate change, or taking all
forms of action in response to large-scale criminal trafficking.
With the World Health Organisation (WHO), the United Nations
stands in the front line in the management of international health
risks. The WHO acts in the first place upstream of crises, attempting to
prevent them by means of technical assistance or by laying down standards. It also acts, as required, in the management of health crises
when they occur, thanks to an early warning system, to scientific
expertise, or again to its strategic co-ordination capabilities. It is also
capable of targeted interventions.
Concerning the protection of the biosphere and combating the
effects of climate warming, France has called for the creation of a
multilateral body for prevention and concerted action in this area. The
European Union has played a pioneering role in this respect, which
needs to be enhanced and expanded.
Similarly, a collective effort is needed to tackle the growing
inequalities of development between the different regions and coun

-----

tries on our planet. The competent international organisations in the
fields of international trade and development assistance also need to
make a radical effort to adapt in order to address the questions raised
by poverty, food scarcity and access to water resources, all of which
are potential sources of instability in the coming decades.

###### BOLSTERING REGIONAL SECURITY ORGANISATIONS

Complementing the universal multilateral institutions, the comparative advantages of the regional and sub-regional security organisations should be exploited fully. In Africa, for example, the African
Union (AU), the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
for East Africa are coming to be fully-fledged partners. France will
contribute to consolidating their peacekeeping capabilities where these
are being established, particularly in Africa (co-operation, expertise
and funding), and to promoting them where they do not exist. It will
also seek to extend the action of these organisations to conflict prevention, disarmament, the fight against terrorism, and civil security. Altogether, it is intended to develop, modernise and revive genuine
regional security architectures. This needs to be done not only in
Africa, but notably in the Arabian-Persian Gulf and above all in Asia.
However, this effort should not be prejudicial to the central role of
the United Nations. Our interest in bolstering these regional capabilities does not imply any fragmentation of the international security
system, but should be seen in terms of a complementary fit between
the regional and global levels.

##### The defence of human rights

The experience of the XX[th] century has shown the linkage between
the denial of human rights and the great catastrophes of history. This
experience must not be forgotten: human rights are no more incompatible with State sovereignty than they are with the pursuit of our
interests.
The sovereignty of the State consists in the first place in protecting
its population. Neither the principle of non-interference in the
domestic affairs of a State, nor that of the sovereignty of that State can
therefore be invoked to defend atrocities such as massacres and other
massive violations of international humanitarian law.


-----

France will uphold the efforts of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and will seek to extend its universal reach and means of action.
The same holds for action in favour of humanitarian law. France views
with favour the new obligations and constraints rendered necessary by
the desire to limit the harm caused by the use of certain weapons. In
this spirit, the 1980 convention on certain conventional weapons, the
1997 convention on the prohibition of the use, stockpiling, production
and transfer of anti-personnel mines and on their destruction, and the
recent draft convention on sub-munitions weapons prepared in
Dublin, are creating freely-accepted constraints on whole categories of
weapons.
The primacy of the rule of law, respect for civilians, tolerance
between and within nations, in other words the very values that
underpin the Charter of the United Nations, must be tirelessly reiterated and defended.

##### The role of the European Union in international governance

The European Security Strategy adopted by the European Union
Member States in 2003 stresses the need for international security to
be based on the creation and reinforcement of an “effective multilateralism”. This concept implies the pursuit of a diplomacy whose
overriding aim is not to keep a process in being, but to pursue concrete
aims by means that are not primarily those of military force. It is thus
up to the European Union countries in the first place, whose security
largely depends on the success of multilateral processes, to demonstrate their capacity to enter negotiations and achieve results.
France envisages a substantial proportion of its action within this
European approach. It also supports the role of the European Union
within the multilateral institutions. Since 1994, the European Union
has been one of the leading players in these, capable of driving forward such major projects as international criminal justice or the
responsibility to protect, of assuming global responsibilities in crisis
management, or again in supporting the United Nations or the African
Union in theatres of operations.
In that sense, for France the European Union embodies the drive
to promote an international society based on rules and a collective
approach to decision-making and action.


-----

-----

##### III

### A NEW STRATEGY FOR ACTION


-----

-----

CHAPTER 7

###### WHAT OPERATIONS?

France’s national security strategy organises and implements the
means required to prevent any attack on the life of the country, or to
limit any such attack to the lowest level of gravity possible, and to mitigate its consequences. Its ambition is to raise the country’s capacity
for anticipation, responsiveness and resilience. It lays the groundwork
for a national doctrine aimed at harmonising in all circumstances the
use of Government resources and at promoting dialogue and consistency among all concerned, including local government, businesses,
international institutions and non-governmental organisations.
Our capabilities must be adapted to the new equilibrium of strategic functions that has been defined, and also to the demands of the
operations in which the armed forces and internal and civil security
forces are to be engaged.

##### Consequences of the new balance of strategic functions

With respect to the armed forces, the means described in the 2015
model adopted in 1996 do not correspond to this new balance, nor to
the long-term policy goals described above.
A major effort needs to be made in the area of knowledge and
anticipation. New programmes and a new organisation are needed in
order to take our capabilities to a new threshold. These capabilities
will play a key role in the responsiveness of the French Government
administration, armed forces and of our internal security.


-----

France’s deterrent will be maintained at a level strictly sufficient
for the credibility of its nuclear forces and their capacity to respond to
the various situations the country might have to face. These objectives
will call for considerable efforts in terms of the preparation of personnel, and the quality, reliability and safety of equipment.
Protection will be redefined and will be developed to match the
vulnerabilities to which France and Europe are directly exposed. This
policy should notably be translated into precise operational goals for
our forces, the urgent adaptation of our crisis management capacity
and greater co-ordination between the different responsible officials
across the territory and between civil and military personnel on the
ground.
Intervention capabilities will be adapted to the new overall balance
being sought and to the priorities described above. Their maximum
level no longer depends on massive commitment to a collective airland defensive operation in Europe, within the framework of the
Atlantic Alliance, as was still the case with the “operational contracts”
based on the 2015 Armed Forces model (modèle d’Armée 2015). It
should result from an analysis of the most likely operational situations
in which France could be directly involved in the coming years, and of
key geo-strategic axes for our security.
Our resources will be deployed and our pre-positioned assets
(which also contribute to the prevention function) will be reviewed
according to these geographical priorities. Concentration in space and
time will be the key to this strategy and to the successful use of our
forces.
Even more so than in the past, our effort regarding our capacities
should take into account the salient lessons learned from the past few
years, namely the almost continuous deployment of our military and
civil capabilities in ever more varied situations.
_The logic of concentration and the logic of deployment should there-_
_fore dictate the doctrine, organisation, training and equipment of both_
_our conventional forces and our civil means of action._

##### Likely operational commitments

To resolve a crisis, whether on national territory or abroad, new
forms of co-ordination are required in order to bring the various actors
involved—civil or military, State or private, national or international—
to act together in a coherent fashion.


-----

###### OPERATIONS ON FRENCH NATIONAL TERRITORY

In the event of a grave crisis such as a natural disaster, large-scale
technological accident or mass terror attack, etc., the State and all
public authorities organise their response by deploying all necessary
means to bring relief to the victims, limit the after-effects of a destabilising event (e.g. a health crisis in the wake of a disaster), guarantee the
continuity of government action and ensure a return to normal, and by
prosecuting the perpetrators if the event is the result of an intentional
act. The role of the Government in such cases is to coordinate all of
the public and private actors in society as a whole.
As for all bodies coming under the authority of the State, military
force is also required to provide support by accompanying or completing the work of the specialised civil forces and means.
Internal security and civil security agencies must be prepared to
deal with forms of aggression and crises that may cause grave damage
on the national territory. Consequently, new forms of co-operation are
needed between civil and military capabilities.
The National Security strategy lays the basis for a doctrine to that
end, applicable to all aspects of it, organising co-operation before,
during and after the event. Apart from the organisational measures
this strategy entails within the State apparatus itself, it also entails the
introduction of procedures that must be known and applicable to all
echelons, and tested by means of inter-ministerial exercises. A step
change is required in the quality of crisis planning and the organisation of the public authorities in times of crisis in order to ensure the
country’s resilience.

###### MILITARY OPERATIONS

There is no likelihood of strictly military operations on the
national territory in the foreseeable future, apart from providing support to crisis management operations in the wake of terrorist attacks
or a natural or technological disaster.
Consequently, France’s armed forces will continue to conduct their
operations in the defence of our security interests and in support of
the Nation’s diplomacy and political action outside of French territory.
In all likelihood, these operations will continue to come within one
or another of two broad categories.
Stabilisation operations take many different forms, ranging from
interposition between belligerents, stabilisation operations in the wake
of internal conflicts, operations to secure countries or regions, interventions pursuant to our responsibility to protect. France expects to


-----

continue to be much in demand as a contributor. Its involvement in
operations of this type must comply with the guidelines set forth in
chapter 3. It will generally entail the sending of relatively small contingents of between 1,000 and 5,000 troops, not including naval and air
forces. The armed forces will be expected to deploy and maintain
contingents of this kind in many theatres, in geographically distant
regions, often remote and with harsh physical, human and economic
features. These operations may be of long duration and evolve considerably over time, requiring the forces on the ground to adapt permanently with, as its corollary, adjustments in the general format of
French deployments. Two risks need to be circumscribed at all times,
namely the use of fighting units outside their normal functions, as in
police missions or to maintain law and order, for example, and excessive dispersal of resources across a large number of theatres.
Large-scale military operations cannot be ruled out, as witnessed
by the analysis of the risks of conflict in which France could be
involved. Recourse to military force in a war demands several months
of preparation and deployment. The operation itself generally comprises a high intensity or “decisive” phase, followed by a stabilisation
phase that may stretch over a number of years.
There is no strict dividing line between these two types of operation. A major operation may be followed by a stabilisation operation,
or highly lethal violence may flare up in the course of a stabilisation
operation. Whatever the type of operation, forces deployed on land, at
sea or in the air must at all time be in a position to adapt their posture to the context and to perform simultaneously one-off high intensity combat actions, securing delimited areas, or bringing relief to
populations.
The need to be constantly able to adapt explains why France has
not opted to specialise its forces, preferring to develop a polyvalent
capability. The quantitative criterion, in terms of manpower and
equipment, remains important and quality cannot compensate for it
entirely. When considered in the light of the increasingly harsh nature
of conflicts, raising the risks to forces in contact, this implies the need
to continue our efforts to improve the protection and offensive
capacity of French forces–notably for long range, stand-off strikes–to
preserve their freedom of action.
The capacity for endurance in the course of an engagement flows
from the adaptability of the available means, with a reasonable degree
of redundancy, from their adaptability to foreseeable contexts and,
above all, to the quality and training of the men and women who are
fighting.


-----

###### COMBINED CIVIL AND MILITARY OPERATIONS OUTSIDE
NATIONAL TERRITORY

The commonest occurrence is that of operations preceding, accompanying or following military action, notably for purposes of reconstruction or the consolidation of peace.
Until the end of the Cold War, there was a clear distinction
between military operations, wars, and civil or civil-military operations. This distinction has become blurred to the point where it is
practically no longer possible to conceive of a military operation unaccompanied by civil action.
After a military operation, once the last international military
contingent has left the territory concerned, civil intervention by the
international community continues in support of the political institutions resulting from the crisis, and notably in order to organise international aid, administrative and judicial assistance, and support for
economic development, as we have seen in the Balkans.
These are complex operations, and they have yet to produce a
firmly established “international doctrine”. On the contrary, each is
treated as a separate instance, with a variety of actions proceeding
side-by-side within a single theatre and pursuing parallel aims. The
sole acknowledged common feature is the pre-eminence of the United
Nations. Nevertheless, this rarely materialises in the form of coordinated action by all of the parties involved, local and foreign alike.
The ambition of the French national security strategy is to define
and develop a more effective and more coherent framework for global
action by France’s public authorities.
There is an urgent need to develop certain capabilities. In order to
play its part in large-scale civil operations, France needs to identify,
recruit and deploy specialised civilian volunteers including administrators, magistrates and economic experts.
In addition, it needs to develop appropriate financial and legal
instruments to ensure the quality and coherence of its action in theatres of operations, together with the visibility and traceability of its
contribution. To that end, it needs to define a fully fledged “post-crisis”
strategy, closely involving French businesses in the economic and
financial reconstruction of the countries concerned, at the earliest
opportunity.
What is true for the military instrument referred to above is
equally so for other instruments of government: the array of French
assets capable of being committed abroad within the framework of a
civil or civil-military operation and contributing to the political and


-----

diplomatic action of the Nation as a whole needs to be organised more
effectively.

The choice of capabilities required to prepare and successfully discharge these commitments is described below, through strategic functions, and are organised around two time frames, namely the shortand medium-term (here 2015), and medium-and long-term (2025).


-----

CHAPTER 8

###### KNOWLEDGE AND ANTICIPATION

In an international environment marked by great uncertainties and
potentially extremely short warning periods, a country’s first line of
defence are its capabilities for knowledge and anticipation. These must
offer decision makers, as much prior to the crises as possible, the necessary basis for assessing the situation (the variety and gravity of risks
and threats, opportunities for French and European interests, etc),
enabling them to make better-informed choices between the different
possible modes of action. Consequently, the knowledge and anticipation function has been elevated for the first time to the status of a strategic function in its own right and embraces several areas.

##### Intelligence

The purpose of intelligence is to enable the highest authorities of
the State, together with our diplomacy, armed forces and our internal
and civil security services, to anticipate developments, and to reach
assessments, decide and act in full independence.
By presenting the state of risks, threats and opportunities in the
widest spectrum of fields (political, military, economic, energy, etc.) as
comprehensively and accurately as possible, intelligence serves to
enlighten decisions, as well as to foreshadow, support and review action.
It must therefore maintain a permanent vigil to detect new risks
and the first signs of developments affecting our security. It provides a
basis for the planning and conduct of operations. It must give France
the capacity to preserve the strategic initiative and retain its ability to
decide independently.


-----

The acquisition of intelligence flows from several different groups
of activities working in close association, namely: information gathering in the field, through human or technical sources; the work of
civil and military intelligence services; and the activity of specialised
military units. In all cases, the information is exploited, cross-checked,
synthesised and analysed, before being transmitted to decision makers.
This presupposes on the one hand an organisation designed to promote the dissemination and assimilation of information in real time,
and on the other the upgrading of our information-gathering and processing capabilities.
_The systematic enhancement of our intelligence means will be the_
_object of an overall planning process to be implemented according to four_
_main priorities_

###### AN INDISPENSABLE FOCUS ON HUMAN RESOURCES

Intelligence depends in the first place on the people who gather,
analyse and exploit it, sometimes in dangerous conditions. The
greatest attention will therefore be paid to the recruitment, training
and careers of intelligence personnel. Human resources management
will be overseen jointly by the relevant ministries and services in order
to optimise this function (chapter 14).

**Recruitment and career management**

Staffing levels will be reinforced and recruitment will be stepped
up, notably as regards the fight against terrorism, counter-proliferation,
fighting organised crime, combating espionage and economic interference. The number of technical personnel such as engineers, technicians, linguists, imagery interpreters and specialists in the programming of these capabilities will also be increased.
Particular emphasis will be placed on creating enhanced career
tracks in intelligence. Recruitment needs to be not only limited to the
specialised and technical civil service channel, but also open to the
universities and grandes écoles, with easier recourse to personnel under
contract.
Common careers management norms will be laid down regarding
the recruitment and mobility of personnel, as well as initial and
continuous training. An intelligence academy will formulate a training
programme serving as a fully-fledged “core course” to be developed
among the different intelligence services, run by them and sanctioned
by a diploma recognised by them all.


-----

Human resources should also be better used, for example, with
regard to rare languages. Encouragement should be given to crosspostings by secondment between the different services, as well as to
greater mobility between services and ministries.

**Human intelligence sources**

Special emphasis will be placed on human sources of intelligence,
as part of the overall effort. This implies efforts in terms of manpower,
quality of recruitment, training of the personnel in charge of this mission, as well as an increase in the recruitment of sources and an
improvement in their geographical distribution according to the newly
defined priorities.

###### DEVELOPING TECHNICAL CAPABILITIES

The rapid pace of technological change calls for expanded technical means to better ensure the security of the country. A qualitative
and quantitative leap is particularly necessary for France to remain at
a level enabling it to dialogue with the handful of countries that are its
major interlocutors, both present and future, in the intelligence sphere.
These countries have sharply enhanced their capabilities since 2001,
while the French services have not done so to the same degree.
The performance of intelligence services and military units will be
enhanced in order to respond to the growing needs resulting from our
new strategy. In certain areas it is essential to guarantee the complementary fit between the various sources—space-based, land-based, seabased and airborne. A qualitative and quantitative effort will be initiated, starting in 2008, and will be pursued continuously over the next
15 years.
The Internet has become crucial to our security. The Government’s
technical capabilities in this sphere will be strengthened, with a
greater number of specialised technicians and experts placed at its
disposal.
The effort will also concern activities in space, a key factor of strategic independence. Space-based assets, freed from the constraints
bearing on aerial overflight, can cover a broad array of needs from
strategic vigilance to the planning and conduct of operations.
_Imagery intelligence (IMINT) is based on complementary resources_
at the strategic level (observation satellites), operative level (i.e., on a
theatre of operations) or at the tactical level (i.e., on the ground, using
human observers, drones and airborne sensors). Space imagery
requirements are currently covered by the Helios 2 programme for


-----

very high resolution images in the visible spectrum and infrared
images, and by the addition of all-weather imagery provided by
exchanges with Germany and Italy, thanks to the SAR-Lupe (2007)
space systems in the former case, and to the Cosmo-Skymed (2009)
programme in the latter. A European programme, MUSIS (multiuser
satellite imagery system) is expected to permit the launch of the next
generation of space sensors. The visible spectrum component will be
reinforced in 2015 via a reconnaissance asset providing ultra-high resolution images, together with superior identification capacity. At the
same time, Germany and Italy plan to develop their radar capacities.
To avoid the risk of discontinuity at the end of the life of Helios 2B,
France will begin work on the visible spectrum component of the
MUSIS programme as from 2008.
As regards airborne capabilities, the effort will focus in particular
on drones, remotely piloted air vehicles providing control over information in crisis theatres and thereby facilitating the operational
engagement of our forces. A MALE (medium altitude and long endurance) UAV system is expected to be operational in the middle of the
next decade. This will carry a more comprehensive intelligence gathering capability than what is currently available with tactical drones.
The effort will also focus on new generation on-board systems carried by combat aircraft.
_Signal intelligence (SIGINT) embraces the gathering, positioning,_
identification and interpretation of electronic signals. This helps to
enhance our independent capacity to assess situations and improve our
forces’ capacity to protect themselves. The space component will be covered by the CERES (space signal intelligence capability) programme,


-----

which is open to European co-operation, to be launched in the short to
medium term in order to be operational by the middle of the next
decade. In the airborne sector, the effort will notably concern on-board
sensors equipping the successors to the Transall Gabriel aircraft, and a
UAV capability. It will also include land-based means including
advanced transmissions detachments, and seaborne assets in the form
of an “acoustic intelligence” ship and nuclear attack submarines.
Overall, the share of annual intelligence service budgets earmarked
for technical investment will therefore need to be increased.
To signal the priority given to all joint assets contributing to
knowledge and anticipation, the Defence General Staff will develop a
_specific planning and programming process for this sector._

###### THE NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE COUNCIL

The existing perimeter of the intelligence services reflects the
diversity of their missions. There is therefore no plan to modify these
beyond the recent reforms, which have enhanced the effectiveness of
the setup and which led to the creation in 2008 of the direction centrale
_du renseignement intérieur (DCRI Central Directorate for Domestic_
Intelligence).
However, the intelligence organisation needs to be better coordinated, with a more clearly defined complementary fit than is currently
the case.
The governance of the intelligence organisation will therefore be
reinforced with the setting up of a National Intelligence Council.
At the operational level, already existing co-operation between the
services of a single ministry or different ministries will be formalised
and stepped up in new areas. The aim is to avoid dispersal of effort
and human resources within a tight budgetary context, and making
better use of resources, developing synergies between services with
common aims, and avoiding duplication or gaps in coverage. Within
the framework of these forms of co-operation, policy with regard to
equipment should give rise to systematic pooling. The bulk of the technical assets and investments is concentrated in the Ministry of
Defence, with the means at the disposal of the direction générale de la
_sécurité extérieure (DGSE) and the direction du renseignement militaire_
(DRM).
In the fight against terrorism, the Unité de coordination de lutte
_contre le terrorisme (UCLAT Anti-Terrorism Co-ordination Unit), which_
reports to the Director General of the National Police, will continue to
co-ordinate the competent services.


-----

-----

At the strategic level, a new echelon of co-ordination between intelligence services will be put in place. It will set policies, apportion
objectives and arbitrate between competing requirements. The new
setup will be articulated around a National Intelligence Council and a
National Intelligence Co-ordinator working in the Office of the President of the French Republic.
Plenary meetings of the National Intelligence Council will be
chaired by the President of the French Republic and will be attended
by the Prime minister, the Ministers of the Interior, Defence, Foreign
Affairs, Economy and Budget, and where appropriate by other ministers depending on the agenda. The National Intelligence Co-ordinator


-----

and the heads of the relevant services will also attend, as well as the
Secretary General for Defence and National Security[1] who will act as
secretary to the Council.
The Council will set the broad strategies and priorities for the
intelligence services. It will approve a planned timetable for objectives
and human and technical resources, provide guidance and arbitrate
with respect to the legal framework of intelligence services activities.
It will meet at the request of the President of the French Republic, in
a more limited format, to be known as the Restricted Council for
Intelligence.
A National Intelligence Co-ordinator will be appointed, reporting
to the Secretary-General of the Office of the President, with a small
support staff. With the assistance of the General Secretariat for
Defence and National Security, he will prepare the decisions of the
National Intelligence Council and follow through their implementation. He will oversee the planning of intelligence objectives and means,
notably via the annual investment plan, and will oversee its execution.
He will chair the inter-ministerial technical investment steering committees on intelligence matters.
He will be the conduit for the intelligence services to the President
of the Republic.
He will chair the periodic meetings of the directors of the intelligence services in order to establish intelligence research priorities and
examine intelligence services’ requests. The Prime minister’s office will
take part in these meetings. This new organisation is also expected to
improve the flow of the most relevant intelligence.
The General Secretariat for Defence and National Security will
support the work of the National Intelligence Co-ordinator and will
organise task forces on subjects selected in the light of priorities set by
the National Intelligence Council.
At the same time, the information on the activity of the intelligence
services will be guaranteed by the Joint Parliamentary Delegation for
Intelligence (délégation parlementaire au renseignement). These activities will be subject to external control by the competent independent
administrative authorities, and in particular the National Commission
for the Control of Security Intercepts (commission nationale de
_contrôle des interceptions de sécurité), and the Commission for the_
Verification of Special Funds (commission de vérification des fonds
_spéciaux)._

1. Which will replace the Secretariat General for National Defence.


-----

-----

###### AN APPROPRIATE LEGAL FRAMEWORK

Intelligence activities currently lack a clear and adequate legal
framework. This shortcoming needs to be remedied. Consequently, the
new legal framework will define the missions of the intelligence services, together with the guarantees given to personnel and human
sources, along with the principal arrangements for the protection of
national defence secrets. Legislation will be adapted, respecting the
balance between the protection of public freedoms, effective prosecution before the courts, and the safeguarding of secrecy.
For this purpose, a legislative definition of the intelligence services’
missions will be formulated, covering all of their missions. It will be
sufficiently precise for the needs of personnel of the intelligence services concerned. Similarly, provisions will be enacted to protect the
anonymity of intelligence personnel, regulate the conditions under
which they may resort to covert identities and punish the disclosure or
revelation of the identity of an agent or his/her membership of the
intelligence services. Similarly, the disclosure of the identity of agents
will be protected in the course of administrative or judicial proceedings, and provision will be made for the protection of the intelligence services’ sources and external agents: the divulgation of information liable to reveal their identity will also be prohibited and punished.
The protection of national defence secrets needs to be adapted and
strengthened. In accordance with an opinion of the French Council of
State (Conseil d’Etat)[1] issued on April 5, 2007, the definition of national
defence secrets and their disclosure will include classified information,
classified networks and certain highly sensitive locations the existence
or purpose of which in and of itself is a national defence secret. Specific
rules for judicial searches conducted in classified locations or in locations containing national defence secrets will also be enacted by law.
There is a need for broader powers of consultation of technical
data and administrative databases referred to in the January 23, 2006
Act on the fight against terrorism, or that of investigative police files.
In addition, exchanges of information between DNRED and TRACFIN
on the one hand, and the other intelligence services on the other, will
be authorised by law. At the same time, the July 10, 1991 Act on electronic communications secrecy will be adapted to take account of
recent technical developments.
Altogether, this amounts to an all-embracing, systematic, longterm approach to our national intelligence system to enable it to
answer the need for the future protection of the interests of the nation.

1. The Council of State is the French Administrative Supreme Court.


-----

-----

##### Knowledge of potential theatres of operation

Knowledge of potential theatres of operation is a key precondition
of all forms of military action. Due to its geography and its international responsibilities, France is particularly attentive to this dimension. The French overseas départements and territories cover a total
surface area of 122,000 sq. km, spread across the globe. This presence
puts France in a favourable position in terms of its knowledge of sensitive areas of the world.

###### FRANCE’S PRESENCE IN THEATRES OF OPERATION

Knowledge of potential theatres of operation comes from regular
familiarisation with the areas concerned. The first priority in this
regard is the strategic axis stretching from the Atlantic to the Indian
Ocean, notably through information-gathering by all of the technical
sensors (space-based, airborne, onshore and naval) to which our forces
have access. Our knowledge will also benefit from our pre-positioned
assets in Africa and the Gulf, and from our forces in the French Caribbean and French Guyana, the Indian Ocean and the Pacific.

###### AREA STUDIES

We also need insight into the politics, society and cultures of
potential theatres of operations. Here, greater use should be encouraged of the work performed by research centres, think tanks and institutes, as well as that of universities with specialists in existing and
potential hotspots. The State’s own prospective and policy-planning
centres will commission studies on these regions.

###### GEOPHYSICAL DATA REQUIREMENTS

Developments in weapons technology, the greater complexity of
actions to be carried out, and the need to minimise collateral damage
put data concerning the geophysical environment at the heart of the
management of defence systems. Ten years ago, very few weapons systems used such data. Today, no weapons system is unaffected by this
capacity.


-----

Knowledge of potential theatres of operations therefore also
requires the acquisition of these data, which depend notably on mapping and meteorology.
Programmes exist for gathering these kinds of data, including digital geographic data, hydrographical and oceanographic data, and
meteorological data. An overarching approach at the national and
European level will be undertaken to structure the global data gathering capability and the utilisation of these data in weapons systems.
Efforts will focus in particular on developing responsiveness in order
to facilitate rapid deployments. This capability is particularly important in view of the fact that France may have to assume command
responsibilities for operations in these areas.

##### Benefiting from the diplomatic network

Thanks to its bilateral embassies, multilateral representations and
consular posts, our country boasts an exceptional external information
network and window onto the world. This network plays a prime role
in the gathering, circulation, sharing and analysis of information, for
the most part from open sources of all kinds, by all of the different
Government services present abroad.
Efforts will be made to ensure that those in charge of our diplomacy are better able to exploit openly available information, analyses
of diplomatic sources and intelligence provided by the specialised services. This implies expanding exchanges among the different Government services working in the countries concerned, under the authority
of the French ambassadors, and cross-checking the different sources.
These exchanges should be made systematic and could take practical shape, for example, in the form of regular meetings of a restricted
committee in each embassy in the presence of the ambassador.
At the level of the central government administrations, all of the
information gathered in the field needs to be compiled and collated.
Working relations between the Ministry of Foreign and European
Affairs, the other ministries and specialised services will be intensified.
The aim is to achieve common and multidisciplinary analyses of security risks


-----

##### “Horizon-scanning”

There is a need to develop a “horizon-scanning” approach by the Government, in universities and in defence and security circles, in order to anticipate emerging risks and threats, opportunities for French and European
interests, and to guide preventive policies and assets in a timely fashion.
This approach should permit greater comparison between analyses.
The areas concerned are multi-disciplinary and inter-disciplinary,
covering military and security strategy, geopolitics, human sciences,
economics, and scientific and technological research.
The resulting needs call for:
— Co-ordination of efforts within the Government and by setting
up an inter-ministerial network consisting notably of the General Secretariat for Defence and National Security, the Ministry of Interior
(Delegation for Prospective and Strategy), the Ministry of Defence
(Directorate for strategic affairs), the ministry of Foreign and European Affairs (Policy Planning Staff), and the Secrétariat d’État for Prospective, Public Policy Evaluation, and Development of the Digital
Economy (Centre for Strategic Analysis):
— Setting up a common Internet portal for this purpose to present
a comprehensive view of the competencies of the different prospective
centres; research themes and intellectual output will be made more
widely known, with systematic calls for projects;
— Encouraging synergies and instituting links (fora for exchanges
of views, etc.), and even pooling or networking of facilities (vigilance
units, documentation centres, etc.), between government departments
and academic circles, research centres, private institutes, think-tanks
and industry;
— Support for research on defence and security, via a financial effort
aimed at developing and maintaining competencies available for mobilisation by Government. University research centres and other research
institutes and think tanks are seriously under-funded at present if we
compare with our main partners. This spending will be stepped up in
the short and medium-term. This will be accompanied by rationalisation of the commissioning of work at the inter-ministerial level in order
to be able to respond to Government requirements in a timely fashion,
and improved circulation of information within administrations;
— The development of international exchanges, especially within
Europe, working through our diplomatic network and the European
external action department currently being set up. Also, a particular
effort will be made towards the European framework programme for
research and development.


-----

##### Knowledge management

The notion of “knowledge management” spans the capacity for civil
and military decision makers as well as State personnel in the field to
gain access in a timely fashion to information and to make optimal
operational use of it. The aim, in normal circumstances as well as in
time of crisis, is to ensure that all National Security actors are able to
share the relevant information and that decision makers are in a position to formulate and transmit the necessary orders at the right time.
The four pillars of knowledge management are:
— The timely transmission of information between decisionmaking centres and places of execution thanks to adequate dataflow
capacity;
— Interoperability between information networks, to optimise the
flow of information;
— Protection of information (information systems security),
ensuring the confidentiality, availability and integrity of the system
and the information processed;
— Verification of information, ensuring that it is reliable, flows
smoothly and is properly utilised.
Secure, reliable, real-time access to information is an essential
condition of sovereignty and freedom of action. This is indispensable
to the capacity to be first on the scene in a theatre of operation and to
guarantee the capacity to intervene as a framework nation.
Knowledge management will apply at the strategic level, i.e., at the
level of the top civil and military decision makers, as well as at the
operational and tactical levels.
At the strategic level, the aim is to network all of the officials
concerned in order to optimise the decision-making process. This
implies extending the ISIS (secure inter-ministerial intranet) interministerial network, and guaranteeing by means of an appropriate
space-based communications system covering the entire planet, permanent interaction between the governmental decision-making centres
and our forces deployed on the battlefield.
At the level of operations, the priority is to deploy tactical radio
capabilities, to equip our forces with broadband networks and develop
the digitalisation of the operational space. The aim here is to optimise
our knowledge of situations in the field and the use of weapons systems engaged, and to integrate each level into a coherent overarching
architecture, linking governmental situation centres to commanders in
the field.


-----

In all instances, the need is for secure interoperable communication networks (intra-and inter-ministerial) on the one hand, and on the
other effective information sharing and processing systems (computer
assisted decision-making, information display, secure messaging, etc.),
thereby reducing the time required for processing and strengthening
networking. These networks should also permit exchanges with our
main partners and allies.
Current and future developments relating to information systems
will radically transform decision-making processes, giving rise to new
practices in the exercise of decision-making at all levels, as well as in
the conduct of military and security actions. Consequently, alongside
the requisite effort where equipment is concerned, greater emphasis
will also be placed on training, adaptation and organisation.


-----

-----

-----

CHAPTER 9

###### PREVENTION

The aim of prevention is to avoid the emergence or aggravation of
threats to our national security. An effective preventive strategy will
rely on a broad range of diplomatic, economic, military, legal and
cultural tools, co-ordinated at the international, European and
national levels. In the age of globalisation, such a collective and integrated approach is a sine qua non for effective prevention.

##### A permanent early-warning system

A capability will be required to analyse potential crisis situations,
with particular emphasis on poverty, inequality, discrimination, scarcity
of natural resources, failing states, natural and technological risks.
The diversified nature of the threats looming over a fifteen-year
horizon calls for a permanent inter-ministerial organisation. A network
will be therefore established, involving the Ministries of Foreign and
European Affairs, Defence, Justice, Interior and Finance, and the
French Development Agency (agence française du développement, AFD),
to share information, monitor situations and issue early warnings to
government departments.
This capability will rely on a network of external experts including
specialist understanding of the implications of scientific, geopolitical,
social and economic developments.
The work of this early-warning system will be part of an approach
co-ordinated with our European partners. The European Union operates a Joint Situation Centre (JSC) which collates national assessments
of crisis zones. The JSC’s resources and its ability to alert Member


-----

States at the earliest stages must be increased. The EU External Action
Service, when it comes into existence, will also need to take this
dimension on board.
In the case of natural or technological risks, France intends to promote an enhanced monitoring and early-warning system, at the international level, similar to that adopted by the UN in the wake of the
Indian Ocean tsunami of December 2004.
At the national level, France must acquire the detection, assessment and response capabilities that will enable the authorities to be
aware at all times of major natural risks and develop policies for their
prevention.

##### Reorientation of cooperation in the field of defence and security

France’s capabilities for co-operation are now considerable, thanks
to the reach of its international presence and the recognition by its
partners of the quality of its instruments of action.
However these capabilities suffer from a number of shortcomings
which must be corrected as a matter of urgency.
Our resources are badly distributed around the world and too
widely dispersed. They do not obey the strategic logic that must inform
our future actions. Some of them are underpinned by outdated legal
frameworks, for example the defence agreements signed with African
countries in the early 1960s. There is insufficient co-ordination
between military co-operation and co-operation in the fields of interior
and civil security when the security interests at stake increasingly
require, for their treatment, a combination of the two.

###### BETTER GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION

France’s co-operation effort should support its National Security
strategy and match its objectives in zones of strategic interest, its security assessment and the changing pattern of risks in these regions, in
line with assessments made jointly with the countries and regional
organisations which could be its partners in co-operation.
In this respect, Africa will be at the forefront of the French prevention strategy over the next fifteen years. The security problems of
African countries are of concern, both directly and directly, to France
and Europe, be it the risks of regional or inter-ethnic conflict, the
growth of terrorism in Sahel-zone states or the perils that threaten


-----

-----

their stability. Should the African countries so wish, France and
Europe can make a contribution to their effort. In any event, the dramatic increase in trafficking via Africa into Europe, or within Africa
itself, and the issues of supplies of strategic raw materials call for
redoubled attention on the part of the European States.
_France therefore wishes to maintain its presence in Africa, but the_
_conditions, purposes and organisation of this presence must change._
Defence and security co-operation with the Middle East and Indian
Ocean zones will take on particular importance in view of the strategic
interest of these zones and the prospects that a presence here might
open up in other major regions of Asia.
Co-operation with the rest of the world, and in particular with
Asia, Eastern Europe and Latin America, will follow the priorities
established by our foreign policy.

###### A NEW APPROACH
TO BILATERAL DEFENCE AGREEMENTS

The bilateral defence agreements with African States reflect a
moment in history, the end of the colonial period, and now belong to
the past. We have currently entered a process of renegotiation with the
States concerned. Clauses relating to possible French intervention to
maintain internal order in certain countries, such as Côte d’Ivoire,
Gabon or Togo, will be abrogated.
The drafting of new agreements, if deemed desirable by both parties, will be directed towards establishing a new form of co-operation
no longer based on military assistance but on a defence and security
partnership.
Furthermore, the French Parliament will henceforth be informed
of existing agreements (see list of the existing agreements at end of
chapter). In the future, Parliament will be kept informed of the
signing of new agreements. Such agreements will be subject to any
approval or ratification procedures that may be required by the
French Constitution.
Future bilateral agreements with African partners will be supplemented wherever possible by partnership agreements with regional


-----

organisations; the European Union will be associated with these agreements inasmuch as it wishes to.
_France’s external military relations will thus evolve towards a net-_
_work of partnerships with new objectives and on a scale both regional_
_and European._

###### AN OVERALL APPROACH TO DEFENCE
AND SECURITY CO-OPERATION

Defence and security co-operation offers a privileged framework
within which these new bilateral or multilateral relations can be
deployed. It must be based on assessments of common security interests, play a direct part in the build-up of African peace-keeping forces,
and promote the role of the European Union.
Where relations are established with countries in crisis or failing
or failed States, the aim will be to recreate or reinforce the foundations
of their State structure, providing support for the reforms needed for
democracy, in particular security sector reform (SSR): demobilisation
and reintegration of ex-combatants, training of army, police and
_Gendarmerie cadres, or the reform of judicial institutions._
Co-operation must be refocused on security missions, such as the
fight against trafficking, against terrorism or against the spread of
CRBN weapons.
_There will therefore be a gradual shift and conversion in our_
_resources._
It will be important to take into account first and foremost our
own interests, the wishes of the countries with which we seek to cooperate, and those of the regional and sub-regional organisations to
which they belong.
Co-operation will extend to all hazards, drawing consistent distinctions between those which constitute defence matters and those which
should be treated as matters of public or civil security.
This policy of prevention through co-operation must also
contribute to broader partnerships, between Europe and Africa,
Europe and Asia, Europe and Russia, Europe and Central Asia or Latin
America.
In order to pursue this policy, France must re-engineer its national
organisation which is currently over-compartmentalised.
The government must have a global overview and establish better
co-ordination, in particular between its diplomatic resources, armed
forces, police and Gendarmerie, civil security and other civil players
involved in security. A broad-based concept of security must therefore
prevail.


-----

The Ministry for Foreign and European Affairs will be responsible
for the day-to-day co-ordination of the structure, with strategic guidance provided by the Defence and National Security Council.
Action in the field will be co-ordinated to ensure that French
resources deployed abroad reflect this global approach in their proceedings: the local French ambassadors will take on this responsibility.

###### RECONFIGURATION OF PRE-POSITIONED RESOURCES

In the early 1960s, a French force of some 30,000 men was
deployed on the African continent; by the late 1980s, pre-positioned
forces numbered around 15,000. Between 1995 and 2007, at the time
of the professionalisation of the armed forces, the numbers were
reduced still further to reflect the division of the continent into subregions, and certain bases were closed.
_French forces are currently deployed at seven bases: four staging_
bases, in Djibouti, Senegal, Gabon and Côte d’Ivoire, one long-standing
deployment in Chad and three operations in progress, in Côte d’Ivoire,
the Central African Republic and on the Chadian border of Darfur.
The total cost, in human and financial terms, represents close on
10,000 personnel and EUR 760 million annually.
_Pre-positioned forces provide operational advantages that go far_
beyond the scope of prevention alone. They provide support and logistics for operations and for missions to protect and if necessary evacuate French nationals. They allow French forces and those of its partners to conduct joint exercises which are useful in terms of
preparation, training and combat readiness.
France’s pre-positioned military resources in several countries are,
however, in need of reconfiguration. It is not France’s role to maintain
endlessly a military presence at the same bases, but rather to be able
to redeploy and concentrate forces rapidly in order to act effectively.
France will therefore embark on the gradual conversion of facilities long established in Africa, reorganising its resources around what
will eventually become two bases, one on Africa’s Western seaboard
and one on the Eastern one, primarily for the purposes of logistics, cooperation and instruction, while maintaining a capability for prevention in the Sahel zone.
The aim is to concentrate French resources while continuing to
maintain a presence where it is wanted and to provide strategic coverage of zones requiring prevention and action. Greater emphasis will
be placed on air and maritime surveillance operating out of these
staging bases.


-----

The missions carried out by our units and their operating methods
will give priority to co-operation and training of host-country forces, to
help build their crisis-response capability and take part in peacekeeping operations mounted by France’s partners in the African Union
and in sub-regional organisations.
France has agreed with Arabian-Persian Gulf countries to
strengthen its presence there, in support of common strategic interests. This new policy will result in deployment of the most modern
capabilities in the region, as in the case of Abu Dhabi, and a stronger
French presence aimed at crisis prevention. It will also help to forge
balanced partnerships with countries enjoying rapid economic
expansion.

##### The fight against trafficking

Trafficking in all its forms (of human beings, narcotics, arms,
radioactive materials, natural resources, national scientific, technical
and economic assets, etc.) and acts of piracy are breaches of National
Security and a legitimate field of action for European co-operation.

###### PREVENTION OF TRAFFICKING

_The fight against trafficking begins a long way from the shores of_
_France and such practices must be attacked at their source, deep in_
international territory while the actual transit movements are in
progress.
In view of the clandestine nature of trafficking, this will mean
mobilising both civil and military actors responsible for intelligencegathering and increasing the co-ordination between them.
France’s action in the Caribbean, Western Africa, the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean (the most sensitive regions) will take into
account the need not only for land, air and maritime surveillance
resources, but also for intervention capability, in particular at sea.
Greater co-ordination will be introduced between civil and military
resources, especially in Africa and the West Indies.
France’s action in this field must also tend towards better protection for the European Union as a whole.
_An anti-drug investigation and co-ordination centre for the Mediter-_
_ranean will be set up at the European level, building on experiments_
_already carried out in the West Indies and in Portugal for the Atlantic_
_zone._


-----

-----

Co-operation between national navies willing to take part in maritime surveillance will be strengthened and will lead to the pooling of
information gathered by each state and the co-ordination of means of
action.
The fight against illicit financial activities, including the funding of
proliferation and terrorism, will call for an economic and financial
approach to questions of security, starting with the work of the
Customs service responsible for the monitoring of goods, and
extending to the processing of financial flows. Stronger action by the
government services concerned is now an imperative, as is raising the
awareness of the financial world in the fight against the funding of
proliferation. Given the complexity of these financial activities, a specialist department will be set up within the Ministry of the Budget,
along similar lines to the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) set
up by the US Treasury Department.

###### SURVEILLANCE OF EUROPEAN UNION BORDERS

With the expansion of the Schengen zone, Europe will require new
technical resources to police its internal frontiers, such as retention of
air passenger data, entry and exit files, a pre-visa system or automated
biometric control systems at borders—all of which must be consistent
with respect for individual freedom.
The European Union will need to give concrete form to its “European Immigration Pact” intended to stem the flow of illegal immigration, defining a common European asylum régime and proposing a
European policy on immigration, the fight against clandestine working,
and integration. This policy will need to be implemented in partnership
with the countries and regions of origin or transit, and will be based on
tools such as biometrics or dedicated information systems.
Within a fifteen-year timeframe the European Union will have an
integrated European external borders policy in place.
Member States will harmonise their working methods and, more
importantly, their resources, as part of Frontex, the EU agency for
external border security. Member States will pool their civil and military capabilities.
Customs services will more closely co-ordinate the surveillance of
flows of goods by land, sea and air: they will set up joint investigation teams, create European identification, investigation and risk
assessment databases, and develop joint or co-ordinated inspection
operations.


-----

-----

##### Arms control and anti-proliferation capabilities

France supports the European and international bodies working to
combat proliferation and overseeing implementation of international
disarmament agreements.
France will contribute to the aid offered by the European Union to
States which undertake to sign and implement the Biological and
Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC) and will continue to contribute to
the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) and to application of the
Chemical Weapons Convention (see Chapter 6). France will also
develop general military and technical expertise to support the detection and suppression of trafficking in materials and equipment used in
the design and manufacture of such weapons.
Fundamental and applied research in these fields will receive
funding, as will work done by French scientific laboratories. Special
training on clandestine programmes will be provided for Customs
officers responsible for monitoring military equipment or technologies
and similar items and dual-use goods.
The Defence and National Security Council will also call for support to projects capable of developing means of detecting and analysing biological, chemical, radiological or nuclear arms or agents.
Tighter controls will also be necessary on commercial and financial movements relating to weapons manufacture that originate in or
transit via France. Training in these fields provided by French laboratories in research centres will have to be monitored to ensure that
those receiving training are not engaged in sensitive research programmes, particularly in the case of high-risk countries.
Anti-proliferation missions and monitoring of disarmament agreements will be included in the objectives assigned to the armed forces
and civil security forces, taking into account the foreseeable increase
in tasking that will be required. Emphasis will be placed on means of
secure destruction of illegal biological, chemical and nuclear facilities,
and on means of defence and protection, biological in particular.


-----

##### Preventing major unintentional crises

Prevention of crises resulting from accidental events is based on a
national organisation, together with European policies and support for
international bodies.
This includes training for those engaged in crisis response, preparation and training of the population, and an appropriate communication policy.
A significant impetus will be needed in the years to come to
increase the civilian population’s capacity for response and resistance.
To meet potential health crises, France will promote the creation
of a health emergency readiness and response agency which, in
consultation with the World Health Organisation (WHO), will draw
up safety standards and co-ordinate information on the risks of pandemic disease. The agency will build up European stocks of medicines and co-ordinate management of various forms of protection
(particularly against CRBN threats). It will finance information and
communication programmes aimed at European citizens and organise joint exercises between member states. Eventually, the agency
could organise overall resource planning and co-ordinate calls on
member states for assistance should a crisis arise. France would also
wish to see a Commissioner given special responsibility for coordinating such measures.
France will commit its energies to sustainable development as a
means of long-term prevention of natural disasters and will do its
utmost to give concrete shape to the solidarity clause provided for in
the Lisbon Treaty, which covers (see Chapter 4) threat prevention as
well as protection and assistance for populations in the event of crisis.
It will encourage the European Union to carry out a regular assessment of the threats faced by member countries, and to decide the
appropriate preventive actions and means required, in the military
field no less than in the field of domestic and civil security.


-----

-----

-----

##### Preventive deployment in potential crisis zones

France’s strategy rules out any form of preventive warfare, even if
it does not preclude ad hoc pre-emptive action (see Chapter 12) in situations of clear and imminent threat.
In certain cases, the preventive deployment of military or civil
resources in a potential crisis zone may suffice, without intervention,
to prevent the emergence or resurgence of potential crises.
Preventive deployments will demonstrate France’s determination
to contribute to international stability. They may also offer opportunities to act in fields such as humanitarian action.
France will have the necessary military capabilities, supported as
necessary by our pre-positioned forces or civil security intervention
units.
Priority will gradually be shifted towards a pooling of European
capabilities. Substantial investments will need to be made in strategic
means of transport to enable significant numbers and volumes of civil
or military equipment to be projected over long distances.


-----

-----

-----

-----

CHAPTER 10

###### DETERRENCE

The credibility of France’s nuclear deterrent will rest on independent access by the Head of State to flexible capabilities adapted to a
wide diversity of situations. French deterrent forces will therefore be
organised into two clearly distinguished yet complementary components, including the support environment necessary for their fully
independent and secure deployment. France will continue to maintain
these capabilities over time.

##### Two complementary and modernised components

The operational credibility of France’s nuclear deterrent relies on
permanent submarine patrols and airborne capability. The level of
awareness these capabilities will adapt to circumstances and to the
engagement plans decided by the President of the Republic.
The technical characteristics of the seaborne and airborne components are very different in terms of trajectory (one ballistic, the other
not), range and accuracy. They are complementary thanks to their
respective advantages and their different capacities of penetration.
Together, these two components offer the President a sufficiently
wide choice of possible action. They complicate the task of the
adversary’s defences and give our deterrent insurance against the
risk of a technical problem or unforeseen technological breakthrough in the fields of air defence, anti-missile defence or submarine detection.


-----

The weapons carried by both components are of a strategic nature.
In no way do they constitute battlefield weapons for military use in
theatre.
Nuclear force capabilities include in particular the ability to deliver
effective strikes against an adversary’s centres of political, economic
and political power, or to paralyse an adversary’s capacity for action.
Modernisation of the two components has been under way for the
past 10 years and is designed to maintain the capability of France’s
nuclear forces to fulfil their tasks over the long term. In 2010, the M51 intercontinental ballistic missile will be brought into service on the
French new-generation SSBNs, providing the seaborne component
with a much extended range and increased flexibility. The new missile
will be technically evolutive and from 2015 will be fitted with the new
ONW warhead. From 2009 onwards, the airborne component will be
equipped with the ASMP-A cruise missile deployed on Mirage 2000NK3 and Rafale aircraft stationed in France (two squadrons), or
carrier-based. The missile’s enhanced performance over its predecessor
has been designed in response to advances in air defence. It will be
equipped on deployment with the new ANW warhead. ANW and ONW
will replace the current warheads as they reach their maximum projected life expectancy, since manufacture of identical replacements
cannot be guaranteed without nuclear testing. Because it will not be
possible to prove performance by testing, the new missiles will be
designed according to a “robust warhead” concept validated during the
final series of nuclear tests in 1995.
The strategic nuclear forces are capable of carrying out all their missions from a diversified range of platforms and in all circumstances.
The seaborne strategic force (Force Océanique STratégique, FOST)
will continue to guarantee a permanent second-strike capability,
requiring a fleet of four submarines which must remain invulnerable.
The Rafale aircraft of the airborne component are multi-role
combat fighters. Some of their potential will be used, if the need
arises, on missions other than deterrence.
_France will continue to maintain its nuclear forces at a level of strict_
_sufficiency and will constantly scale them at the lowest possible level_
_compatible with its security. France will not seek to acquire all the_
resources that its technological capacity may place within its reach. Its
force levels will depend not on those of other nuclear powers but solely
on its perception of the risks and its assessment of the effectiveness of
its deterrent in protecting its interests.
The level of sufficiency will continue to be subject to both quanti_tative assessment of the number of carriers, missiles and weapons, and_
_qualitative assessment of the defences French deterrent forces are_
likely to face. This assessment is regularly submitted to the President


-----

and updated under the responsibility of the Defence Restricted Nuclear
Council (see Chapter 15).

##### Maintaining technical credibility

The continued technical credibility of France’s nuclear deterrent
will rely largely on the scientific and technical resources required to
maintain its nuclear capability over time. France’s long-term capacity
for the independent manufacture of safe, reliable weapons must be
guaranteed.
In the absence of nuclear testing and facilities for the production
of fissile material for nuclear explosive devices, the French simulation
programme thus becomes a key component of nuclear deterrence. The
programme is not designed to develop new types of nuclear weapons,
but to keep abreast of factors such as weapons ageing, changes in
defence strategies and scientific and technical advances.
The simulation programme relies on the results of the final testing
campaign and is intended to guarantee that nuclear warheads will
work without undergoing tests. It relies mainly on the MegaJoule
Laser (LMJ), weapons radiography and super-calculators. It also serves
to maintain the skills of weapons design experts over time.
This combination of human and technical resources also reflects
France’s high level in the field of nuclear physics and upholds the
nation’s scientific standing in the world.
Ensuring the long-term future of our deterrence capabilities also
requires France to maintain highly specialised skills, developed in
France, in the field of missiles and of ballistic missiles in particular.
The appropriate technological and industrial sectors will be maintained. This policy will enable France to undertake the necessary
improvements which, by 2025, will focus primarily on range and
accuracy.
Maintaining an independent submarine component will also
require France to retain national expertise in the essential technological and industrial skills. The capability to build particularly nearundetectable long-range nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines
represents a major strategic advantage.


-----

##### Maintaining communication capability with the nuclear forces

The credibility of the French deterrent also rests on the assurance
that the President will at all times be able to issue orders to the nuclear
forces. The transmission capabilities used to convey these orders must
therefore meet the highest standards of security, constant availability
and resistance to any form of attack.
These capabilities rely on fixed infrastructure networks, transmission stations to each of the components and a system of last resort.
Over the coming years, major investments will be devoted to promoting the flexibility required by the nation’s deterrence strategy and
guaranteeing the availability and performance of these systems over
time.

##### Resources required to ensure the safety of the seaborne component

Independent and safe deployment of the seaborne component supposes the best possible knowledge of the deployment areas and of the
movements of any foreign forces present.
It also implies permanent control of the approaches to the submarines’ home base. Depending on circumstances, these priority missions could require two nuclear attack submarines (SSNs) and up to
four anti-submarine frigates, as well as mine-warfare resources and
maritime patrol aircraft.
Over the next fifteen years, this need for safety will continue to be
an essential factor in the scaling and modernisation of French
undersea environment control capabilities. For this reason, the
renewal of French nuclear attack submarines and anti-submarine frigates will be a priority.


-----

##### Resources required in support of the air component

The airborne component relies on a support structure of fighter
aircraft and refuelling tanker aircraft, the size of which depends on the
priority mission in hand.
Maintaining the operational serviceability of these resources, and
renewing them as necessary, will continue to be a priority over the
next fifteen years, particularly in the case of in-flight refuelling
tankers, urgently required to replace aircraft already over forty years
old.


-----

-----

CHAPTER 11

###### PROTECTION

In the light of the new emphasis on protection of the population
and territory, France will need the capability to meet four main
priorities.
In the new security environment, the first of these priorities will be
to ensure the permanent mission of protecting the population and territory, particularly through in-depth surveillance and control of national
territory and its approaches.
The French resource strategy will need to incorporate the objective
_of overall resilience as a key objective (see Chapter 3) for society and the_
authorities, in order to ensure at all times the continued functioning of
the authorities and the continuity of national life.
In addition, steps must be taken to overcome the failings and gaps
in the French capability to respond to new and unconventional forms
_of threats and vulnerabilities._
Finally, France will need to develop the rapid reaction capability of
_its authorities in the event of a major threat arising on national terri-_
tory and if the national protection posture needs to be raised in
response to an external threat. This calls for a new approach to the
management and co-ordination of civil and military capabilities.


-----

##### Protecting the nation against crises on a wider scale

###### IN-DEPTH CONTROL AND SURVEILLANCE
OF NATIONAL LAND, SEA AND AIR SPACE

Control and surveillance of national land, sea and air space must
adapt to the massive increase in exchanges and communications
brought about by globalisation. In due course, a European security
_strategy will be need to be formally agreed, covering the maritime, air_
_and space sectors. The strategy will help to co-ordinate the work of the_
European Union, civil agencies and the European Defence Agency.


-----

**Movements of persons and goods**

Security measures have traditionally focused on the physical protection of facilities, but must now turn more towards prevention and focus
_on movements of persons and flows of goods. This capability is currently_
severely limited by legal, technological and economic constraints.
France will propose the adoption by the EU of legislation requiring
transport companies to provide advance information on goods
exported to European Union territory. This approach will make it
possible to carry out risk assessments and, if necessary, to issue a ban
on exports of goods to France or apply stricter control measures on
arrival.
As far as controlling the flow of persons is concerned, France will
support the European Commission’s initiative to work towards the
long-term development of a system for controlling movements at the
external borders of the Schengen zone through the introduction of a
system of recording entries and exits.
Automated control systems will be developed to support this initiative (biometric recognition and the associated databases).
While respecting individual freedoms, improvements will also be
made to the use of databases on travellers using public transport, particularly by air and sea, compiled by operators as part of their commercial activities.
As regards controls on the flows of goods, France will contribute to
enhancing the security of international supply chains by supporting
the development of merchandise identification and monitoring systems and content detection systems of illicit or dangerous materials.
Applied research backed up by parallel experiments in conjunction
with industry will be carried out in order to propose attainable standards and reliable equipment to carry out such controls without
reducing the smooth flow of goods.

**Protecting our maritime approaches**

Maritime surveillance and intervention assets must be designed
not only to make a more effective contribution to the fight against terrorism but also to carry out all the missions incumbent on the State at
_sea (protecting national interests, safeguarding of persons and goods,_
combating illicit maritime activities, protecting the maritime environment and resources, etc). These assets include the semaphore chain,
surveillance vessels and aircraft and helicopters. They are intended to
operate in waters where France has not only sovereign rights but also
duties (territorial waters, exclusive economic zone, international


-----

waters in accordance with the provisions of international conventions).
_Most of these assets will need replacing over the next fifteen years. Opti-_
misation will be pursued, with the aim of acquiring units that are rela_tively unsophisticated but capable of operating on the high seas. This_
requirement is essential to guarantee Navy missions in this field, and
to draw a clear distinction between the assets it requires for these
tasks and those destined for military engagement and combat missions, such as first-rank frigates, for example.
Land-based surveillance assets will be reinforced, pursuing deployment of the integrated inter-ministerial national surveillance network,
which will be linked to other European maritime surveillance systems.
Efforts will continue to improve the protection of key strategic civil
and military ports, in particular their harbours, in line with maritime
and port security doctrine. The funding required for the acquisition of
these resources will be allocated in light of the inter-ministerial nature
of maritime protection.
At the European level, France will propose plans to introduce new
capabilities such as maritime surveillance drones, automatic station_keeping satellites, trans-horizon radar, integrated maritime intelligence_
_systems, etc._

**Air surveillance**

France’s air detection network will be modernised to strengthen
our capability to defend against any air intrusion by detecting the
threat before it enters French airspace. Over the short and medium
term, the oldest air defence radars will be replaced; more recent equipment will be upgraded and new low-altitude radars will be deployed to
improve national coverage and lower the radar floor. Detection ranges
will be extended, most notably in the Mediterranean, thanks to the
acquisition of trans-horizon radars. Over the longer term, efforts will be
made to develop resources capable of detecting and intercepting most
small, low-speed aircraft in French airspace.

**Outer space**

Military and civil activities depend increasingly on space-based
assets performing vital missions and services. This situation creates a
new vulnerability, as the amount of space debris in orbit grows and
direct attack capability appears to be within the reach of a number of
national powers.
Constant detailed tracking of objects orbiting the earth is now the
sole preserve of the United States and, to a lesser extent, Russia.
_Europe is dependent on other powers for the surveillance of outer space._


-----

In order to overcome this dependency, avoid foreseeable collisions
and forestall hostile acts, France will encourage the development of a
_European project to detect and monitor objects likely to cause damage to_
_missile launchers or satellites. In the short term, the project will form_
part of GRAVES, the French space surveillance system currently operational at the national level only. In the longer term, this capability will
form part of a more global strategy for the protection of our spacebased infrastructure.

###### RESPONSE TO THE EVOLVING THREAT SITUATION

**Reinforced protection against CRBN threats**

In response to the scale of the challenges posed in a field which is
both complex and costly, France will substantially upgrade its
response and improve co-ordination between the various authorities.
This process will be steered by a strategic committee tasked with
ensuring the overall consistency of capabilities designed to protect
against these threats and the proper execution of research and deployment programmes.
One of the first priorities will be to support and strengthen the
national network of Biotox-Piratox laboratories set up in 1997, following the sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway, to identify and characterise the most dangerous agents.
In this domain more than in any other, joint training programmes
_and exercises will be developed in order to simulate the conditions of_
such an attack as realistically as possible for all those potentially
involved—emergency, security and medical services—and hone joint
intervention procedures.
The Defence and Interior ministries will set up a joint national civil
_and military training centre. Equipment and training of civil and mili-_
tary units will be boosted with the emphasis on shared identification
of threats. All first-line response personnel in the public security appa_ratus will gradually be equipped with appropriate CRBN protective gear._
_The resources allocated to the defence zones—renamed defence and_
_security zones (see box)—will need to be stepped up and include, to a far_
_greater extent than is currently the case, mobile facilities for the detec-_
tion, sampling and identification of biological and chemical agents.
Decontamination facilities will be expanded, in the short term to three
times the number of decontamination chains currently deployed
nationwide. Some of the powers currently reserved exclusively to the
_Détachement Central interministériel d’Intervention technique (DCI), the_
Central Inter-ministerial Technical Intervention Detachment, will be
handed over to the defence and security zones for greater responsive

-----

ness in the initial operations to deactivate improvised radioactive
devices (so-called “dirty bombs”).
Facilities for the hospital treatment of victims of a CRBN attack
will be improved, and hospitals with approved emergency capability
will gradually be equipped with permanent decontamination facilities.
Research and development work on new means of identifying biological and chemical agents and explosives (particularly home-made
devices) will continue.


-----

-----

**Protection of critical information systems**

Faced with a growing threat, whether State-backed or otherwise,
France must in the short term acquire reactive capability to protect the
nation’s information systems.
_Early-warning systems will be developed to detect cyber attacks by set-_
ting up a detection centre in charge of the permanent monitoring of critical networks and implementation of appropriate defence mechanisms.
To combat the threat, greater use will be made of security products
_and trust networks. This in turn will require sufficient national_
capacity in the industry to master and develop very high-security products to protect State secrets, as well as a range of guaranteed “trusted
products and services” for use by government agencies and services
which will be made widely available to the business sector.
Regulatory provisions will also be introduced to ensure that electronic communications operators implement the technical and organisational measures necessary to protect their networks against the most
serious failures and attacks. In this respect, the Internet will need to be
considered as critical infrastructure and considerable effort will be
made to improve its resilience.
A new agency responsible for information systems security (agence de
_la sécurité des systèmes d’information) will be set up to reinforce the_
coherence and capacity of State resources. Reporting to the Prime
Minister and operating under the aegis of the General Secretariat for
Defence and National Security (SGDSN), the agency will take over,
and substantially expand, the staff and resources of the SGDN division
currently responsible for this task. The agency will operate a centralised capability to detect and defend against cyber attacks. It will have
the resources to sponsor the development of, and acquire, the security
products essential to protect the Government’s most sensitive networks. The agency will also take on an advisory role to the private sector,
_particularly in areas of critical strategic importance, and will participate_
_actively in the development of security for the information society. The_
development of Internet sites dedicated to information system security
and accessible to all will be one of its responsibilities.
More generally, the Government administration will enhance its
expertise by increasing the numbers of specialised personnel in the
ministries, creating a reservoir of competencies available to serve the
needs of government departments and operators of critical infrastructures.
In view of the international dimension of the threats to communication networks, the agency will maintain close links with our main
partners, particularly in Europe, and will encourage the development
of a Europe-wide communication networks security policy.


-----

A nationwide network of experts will also be established in the
form of information system security observatories in the defence and
security zones. These observatories will report to the zone Prefects and
their principal tasks will include support (training, advice) to local government, organisation of networks and reporting early warning-signs
of incidents.

**Countering ballistic missile threats**

At present only the major world powers possess ballistic missiles
with sufficient range to reach Europe and France. It is already clear,
however, that other powers will, over the course of the next few years,
achieve possession of operational assets with equivalent capabilities.
The spread of the necessary technology means that the probability of
such proliferation increases with time.
— As part of its contribution to European and Atlantic solidarity,
France will adopt an active prevention strategy designed to curb ballistic weapons proliferation, especially in the highest-risk zones. The strategy will be based on France’s capability to deter any intent by another
State to attack our vital interests using weapons of this type.
— France will also reinforce its intelligence and response capability. With this end in view, France will acquire a detection and early_warning capability, interoperable with that of our allies and partners._
This capability will enable us to monitor the evolving ballistic threat,
pinpoint missile launch origins in order to identify the instigator of the
attack, and improve the public alert system. It will be based first on
very long-range radar pilot system with a view to initial operating capa_bility in 2015. In parallel, research and studies will be continued to_
pave the way for the launch, if possible in co-operation, of an advanced satellite detection programme. Our goal is to possess a space based
_early warning system in 2020. Taking into account the degree of tech-_
nological complexity and risk associated with such a project, this programme will entail deployment and use of a probational satellite capability in the first half of the coming decade.
— Within the framework of the European Union and of the Atlantic Alliance, France will participate in combined efforts that may result
in the deployment of an active missile defence capability. To this end,
France will provide continued support for NATO-sponsored research
to determine the global architecture of a system to defend the Atlantic
Alliance against long-range ballistic missiles.
— Lastly, the authorities must make preparations to mitigate
_damage of any kind that may ensue as a result of missile attack on_
national territory, through a combination of response and protective
measures, including alerting the public.


-----

-----

**Detection and early warning**

**Reinforcing civil protection capability**
**to cope with major crises**

Major crises, whether intentional in origin or otherwise, can affect
whole populations, especially in the DOM-COM as a result of geographic factors. They may trigger massive displacements of populations, whether organised or spontaneous. Recent examples have suggested an order of magnitude (tens and sometimes hundreds of
thousands). The issues raised by the evacuation of populations and its
consequences, in terms of dealing with the victims, have been insufficiently addressed.
_Plans will therefore be drawn up, with military support, under the_
auspices of the Ministry of Interior. They will include the prepositioning on national territory of the logistics resources immediately
necessary to cope with tens of thousands of evacuees.
In addition, an inter-ministerial approach to helicopter rescue missions will be adopted. Defence and Interior Ministries in particular, as
well as other public and private operators (SAMU emergency medical
response units, companies, etc.), own and maintain redundant helicopter capabilities. Rationalising these resources will generate cost
reductions (training, support, alert, equipments, development, etc.)
and optimise their use.


-----

-----

The security policy for activities of strategic importance, launched
in 2006, will be pursued vigorously. The policy covers twelve defined
sectors and is intended to assess and rank risks, then take measures to
address them. One of the essential aims of the policy is to determine
which strategic sectors will require the most significant effort of protection in the years ahead, initially from operators and subsequently
using the resources of the State if necessary.

**Critical sectors**

(Regulation of 2 June 2006)

Civil activities of the State – Judiciary activities – Military activities of
the State – Food – Electronic communications, audiovisual and news
media – Energy – Space and research – Finance – Water supply –
Industry – Health – Transport

A number of major infrastructure resources, particularly for the
transport of energy, information and goods, are trans-national. The
security of such resources must be addressed coherently by the States
and operators concerned. To this end, the French approach to strategic
sectors will be presented to France’s European partners in order to
take forward initiatives launched by the European Union to establish
common principles for critical infrastructure protection and promote
the sharing of best practices.


-----

###### IMPROVING THE PUBLIC COMMUNICATION,
INFORMATION AND ALERT MECHANISMS

_Communication is an integral part of any national security strategy._
Handling a major crisis requires, first and foremost, retaining the population’s trust in the authorities. Silence on the part of the authorities,
withholding of information, an appearance of improvised, unfocused
communication, or messages that are exclusively defensive in tone,
invariably add to a sense of anxiety which is inevitably passed on and
amplified by the media.
The communication which accompanies a terrorist attack or the
most severe natural or industrial disasters leaves a profound and
lasting mark on collective memory as a result of the stress that such
events engender. The first public reference to an event that threatens
the continuity of normal life is therefore a key moment and must be
the responsibility of the senior person responsible for handling the
crisis. The next step is to lose no time in informing citizens as to the
real nature of the event, how they should react, the objectives of government action and how they can contribute to their realisation.
Two levels of government communication must therefore be
clearly distinguished:
— The political and strategic level of general communication;
— Communication aimed at those in the field.
_Alerting and informing the public, along with communication, will_
_be made central to the crisis management process._

**Modernising the public alert system**

First and foremost, France must have the means of informing the
public rapidly. A powerful and robust alert network will be introduced,
replacing the present system. The system will need to be fully modernised to make the most of the diversity of means now available: sirens,
text messaging, e-mails, public bulletin boards in towns, railway stations, airports and on road and motorway networks. The potential of
the Internet must also be exploited.
In addition, dedicated standalone means of communication (satellite phones, off-network radio-telephones, etc.) will be provided in case
of total loss of electrical power supply.

**Planning and professionalising crisis communication**

In an environment characterised by a proliferation of messages,
widely-scattered contacts and the instant flow of information from a


-----

huge diversity of sources, the first problem is the legitimacy and credibility of the “official” message. Comments by so-called experts, the
immediate broadcasting of raw images, the rapid succession of stories
designed to capture the public’s attention, make it all the harder for
the population to understand the statements put out by the authorities.
If it is to be effective in such circumstances, crisis communication will
need to have been thought out and organised in advance.
_A section on communication will therefore systematically feature in_
_all crisis management planning. The “avian flu pandemic” plan already_
incorporates communication as an operational dimension in its own
right, analysed and set out in detail in the same way as all the other
actions included in the plan.
Planning will be accompanied by a joint effort to prepare for communication in an emergency. Plans are of little use if those who will be
called upon to implement them lack a minimum understanding of the
institutional and operational context of their implementation. A permanent inter-ministerial network of experts will be set up, whose members are used to working together, and who will be responsible, when
the time comes, for implementing the planned measures.
_National and area exercises to test the plans will bring together all_
those involved in crisis management, including representatives of the
highest political authorities, the media, local elected officials and
public and private operators.
_The location from which the message is issued will also influence_
public perception of the crisis management as such. At national level,
the political decision-makecharged with the strategic management of
major crises will have access to facilities to issue full and informed
public statements. Crisis operations centres will be provided with facilities to allow operational officials to address the population. At the
local level, the necessary resources will be placed at the disposal of the
representative of the State.

**Developing inter-ministerial tools for broadcasting**
**information before, during and after a crisis**

France will at the earliest possible opportunity set up a government
_Internet portal to raise public awareness of risks and responses in the_
event of a crisis.
In addition, a national call centre will be established, with the task
of providing information to the population on the cause of the event,
advising those affected by the alert, answering questions and allaying
concerns, calling on expert advice as necessary.
It is important to draw on other countries’ experiences in this field,
which shed light on how far citizens can be encouraged to prepare for


-----

a crisis without unnecessarily fuelling anxiety. Internet sites dedicated
to individual preparedness for crisis situations exist in most European
countries.

**Making the news media a key partner**
**in the event of a crisis**

The media nowadays are too often perceived by government
agencies as likely to have a negative impact on crisis management.
On the contrary, in situations where national security is at risk, journalists must be recognised as partners in the chain of crisis communication, independent yet responsible. As is the practice in the United
Kingdom, journalists should be given the fullest possible information, as this will only help to improve the information that reaches
the public.
This approach should prevail both before and during the crisis.
_Before the event, journalists must have been provided with ade-_
quate and concrete information on the crisis management organisation and the resources available to the authorities, without breaching
the necessary confidentiality which should surround certain mechanisms and responses. With the approval of media managers, media
professionals will also be included in crisis exercises.
Informing the public about procedures and resources is likely to
encourage the vigilance necessary as regards certain risks and an
understanding of the measures taken by the State or the main operators. It is always easier to deal with a vulnerable area of social or eco_nomic life when everyone knows of its existence. This approach will_
enhance the resilience of our society and its capacity to deal with risks
alongside the authorities and all their partners.
_During the crisis, those in charge must take the initiative of_
explaining the key facts rapidly to those whose business it is to report
them. The most seasoned media professionals are increasingly aware
in advance or in real time of realities on the ground, or even of military or civil manoeuvres. The principle of a period of secrecy, if legitimately applicable, which lies at the heart of the decision-making
process or of intelligence and action capabilities, must not become
an obstacle to successful crisis management. The instantaneous
broadcasting of information that is typical of crisis situations calls
for other communication and information strategies as the crisis
unfolds. Greater openness must be the rule, particularly as regards
rescue or peace-keeping operations. Reliance on public means of
information as part of the manoeuvre will be incorporated as such
into the operation plan at every level, to a far greater degree than is
currently the case.


-----

Along similar lines, a mechanism for dialogue at times of major
_crisis will be established between predetermined contacts in govern-_
ment services, crisis management centres and the main media.
Finally, the management of the media concerned will be invited to
take part in experience feedback analysis to improve the authorities’
awareness of the effects and perception of their action.

##### Improving crisis management on French soil

Although in recent history France has not, unlike the United
States, Spain or the United Kingdom, been faced with a major crisis
on its soil, this fortunate circumstance could turn into a weakness if
the authorities do not improve their collective preparedness for such
events.

###### AT CENTRAL LEVEL

Significant progress has been made in recent years, particularly
with the rethinking from 2001 onwards of the “Vigipirate” antiterrorism plans. Government strategic planning capabilities nonetheless remain limited, incomplete and dispersed. The system is insufficiently co-ordinated and inadequately linked in to the national network
at préfecture level.
This situation is perilous, because of the recurring characteristics
of early XXI[st] century crises: instantaneous information, European and
international interactions, impact not only on national land-space but
also in the air, sea and cyber-space, simultaneity or chain-linking at
several points around the country or the world, a multiplicity of parties
concerned, both public and private.
A new organisation is therefore necessary in order to prepare and
guide government action.
The principal orientations and governmental plans will be adopted
by the President in the councils which he chairs. These plans will be
drawn up by the Prime Minister, supported in this instance by the
General Secretariat for Defence and National Security, which will coordinate the formulation and approval of governmental plans,
involving all the ministries concerned.
The crisis management policy and strategy come under the
authority of the President and the Prime Minister. It is their responsibility to organise political decision-making during a crisis. They must


-----

be able to rely on a command organisation geared to major crises,
guaranteeing real-time information on the progress of events and
enabling them to direct government communication. The public,
media and all those involved, in France and overseas, must be familiar
with the existence of this organisation, which will be the natural point
of entry into the crisis management structure for European and international contacts at the highest level.
The Minister of the Interior, who is responsible for domestic security and for civil security and protection, in the broader sense that
these terms will be given in the Defence and Domestic Security Codes
following reform of the ordinance of January 7, 1959 (see Chapter 3),
will be responsible at the operational level for inter-ministerial management of crises on the French national territory. The Ministry’s
present resources will be supplemented by the creation of an Inter_Ministerial Crisis Management Centre based in Place Beauvau, within_
which all the Ministries concerned (Economy, Transport, Health, etc.)
will be represented. The centre will network with the resources of the
other ministries, particularly those responsible for foreign affairs,
industry, transport and energy, and will ensure the coherence of civil
and military responses in conjunction with the armed forces operational centre.
In terms of crisis preparation, the Ministry of the Interior will be
responsible for plans dealing predominantly with public order and
civil protection and security and will play a leading role in the formulation of plans to protect against terrorism on national soil.
The Ministry of the Interior will be provided for the purpose with
a new directorate responsible for planning, reporting to the Secretary
General of the Ministry (see Chapter 15). The directorate will act in
close liaison with the Directorate General of the National Police, the
Directorate General of the Gendarmerie and the Directorate of Civil
Security on operational matters, and with the new Prospective and
Strategy Delegation on medium and long-term crisis planning. The
new directorate will be tasked with designing, developing, updating
and monitoring plans in areas under the direct remit of the Minister of
the Interior, and will provide the Ministry’s contribution to governmental plans extending beyond that remit. It will steer the transfer of
government planning to decentralised levels, as decided in council by
the President and the Prime Minister, ensuring that such planning is
adapted to the local level and monitoring its implementation. The
directorate will also be tasked, with assisting of the ministries
concerned, with formulating planning implementing instructions for
the information of the Prefects and the use of local government. The
directorate will rely in all its missions on the defence and security zone
Prefects.


-----

###### AT DECENTRALISED LEVEL

Crisis management on national territory falls under the powers of
the Prefects. The defence and security zone Prefects will have their
powers extended to make them the first level of inter-ministerial
decentralisation in terms of preparation for and management of major
crises affecting national security.
The defence and security zones will perform the following main
functions:
— Steering crisis forecasting and management;
— Collating information in crisis situations;
— Providing support to the departments on planning, exercises
and training;
— Organising cross-border co-operation policy on civil security
and protection.
Defence and security zone Prefects will also be given responsibility
for steering a policy of organisation and harmonisation of all ministry
reserves, in conjunction with the military authorities as regards the
military reserves and in support of the départment Prefects as regards
local government reserves.
_The co-ordination of civil and military resources in the defence and_
_security zones will need to be stepped up._
Zone Prefects will be supported by military advisers, who will be
the generals of the defence zones, under the direct command of the
Chief of the Defence Staff.
The staffs of the zone Prefects and of the generals of the defence
zones will be combined. Military planning resources will be incorporated into a single staff under the authority of the zone Prefects, so
that government plans can be jointly applied at zone level across the
country.
The generals of the defence zones will be empowered by the Chief
of the Defence Staff to call upon the zones’ regular military resources,
for faster responsiveness in placing these resources at the Prefects’ disposal in the event of a crisis.
In order to allow the inter-ministerial role of the zone Prefects its
full scope of action, decentralised ministry organisations involved in
crisis management will be aligned or harmonised at zone level.
Lastly, the Minister of the Interior will regularly convene a
committee of defence and security zone prefects, with the Planning
Directorate providing the secretariat.


-----

**Interoperability**

Crisis management tools are insufficiently interoperable in technical terms at present. Interoperability will be enhanced and this
applies in particular to the information, command and communication
resources of the public security forces, the civil security forces and the
armed forces. Establishing reliable links between the various agencies
is key to the smooth running of crisis management, especially in the
first hours after the response is triggered. The Inter-ministerial Secure
Intranet System (ISIS) will be extended for this purpose to the entire
decision-making and command chain in Metropolitan France in the
near future.

**Involvement of local government and operators**

The effects of the decentralisation policy, and in particular the
evolving relations between the State, operators in sectors of vital
importance and local government agencies will need to be better
understood and taken into account. As in the case of training, these
actors will need to be more closely associated with planning. They are
in possession of the competencies and the key resources, in the field of
civil security for example. At the same time, the different legal schemes
covering requisitions will be harmonised, in order to guarantee that, in
times of crisis, the representatives of the State enjoy the full support of
all the actors involved.

**Training for crisis response**

A coherent response to a major crisis also requires the various
agencies involved in crisis response to receive regular training in joint
action, at all levels. There is still significant progress to be made in this
area, and in the analysis of experience feedback. Long-term interministerial planning for such exercises will be put in place. The necessary financial resources will be identified. The feedback process will be
formalised.
_Particular attention will need to be paid to better training across the_
_entire crisis management chain, from the strategic steering structures_
down to actors in the field. The personal involvement—even if only
occasional—of senior political decision-makers or their representatives
will be encouraged as an essential condition for the realism and effectiveness of such exercises. Local elected officials, who are often in the
front line of disaster response, will also need to be closely associated.


-----

##### Establishing objectives and operational contracts for the domestic and civil security structures and for the armed forces

Whatever the crisis scenario, the first land-based response is
always carried out by the domestic and civil security structure. The
armed forces complement this response, using their specific resources
and know-how as requested by the civil power responsible for crisis
management.
Thus the domestic and civil security system stands in the front line
in dealing with all risks and threats on national territory. Should a
major event occur, provision must exist for all resources in the vicinity,
including the operational reserves, to be committed immediately and
rapidly reinforced, where necessary, by special intervention units
(RAID, GIGN, DCI, GIH) and by at least thirty Gendarmerie mobile
units and ten Civil Security reinforcement columns equipped with
CRBN protective gear. This will be set out in the operational objectives
laid down for the domestic and civil security system as part of the civil
and military planning of crisis management.
Similarly, an operational contract of protection applies to the armed
forces on national territory. This is in addition to the general support
missions provided by all the armed forces on national territory. It
includes a land-based force capability of up to 10,000 soldiers, if necessary, deployable in a matter of days to contribute, at the request of
the civilian authorities, first to the security of points of vital importance, and for land-based flows essential to the life of the country, as
well as to control access to the national territory.
At the same time, the armed forces must also be able to provide
reinforcement of the permanent air security posture, up to six operational patrols and four operational patrols specialised in combating
low-speed aircraft. Reinforcement of the permanent maritime security
posture requires the deployment of a frigate, of two mine-hunters and
a maritime patrol aircraft on each of the three seaboards.
The Directorate-General of the Customs will act in co-ordination
with the services concerned in the event of a crisis requiring increased
surveillance, or even the closing of the borders. The Customs service
will have the capacity to concentrate its forces rapidly at the most sensitive entry points, and will co-ordinate its maritime and air resources
with the armed forces in order to ensure optimal national coverage.
In the overseas départements and territories (DOM-COM), coordination of civil and military resources will be strengthened and


-----

forces will be reorganised according to the following principles (with
no impact on service militaire adapté, SMA, vocational training units
with military cadre):
— Redefinition of a predominantly air and sea force in each collectivity to carry out public service missions and combat all forms of
trafficking;
— Establishing theatre resources in French Guyana, Réunion and
New Caledonia capable of rapid intervention in the three zones, West
Indies-French Guyana, Indian Ocean and Pacific Ocean respectively, in
the event of a crisis (natural disaster, for example).
_Gendarmerie and Civil Security resources will be adapted and_
reinforced as necessary, particularly as regards helicopters.

**Crisis in the French overseas départements and territories**
**(DOM-COM)**

Over the next fifteen years, specific concerns will weigh on the defence
and security of the DOM-COM, namely:
— The risk of natural disasters;
— The security of the Kourou space centre in French Guyana, vital to
both France and Europe;
While all the départements and territories are not equally threatened,
this type of event is one of the most influential factors determining the
scale of government response.
The remoteness of the DOM-COM from Metropolitan France (7,000 km
in the case of French Guyana, 8,000 km for Mayotte, 18,300 km for New
Caledonia) may make the rapid projection of reinforcements, of both
personnel and equipment, more problematic, and increase the difficulties of crisis management.
The probability of hostile action, particularly of a military nature, by a
regional actor is considered to be much lower. The Kourou site is a special case, requiring specific resources.

##### Strengthening cooperation with European States

Crises may have cross-border impacts not only because of their
nature (pandemic disease, for example), or the scale of their consequences, but also because any major crisis (terrorist attack, for
example) carries an international dimension even if its effects are
confined to France.


-----

There is considerable margin for progress in terms of protecting
European citizens, given existing practices and degrees of compartmentalisation.
It will be important to make use of all the mechanisms that EU
Member States decide to implement under the terms of the solidarity
clause in the Lisbon Treaty.
The precise terms of the co-ordination between States in the event
of a major crisis will need to be clarified and made known to all
concerned. France will appoint a national co-ordinator, who will be
known to our partners and allies, to work with the decision-makers
and officials in charge of crisis management.
Procedures for the co-ordination of crisis communication will need
to be introduced by the European Union. The practice of staging European exercises will be developed in order to test the co-ordination of
chains of command and national protection (and communication)
capabilities in the event of a crisis affecting several countries, or in
close proximity to our external borders.
Integrated management of operational co-operation at the European Union borders will also need to be improved, with the effort
focused on Frontex, the EU agency for external border security.
In the area of civil security, France will support reinforcement of
European capabilities for civil protection and fighting CRBN threats
(see Chapter 4).


-----

-----

CHAPTER 12

###### INTERVENTION

Intervention abroad imposes the greatest demands, and therefore
remains the key determinant for our armed forces structure and requirements. There is also a growing need for civil operations calling for a
clearly identified capability to be established. In those regions to which
France commits resources, it is important to have a strategic overview of
the entire operations encompassing all its components, both military
and civilian, and to strive to achieve optimum synergies between them.

##### Overall objective

France will constantly maintain the force projection capability necessary to defend its security interests and responsibilities. In the event
of large-sale military operations, which will necessarily take place
within a multilateral framework, France will field forces sufficient in
quality and in strength to ensure adequate representation on operation
planning and command bodies, and therefore to guarantee its freedom
of assessment and decision-making.
France will develop its capability for long-distance, in-depth force
projection against an adversary. The strategic range of its military
capabilities in all their components, sea, air and land-based, will be
sufficient to cover all strategic zones of major interest. The quality and
coherence of the French military capabilities will be maintained and
improved in order to retain the advantage over all plausible adversaries. The definition, dimensioning and positioning of French forces
will therefore allow for a significant engagement capability in addition to
_crisis management missions over the next fifteen years._


-----

The capabilities of France’s armed forces must be sufficient to
mount the following operations:
— “Special” operations on a national basis or in a narrow multilateral framework, in order to free hostages or to pursue terrorists, for
example;
— “Middle–scale” operations, undertaken in a national framework,
such as the evacuation of French nationals in hostile environments or
targeted, selective retaliatory operations in response to direct action
against French interests;
— “Significant” operations, in a bilateral or a multinational framework, particularly for peace-keeping or peace-restoration purposes;
— “Major” operations, necessarily undertaken in alliance or coalition, at a substantial distance from the French national territory.
In every eventuality, there must also be sufficient capability to
combine these operations with other actions, in particular to raise the
_level of protection of the French national territory, on a par with the_
_crisis justifying the intervention._
Furthermore, an emergency reaction capability must be constantly
available in order to preserve the French freedom of action. This capability must also be adaptable to a wide range of potential deployment
scenarios, ranging from an evacuation of French nationals to ad hoc reinforcement of a main force or a secondary operation of short duration.


-----

##### Outlook for future operations

Decisions regarding the military capabilities required now and in the
future draw on the lessons learned from recent and ongoing operations.

###### MULTINATIONALITY – INTEROPERABILITY

Most of the military operations carried out by French forces are
likely to take place within a multinational framework. This may be
either an existing framework, as in the case of the Atlantic Alliance and
the European Union, or an ad hoc coalition dictated by circumstance.
Interoperability with our allies continues to be a prerequisite for
any joint operation. This interoperability is the result of measures
taken over the long term. Equipment interoperability, particularly
communication and command systems, is the best-known component.
The concept of interoperability of doctrines and procedures is also
under development, however, and will be pursued over time. National
military capabilities will therefore from the outset incorporate the
imperative of interoperability with our allies.

###### VERSATILITY

Foreseeable military operations are likely to be of long duration
and to undergo profound changes over time. Furthermore, highly
diverse operations may be carried out simultaneously within a single
theatre, ranging from high-intensity combat to securing a zone, from
escorting a convoy to protecting a refugee camp or providing assistance to the population.
These two factors: changes over time and simultaneous diversity,
call for a versatile and reactive intervention capability, able to carry
out the full range of operations, often using the same personnel.
The flexibility of France’s military forces will stem from the quality of
its units, its soldiers and its equipment, but also from a reasonable level
of redundancy allowing for choices to be made between the resources
available, and for resources to be adapted as and when necessary.

###### FORCE PROTECTION

Future operations will be no less dangerous than those of the past.
While the likelihood of massive losses now seems small, the possibility


-----

of significant losses is one that France and her armed forces must be
ready to face.
Losses suffered by a force in theatre have a profound influence on
the nation’s perception of the operation. A sharp upsurge in losses or a
continuous stream of fatalities may have strategic consequences.
_Protecting our forces is therefore not only a moral imperative but also_
_a necessity both strategic—to maintain support—and tactical—to ensure_
success. When circumstances allow, the use of precision-guided
weapons fired at long range, without exposing combatants, is in itself
a form of protection.
Force protection requires in particular:
— Investment in enhanced-protection equipment, particularly
land vehicles and helicopters, anti-IED[1] jamming and detection systems, anti-tactical missile systems and CRBN protection gear;
— Personnel training and battle-hardening, based on the implementation of constantly updated security procedures and effective and
reactive experience feedback (through the “lessons learned” process).

###### POPULATIONS

Today’s military operations increasingly take place among populations, which are both their environment and their objective. Operating
within a civilian population calls for an appropriate military culture
and adequate equipment, particularly to protect both civilians and
combatants, in compliance with international humanitarian law. It
also calls for techniques, tactics and procedures to improve the synergy of forces diluted within a complex and fragmented environment.
Where zones of operations of various forces and parties overlap
and there is no clear delimitation between camps, or between the
armed force and the population, the number and variety of actors adds
a further degree of complexity. Regular armed forces must be able to
operate with, on behalf of, or alongside, a number of military and civil
stakeholders, be they local authorities, representatives of the international community, non-governmental organisations or the press.
The quality of these highly diverse relations will determine the overall
outcome of the operation. For their part, the forces deployed must,
without substituting for or competing with civil organisations, possess
their own resources to engage in civil-military operations on behalf of
the population. These operations concern in particular the field of
health and local investments. The armed forces will therefore have to

1. IED: Improvised Explosive Device.


-----

develop competencies in the field of civil-military action, which has
become inseparable from military action in the strict sense.

###### PERSONNEL AND MORALE

In sum, the combat soldiers’ training and level of readiness, the
legitimacy of their action and the clarity of the objectives they are
assigned are more critical than ever to success on the ground. The primacy of the human factor must be reaffirmed.
In this respect, there is no substitute for the morale of soldiers
facing combat; it is the result of training creating cohesion, of discipline that governs engagements, and of everyday work with a carefully
selected and experienced staff, where trust is built.

###### THE QUANTITATIVE FACTOR

Even if the armed forces develop all the qualities mentioned above,
quantity remains a decisive factor in most operations, whether on
land, on the sea or in the air. The number of soldiers on the ground to
control situations; the number of ships at sea to project force landwards, monitor a seaway, stop and search suspect vessels; the number
of aircraft to maintain constant surveillance, transport or strike capability, at all times, over sometimes considerable distances. The capabilities of the armed forces will represent a reasoned compromise
designed to provide a sufficient number of army, navy and air force
personnel provided with quality equipment.


-----

-----

##### Keys to operational superiority

Operational superiority must be enhanced. In the period to 2025, it
will result largely from the following factors.

###### INFORMATION – COMMUNICATION – SPACE

Information, as pointed out previously, is the key to all strategic
functions. Obtaining information calls for intelligence effort: sorting,
analysing and interpreting information underpins the capacity to
anticipate; disseminating information to those who need it, and in
forms and time scales compatible with their action, is the source of
operational effectiveness, both military and civilian; protecting information is a constant concern that applies to everyone.
In terms of operational military needs, in addition to the acquisition of information referred to under the “knowledge and anticipation”
strategic function, the object is to establish secure, reliable, protected
and high capacity communications, from the highest level of the State
down to those in the field. France has acquired a range of high-quality
assets, including satellites, to guarantee independence. This effort
must be maintained and developed to keep pace with ever-growing
needs.
The information revolution has paved the way for the concept of
“netcentric warfare”. Technology currently being deployed allows for
battlespace digitisation, transforming each individual combatant, each
vehicle, aircraft or vessel, into a communication node integrated into a
global network. The effectiveness of land, air or sea forces will be
considerably enhanced as a result.
_France cannot afford to be left behind in this development, in the_
interests of maintaining superiority over its adversaries or interoperability with its main allies. Our air and naval forces are currently
more advanced in this area than our ground forces. All our armed
forces will intensify their efforts in this field, which is crucial for military superiority.
In the context of operations, access to strategic communications,
battlefield observation, extension of the surveillance zone, all depend
to a considerable extent on assets deployed in space, in particular communication and observation satellites. Management of capacities in
outer space is therefore an essential aspect of our force projection
capabilities, all the more so in a context of force projection at a distance from the national territory.


-----

-----

###### OFFENSIVE CYBER-WAR

The effectiveness of defence and security forces at all levels
depends, and will depend increasingly in the future, on the proper
functioning of their information systems. The planning and execution
of conventional operations combined with cyber-operations is tending
to become standard practice. Before any physical target is destroyed, a
defence system can be disrupted and partially incapacitated by means
of targeted stealth attacks.
In the IT field more than any other, defence will mean knowing
how to attack. France will need to be aware of the many and diversified
forms and techniques used in these potential attacks (saturation, Trojan
horses, worms, malicious software, etc.), and be able to retaliate against
the adversary behind the attack using offensive capabilities.
We therefore need the capability to neutralise attacks inside the
very operations centres used by our adversaries: this is the objective of
offensive cyber-war.
France could be the victim of direct or indirect cyber attack. Our
forces must be ready to carry out offensive actions and will need to
invest over the long-term in the following key areas:
— Definition, by the Joint Staff, of an overarching concept incorporating all actions involved in cyber-war;
— Development of specialised tools (networked digital weapons,
technical and operations laboratory, etc.);
— Formulation of a body of doctrine for offensive cyber-war capabilities (planning, execution, evaluation of actions);
— Introduction of appropriate and regularly updated training for
selected personnel, to be used flexibly in specialised units, overriding
administrative considerations.
The concept must be compatible with the legal principles of
French legislation and respect the principle of proportionate response,
with the adversary’s operational assets as its priority target.


-----

###### TECHNOLOGICAL CAPABILITIES

France will continue to develop leading-edge technologies to meet
its armed forces’ requirements.The criterion of operational need must
be reaffirmed, since this is the justification for acquiring a technological capability.
Identified operational requirements that warrant major research,
development and acquisition investments relate to:
— Surveillance and intelligence gathering assets, in space and in
the earth’s atmosphere, including remotely-piloted vehicles (UAVs);
— Superiority in information technology, particularly through the
development of defensive and offensive cyber-war capabilities;
— Battlespace digitisation and, more generally, all information
technology applied to the context of force engagement;
— Long-range precision-guided strikes, including from armed drones;
— Active and passive countermeasures to neutralise or mitigate
the effects of harassment weapons encountered in theatres of combat
(particularly IEDs, mines and booby-traps, snipers);
— Equipment facilitating military action in urban environments,
which concerns not just ground forces exclusively, even if they are the
first to benefit from it. Precision-guided strike capabilities, day or
night, mitigating the risk of collateral damage, can be used by all land,
sea or air-based vectors, for example;
— Protection of forces against threats of all kinds, and against the
CRBN threat in particular. The need to increase the degree of passive
and active force protection is, of its own, sufficient reason to warrant
replacement of a significant proportion of latest-generation assets
(armoured infantry combat vehicles, for example);
— Naval superiority, particularly in zones where most of the
foreseeable medium-term threats are concentrated. This will require
France to maintain its lead in anti-submarine warfare and mine
warfare;
— Air superiority in all its forms, from the interception of drones
and low-speed aircraft to dealing with all threats on the ground.

###### MOBILITY

Strategic mobility is achieved by the combination of material
resources or procedures involving a number of State or private actors.
It goes hand in hand with tactical mobility, which guarantees freedom
of action and the efficacy of forces in the theatre. At both levels, this
freedom of action also relies on the quality of the logistics and supply
chain. France’s armed forces suffer from a specific structural weakness


-----

in the area of tactical air mobility, based on tactical helicopters and
transport aircraft. Investment in procurement must seek to overcome
this weakness, which currently hampers the effectiveness and
autonomy of French forces.
Replacement of the strategic air transport fleet and increasing its
capacity will call for sustained efforts including, but not restricted to,
acquisition of new-generation aircraft such as MRTTs and A-400 Ms.
In the field of naval mobility, with the acquisition of force projection and command vessels (BPC) and large amphibious ships (TCD),
France has acquired a transport and landing capability that will be
maintained over time and possibly strengthened. These will be
renewed and even reinforced.
At this stage, asset-sharing at the European or NATO level provides
only limited capabilities. The same is true of the use of civil chartering,
the conditions of which may create constraints incompatible with the
prevailing urgency and threat posed by a major national engagement.
Asset-sharing is nonetheless an avenue that must be pursued.

**Average age of equipment due for replacement**

Refuelling tanker aircraft 45 years

Wheeled armoured fighting vehicle (VAB) 28

Tactical transport aircraft (C 160 and C 130) 28

AICV AMX10P and VBCI (41 delivered in 2008) 26

Underway refuelling tankers (single hull = not to 2008 standard) 24

Support helicopters (Puma, Cougar, Lynx, SuperFrelon) 30

Wheeled armoured reconnaissance vehicle (AMX 10 RC) 23

Combat frigates 21

Tactical vehicles (Peugeot P4) 20

Nuclear attack submarines, Rubis class 20

Heavy trucks (TRM 10000, VTL) 20

Fighter aircraft (excluding Rafale) 20

Artillery 18

AWACS aircraft 17

Atlantique 2 maritime patrol aircraft 15

Source: Ministry of Defence/Joint Staff

|Average age of equipment due for replacement|Col2|
|---|---|
|Refuelling tanker aircraft|45 years|
|Wheeled armoured fighting vehicle (VAB)|28|
|Tactical transport aircraft (C 160 and C 130)|28|
|AICV AMX10P and VBCI (41 delivered in 2008)|26|
|Underway refuelling tankers (single hull = not to 2008 standard)|24|
|Support helicopters (Puma, Cougar, Lynx, SuperFrelon)|30|
|Wheeled armoured reconnaissance vehicle (AMX 10 RC)|23|
|Combat frigates|21|
|Tactical vehicles (Peugeot P4)|20|
|Nuclear attack submarines, Rubis class|20|
|Heavy trucks (TRM 10000, VTL)|20|
|Fighter aircraft (excluding Rafale)|20|
|Artillery|18|
|AWACS aircraft|17|
|Atlantique 2 maritime patrol aircraft|15|


-----

##### The main objectives of operational capabilities

In order to engage with an adversary, French armed forces must
hold an undisputed operational advantage, which must be assessed at
every point in the chain from strategic to tactical level. The maximum
force size is determined on the basis of a major multinational operation. It does not exclude participation in operations of a different
nature requiring fewer resources.

###### MAJOR MILITARY INTERVENTION CAPABILITIES

As indicated earlier (Chapter 3), France must be in a position to
concentrate its capabilities on a geographic axis running from the
Western approaches to the Mediterranean, the Arabian-Persian Gulf
and the Indian Ocean, while maintaining its capacity for action on
Africa’s Western seaboard, in the Sahel and in the DOM-COM. This
geographical scope covers the majority of foreseeable involvements.
Our presence in the Indian Ocean could serve as a stepping-stone to
extending our presence and co-operation into Asia.
This decision implies a reduction in our pre-positioned forces as
currently deployed, and a shift towards appropriate co-operation capabilities in accordance with the objectives set out in the “prevention”
strategic function (Chapter 9).
It also implies a reduction in the size of our military forces stationed in the DOM-COM, retaining only the resources necessary for
strictly military missions. Significant capabilities will be maintained in
Réunion and Guyana. The military forces in French Polynesia, the
West Indies and New Caledonia will be reduced and rationalised.
Continuity of State support for missions not strictly military in nature
will be maintained by bringing in any extra resources that might be
necessary from the Gendarmerie and civil security.
When taking part in large-scale operations, France will have the
specific staff capabilities at the highest level—“framework nation”
capabilities, in international military vocabulary—to take on joint
command responsibilities at theatre level, or for the land, air or sea
components, or for special operations.
France will possess the skills inherent in the critical phases of a
major operation, whether at the launch phase, i.e. for its forces to have
“force entry” capability, or during the transition from a coercive operation to a stabilisation operation, then to one of peace consolidation.


-----

-----

The size of the projectable ground forces required to meet this need
is assessed at some 30,000 soldiers deployable within 6 months for a
_period of one year, without replacement, with full autonomy in the main_
joint operational functions (close fight, support and logistics). This capability will cover the range from major operation to limited but rapid
reaction operation, or a long-term stabilisation operation. The ground
forces will need to be able to regenerate the force or reorganise it to take
into account changes in the conditions of commitment.
France will also maintain an independent reaction or reinforcement capability consisting of a 5,000-strong reserve on permanent
operational alert (land forces).
Unless they are committed to a large-scale operation, the French
ground forces will be able to contribute to a number of stabilisation or
_peace-keeping operations._
The deployable air component will be based on a single pool of
modern combat aircraft (Mirage 2000 and Rafale, operated by the Air
Force or the Navy). The standing objective is a force projection capa_bility of the order of 70 combat aircraft capable of sustained high-_
_intensity operations during a coercive operations phase, followed by_
operations at lower intensity during a stabilisation phase. Air assets
must also have the capability to project a force of 1,500 soldiers over a
distance of 7,000 to 8,000 kilometres in a few days, complete with
command, control, detection and air traffic control resources, as well
as the necessary air bases.
The air component will also retain rapid, independent force projection capability consisting of some 10 combat aircraft on permanent
operational alert.
Naval forces will have the capability to deploy the aircraft carrier
_battle group, with its full complement of aircraft and escort frigates and_
nuclear submarines. Independent of aircraft carrier availability, the naval
air assets may be used in force projection or as necessary reinforcement
of the air protection posture over the national territory. France will
contribute to the development and implementation of a European
aeronaval co-operation initiative, which was agreed on in principle at the
2008 Franco-British summit. In addition, France will reinforce its naval
deployment and amphibious operations capabilities when replacing vessels, by investing in four projection and command ships (BPCs).
One or two naval groups, either amphibious or tasked with the
protection of maritime traffic, with their logistic support, will also be
available for intervention missions or to provide forward presence. At
the same time, an autonomous response capability on permanent alert
must be deployable for ad hoc operations such as the evacuation of
French nationals, maritime counter-terrorism operations or humanitarian operations.


-----

Furthermore, should a clear and imminent threat of armed
aggression affecting national security be identified, France must also
be able to plan, conduct and execute pre-emptive military action either
alone or in coalition. This will call for appropriate and autonomous


-----

intelligence, targeting and deep-strike capabilities by land, air and sea.
The organisation of planning must offer political and military
decision-makers an adequate range of options.

###### THE PRIORITIES AND THEIR PHASING OVER TIME

The adaptation and modernisation of France’s military resources
must take into account the priorities established for armed forces that
will characteristically be used in recurrent fashion in foreign theatres
of operation. Over the period to 2025, these priorities include:
— Upgrading force and individual soldier protection (armoured
vehicles, anti-IED equipment, CRBN capabilities, electronic countermeasures, etc.);
— Maintaining the operational capability of all forces’ equipment;
— Implementing programmes with a direct impact on operational
coherence;
— Capabilities for defensive and offensive cyber-war;
— Addressing shortfalls in strategic and tactical air transport, and
air mobility;
— Gradual modernisation of air combat resources, with priority
given to capabilities directly applicable to the support of ground forces
(precision, lethality, urban areas);
— Control of the undersea environment and of littoral zones;
— Means of striking from a safe distance, in particular submarinelaunched cruise missiles;
— Networked operations and more generally the pursuit of force
multipliers.
These investments, often substantial, will need to be phased over
the period to 2025. Although the priorities are by no means mutually
exclusive and many of the operations must be carried out simultaneously, two stages are deemed necessary.
_In the first phase, in the short to medium-term (2015), special_
_emphasis will be placed on the following operations, and in particular on_
_the upgrading of land-based resources:_
— Modernisation of air-land combat assets, covering the full spectrum of capabilities required to meet the operational objective (30,000
soldiers deployable in 6 months), in parallel with a reduction of the
force structure. Special attention will be paid to the force protection
and operational coherence programmes associated with this capability.
This new format will result in a far-reaching reconfiguration of the
army that will mean abandoning or reducing capabilities deemed
superfluous or marginal;


-----

— Gradual modernisation of air combat assets in parallel with a
reduction in the present number of aircraft, with an effort focusing on
the penetration and strike capabilities in support of land-based forces
considered most valuable in the context of current or foreseeable
operations;
— Modernisation of undersea control capability (anti-submarine
frigates and nuclear attack submarines);
— Making up the shortfall in strategic air transport (Airbus
A400M transport aircraft and MRTT in-flight refuelling tankers) and in
air mobility (support helicopters);
— Adapting amphibious capacity;
— Upgrading ammunition stocks.
_In a second, medium to long-term phase (2025), the focus will be on_
_maritime, air and air-sea operations, with:_
— Accelerated replacement of the surface fleet, frigates in particular, in order to reinforce forward presence capability in all theatres;
— Accelerated modernisation of air assets, in terms of number of
aircraft and drones, with a view to achieving generational replacement
by the end of the period considered;
— Continued modernisation of the ground forces;
— Reinforcement of precision-guided long-distance deep-strike
capabilities in significant quantities and from several launch platforms
(air, sea and possibly land).

###### OBJECTIVES FOR CIVILIAN CAPABILITIES

The primary objective of military intervention is to put an end to
overt hostilities, reduce the level of tension, provide a sufficiently safe
environment for local and international actors to operate without
threat or hindrance. Peace consolidation, reconstruction and assistance to emerging local institutions call for clearly identified civil capabilities that can be deployed under realistic conditions of lead-time and
duration.
France has specific resources to meet some of these needs:
— Gendarmerie, in the field of police functions. This specialist
force, which has military status and the full range of skills required—
Intelligence, general security, public security, protection of persons,
maintaining public order, investigations and criminology—is already
called upon to contribute in many theatres considered essential;
— Civil security, which is made up of specialist military units, all
of which are projectable, and also of civil units under local government
authority. Some of these resources can be deployed, either as ad hoc
units or individually. The formation of such units is tested to exercises


-----

and procedures, European as well as French, in the process of
development;
— The Services Health Corps (Service de Santé des Armées, SSA),
which has military status and provides a highly sophisticated medical
and surgical capability.
Even so, the extension of civilian operations now calls with
increasing urgency for new skills that military personnel do not possess: those of administrators, judges, police officers and experts in
every aspect of economic and social life.
France’s police force is called upon to participate, in its areas of
expertise, in the work of international organisations, in particular the
UN, in providing policing training. The force also has a network of
domestic security attachés (Attachés de Sécurité Intérieure, ASI) covering 150 countries and providing local liaison with domestic departments and security forces on co-operation and training actions.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the General Secretariat for
Defence and National Security will set up the resources necessary to
compile a list of volunteers, create greater synergy between government departments and achieve more effective impact on the ground.
_The national security strategy will therefore be based on an enhanced_
_civilian structure more readily available and better adapted to local_
_conditions._
Three avenues of approach will take priority:
— Ongoing identification and recruitment of civil personnel with
the requisite specialist skills, at levels commensurate with France’s
international responsibilities and strategic interests. In the main, these
will be administrators, legal experts or judges, police officers, civil
engineers, health professionals and teachers;
— Consistency between the military effort and the financial and
economic commitments made;
— Establishing an inter-ministerial doctrine and procedures geared
to the mobilisation of the national component of a civil operation (negotiation, component generation, deployment, follow-up, redeployment).
France’s involvement in civil operations is directly affected by its
ability to respond to calls on its services from the United Nations or
the European Union, in the case of most of the operations envisaged.
This response must be forthcoming in good time, and at a level commensurate, in quantity and quality, with the strategic objectives being
pursued.
It will only be possible to generate the civil resources needed for
operations of this type by offering appropriate and attractive statutory
terms.
The effectiveness of the new organisation will depend on the financial and human resources made available. A new and reactive organisa

-----

_tion to raise funds for the post-crisis period will be set up under the aus-_
pices of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The aim will be to provide
better financing for civil activities to encourage local stabilisation in a
degraded security environment, with countries where our forces are
deployed taking priority. We will increase our capability to commit
civil experts to operations in order to strengthen our own resources
and support international missions.


-----

-----

CHAPTER 13

###### THE FORCE STRUCTURE

The definition and articulation of the main strategic functions
designed to ensure National Security derive from the review carried
out in 2007-2008. They set out broad guidelines. But these must
remain flexible and adaptable, and avoid becoming locked into a intangible model, which could quickly become an over-rigid framework in
an environment that is unstable, uncertain and volatile. This White
Paper therefore deliberately does not set out to define a “model army”,
but rather presents the main operational and capability objectives
assigned to the principal forces and to the government authorities
involved in National Security strategy. The overall linkage, like the
objectives, will require regular updating, as will the White Paper, as
recommended earlier (Chapter 3).

##### The armed forces


Over the next fifteen years, the armed forces will be required to fulfil
the following operational objectives:
— providing knowledge of the risks and threats, of potential upsets of
all kinds, and anticipate crises;
— maintaining the deterrence posture at the level of permanence,
reactivity and safety established by the President of the Republic;
— contributing rapidly and if necessary over time, to the protection of
_the population on national territory, and to the nation’s resilience in_
the face of risks and threats of all kinds:


-----

These operational contracts, coupled with a definition of the
desired political and military effects, served as the basis for an assessment of the capacities and the operational forces required, in both
quantitative and qualitative terms. A premium was placed on the versatility and flexibility of resources to maintain maximum flexibility for
the armed forces enabling them to cover the full range of operations to
best effect.
The means of acquiring these forces within the time scale, in the
zones of interest and for the periods established were then assessed,
taking into account the performance and availability of future equipment and training standards.
The current structure of the armed forces will undergo a controlled
reduction, combining on the one hand the effects of concentration of


-----

military bases in France and the rationalisation of administrative and
support functions and, on the other, the redefinition of operational
contracts. A similar reduction will be made in the size of prepositioned forces and forces stations overseas.
The new operational contracts and the reconfiguration of forces
were defined as part of a systematic joint approach. This has resulted
in a reduction in the size of certain forces and a rebalancing of the
operational functions and capacities required.
The overall scaling of forces is summarised below, by major
component.

###### LAND COMPONENT

Ground forces will be capable of carrying out the following missions simultaneously:
— participating in the protection of national territory in reinforcement of the public security and civil security system, with resources
involving up to 10,000 soldiers in a matter of days;
— intervention as part of a major multinational commitment, in a
theatre up to 7,000-8,000 km distant, deploying 30,000 soldiers in
6 months, for a period of one year, without replacement. The structure
of the ground forces will need to allow for this force to be replenished
or adapted to changes in the conditions of engagement;
— maintaining a permanent and autonomous action and reaction
capability to deploy 5,000 soldiers within a very short timeframe;
— maintaining a prevention force outside national territory,
concentrated at one base on each African seaboard and one or more in
the Arab-Persian Gulf. A permanent but appropriate state of combatreadiness and intervention capability will be maintained. Initially, this
structure will keep a stock of pre-positioned equipment to allow for
emergency deployment from France. Reinforcement will always be
possible, by deploying an amphibious force for example;
— a presence in the DOM-COM representing a sovereign force,
with theatre assets concentrated on French Guyana, Réunion Island
and New Caledonia, and a regional projection capability in the event of
a crisis.
In addition to a major operation, the ground forces may be committed in a number of stabilisation or peace-keeping operations.
_The army structure will combine “decisive” forces, capable of_
engaging in the fiercest combat, “multi-role” forces destined more to be
first in theatre with an element of surprise, and for transition phases
and stabilisation operations, and “emergency” forces with a high level
of strategic mobility.


-----

While retaining the capabilities necessary to operate as a framework
nation, ground forces will also be proportioned to allow France to:
— take command of a joint forces land army corps (Land Compo_nent Command or LCC);_
— provide the framework for a reinforced NATO division (of two
or three French joint brigades and one or two allied brigades), with
full tactical autonomy in all joint operational functions (contact combat, support);
— organise logistic support for the land component, or for the
joint force.
Modernisation efforts will give priority to force protection, digitisation of the operational space, restoring air mobility capability, the
acquisition of deep-strike capabilities.
Out of an overall force strength of 131,000 soldiers, the ground
forces will make up an operational force of 88,000 soldiers, organised
into:
— 8 joint brigades, equipped with some 250 Leclerc-type main
battle tanks, some 650 AICV-type armoured vehicles, 80 combat helicopters, 130 support helicopters and some 25,000 FELIN-type infantry
combat suites;
— 3 specialised brigades;
— The corresponding support resources.

###### NAVAL COMPONENT

The naval forces will provide the permanent presence at sea of the
_strategic submarine force (Force Océanique Stratégique, FOST), guaran-_
_teeing our second-strike deterrent capability. They will also guarantee_
the autonomous and secure deployment of the maritime component by
developing the best possible knowledge of SSBN deployment zones
and the movements of foreign forces in those zones. They will retain
permanent control of the approaches to the base port. These missions
may require two nuclear attack submarines and up to four antisubmarine frigates, as well as mine warfare resources and maritime
patrol aircraft
They will monitor and control the approaches to the national territory, in Metropolitan France and overseas. They will constantly
reinforce the permanent maritime security posture in Metropolitan
France with the deployment of a frigate, two minehunters and an
ATL2 maritime patrol aircraft on each seaboard.
They will assert French sovereignty in areas under national jurisdiction (territorial waters, exclusive economic zone), and will take part
in the protection and safeguarding of persons and in maritime safety


-----

and security, in the protection of the marine environment and maritime resources (protected zones, fisheries, etc.). These missions come
under the heading of “State action at sea” (action de l’Etat en mer,
AEM) and require the deployment of the appropriate resources for
presence at sea, both in Metropolitan France and in the DOM-COM.
In the field of prevention, the naval forces will be required to
participate in air and sea control in our zones of interest (West
Africa, the Arab-Persian Gulf and the Indian Ocean in particular), in
securing lines of communication, in monitoring maritime traffic as
part of the fight against terrorism, illicit trafficking and clandestine
immigration.
In order to contribute to crisis resolution around the world, the
carrier battle group will be deployable to a theatre 7,000-8,000 km distant, with its full complement of aircraft and escort frigates and
nuclear submarines. Independent of carrier availability, the air assets
may be used in force projection or as necessary reinforcement of the
air protection posture over the national territory.
One or two amphibious or maritime traffic protection naval
groups, with their logistic support, will also be available for intervention missions or to provide a presence. At the same time, an autonomous response capability on permanent alert must be deployable for
_ad hoc operations such as the evacuation of French nationals, a mari-_
time counter-terrorism operation or a humanitarian operation.
The overall scaling of naval forces will also enable them to:
— contribute to intelligence gathering, in both our maritime
approaches and in theatres of operation;
— take command of a joint forces maritime component (Maritime
_Component Command or MCC);_
— project mine warfare capability;
— field an appropriately scaled support fleet for all missions.
_Modernisation efforts will give priority to undersea environment_
_control capabilities (nuclear attack submarines and anti-submarine frig-_
_ates), to precision-guided deep-strike capabilities by naval cruise missiles_
_and to reinforcing sea-based command and projection capabilities._
The replacement of nuclear attack submarines is therefore a stra_tegic priority. By virtue of their stealth and almost unlimited range,_
they make an essential contribution to the security of the FOST and to
the protection of the carrier group. The construction of six Barracudaclass submarines will ensure that at least five submarines are
constantly in service to perform all these missions over the timeframe
in question.
To carry out these missions, the naval component will consist of
_44,000 men and will notably be equipped with:_
— four SSBNs,


-----

— six nuclear attack submarines,
— an aircraft carrier with its carrier air group,
— 18 first-rank frigates,
— four force projection and command vessels.

###### AIR COMPONENT

The air combat component will be modernised to provide a uniform fleet of 300 multi-role aircraft such as the Rafale and Mirage
2000 D, of which 270 will be on line. It will provide for implementation of the airborne deterrent component, with two squadrons of
nuclear-capable aircraft and an associated refuelling capability, in
addition to the assets aboard the aircraft carrier Charles-de-Gaulle.
In addition to deterrence, the air forces will also provide permanent surveillance and control of the air approaches to the national terri_tory (Metropolitan France and the DOM-COM, in particular French_
Guyana), and will have the necessary aircraft and AWACS radar infrastructure. They will be capable of reinforcing the permanent security
posture, up to 6 operational patrols plus 4 operational patrols specialising in combating low-speed aircraft, and of arming protection systems at the time of major events (two or three air defence “bubbles”).
The air forces, both air force and naval air arm, contribute to gathering the intelligence necessary for operations, surveillance of the territory, of its approaches and of space. For the purposes of prevention,
a force will be maintained in Africa, in Djibouti in particular, and in
the Gulf.
Should France be involved in a major conflict outside national territory, the air forces will need to be able to project to a theatre 7,000
to 8,000 kilometres distant an airborne combat force of the order of
70 combat aircraft, including naval air arm aircraft, plus the associated operational support aircraft. This force must be capable of sustained high-intensity operations during a coercive operations phase,
followed by operations at lower intensity during a stabilisation phase.
It must also be able to project command, control, detection and air
traffic control resources, as well as the number of projectable air bases
necessary, up to a maximum of two major bases simultaneously.
At the same time, an autonomous response capability on permanent alert must be deployable for ad hoc operations such as the evacuation of French nationals, retaliatory action or a humanitarian
operation.
The overall size of the air forces, in a 50,000-man format, will also
enable them to:


-----

— take command of a Joint Forces Air Component (Joint Forces
_Air Component Command or JFACC);_
— project the emergency echelon of a force (1,500 soldiers with
equipment) over a distance of 7,000 to 8,000 km in five days, supplied
to operate autonomously.
Modernisation efforts will focus on strategic and tactical mobility
capability, which will extend to a range of 7,000 to 8,000 km, on
ground force support capability (precision, protection, permanence
over zone and all-weather capability) and on deep-strike capability.
The capability of tactical and extended-life drones will also be
strengthened, both for surveillance and intelligence purposes and to
provide support to ground forces by armed drones. Air Force and Navy
combat aircraft will be combined under the operational command of
the Chief of the Defence Staff into a single fighters fleet which will ultimately consist exclusively of Rafale and modernised Mirage 2000 aircraft, under Air Force management. The Air Force will ensure, in
liaison with the Navy, that the maximum possible synergies are
achieved in terms of the organisation, support and readiness of these
forces. In addition, the Air Force will be tasked by the Joint Space
Command with the surveillance of outer space, and will be given
extended powers to implement space-based capabilities.
To fulfil all these missions, the Air Force will field the following
resources:
— 300 modern combat aircraft (Rafale and modernised Mirage
2000-D), including Navy fighter aircraft;
— 4 AWACS systems;
— A fleet of refuelling tanker and transports aircraft comprising
some 14 MRTT-type aircraft and some 70 transport aircraft.

###### JOINT CAPABILITIES

Over the next fifteen years, joint capabilities will develop as follows:
— continued efforts to enhance joint command and planning
_capabilities,_
— reinforcement of the space component and the creation of a
_Joint Space Command,_
— the introduction of a joint cyber-war capability,
— reinforcement of special operations capabilities, in particular by
pooling specialised helicopters and combat crew recovery helicopters,
— improvements in military intelligence, which will contribute to
the overall effort dedicated to the “knowledge-anticipation” strategic
function, at strategic, operational and tactical level,
— special attention will be paid to joint logistics, particularly in
the field of strategic movements, health support and fuel support.


-----

###### FORCE STRENGTHS

The effects of the new operational contracts assigned to the armed
forces, coupled with a reduction in support and administration functions, will result in a reduction in total armed forces numbers from
_271,000 civilian and military personnel in 2008 to 225,000 in 2014-2015._
This reduction in force numbers will take place over a period of six
to seven years, with the main burden falling on support personnel. The
preservation of the personnel required for fulfilment of the foregoing
operational objectives is an imperative.
Force strengths will evolve as follows:
— the Army will ultimately have a force strength of 131,000,
— the Navy, 44,000,
— the Air Force, 50,000.
The full reduction will be implemented over a period of six to
seven years. Reductions will focus primarily on support functions,
since the force strengths required to meet the operational objectives
set out about must at all costs be preserved.

##### Domestic and civil security provisions

These provisions are under the authority of the Ministry of the Interior.
In order to adapt to national security issues over the next fifteen
years, the following main efforts will be made under the authority of
the Minister of the Interior:
— Police and Gendarmerie under a single authority; the Ministry of
the Interior will take over full control of the Gendarmerie Nationale on
1 January 2009; the Ministry will decide the use, organisation, objectives, investment capacity and operating costs of the police and Gendarmerie forces, although the Gendarmerie will retain its military status;
— merging internal intelligence services into a single agency; domestic intelligence will be gathered under the sole agency of the Central
Domestic Intelligence Directorate (Direction Centrale du Renseignement
Intérieur, DCRI), which will take over the missions carried out at present by the Directorate for the Security of the Territory (Direction de la
Surveillance du Territoire, DST) and those of the General Intelligence
Directorate (Renseignements Généraux, RG) which relate directly to
national security. The Central Directorate will have four main missions:

  - combating espionage and foreign interference,

  - the fight against terrorism,

  - protection of national assets and economic security,

  - surveillance of violent subversive movements.


-----

###### NATIONAL POLICE

The main changes made to the police will focus on:
— providing CRBN equipment, beginning with the RAID and the
CRS companies stationed in the Paris Region, who will shortly be
issued with breathing equipment, essential in the event of CRBN
attacks. Significant efforts will be devoted in the short term (20092011) to the detection and prevention of CRBN risks and the ability
to carry out investigations in contaminated environments. All firstresponse forces will gradually be provided with protective equipment
(mixture of masks and light decontamination suits);
— in the next two years, trebling the number of surveillance cameras in public areas to a total of 60,000, with transmission of images to
the police and Gendarmerie as standard; the installed base of cameras
on public transport will also be trebled, and an extra 450 cameras will
be installed aboard response vehicles;
— development of air capability (helicopters, drones), shared with
the Gendarmerie.
These service reorganisations are designed to create the necessary
margin for manoeuvre to increase force numbers to meet increased
demand for security-related missions.

###### GENDARMERIE NATIONALE

To adapt to national security issues over the next fifteen years, the
Gendarmerie will build partnerships with the police in common areas
of activity, so as to provide greater consistency in response to risks,
and to develop joint initiatives at all levels and achieve budget savings.
This pursuit of synergy will apply in particular to logistics (joint
contract awards) and technology (software, etc.).
The Gendarmerie will continue to be an armed force and to fulfil
its military defence missions. It will remain capable of playing a part
in security systems in all contexts: in peacetime and in times of crisis
at every level of intensity, up to and including situations of armed
conflict, whether on national territory (Metropolitan France and overseas) or in external operations.
Enhancing Gendarmerie capabilities over the next fifteen years,
will be achieved by giving priority to the development and use of new
technology: making optimum use of data available by development
analysis capabilities, the use of automatic number plate recognition,
digital mapping, geolocation of patrols, hardened command and communication capabilities.


-----

Armoured capability will be renovated and reduced. Air mobility
capabilities will be improved by replacing the helicopter fleet.
The Gendarmerie will augments its CRBN potential, equipping all
its operational forces with masks and filter cartridges and equipping
two mobile Gendarmerie squadrons in each defence zone with filter
suits. Operating capability (criminal investigations by the Gendarmerie
criminal investigation unit, IRCGN, and the nuclear arms security
Gendarmerie) and intervention capability (GIGN) in contaminated
environments will also be developed..
Gendarmerie organisation will be rationalised, particularly by
reducing the schools structure and, over a period of ten years, converting
6,000 Gendarmerie officer and non-commissioned officer (NCO) posts
to 4,000 civilian posts and 2,000 technical and administrative support
posts (Corps de Soutien Technique and Administratif de la Gendarmerie,
CSTAG).

###### CIVIL SECURITY

Over the next fifteen years, civil defence and protection capabilities
will need to evolve in order to take greater account of the foreseeable
change in the scale of risks. It will be necessary to:
— make better preparation to deal with health risks, by working
closely with the Ministry of Health in order to cope with assumptions
of heavy civilian casualties;
— reinforce means of fighting the CRBN threat, whether intentional in origin (terrorist threat) or accidental (technological risk); the
reinforcement of civil security capabilities will rely particularly on a
trebling of decontamination resources, the acquisition of mobile analysis units covering the sixteen largest urban areas and the creation of a
single training centre for all emergency services;
— reinforce logistics resources to cope with massive population
movements, whether organised or spontaneous;
— introduce a new population alert system, designed for national
use and based on an approach centred on designated areas at risk;
— take greater account of the risks posed by climate change. As
part of the work initiated by UNESCO, France will, with the support of
the European Union, set up a regional tsunami warning centre that
will include tsunami detection, analysis and transmission of warnings
to the populations concerned;
— reorganise emergency rescue services using light and medium
helicopters in the DOM-COM, in cooperation with the armed forces.
Civil security will continue to rely on territorial resources, close to
the populations they serve, of 250,000 fire officers, 300,000 first-aid


-----

personnel, relying on national resources: military civil security formations (1,500 soldiers), aircraft and helicopters and logistic intervention
units (shelter, flooding, water treatment, etc.).
A large part of the country’s capabilities will rely on the mobilisation of local authority resources to meet stated national security objectives. This mobilisation should be planned and carried out in consultation with the local authorities.

###### CUSTOMS

The Customs service forms part of the State’s rapid reaction force
on national territory in the event of major crisis, acting to tighten
border controls or reinforce mobile means of surveillance.
Over the next fifteen years, the Customs service will develop a
system for monitoring vehicles under surveillance, thanks to automatic
number plate recognition equipment currently being developed in
partnership by the Gendarmerie and the police.
The service will augment its capabilities to detect products
involved in proliferation by applying, nationwide, new non-invasive
inspection technology to the screening of freight, including containers.
It will also develop new risk assessment models, using data on sea
and air passengers and freight made available by mandatory prearrival screening before entering French territory.
It will put forward a legal mechanism to link anti-fraud files held
by different government departments, as a means of extending its
detection capabilities.


-----

-----

##### IV

### A ROADMAP FOR CHANGE


-----

-----

CHAPTER 14

###### PROFESSIONALS SERVING THE NATION

National Security depends on the men and women who have
chosen to serve their country and their fellow citizens. Their commitment deserves to be recognised and respected.
France has a vibrant military tradition. Serving in the armed forces
continues to be an attractive option. For the armed forces, the process
of professionalisation embarked upon ten years ago has represented a
modernisation without equivalent in government administration. The
change has undoubtedly proved to be a success, earning national and
international recognition for France’s armed forces. The professional
army has effected the transformation of its organisation and culture
without looking back. It has successfully integrated women soldiers. It
has coped unflinchingly with the painful restructuring and force
reduction measures that followed on from this reform[1]. With a strong
sense of its usefulness to society, it wholeheartedly carries out the missions assigned to it. It is justifiably proud of the high level of competency within its ranks. This success story must be underlined and professionalisation must now be deep rooted in our military and our
society.
The professionalism of the police and Gendarmerie is widely recognised. Both forces have acquired more modern resources since the
implementation of the first Domestic Security Bill. Civil servants and
public officials playing their part in domestic security, in the prefectures, in civil security, in hospitals or in the Customs service, or over
1. 370 closures and 250 base or unit transfers or reorganisations, affecting
45,600 military and 23,000 civilian personnel, in particular the dissolution of
around one hundred regiments. In contrast, 180,000 soldiers have been
recruited over the period.


-----

seas in the diplomatic and consular services, are competent and dedicated to public service. France also has an extensive network of
volunteers who can be called upon to serve national causes, in terms of
solidarity or security.
Nonetheless, today there are a number of challenges to be met.
Firstly, there is the challenge of adaptation. The redefinition of our
strategy is accompanied, as we have just seen (Part III), by a redefinition of the operational contracts assigned to the armed forces. At the
same time, the general review of public policies has highlighted the
need for an in-depth restructuring of the general administration of the
Ministry of Defence and the structure of support to the armed forces
on national territory. When the process of professionalisation came to
an end, the geographic reorganisation of the armed forces was still
incomplete. Military bases are scattered too widely, causing duplication, separations between armed forces and excess costs that cannot be
justified in military or security terms. We must take into account the
new geography of our force commitments and undertake the necessary
regroupings that will best serve our strategic objectives and the operational quality of our forces. These restructurings will result in significant reductions in personnel.
Second is the challenge of cooperation. National Security, in which
domestic and external security are closely associated, calls for closer
cooperation between civil and military forces, ministries and the State
and other bodies concerned. The purposes of national security must be
clear to all those engaged in its service. It involves no confusion of
roles or of professional identities, but better cooperation and pooling
of efforts between all the actors concerned, military, civil, police and
gendarmes, fire officers, first-aid personnel. All must feel that they are
serving common goals, each within the structure in which he or she
has elected to serve.
Third is the challenge of crisis preparedness and resilience. Neither
the authorities nor society are adequately prepared to face major
crises. The recruitment, training and readiness of the civil servants
concerned must be improved.
Finally, there is the challenge of attractiveness. The defence and
security professions must continue to be built on powerful values: dedication, altruism, a sense of community and a spirit of self-sacrifice. As
labour becomes scarcer, the armed forces and the civil security or
domestic security forces will remain attractive only if they adopt a
modern approach to recruitment, offering attractive professional,
social and personal prospects.


-----

##### A professional army geared to the new balance of its missions

The day to day task of protecting national territory and fulfilling
France’s international security responsibilities falls on the army. Of
those serving in the armed forces, some are following a calling and
others simply opting for a career that appeals to them. Whatever the
reasons, they accept the unique constraints that military life imposes
upon them. Military personnel are not civilians wearing uniform. They
take on and live up to the demands of a military career and its responsibilities, and they want their choices to be recognised and respected.
The motivation of defence personnel will continue to rest on a sense of
belonging to a community with prospects for the future and shared
values.

###### THE CHALLENGE OF RESTRUCTURING

The foremost challenge for the armed forces over the next few
years is to succeed in the restructuring of their support and administration functions, and in reducing the force structure.
_This adaptation must follow clear principles._
The restructuring will focus as a matter of priority on the support
and administrative functions, which are frequently redundant, compartmentalised and inappropriate to the commitment of forces. The
operational capabilities of our armed forces must be preserved and
modernised to the maximum. The emphasis on operational missions
_and the resulting constraints should be the primary guide, ahead of any_
_other consideration, when adapting our defence structures and resources_
_on French soil and overseas._
Military personnel should concentrate on operational missions,
civil personnel on administrative and support tasks, where these are
not outsourced. Other core concerns will be preserving competencies
within the professional army, as will the ability to cope with sudden
changes of context and to ramp up efforts.
What makes these objectives all the more essential is that the profession of arms is, more than any other, subject to rapid turnover, in
contrast with the lengthy careers common in the civil service and the
_Gendarmerie. Recruitment of young soldiers will therefore need to be_
_maintained at a high level to guarantee that the professional army is_
combat-worthy and geared to its missions. A priority effort will need to
be devoted to recruitment, retention and redeployment of personnel.


-----

The link between short-service, long-service or contract service
careers, unique to the armed forces, must be preserved. Preference will
continue to be given to contract service over career employment.
The current military pensions scheme encourages recruitment, the
retention of those who enlist and acceptance of departures and redeployment. It is more than a pension scheme in the strict sense; for military personnel, more than for any other category, it acts as a form of
deferred remuneration, designed to ease the transition to a second
career and infuse new blood into operational forces. This system therefore meets the needs of the professional army and should be retained
on that basis.
The policy of personnel redeployment, particularly towards the private sector, will be an absolutely crucial factor in the phase now commencing. This effort implies better accreditation of the professional
skills acquired by military personnel. Agreements with companies and
with training and integration bodies will be set up. Service outsourcing
contracts, which are encouraged as a means of supporting redeployment and the restructuring of the defence system, may be linked to
recruitment of military personnel leaving the forces, with proper
respect for ethical codes of practice and current legislation.
Redeployment to the civil service and to uniformed public service
corps will be reinforced. This policy will also enable the Government
and other public communities to benefit from the services of qualified,
competent personnel in whom a considerable training investment has
been made.
Provisions for integrating military personnel into the civil service
will be developed, for example by increasing recruitment under the
secondment-integration scheme provided for in article 4139-2 of the
general regulations for military personnel and under the reserved
occupations scheme.
A social and professional support structure will be set up, learning
the lessons of past experience. Some of the measures will be designed
to facilitate and compensate the geographic and professional mobility
of civil personnel and will include a special scheme for State workers
not covered by the measures aimed at civil servants. A second set of
measures will support incentives for the redeployment of military and
civil personnel in the form of departure payments and grants, particularly to pursue personal projects. Assistance with home-buying and
employment opportunities for spouses will also be reinforced.
Military personnel will eventually benefit from the positive effects
of geographical concentration on their living conditions and those of
their families: imposing fewer requirements for geographical mobility,
promoting professional mobility, for civil personnel as well, making it
easier for spouses to find employment and for military personnel to


-----

buy a home. All these issues are matters of great sensitivity, as highlighted time and time again by the High Level Committee on the
conditions of military personnel.
Better dialogue and consultation with all personnel categories will
be more necessary than ever.
As regards civil personnel, the social dialogue charter between
the Ministry of Defence administration and employee representatives guarantees greater recognition of union rights by employers
and the involvement of trades union organisations at an early stage
in discussions.
As far as military personnel are concerned, their missions and service require an availability and acceptance of constraints that cannot
readily be reconciled with the enjoyment of union rights. The various
mechanisms for local consultation or redress must, on the other hand,
be employed and strengthened. Full use must be made of local consultation mechanisms such as the participatory unit commissions. The
circulation of information, dialogue between the representatives of the
different categories of military personnel and the transparency of
decision-making processes must be guaranteed at all levels.
The Military High Council and the military councils of each service
will have their powers augmented. Members will be allowed the time
and freedom necessary to perform their tasks and will receive appropriate training. The councils will have the power to propose items
within their field of competence for inclusion on the agenda.

###### ADAPTATION TO MISSIONS

The combat-readiness of our professional soldiers will continue to
be one of the keys to France’s security. They must be capable of facing
up to danger, to the brutality of the threat, to the sudden upsurge in
violence and stress. In such situations, the psychological pressure can
only be surmounted thanks to a combination of professional capability
and high morale forged in training and in the community life of units,
teams and squadrons. Military service also, and increasingly, means
that soldiers must be prepared for frequent absences from country,
family and loved ones, in order to go into combat or to assist those in
combat, to provide protection for a humanitarian action or to help
settle a crisis peacefully. They are required to enter hostile or unstable
environments, to engage in dialogue and act in concert with armed
forces from other countries and other backgrounds, speaking other
languages. Repeated absences place great pressure on soldiers and
their families, pressure which may impact negatively on personnel
retention.


-----

Moreover, in the years to come the armed forces will need to be
better prepared to prevent attacks of a new kind on national territory,
to secure the most critical installations, to assist populations in unforeseen and perhaps extreme circumstances. Young recruits will need to
be familiar with the latest technology, because fighting soldiers will
operate in environments transformed by the tools that will be available
to them, while still being required to call on the same physical and
psychological resources as their predecessors. Military personnel will
thus need to become familiar with all the tools of information warfare,
while remaining fit for physical engagement in the field.
The forces will need to be trained to operate in joint, coalition and
European environments, and to demonstrate the versatility that is one
of the keys to the choice of how to organise and equip our armed
forces.
It is therefore of the utmost importance that they should receive
quality training. Historical and ethical issues will take on all the more
importance as their speed of reaction and ability to adapt will be
increasingly called into play.
The burdens and constraints of military life, readily accepted in
the early years of a career, frequently come to weigh to heavily on married and social life. Housing problems and the impact of military
demands on family life are potential causes of disaffection. There must
therefore be provision for fair pay in recognition of the special
demands of certain professions, payable to those actually subject to
those demands.

**Officers**

Command and staff tasks will continue to evolve. The primary mission for officers will always be to command their soldiers in combat
and to prepare them for combat. They will also be called upon, however, to adapt the military corps to the new contexts of deployment
described in this document, in Metropolitan France, in the DOM-COM
or in the course of commitments abroad.
A particular feature of the officer’s career is that it is explicitly
selective, notably comprising a period of military education in midcareer. The advantage of such a system is that it provides the State
with a high-level staff corps, combining the advantages of operational
experience acquired early in their career with selection by competitive
examination. This should be encouraged and strengthened.
In order to adapt—in accordance with their traditions—to highly
fluid circumstances on national territory or in theatres of operations,
officers will need to be selected with care and receive regular training,


-----

while ensuring that training periods do not disrupt the continuity of
their operational responsibilities.
There will be a growing need for officers to perform management
and conceptual functions in joint and international posts. Officers will
more than ever need to rely on a culture of joint operations, European
and international experience, awareness of the approach adopted by
the main civil interlocutors, heads of government departments, major
operators and actors in economic or social life, and an in-depth knowledge of the legal context of their profession. Regular contact with other
European and NATO officers at various stages in their career and
training, plus the ability to speak foreign languages (English in particular), are now indispensable.
More joint training programmes should be set up for officers from
the armed forces, armament corps and service corps, to develop a
shared culture and enhance cohesion. The Higher Institute for
National Defence (Institut des Hautes Etudes de Défense Nationale,
IHEDN) and the Centre for Higher Armament Studies (Centre des
Hautes Etudes de l’Armement, CHEAr) will be merged in pursuit of
this logic (see Chapter 18). By the same principle, the number of
officers from the armament corps and services corps attending the
Joint Forces Staff College will be increased, as will exchanges of personnel between the main Ministry of Defence departments (armed
forces, DGA defence procurement agency, SGA secretariat-general for
administration).
Rates of pay will need to take greater account of the increased
responsibilities taken on by officers, offer higher rewards for levels of
qualification, compensate families more generously for the effects of
mobility and, finally, offer better rewards to personnel who are called
upon at times to occupy extremely demanding positions in the course
of their career as officers.
The command function must be assumed in all its dimensions:
authority, the ability to listen and respect for all—subordinates, noncommissioned officers (NCOs), private soldiers, and civilians.

**Non-commissioned officers**

As the linchpins between conception and execution, noncommissioned officers are central to the military institution. They
form a corps distinguished by a great variety of specialisations, military and armed forces cultures, types of activities and lifestyles within
the formations in which they serve.
The new pay scale will eventually reflect their increased responsibilities in increased pay. It should mark more clearly the move from
the rank of private to that of NCO, in recognition of the qualification,


-----

technical skills and authority required. A number of problems are still
to be solved, however:
— access to higher ranks, which requires a long, costly process of
qualification, or to the officer corps;
— maintaining the attractiveness of careers in order to retain the
skills of highly experienced NCOs, particularly in technical functions;
— the need for appropriate professional redeployment for a number of NCOs in physically and psychologically demanding jobs.
— A number of levers may be employed for this purpose:
— NCOs must be refocused on operational professions. Greater
use of technical or administrative civil servants or external providers
for other missions must be encouraged;
— tasks must be better distributed between NCOs at the beginning
of their career and more senior NCOs who can take on broader
responsibilities;
— bridges must be organised for a reasonable number of NCOs to
allow for the transition from certain physically demanding initial specialities to functions more closely aligned with operational support.
The training system must have the flexibility to support transitions of
this kind.

**Private soldiers**

The professionalisation of the armed forces has resulted in significant recruitment of privates. Demographic projections to 2020 suggest
that armed forces recruitment needs will remain high. The expected
competition on the labour market, however, coupled with the rapid
disenchantment that certain aspects of the profession may engender,
could undermine the concept of the professional army in France.
Significant efforts will have to be made to retain this category of
personnel.
Pay levels will be guaranteed by the new pay scales, an important
factor in attracting recruits, particularly for qualified posts. The most
sensitive questions when it comes to recruitment and retention, however, are the condition and availability of equipment, including even
minor items of everyday kit. It is here that we find some of the most
common causes of dissatisfaction among privates. The gap between
the level of the missions assigned to them and the equipment issued to
them is wide enough to be discouraging. Henceforth, the quality of our
armed forces will depend to a very great extent on the progress made
in this area, which is often sacrificed to financial constraints.
The nature of the job and the consideration that goes with it are
key to retention of young recruits. Private soldiers expect to hold
action jobs within an organisation that they hope will treat them as


-----

professionals with recognised technical and human skills. Initial career
guidance on recruitment needs to be improved and greater consideration given to expectations within a professional career, in order to
recognise their progress and increase their chances of promotion. Promotion to the rank of NCO will continue to be a major motivation.
Particular attention will need to be paid to experience and
seniority when training NCOs and corporals. There will be an option
allowing police and Gendarmerie officers reaching the end of longservice contracts to join the armed forces, to increase the fluidity of
human resources in professions contributing to national security. This
will first require the setting up of a system for accreditation of professional competencies.

**Civilian defence personnel**

Civilian personnel are a component in their own right of a professionalised defence force. Although not subject by their status to the
same obligations as their military colleagues, they also display remarkable commitment and competence. Their successful integration into
units in support of operational military personnel is fundamental, as
examples from the armed forces of other countries have shown. Previous expansion of the civilian component has marked time in recent
years, however, at around 19% of total armed forces personnel.
Efforts made to integrate civilian personnel must be continued. It
is important for civilian personnel to be more closely associated with
the operational challenges faced by the bodies and units in which they
serve. Greater involvement increases their effectiveness. Indeed, henceforth they must now play a bigger role in support functions, as military
personnel are concentrated on operational tasks.
The distinction between jobs that allow overseas service and those
that do not will be abolished. The participation of civilian personnel in
external operations, on a voluntary basis, will be encouraged, particularly within the framework of civil-military operations or civilian operations, on missions involving stabilisation or reconstruction of a
former combat zone.

**Reservists**

Members of the operational reserve have the status of military personnel performing military duties and are members of the professional
army.
Professionalisation and reductions in the armed forces means that
it is more important than ever to move up a level in forming a reserve,
smaller in number if necessary but more specialised, better trained


-----

and better integrated into the military structure. The significant
increase in the use of forces and the needs regularly expressed in certain areas of specialisation will call for significant effort in the years
ahead. Perhaps the best reason for doing so is that investment in the
reserve is a powerful statement of the contribution that citizens can
make to National Security.
Improvements are urgently needed here. The operational reserve
must definitively move away from the image of the conscript army
reserve. The policy governing reserves, their recruitment, management
and missions, must adapt to the nature of the operations the armed
forces will be called upon to perform, now and in the future.
As matters stand, the reserve pool created by conscription has now
dried up. As a result, it is essential to intensify efforts directed at civil
society, which is where the future of operational reserves now largely
lies. When recruiting, a distinction will have to be made between
former active military personnel, required to serve for five years after
the end of their enlistment, and reservists from civil society who must
take deliberate steps to join. It is the latter group that will be a priority
target for information and recruitment drives.
The armed forces will encourage the use of reservists acting either
in support of active units or within units set up on French soil for the
purposes of protection or, where possible, on external operations. The
use of reservists in functions where their specialist expertise can be
placed at the disposal of a high level command will be encouraged.
The operational reserve represents a major advantage for future security when deployed in crisis management agencies, centrally or in the
defence and security zones, in the Gendarmerie or in units, replacing
those deployed on overseas operations. The success enjoyed by the
Gendarmerie reserve must be built on and put to good use in serving
National Security, especially in times of crisis.
A major recruitment drive will be needed, particularly in civil and
military education centres of excellence. Incentive measures to attract
senior executives in the civil sector will also be needed to reinforce the
reserve’s high level of capability.
Despite its recent overhaul, the current reserve system appears to
be too rigid and drop-out rates are too high. The aim should be to have
reservists able to commit not to 5 days a year, as at present, but to at
least 30 days a year and in certain cases up to 200 days.
Recruitment to the reserve should also be encouraged, by making
legal and practical provisions for the resulting interruptions to professional careers. These measures concern not only the reservists, but also
their employers and society as a whole. In any event, being a member
of the reserve should not result in any loss of income for reservists.


-----

Should reservist pay be less than the reservist’s professional income, a
top-up payment should be provided for.
Moreover, certain cultural stumbling-blocks in our society need to
be overcome. Too many reservists conceal their status from their
employer, whether in the public or private sector. It is unacceptable
that serving one’s country should be something to be concealed. The
role of reservists should be valued and made much more acceptable to
employers and government departments.
In the same spirit, employers should not suffer any disproportionate financial prejudice as a result of reservists’ commitments.
There should be partnerships between companies or government and
the defence forces to facilitate and value reservists’ commitment.
Because of the diversity of needs, it will eventually be necessary to
set up an inter-ministerial structure providing operational reinforcement for crisis management, alongside the professional operational
reserves. The structure, which will offer a training programme
common to several government departments, will promote recruitment
and avoid duplication of efforts.

##### National security human resources

###### DEVELOPING INTER-MINISTERIAL COOPERATION
ON HUMAN RESOURCES

Policy co-ordination will be improved by creating a network
linking those responsible for policies on recruitment, training, qualifications, careers, retention and redeployment. The network should take
an overarching view and promote joint, concerted and programmed
approaches.
Given the recruitment needs of National Security and the high
level of qualifications required, a close partnership with the Ministry
of Education should result in a vocational training programme for the
security professions, as the first step towards a formal professional
development path. It will provide a clearer vision of professional
opportunities and promote the career progression of interested parties.
Careers information policies must become more consistent and
serve to direct candidates into the channels that best suit their preferences and skills. The Ministry of Defence will continue setting up centralised vacancy clearing houses, which will also serve as one-stop
shops for private and public enterprises seeking to recruit qualified
former military personnel. There will be a centre for each region, and
the centres may also provide services for families and for associations.


-----

Furthermore, given the close similarities in certain competencies
required in both the defence and security professions, every encouragement will be given to the pooling of training. This practice already
exists for helicopter pilots, and could be extended to professions such
as intelligence and civil security, particular as regards the major needs
identified in anti-CRBN measures, bomb disposal and mine clearance.
Joint management of reserves under the authority of different ministries will be introduced to provide a co-ordinated response to the
needs associated with acute crises on national territory. Because of the
number of overlapping sectors involved (armed forces, Gendarmerie,
police, health, civil security), there is a danger of double-counting of
certain individuals, which creates risks when their skills are in short
supply (specialists, medical personnel, etc.). Inter-ministerial consultation and cooperation is the only way to overcome this inconvenience,
and nationwide co-ordination at the level of defence and security zone
Prefects.

###### STRENGTHENING CRISIS MANAGEMENT
PREPAREDNESS

Crisis management preparedness implies that the State, the civil
service and the public hospital system are assured of the permanent
availability of agents ready—within an appropriate legal framework—
to perform their tasks in exceptional circumstances. Three conditions
must be met:
1) Military personnel and category A and B agents of the three services must be introduced to questions of national security from the
earliest stages in their training, which must explain the overall security
and defence issues and the roles allocated to the various institutions
called upon to deal with them.
2) The process of refocusing military personnel and uniformed
public servants on their operational professions must be continued
and extended. If the demands for discipline and neutrality, on the one
hand, and the constraints and impositions on the other, pay offered in
compensation for the constraints imposed by military life should only
apply to those who are indeed subject to specific constraints in their
everyday work.
3) Finally, systematic efforts should be made to promote cohesion
between administrative executives, police officers and military personnel. In the event of a crisis, the tasks which fall to them will inevitable converge. As yet, however, there is no sufficiently clear and
shared vision of the risks that threaten the life of the nation, or of the
overall policy the State is pursuing in order to prevent and to respond


-----

to them. Many fields vital to national security—intelligence, the use of
economic data, or the protection and confidentiality of sensitive data—
are substantially underestimated. Over the next fifteen years, ignorance of military defence issues at executive level will grow unless
executive officers destined for the highest ranks of the civil service and
police forces are made aware of what is at stake.
There should be an increase in dialogue and exchanges likely to
_reinforce cohesion between the military and the senior civil service. Man-_
_datory mobility outside their initial service arm will be introduced for_
_commissioned officers identified as potential high-flyers. This mobility_
—a two-year period, as is the case for civil servants—must be completed between graduation from the Joint Staff College and promotion
to the rank of general officer, and will generally be a condition for
such promotion.
At the same time, all bodies providing higher education for senior
civil servants and magistrates—particularly the _Ecole_ _Nationale_
_d’Administration, Ecole Nationale Supérieure de la Police and Ecole_
_Nationale de la Magistrature—will include a training module on ques-_
tions of strategy and National Security designed to familiarise students
with the key defence and security issues.
In order to respond effectively to a crisis, the State must be able to
count on all the necessary personnel being rapidly available. The general status of the armed forces meets this need, since it sets out the
principles of commitment and availability arising from the missions
entrusted to the armed forces in times of peace and of war. The special
status of the corps of prefects, the police, but also the DGSE or the
prison service, also places their personnel under specific constraints.
There are no plans to increase these statutory constraints. The proce_dure for calling on civilian public servants on general status, or on pri-_
_vate companies working in security-related fields, needs to be reconsid-_
_ered, however._
The “defence service” is the framework that was intended to ensure
continuity of public action and of companies contributing to the
defence, security and integrity of the territory and the population, in
the event of a crisis. The system was set up in the 1950s and now, in
its current form, suffers from major shortcomings. Although updated
in 1999, it is not implemented. Its legal provisions tie it to situations
(such as mobilisation) that have now become improbable. Finally, it
imposes no obligations as regards training or preparedness.
The “defence service” will be replaced by a “national security ser_vice”. It will be called into play should a state of emergency be_
declared.


-----

###### THE INTELLIGENCE PROFESSIONS

The importance placed on intelligence in the national security
strategy calls for a particularly ambitious human resources policy.
Reorganisation and investment must go hand in hand with the introduction of training and career pathways, and with the pooling of education and training. Intelligence must be seen as a specialisation in its
own right. This means being able to recruit not only from specialist or
technical sectors of the civil service, but also from the elite postgraduate schools (Grandes Ecoles) and universities. While these sectors
already exist, in varying degrees, in the armed forces, they are only in
their infancy in the police and Gendarmerie. They will need to be
developed. An “intelligence” specialisation will be created in the
training schools for the cadres of these two forces.
Financial and legal provision will need to be made for the recruitment of contract employees, in particular to facilitate inter-service
mobility for careers in intelligence. Specific recruitment and career
development policies will be introduced for specialists with the
scarcest skills.
Common career management standards for the intelligence professions will be laid down, particularly with regard to recruitment, and
core curricula for initial and ongoing training will be developed.
Lastly, the creation of an intelligence academy (see Chapter 8) will
contribute to a better intermingling of the cultures specific to each service, and to better mutual knowledge.

##### European and international outlook

Given that our forces will to a very great extent be called upon to
serve within a multinational framework, and in particular a European
or Alliance framework, greater attention will need to be paid to introducing a European and international component into training and
career development for military and civil defence and security
personnel.
Proposals made by France for the European Union to play a
greater role in defence and security make this movement necessary,
particularly in the field of training. We must therefore seek to reinforce European training policy, which will be directed towards the cre_ation of a common European defence and security space. If our partners_
are in agreement, the project will be carried out under the auspices of
the European Security and Defence College (ESDC), which will be allo

-----

cated increased and permanent resources, making the college a standard point of passage in professional military careers.
If this European space is to be workable, the conditions governing
_the movement and stationing of European military personnel on Euro-_
pean Union territory will need to be simplified.
The European space will eventually be reflected in:
— systematic inclusion of European modules in all initial and
ongoing training programmes. This is a priority with high value added
in the operational field, since forces that have trained together will be
more effective when serving together. It will also help to prompt partnership reflexes in the higher administrative and military echelons;
— more technical training common to several European countries,
particularly training in the use of jointly designed and procured equipment. Current illustrations of this principle in action are the FrancoGerman training school for Tiger helicopters, or the European combat
aircraft pilots project;
— shared training in doctrine and force commitment concepts.
Insofar as the European Union conducts military operations, it would
seem logical to engage in its own examination and analysis of military
strategy and action in the course of operations. Regular exchanges of
experience feedback between partners returning from theatres of operations should be made systematic.


-----

-----

CHAPTER 15

###### GOVERNMENT REORGANISATION

The organisation of government authorities established by the
ordinance of 7 January 1959 and including the general organisation of
defence, as codified in the Defence Code, is the product of a historical
and strategic context very different from that of today. It no longer
meets the demands of our times. The missions it assigns to the various
actors in national security, and to ministries in particular, now bear
very little relation to what their role must be today. In addition, the
current organisation no longer adequately involves parliamentarians.
The national security strategy therefore requires that government
authorities to be reorganised in order to meet their priorities more
effectively. This reorganisation will be achieved, within a constitutional framework that has itself been overhauled, by rewriting the
Defence Code and adapting the future Domestic Security Code.

##### A new organisation at the highest level of the State

###### THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
AND THE DEFENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

By virtue of article 15 of the Constitution, the President is the head
of the armed forces: as such, he “chairs the national defence councils
and higher committees” and has sole responsibility for giving the order
to commit France’s nuclear forces (art. R* 1411-1 and following of the
Defence Code). The President is also, by virtue of article 5 of the
Constitution, the “guarantor of national independence, the integrity of


-----

national territory and the fulfilment of treaties”. It is his responsibility
to ensure the “proper functioning of the Government and the continuity of the State”. On this basis, he may invoke the extraordinary
powers he holds by virtue of article 16. He also chairs the Nuclear
Policy Council created, in its present form, by decree of 21 April 2008.
These provisions, supported by unbroken institutional practice, place
an eminent responsibility upon the President in the entire field of
national security. He must have the means to assume that responsibility in full.
The first of these means is the chairmanship of the councils
referred to in article 15 of the Constitution by the generic term
“national defence councils and higher committees”. It is within the
Defence Council, without prejudice to the powers of the Council of
Ministers, that “decisions regarding the general management of
defence” are made. Established practice under the Fifth Republic and
the implementation of the 1959 ordinance have also developed the use
of select committees, meeting in the event of crisis or a decision to
commit French forces. Lastly, a decree of 15 May 2002 created a
Domestic Security Council.
As a consequence of a strategy in which national security is the
federating and mobilising objective of government action, a Defence
and National Security Council (Conseil de Défense et de Sécurité
Nationale, CDSN) will be set up. Its remit will cover all the questions
and public policies relating to the fields of defence and national security for which the President is responsible under the terms of the
Constitution.
The State will thus be provided with a body at the highest level in
which to address all aspects of issues such as military programming,
the policy of deterrence, the programming of domestic security as it
relates to national security, the fight against terrorism or the planning
of responses to major crises. In addition to the President and the
Prime Minister, the council will be composed of the Ministers of
Foreign Affairs, Interior, Defence, Economy and Budget. Other ministers may attend as necessary; the Minister of Justice, for example,
concerning the fight against terrorism, or the Minister of Health with
regard to the prevention of health crises.
The Defence and National Security Council may meet in a variety
of different formats, and in particular as a select council on issues
relating to foreign operations, or on certain issues regarding nuclear
deterrence. It will also include the National Intelligence Council (see
Chapter 8) and its offshoot, the Intelligence Select Committee. The
decree of 15 May 2002 relating to the Domestic Security Council will
be abrogated. Issues relating to the day to day security of goods and


-----

property will be dealt with in different and specific forums, chaired by
the President or Prime Minister as appropriate.
The establishment of this council, with far-reaching powers, does
not in itself prefigure any major alteration in the workings of the
Defence Council on questions of strategy and military assets. It does,
however, allow for these questions to be raised within a framework
geared to the new kinds of risks and crises of today and will give the
President and the Prime Minister an overall view of the objectives and
constraints of national security, by overcoming the internal partitions
between the State and the government departments.
Such an institution cannot, in isolation, guarantee the new effectiveness that needs to be brought to the decision-making process, however. The President and the Prime Minister must also have at their disposal, at the right time, a diversity of assessments and insights from a
range of sources, both internal and external to the administration. The
various dimensions of political, financial, operational and international decisions must be subject to debate, and be presented in the
form of open choices for final decision.
With this end in view, the President and the Prime Minister will be
presented with independent expert analyses as part of an Advisory
Board for Defence and National Security (Conseil Consultatif sur la
Défense et la Sécurité Nationale, CCDSN) composed of independent
experts appointed by the President.
The Secretariat-General for National Defence (Secrétariat Général
de la Défense Nationale, SGDN) will become the General Secretariat
for Defence and National Security (Secrétariat Général de la Défense
et de la Sécurité Nationale, SGDSN) under the authority of the Prime
Minister and working in close association with the Presidency of the
Republic. The General Secretariat will be responsible for preparing
and following up decisions taken by the Defence and National Security
Council, and will guarantee the conditions for inter-ministerial dialogue and the expression, and presentation to the Head of State and to
the Prime Minister, of points of view that may be contradictory.

###### THE PRIME MINISTER IN CHARGE
OF GOVERNMENT ACTION

Pursuing the role allotted to him by uninterrupted institutional
practice since the origins of the Fifth Republic, the Prime Minister will
oversee the implementation of all decisions taken in the Defence and
National Security Council.
As the head of government responsible, under article 20 of the
Constitution, for the administration and the armed forces, the Prime


-----

Minister is responsible to parliament (with the ministers concerned)
for the various policies contributing to national security: defence,
domestic security and civil security, economic security, foreign policy,
etc.
The Prime Minister has a duty to guarantee the consistency of governmental action across the entire field of national security; such
consistency is essential to the effectiveness of gouvernemental action,
whether it be in the matter of investment decisions, crisis management, for which he provides strategic steering in consultation with the
President, industrial policy or information systems security.
He will be assisted in the exercise of these powers by the General
Secretariat for Defence and National Security, which will co-ordinate
preparations and ensure the implementation of measures in support
of the national security strategy, such as preparedness for major
crises.

##### A stronger role for Parliament

The involvement of Parliament in the national security strategy is
one of the keys to winning the nation’s support for this strategy. It is
essential in nurturing a sense of cohesion between the nation and
those who serve it. France will join the ranks of the great democracies
by reinforcing the role of its parliamentary assemblies, in terms of
information and power of proposal, as well as of decision and oversight in the whole field of national security.
Firstly, it is proposed that the intervention of our armed forces
abroad should be subject to a notification and authorisation procedure
written into the Constitution. This constitutes a radical innovation.
Parliament will be informed of the nature and objectives of interventions abroad within a maximum of three days following deployment of
forces in the theatre of operations. This information phase will be followed by a debate, but no vote. On the other hand, any extension of
the intervention beyond a period of no less than four months must be
authorised by a vote in parliament.
Whenever possible, as in the case of peace-keeping operations, for
example, which are generally prepared over a period of months, and
excluding emergencies or legitimate defence, Parliament will be
informed prior to units being deployed on the ground. Beyond their
authorisation by Parliament, interventions will be examined, where
appropriate, at the time of voting the initial budget bills, when examining the proposed provision for external operations. Respecting the
principle of the separation of executive and legislative powers, the


-----

conditions and operational terms governing the commitment of
French forces will remain the sole prerogative of the Head of State and
of Government.
Secondly, Parliament’s role as a legislator will be strengthened.
The practice of military programme bills and domestic security programme bills, in conjunction with a report setting out the main thrust
of defence and domestic security policies, will be maintained.
In more general terms, parliamentarians will be associated more
closely with the definition of national security strategy and the policy
orientations associated with it, particularly through orientation
debates. Parliament will be consulted when the White Paper on
defence and national security is updated prior to each new programme
bill.
Parliament will be informed of bilateral defence agreements
between France and foreign partners when these may lead to the
country’s defence capabilities being committed on behalf of the security of other States. Parliament will also authorise the ratification or
approval of these agreements when the Constitution so provides.
Finally, Parliament greater information will be provided to. The
creation of a Parliamentary Intelligence Delegation, under the 9 October
2007 Act, already provides parliamentarians with information on intelligence activities, without compromising confidentiality, particularly
as regards the terrorist threat (see Chapter 8). Parliament will also be
kept regularly informed on arms export policy by the Prime Minister
and by the Minister of Defence.

##### Clarification of ministerial responsibilities and better governance

Ministers are responsible for the contribution to national security
made by the public policies for which they are responsible. They rely
in particular on a senior defence and security official to advise them
on all questions relating to defence and national security.

###### MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

The Minister of Defence is responsible within the Government for
defence policy for which he is accountable to Parliament, along with
the Prime Minister.
The Minister is responsible for the preparation and employment of
the forces decided by the President and also for: the quality of foreign


-----

and military intelligence, prospective studies and crisis anticipation
and monitoring; matching defence needs and armed forces capabilities; matching ministry action to the objectives of national security,
foreign policy, State modernisation policy and the Government’s
public finances policy; industrial and social policy as it pertains to the
defence sector.
Clarification of responsibilities within the Ministry means
amending the decrees governing its organisation. The priority placed
on armed forces’ operational needs will be reaffirmed. The Chief of the
Defence Staff will continue as both commanding officer of all military
operations, under the authority of the President and the Government,
subject to the provisions specific to deterrence, and as military advisor
to the government. Within the framework of the directives handed
down by the Minister, the Chief of Defence Staff will continue to be
responsible for preparing military programming and organising international military relations. His authority over the service Chiefs of
Staff will be reinforced.
Given the recurrent difficulties encountered with Ministry investments, the conditions for the launch and conduct of operations will be
modified. Two principal objectives will be pursued: greater awareness
of the total costs of investments, and better organisation of the dialogue with the Ministry of the Budget.
For each investment envisaged (arms, operational serviceability,
infrastructure, information systems, upstream research), appraisal
prior to the decision to launch will include an examination of all the
financial and economic information relating to the objective in questions, in addition to an evaluation of the operational needs to be met.
The Ministerial Committee on Defence Investments, which is chaired
by the Minister with the Secretary General for the Administration
acting as the secretariat, will systematically consider: whether the
operational need is met, the risk management strategy, the provisional
cost of procurement, total life-cycle cost, overall financial feasibility,
the most appropriate procurement strategy (asset acquisition, partnership or service contract, etc.), the support policy and the equipment’s
export potential.
Consultation with the Minister of the Budget will be improved.
Work on this White Paper has prompted an unprecedented exchange
of information and documentation between the Ministries, including
all the financial data on arms programmes. This policy must be
continued and expanded. As part of the overall reform of ministerial
budgeting and accounting controls, a Finance Committee will be
chaired by the Secretary General for the Administration or by the
Director of Financial Affairs, and will include the heads of Defence
Ministry programmes, as understood by the constitutionnal by law on


-----

budget Acts (LOLF), plus a representative from the Ministry of the
Budget. This committee will scrutinise the financial sustainability of
programming and enable the Ministry of the Budget to monitor the
Ministry of Defence’s investment policy on a more regular basis.
The Ministry’s range of economic framing, forecasting and monitoring tools will be extended, using the expertise of the Financial Affairs
Directorate. An internal audit function will be introduced to ensure that
financial information produced is transparent, demonstrably accurate
and shared: it will rely primarily on the armed forces controller
(Contrôle general des armies). Lastly, the Secretary General for the
Administration will steer all the Ministry’s joint policies (finance, human
resources, legal affairs, etc.). The Ministry’s financial function will be
reinforced and will operate on behalf of the Ministry as a whole.
The means of access to information, analysis, arbitrage and control
available to the Minister will be reinforced, to provide diversified and
reliable assessments in the strategic, technical, operational and financial fields. The Ministry’s strategic analysis and prospective study capabilities will be enhanced and placed under the sole direction of the
Strategic Affairs Directorate. This directorate will give momentum and
overall consistency to all the prospective work carried out by the
Ministry, by the directorate itself, by the Chief of Defence Staff, any by
all agencies under the authority of the Secretary General for the
Administration. The directorate will also have access to all assessments
and work produced by the intelligence directorates under Ministry of
Defence authority.
Finally, the reorganisation will also regroup the entire central
administration, currently dispersed, in a leaner format at a single site
in Paris.

###### THE MINISTRY OF THE INTERIOR

The Minister of the Interior is responsible for the security of life
and property on French soil. He is responsible for those domestic security and civil security policies that contribute to national security.
The Minister of the Interior has particular responsibility for coordinating crisis management on French soil and domestic intelligence.
He is supported in this task by the department and defence zone prefects who, under article 72 of the Constitution, are the representatives
of each member of the government and are responsible for national
interests, administrative oversight and compliance with the laws.
The organisation and governance of the Ministry of the Interior
will evolve in a number of directions to ensure that the priorities of the
national security strategy are fully taken into account.


-----

The centralisation of all domestic security resources under the
authority of the Minister of the Interior will be completed following
the full integration of the Gendarmerie, and its budget, with effect
from 1 January 2009. The Gendarmerie will retain its military status,
but its resources will be closely co-ordinated with those of the police in
providing protection in Metropolitan France and in the DOM-COM.
The priority emphasis placed on knowledge and anticipation will
be reflected in the work of the new Central Domestic Intelligence
Directorate, formed by the merging of the General Intelligence Directorate (RG) and the Directorate for the Surveillance of the Territory
(DST). The missions and resources of the Central Directorate will be
significantly reinforced as part of new intelligence planning structure
and the domestic security programming laws.
The Ministry’s forecasting and preparation capabilities will be
enhanced by the creation of a Delegation for Prospective and Strategy,
which will reinforce the consistency of Ministry action in its various
areas of responsibility.
The Ministry’s operational crisis management capabilities will also
be substantially reinforced. An operational centre will be created by
2009, based in Place Beauvau; it will serve as the central level for operational crisis management on French soil. Crisis communication will
be reorganised under the auspices of the recently-created post of
Ministry spokesperson.
The function of Senior Defence Official, currently performed by
the Director of Defence and Civil Security, will devolve upon the
Ministry General Secretary who will, in this capacity, have authority
over all Ministry departments. He will be assisted in this task by a
Director of Planning, whose role will include planning formulation and
follow-up, steering the defence zones, Ministry information systems
security, and national economic intelligence (see Chapter 11). In the
field of economic security, without prejudice to the specific powers of
the Ministry of Defence in the matter of armaments, the Ministry of
the Interior is responsible for protecting the tangible and intangible
assets of France’s economic sector (companies, laboratories, research
centres), preventing foreign interference and maintaining a secure
environment for business.

###### THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AND EUROPEAN AFFAIRS

The Minister of Foreign and European Affairs is responsible for
the co-ordination of France’s foreign policy. It conducts diplomacy in
such a way as to reflect the national security strategy, in particular as
regards France’s contribution to European and international security.


-----

He oversees defence and security co-operation. The Minister will chair
the Inter-Ministerial Steering Committees on actions conducted using
the resources of the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of the Interior and
other ministries involved in defence and security co-operation.
The Minister will also provide inter-ministerial oversight of external
crisis management, irrespective of the nature of the crisis.
He will be supported by a civilian planning capability and an
Operational Centre for External Crisis Management, under the
authority of the Secretary General.
The Centre will perform three functions:
— pre-crisis: monitoring and early warning. The Centre will also
prepare the ground for government action by identifying in advance
the personnel and equipment needed in the event of crisis, and by
organising ad hoc exercises;
— during a crisis: operational co-ordination, to ensure effective
implementation of strategic orientations decided by government. The
key factors informing the Centre’s actions will be administrative
decompartmentalisation, centralisation and the rapid circulation of
information;
— post-crisis: co-ordination of feedback on experience of external
crises.
The Centre will be supported in the performance of these missions
by the capabilities of the Ministries and government departments
concerned, in addition to those of the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs.

###### THE MINISTRY OF THE ECONOMY

The Minister of the Economy is responsible for economic security
policy, a concept that will replace that of economic defence in all government documents (Chapter 3). It will therefore be the Minister’s task
to take all the measures within his power to guarantee the continuity
of economic activity in the event of a major crisis and, more widely, to
ensure the protection of France’s economic interests under normal circumstances as well as in times of crisis.
The Minister of the Economy will ensure the protection of sensitive sectors and companies, in liaison with the Ministries concerned,
and the protection of information likely to enhance the competitiveness of economic players. The Minister will ensure the efficient circulation of strategic economic information, as part of the government’s
economic intelligence policy.
Organisation will continue to be handled by a senior official
responsible for economic intelligence, under the authority of the


-----

SGDSN, with correspondents in the main ministries, and in particular
the Ministries of the Economy, Defence, Interior, Foreign and European Affairs and Ecology & Sustainable Development. The Ministry of
the Interior will direct the nationwide structure placed under the
responsibility of the Prefects.

###### OTHER MINISTRIES

The Minister of the Budget oversees consistency between the
choices proposed and the general strategy of public finances. The
Minister contributes to the national security strategy through the work
of ministry departments which have wide powers (inspection of persons, goods, means of transport, financial flows and taxable activities)
and may intervene in movements outside and inside the European
Union.
Other ministers, in particular the Minister of Health (on health
crisis prevention and management), the Minister of Transport, Infrastructure and Environment (responsible for the security of much critical infrastructure and for relations with major operations), the Minister of Justice (with a central role in the fight against terrorism), and
the Minister of the Environment are also called upon to make an
essential contribution to national security strategy. The organisation
and resources of their departments will be geared to meet this requirement more effectively.


-----

CHAPTER 16

###### INDUSTRY AND RESEARCH

France’s scientific, technological and industrial skills determine
our capability to meet the needs of our armed forces, of our European
partners and, increasingly, those of our domestic and civil security
forces. They are crucial to retaining our strategic autonomy and help
to promote Europe as a centre of industrial and technological
excellence.

##### A competitive but fragmented industry

###### A COMPETITIVE FRENCH INDUSTRY

The world arms market, estimated to be worth 300 billion Euros,
is largely dominated by the U.S. arms industry, which alone accounts
for a market share of over 50%. Europe’s defence industry currently
represents net sales of some 55 billion Euros. 90% of the industry is
concentrated in six countries: Germany, Spain, France, Italy, the
United Kingdom and Sweden. Four European groups (BAE Systems,
EADS, Finmeccanica and Thales) rank in the world’s top 15—all the
others are American. These four have attained the size, financial
resources, competitiveness and capabilities to take on complex
projects. Of the top ten European groups, four are French (Thales,
DCNS, Safran and Dassault Aviation) and another is EADS, in which
France plays a substantial role.
Ever since the late 1950s, France’s defence industry policy has
been geared towards the pursuit of strategic and technological
autonomy centred on major projects exploiting disruptive technology


-----

(nuclear, aeronautical, missiles) and relying for the most part on major
national State-owned groups. France’s independent nuclear deterrent
is one successful product of this policy.
France now has a significant and highly successful defence
industry that ranks second in Europe, just behind the United
Kingdom. It provides direct employment for 165,000 people and indirect employment for as many again, and posts net sales of the order of
15 billion Euros, around a third of which is derived from exports.
France ranks as the world’s fourth largest exporter.
The financial performance and profitability of France’s leading
defence firms falls well within the world average, with certain minor
differences depending on the indicators measured: faster growth in
average net sales, relatively low net margins despite an average rate of
indebtedness slightly lower than that of its American counterparts.
Spending on research and development represents between 10%
and 20% of net sales for the ten largest defence groups in France,
which employ globally something like 20,000 people in their design
offices.
Research breeds technological innovation and is a driving force for
major technologies, many of which have civil applications. The military aeronautics industry, for example, has spawned numerous applications in the fields of avionics, electronic flight control systems, IT
and communication, simulation, modelling and computer-assisted
manufacturing, not to mention new materials. These advances provide
a huge boost to the international competitiveness of the civil industry.

###### A FRAGMENTED FRENCH
AND EUROPEAN DEFENCE INDUSTRY

The French defence industry has undergone major restructuring
since the mid-1980s in response to an increasingly competitive international market. New players that have emerged include Israel, Russia
and China, and these will probably be followed by countries like
Brazil, India, Pakistan and other Asian powers. The restructuring of
Giat Industries (now Nexter), begun in 2003, and of the defence electronics industry or, more recently, the transformation and development of French naval shipbuilder DCN (Direction des Constructions
Navales) have all helped to consolidate the country’s industrial and
technological base. Even so, the French and European defence industries remain fragmented. Problems have increased due to national
concerns exclusive to individual States, and a tendency for some of
them to turn to non-European suppliers.


-----

Major European groups have emerged in some sectors, primarily
aeronautics and defence electronics. Industrial mergers are based on
internal organisations determined by national considerations. These
considerations have resulted in a distribution of technological and
industrial capabilities dictated not by any economic strategy, but by
Government insistence on retaining national R&D, production and
maintenance capabilities seen as strategic. This trend has significantly
hampered industrial integration and specialisation. The level of integration between the various national subsidiaries of these major European groups is therefore very limited, even to this day.
Most of the other industrial sectors have remained on the fringes
of these transnational moves towards concentration. In the field of
combat aviation, five large firms currently share in three competing
programmes. A similar situation will soon arise with drones if no
European industrial strategy is put in place. In the field of military satellite telecommunications, France, the United Kingdom, Germany,
Italy and Spain are currently involved in five different national programmes. The European naval industry has embarked on gradual
restructuring. But with six leading project managers dealing with over
twenty major naval shipyards, there is still no comparison with the
United States, where the restructurings of the 1990s pared the naval
industry down to two major project managers and six yards. In the
land weapons sector, a handful of global national players (Germany,
France) are to be found alongside the U.S.-influenced transnational
groups, as well as a multitude of local or “niche” actors. Ten or so
European firms still can lay claim to the skills needed to manage
armoured vehicle manufacturing projects. In all these sectors, the various manufacturers capture the bulk of their domestic market and
compete fiercely on exports.


**The gap between the United States and Europe**

The defence procurement budget of the United States in 2006 was
116 billion Euros, three times total procurement spending by the whole
_European Union, which in turn devotes only 18% of its procurement_
spending to co-operation programmes. The comparison is even more
unfavourable if we compare defence R&D budgets, with the United
States spending 67 billion Euros in 2006, six times the fragmented
_spending allocated by Europe._


-----

##### An industrial strategy with a European focus

###### THE THREE CIRCLES OF INDUSTRIAL POLICY

No European country can now afford the current level of dispersal
of efforts, in view of current levels of financial resources and the
growing cost of arms systems. No country in Europe—not even France
or the United Kingdom—now has the capacity to bear single-handedly
the cost of a defence industry capable of fully meeting all the needs of
its forces.
France’s arms procurement strategy will be determined on three
levels.
France will retain national proficiency in the technologies and
capabilities needed to design, manufacture and maintain the military
_equipment essential to areas of sovereign prerogative where, in view of_
our political choices, sharing or pooling resources is not an option.
For the majority of defence and security procurement, our strategy
will tend towards European interdependence. The aim will be to build
interdependence by free consent between States rather than, as it is so
often perceived, being subject to dependencies. European interdependence will therefore be conceived in terms of reciprocity, security of
supply and an overall balance. It will also need to be underpinned by
effective procurement procedures.
Whenever security of supply is not a direct issue, either because it
is guaranteed by a number of different suppliers or because it is possible to build up strategic stocks to guard against any interruption of
supply, France will turn to the world market. Procurement on this
market will be seen by the public procurement agency as an integral
part of procurement strategy in its own right, and not as a fall-back
solution once all other options are exhausted. Procurement on the
world market means we must retain robust national competencies in
order to specify, order, assess and qualify equipment so procured.
A strong political will, shared with our European partners, is
essential in developing a European strategy.

###### DEVELOPING WORLD-CLASS EUROPEAN CHAMPIONS

With the aim of promoting a competitive industry in France and
Europe, France will encourage the development of world-class European industrial groups. Firms themselves have an essential role to play


-----

in this approach. Since Government procurement is particularly influential in shaping industrial supply, however, it is for States to create a
positive framework from which such champions can emerge. First and
foremost, they must create a domestic European market by sourcing
supply from these groups whenever acquiring equipment for their
armed forces. Next they should encourage convergence of common
operational needs that can lead to co-operation programmes, both to
reduce development costs and allow for long production runs.
Harmonisation of military needs between the European countries
will determine the rationalisation of Europe’s defence industry. France
will adopt a pragmatic approach, entering into structural bilateral or
trilateral partnerships. From these concrete partnerships, European
ambitions for an arms industry will take shape. The European Defence
Agency (EDA) will pursue the process of programme generation it has
already embarked upon, which includes co-ordination of expressions
of military needs with the EU Military Committee and Military Staff. It
is of the utmost importance that the EDA should be entrusted at the
earliest possible opportunity with the task of drawing up programmes
to meet these needs.
The emergence of world-class European industrial groups also
depends on changes to national and European regulations: a defence
company operating in several Member States must be able to function
in the same way as a company based in a single State. Current regulations, however, require a European defence company to obtain an
export licence to transfer defence equipment from one Member State
to another, thereby posing a major obstacle to company integration.
Relaxing the conditions for the movement of defence products
between European countries is therefore an essential requirement.
France would favour the introduction of a general or global licence
mechanism for the European defence industry and would like to see
the introduction of a European free trade area in defence equipment
between countries with comparable control procedures. France will
propose this objective to all its European partners.


-----

-----

###### AN INDUSTRIAL STRATEGY EXTENDING
TO ALL SECTORS OF SECURITY

All agencies involved in National Security are confronted to shared
technological problems, and only a joint approach is capable of producing synergies. Pursuing separate approaches could result in duplication of effort and pose a threat to equipment interoperability.


-----

This is true of systems used in communication and crisis management, maritime protection, border surveillance, biometric identification of individuals, CRBN detection, information systems security,
drones and intelligence systems in general.
While some progress has been made in recent years, the process
must be taken forward by creating closer links between those working in
the public security and civil security structures (police, Gendarmerie,
civil security, Customs, etc.) and Ministry of Defence departments.
Technology watch should be pooled, as should detection and
concerted monitoring of the most significant companies. In addition,
every effort will be made to harmonise expressions of security needs as
far as possible, and to pool equipment development and procurement.

##### The strategic role of research

In today’s world, an active research policy provides the means of
mastering defence system technologies, preparing the technological
responses to medium and long-term operational needs, and identifying
the disruptive technologies of the future. Significant effort will be
devoted to space technology to pave the way for future telecommunications, observation and surveillance programmes, in view of the priority placed on the knowledge and anticipation strategic function.
Developing research also helps to maintain over time core competencies threatened by defence equipment procurement and life cycles, where
phases of mass production alternate with phases of technological development. Since the last Military Programme Bill, France has moved into a
period characterised by the completion of development and the ramping
up of production on most of our major programmes (Rafale, Tiger,
NH90, A400M, VBCI/AICV, ASMPA, Meteor, Horizon, M51, SSBN,
Helios 2, Syracuse 3, etc) and, as a corollary, a reduction in the budgets
allocated to defence and security research. This means that an extra
effort will need to be made in research and technology (R&T) in the years
ahead, to avoid seeing vital technological capabilities abandoned. The
State will therefore implement a policy of maintaining core competencies, in R&T and engineering design as well as in industrialisation. This
policy will encompass the production of technological demonstrators.

###### POOLING DEFENCE
AND SECURITY RESEARCH EFFORTS

The efficiency of the national research effort will be increased by
_pooling defence and security research efforts. Without setting up new_


-----

structures, synergies between security and defence R&T programmes
will be strengthened through inter-ministerial co-ordination.
Defence and security R&T oversight within the Ministry of Defence
will be reinforced. The Ministry of the Interior will be given extra powers
to guide and assess defence and security research.
The Ministry of the Interior will establish a dialogue with all those
involved in security through a council on Economic and Scientific
Security, made up of the main research bodies, security operators,
industrial suppliers of technical solutions and representatives of the
Ministries of Defence and Research.

###### PROMOTING SYNERGIES BETWEEN CIVIL RESEARCH
AND DEFENCE AND SECURITY RESEARCH

France and Europe must encourage synergies between civil
research and defence and security research. 60% of the research
financed by the Ministry of Defence has spin-off applications in the
civil sector, compared to just 20% in the opposite direction.
The Ministries of the Interior and Defence will thus need to intensify
their relations with the major government, industrial and university
research facilities, but also with smaller laboratories. They will need to
be represented at the highest level in the National Research Agency
(ANR). The volume of calls for projects from Ministry of the Interior and
Ministry of Defence partnerships will need to be increased.
Dual-use civil and military technology programmes will play a
bigger part in ANR annual programming. The Ministry of Defence
“dual research” budget programme will be more clearly directed
towards fundamental defence and security research. Rather than being
considered in the light of a subsidy, as at present, it will be used as
funding for identified projects.

###### SUPPORTING THE MOST INNOVATIVE SMALL FIRMS

Supporting small firms, which are at least as dynamic as major
groups when it comes to innovation, also makes a direct contribution to
reinforcing research. France will create more openings for such firms to
access the defence market and will encourage the leading defence and
security groups to join forces with the most innovative small firms.


-----

###### POOLING RESEARCH EFFORTS AT EUROPEAN LEVEL

_The European framework also offers an opportunity to unify R&T_
efforts. The European Defence Agency (EDA) will be the spearhead of
this ambition. Based on identification of common needs for all the
Member States, the EDA will be called upon to identify key technolog

-----

ical capabilities and develop a strategy to bring them to maturity.
France will submit challenging projects to the EDA, and is favourably
disposed towards a significant increase in its own R&T budget. Closer
links with technical research in the defence and security fields must be
reflected at the European level by significantly closer co-operation
between the EDA, on defence research, and the European Commission
(security research).

##### A new partnership between the defence industry and the State

State procurement of defence equipment is of a very different
nature from the purchasing carried out by a commercial company.
The quest for technological superiority involves equipping our forces
with systems that generally require specific developments demanding
cutting-edge technology and short production runs. There is practically
no market for such equipment beyond the orders placed by a limited
number of States. In turn, these States deal with a very limited number
of suppliers who are therefore largely dependent on the choices and
obligations imposed upon them. In the circumstances, the most effective lever on industrial strategy is government contracting and procurement policy, and it operates in every programme phase, from
upstream planning to withdrawal from service.

###### MORE EFFICIENT PROCUREMENT

The State must be in a position to publish its long-term procurement strategies, enabling companies to consolidate and position themselves on the world market. In developing these strategies, as in pursuing efficiency in the procurement process, the State will therefore
need to develop robust technical and economic expertise, backed up by
extensive knowledge of industrial resources.
Only by so doing will the State be in a position to evaluate the economic and technical validity of proposals from its suppliers and arrive
at decisions which fall within the limits set by the overall strategy of
public finances.


-----

**Controlling the life-cycle cost of equipment**

In the interests of more efficient procurement, the State will create
the conditions for real control of life-cycle cost through equipment life
cycles.
Only by knowing the life-cycle cost is it possible to make an evenhanded assessment of the various industrial solutions offered in
response to an operational need, and to measure the impact that decisions will have over a period of years. It is essential, for both industrial
policy and for financial control of defence spending, that the ministries
should acquire methods of scheduling over time the full costs of the
equipment and capabilities they intend to acquire.
This approach must also enable France to make maximum use, to
a far greater extent than at present, of the potential offered by public_private partnerships (PPP). These are based on optimised sharing of_
responsibilities and risks between the public and the private partners.
Once their operational and economic value has been demonstrated,
they should pave the way for better control of the total life-cycle cost
of infrastructure or equipments, particularly in the dual-use fields of
training, telecommunications, rear echelon logistics, support—in particular maintenance of operational serviceability—or infrastructure.

**Improving the management of arms programmes**

Analysis of arms procurement programmes reveals a number of
cases of serious shortcomings, resulting in cost escalations, missed
deadlines and sometimes even performance shortfalls. The management of arms programmes will be entirely overhauled.
Investment launch and financial planning procedures must be
made much more rigorous. The Ministry of the Budget and the Ministry of the Economy must in the future be closely associated in the
decision-making process.
Under the new Ministry of Defence organisation, a programme will
be designed, prepared and executed by a single dedicated team, headed
_by a programme manager appointed for the duration of the programme._
The programme team will systematically include an officer responsible
for evaluating the operational need (from the Defence Staff), an engineer responsible for technical, industrial and economic expertise
(DGA) and a budget and finance expert (SGA). Specific provisions for
nuclear arms programmes will be continued, in view of the particular
role of the Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique (CEA), the French
atomic energy commission.


-----

Bringing the Ministry’s entire central administration together at a
single site will facilitate the work of the teams.
To ensure that the armed forces assume full accountability for the
_operational need and the strategy proposed as best meeting those_
needs, during the definition and design phases of weapons systems the
programme team will be placed under the authority of the Chief of the
_Defence Staff, who will act as the contracting authority for the pro-_
gramme up to the point of contract negotiation and will submit to the
Minister all decisions to be made during these phases[1]. Before making
a decision, the Minister will, through the ministerial investment committee (see Chapter 15), examine all the relevant information on which
to assess the pertinence and respective merits of the solutions proposed, in terms of performance, cost of acquisition and life-cycle cost,
co-operation issues, industrial impact, and procurement strategy (use
of public-private partnership, asset acquisition), etc.

1. Here refers to those phases which, under the present organisation of
arms programmes management, cover the preparation phase and part of the
design phase, up to the point of launching negotiations with the defence
_contractor._


-----

_In the contract negotiation phase, the programme team will come_
_under the authority of the director for procurement (DGA), which takes_
over as contracting authority when preparing and negotiating the


-----

contract. At the end of this intermediate phase, the decision to launch
programme execution will be taken by the Minister, on DGA recommendation, after taking advice from the Chief of the Defence Staff, on the basis
of a file than includes the outcome of negotiations with the industry.
_During the execution phase, the programme team will remain under_
_DGA authority. During this phase, the Chief of the Defence Staff will be_
involved in all changes, regarding the estimate, technical aspects or calendar, likely to affect satisfaction of the operational requirement.
_During the deployment phase, i.e. once the equipment has gone into_
service with the armed forces, the team will once again come under the
_authority of the Chief of the Defence Staff._
The respective responsibilities of the Chief of the Defence Staff and
the DGA will thus be clearly defined during every phase of the programme. In fulfilling these responsibilities, each will rely on a single
team that will have a complete overview of the life of the programme.
In each major phase, the Minister will take decisions based on their
proposals and on the deliberations of the ministerial investment
committee.

**Equipping the State with more responsive**
**and flexible procurement capabilities**

France will need to introduce a far more reactive procurement
strategy and capabilities, which will mean adapting the State’s decisionmaking processes and involving defence contractors far more closely.
The needs of the armed forces are changing at an ever-increasing
pace. Lead times between the expression of an operational need and
the equipment coming into service must be reduced. The procurement
of security equipment must also be made as reactive as possible, to
keep abreast of the rapid developments in criminal activities and
methods.
Certain rules of public procurement, as they stand, are a hindrance
to the development of innovative and reactive procurement processes.
These rules will need to change. The Code des Marchés Publics (procurement contract code) will have to allow for the possibility of specific stipulations as part of the procurement of especially innovative
and complex equipment or services. It must also facilitate co-design
with manufacturers. In particular, readier access must be available to
modern resources such as the Laboratoire technico-operationnel
(LTO), a joint Ministry of Defence and industry capability analysis
environment.


-----

###### MODERNISING MAINTENANCE
OF OPERATIONAL SERVICEABILITY

Maintenance of operational serviceability has a direct influence on
force availability and commitment. Its effectiveness needs to be significantly increased and modernised, by speeding up the process of transferring industrial project management from the State to companies.
Maintenance of operational serviceability using internal resources
_must be strictly limited to work that could not be carried out safely or_
promptly enough by an industrial firm. The industrial resources of the
State will be particularly useful in guaranteeing continued serviceability of ageing equipment.
The traditional sequential approach (manufacture by industry previously owned by the State, maintenance by the State, midlife renovation, decommissioning) is often obsolete. Maintenance of operational
serviceability should provide for simultaneous maintenance and development of equipment to keep pace with advances in technology, from
the moment the first items are brought into service. Processes will
need to be decompartmentalised, particularly as regards the procurement of spare parts, technical expertise, fleet management and equipment development.
_Relations between the State and companies will need to be put on a_
_new footing. Companies will benefit from a long-term view of their_
future workload schedules, helping them to retain core competencies.
The State must possess the competencies and expertise necessary to
identify potential partnerships with companies.


-----

The success of this partnership policy will depend on the overall
accountability of the companies involved in maintenance of operational serviceability. It will entail the use of service contracts, based on
_performance bonds, with stipulations of availability, operating hours or_
other performance indicators directly linked to operational utility, coupled with adequate incentives.
The new approach will also depend on greater consistency, within
the Ministry of Defence, between the equipment procurement process
and the serviceability sustainment process.
The integrated support structures (SSF, the fleet support department for naval equipment, and SIMMAD, the integrated structure for
maintenance of aeronautical defence equipment) will continue as part
of the armed forces during the coming phase. They will be required to
integrate their work more closely with that of the DGA, throughout
programme life. This enhanced integration will result in stronger negotiating positions with companies, optimised use of specific human
resources in terms of procurement and technical expertise, and greater
control over total life-cycle cost.
The integrated programme teams (which includes a service sustainment specialist) will see their responsibilities gradually extended to
the deployment and decommissioning phases.

###### BOOSTING EXPORTS

France is a major player on the international arms market and
exports are a key component in the country’s industrial strategy.
Exports allow for longer production runs and help to reduce or at least
limit the unit cost of equipment ordered by the State. Exporting companies are less dependent on the national market, while maintaining
their competencies nonetheless.
The international market is extremely challenging at present as a
result of the emergence of new exporting countries, and so calls for a
government policy of resolute support for the industry. Strict rules
must be obeyed, however, to avoid breaching national and international standards governing such support.
France’s policy will be founded on three principles:
— ensuring at every level of Government administration—inter_ministerial and ministerial—the separation of control functions and export_
_support functions that guarantees against any conflict of interest;_
— pursuing rigour and rationalisation of our control procedures
(see box);
— boosting arms exports by providing added support to industry,
in respect of pre-approved operations (see box), but always strictly
within the rules shared with our European and international partners.


-----

**Major arms exporters 2003-2006**
Estimated market share

Source: Report to Parliament and official data from the Ministry of Defence/DGA.

_In the matter of export controls, efforts will continue to simplify and_
rank procedures by importance, with particular emphasis on reducing
application processing times. Controls on transfers between European
countries engaged in co-operation programmes should be abolished.
Since many types of equipment may have both civil and military
applications, a more rigorous treatment of controls on the export of
dual-use items will be introduced, adopting an organisation and procedures akin to those applying to export controls on weapons and military equipment. France will also introduce legislation on arms dealing.
Furthermore, France actively supports the international arms trade
treaty under discussion by the United Nations.
In the nuclear field, the main policy guidelines on exports are laid
down by the Nuclear Policy Council.
_In support of exports, France will promote the presence of French_
firms and their products and services on export markets.
Government action in the field of exports must be co-ordinated to
ensure that export markets are systematically presented with a global
_offering, i.e. from definition of need all the way through to assistance_
with maintenance of exported equipment. In some instances, the State


-----

may play a part in the transaction, along similar lines to the United
States. France will also exploit the opportunities offered by the secondhand military equipment market.
Export prospects will be taken into consideration from the preparation phase of equipment programmes.
France and Europe will also need to strengthen their influence on
standardisation. This could provide a lever for placing European technology in a strong position, via standards, on markets with strong
export potential.
Finally, France will work alongside its European partners on establishing the conditions for healthy and fair competition. France is a signatory to the 1997 OECD Convention on combating bribery of foreign
public officials in international business transactions. There are disparities, sometimes significant, in the application of the Convention’s
provisions by signatory countries, however. These discrepancies penalise France and Europe on export markets.


-----

-----

###### DEVELOPING A LOGIC OF INFLUENCE

Building a European defence industry may require a change in the
relations between the State and the industry. The State will evolve as
necessary away from a logic of actual ownership of industrial facilities
to one of influence over the actions of industrial operators. The State
has many ways of exerting direct influence over the strategic orientations of the companies it purchases from, the most important of these
being the volume of business it represents, the introduction of publicprivate partnerships, or the institutional support it provides.
In common with a number of European countries, France has
established a mechanism for controlling inward investment in eleven
“protected” economic sectors. The mechanism can be used to oppose a
foreign takeover of a French company holding strategic assets, or to
impose conditions to protect France’s security interests.
Together, these capabilities will enable the State to steer corporate
developments and watch over the interests of national security in this
particular sector of industry.


-----

-----

CHAPTER 17

###### FINANCING THE STRATEGY

The funding of France’s national security must be consistent with
its analysis of its security interests, the risks France faces, and the definition of the necessary assets to confront those risks and prevail.
To be credible, the financial effort must also make allowance for a
context that is particularly difficult. The high level of requirements
contrasts with tight financial resources in the short term, as entailed
by the need to restore the public finances.
Mechanisms must be established to improve the planning of future
expenditures and to boost their effectiveness, drawing lessons from
past budgetary experience.

##### Redefining the Nation’s defence effort

###### DEFENCE SPENDING IN 2008

The professionalisation of the armed forces decided in 1996 was
based on model force goals for the year 2015, to be attained through
three successive multiyear Military Programme Acts (lois de program_mation militaire, LPMs). In 2007, the Ministry of Defence considered_
that the equipment requirements to be financed in order to achieve
this model would require an additional 6 billion Euros per year on
average over six years starting in 2009, compared to the 2008 allocation. This amount would have corresponded to a 40% increase in
annual spending for research, equipment maintenance and procurement, representing 15.6 billion Euros for 2008.
This situation has several causes.


-----

The first two LPMs for 1997-2002 and 2003-2008 were insufficient
to finance investments at the planned level.
The resources actually available over the period 1997-2002 were
considerably less than the amount provide for in the programme,
firstly because the allocations in the initial (yearly) budget were less
than the annual amounts expected, and secondly as a result of the
budget’s implementation (due to inter-ministerial redeployment and
the financing of overseas operations). The estimated gap is approximately 13 billion Euros, which is close to the total annual allocation
for each of the six years covered by the LPM. This has led to programme cancellations, lowering of targets and the postponement of
equipment deliveries. Equipment and infrastructure maintenance and
procurement of ammunition have been hard hit by the lack of funding.
During the period 2003-2008, although budgets were higher than
during the previous period, appropriations included in the annual
budgets were much closer to the amounts provided for in the LPM.
The total gap at the end of the period was slightly more than 1 billion
Euros, out of a total of 88 billion Euros.
In spite of this, it was not possible to finance equipment expenditures as planned because their true cost had not been properly
assessed at the time of their initial programming. This applies to the
launching of new programmes, maintenance of equipment in operational condition and the costs of ongoing programmes.
The budget outturn over the two periods also contained spending
not provided for in the two Programme Acts. In the case of overseas
operations, starting in 2005, provisions to cover the additional costs
over and beyond the initial budget gradually cushioned the impact of
credit cancellations during the year resulting from inclusion of the cost
of these operations. Yet this procedure was not abandoned entirely,
due in particular to the total cost of such operations.
N.B.: The share of additional costs borne by the Ministry of
Defence and financed under equipment expenditures has evolved as
follows: (cf. table below):

**Share of additional foreign operations costs covered**
**by procurement budget**

|Col1|1998|1999|2000|2001|2002|2003|2004|2005|2006|2007|Total|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|% of total foreign operations costs|82%|62%|73%|71%|68%|||78%|31%|45%||
|In current M€|261|429|364|374|460|0|0|429|184|310|2,811|


-----

-----

As a result, and taking account of all of the above factors, there is
a gap of approximately 24 billion Euros between credits and resources
corresponding to the physical goals of the two bills.
The effect of this has been to delay equipment renewal and to prolong the design, development and manufacturing phases. Lastly, many
programmes were postponed to 2009 and later years, i.e. beyond the
period covered by a pre-defined LPM. As regards the operational
aspect, old equipment has remained in use with the corresponding
aggravation of problems of repair and maintenance. The phasing-in of
new generation equipment that had been envisioned to reach the 2015
format has been disrupted by successive postponements, creating a
bottleneck.
During the same time frame, there has been no reduction in the
Ministry’s administrative staff, or in expenditures on personnel and
operating costs. The 2003-2008 LPM provided for a staff increase of
around 10,000. About 5,000 armed forces jobs were eliminated
between 2003 and 2007. Yet Ministry of Defence staffing levels
remained stable at about 430,000 civil servants and military personnel.
The Internal Security Programme Act (loi d’orientation et de program_mation pour la sécurité intérieure, LOPSI) created 6,500 new positions_
in the Gendarmerie. The professionalisation of the armed forces was
accompanied by a financial effort to improve military personnel living
standards. In total, between 2003 and 2007, payroll and operating
costs have risen by about 4%: in other words, at an average pace close
to that of procurement. Given this situation, unexpected expenses were
paid for out of funds initially earmarked for new equipment, with the
result that a rising proportion of the inventory is ageing.
The cost of renewing old equipment and the simultaneous rise in
other defence spending, as planned at the end of the 2003-2008 period,
was creating an increasingly perilous financial situation, to say the
least.

###### THE GENERAL BUDGETARY STRATEGY

The Government’s general financial strategy was announced in the
initial draft budget bill for 2008 and the stability programme commitments communicated to France’s European partners.
This strategy aims to achieve a balanced budget at the end of the
2009-2012 time frame, limiting the rise in total civil service expenditure to 1.1% per year. This represents a considerable effort, given
the average annual growth rate of 2.25% over the last ten years.
Every component of public spending is expected to contribute to this
goal.


-----

Central government expenditure, which now includes revenue
transfers to the regions and the European Union, is to remain stable in
volume; this means that the annual increase will merely compensate
for inflation. Among these expenditures, the compulsory charges for
pensions and the debt repayment are tending to rise, given the annual
increase in the total public debt, rising interest rates and large numbers of people taking retirement.
Given this situation, all central government expenditures other than
pensions, debt and revenue transfers, must necessarily remain constant
in value during the 2009-2012 time frame, i.e. they must be carried over
for exactly the same amounts with no compensation for inflation.
The Government will impose much tighter cost controls than in
the past. This will apply to all ministries and to all categories of expenditures, including operating expenditures, staff, intervention, and
investment costs.

###### DECISIONS TAKEN

Spending on defence will continue to be a major priority for
France. In financial terms, defence will remain the number two central
government budget, just behind education (excluding compulsory debt
servicing charges).
The budget of the “Defence Mission” amounted to 36.8 billion
Euros in 2008 and consisted of:

**2008 “Defence Mission” Budget[1]**

**(In 2008 Euros billion)**

Salaries 11.6

Maintenance of equipment 3.4

Research and Technology 0.9

Other operating expenses 3.5

Investment 10.5

Subsidies and international contributions 0.2

Pensions 6.7

1. These amounts apply only to credits of the Defence Mission budget in keeping
with the Constitutional Bylaw on Budget Acts, and not to total expenditures of the
Ministry, which come under Security in the case of the Gendarmerie, Veterans,
National Memorials and Remembrance Policy, and Research and Higher Education
as well as for the Ministry’s contribution to the civilian research budget.

|2008 “Defence Mission” Budget1 (In 2008 Euros billion)|Col2|
|---|---|
|Salaries|11.6|
|Maintenance of equipment|3.4|
|Research and Technology|0.9|
|Other operating expenses|3.5|
|Investment|10.5|
|Subsidies and international contributions|0.2|
|Pensions|6.7|


-----

During the initial phase, the defence effort will consist in maintaining annual resources in absolute terms, excluding pensions, i.e.,
compensating for the effects of inflation. Then during a second phase,
starting in 2012, this effort will rise at a pace of 1% per year in volume,
_i.e., on top of inflation._
According to today’s budget resource projections, this means a
total of 183 billion Euros (2008) excluding pensions, over the next six
years, and 377 billion Euros over twelve years. The annual allocation
excluding pensions will thus increase from 30.2 billion Euros in 2008
to about 33 billion Euros in 2020. (Expressed in 2008 Euros).
Maintaining and then increasing the volume of defence spending
represents a major effort on the part of the nation in the coming years
by comparison with other areas of public spending. The “Defence Mission” budget will represent an exception to the general rule of carrying
over the central government budget in current Euros with no adjustment for inflation.
This financial commitment is necessary in order to achieve the
national security targets described here and to furnish the armed
forces with the assets required to perform their mission. As a result,
the share of defence in public spending will remain stable or even
increase. This decision is consistent with France’s repeated determination to see Europeans ensure their own defence and to revive the forward momentum of the European Union in the area of defence and
security.
The restructuring and reform of the Ministry of Defence will match
the financial effort being made by the nation, giving rise to capabilities
and a format that are both sustainable and consistent. The aim is to
increase the share of investment and maintenance within the overall
budget.
The entire process will entail a reapportionment of defence
resources among their different applications.
The strategic options presented here will result in an increase or
stabilisation of financing for certain equipment expenditures, e.g.
knowledge and anticipation, deterrence, protection against new
risks, including the fight against cyber-risks, armed forces protection, maintenance in operating condition and exploratory research.
It also leads to contracting or reorienting the operational force
objectives for prevention and intervention (See Part III—
Chapter 13). A number of weapons programmes will be redefined,
equipment and staff will be shared among several functions or else
reduced, for example the existing fighter aircraft fleets or first rate
frigates.
Besides, potential savings in logistics and administrative support
identified during the overall review of public policies will lead to sig

-----

nificant staff reorganisation and streamlining over a period of six or
seven years. All of this will result in a reduction of 54,000 jobs in the
Ministry of the Defence, with 46,500 for the armed forces and 7,500 for
civilian and military personnel in the various divisions of the Ministry
(in the Armament Procurement Directorate and the Secretariat General of the Administration). These reductions will be accompanied by
specific measures for personnel (See Chapter 14.). The resulting savings from restructuring will be fully reinvested in defence; this is justified both by the security challenges facing the nation and the scope of
the restructuring effort.
The balance of defence spending will thus be shifted in favour of
investment. Provided the reorganisation takes place as planned, the
funds available each year for procurement under the next two programmes bills will be much higher than the annual allocations
during the previous two LPMs. The annual allocation for investments
was 13.8 billion Euros in 1997-2002 and 15.5 billion Euros in 20032008. On a like-for-like basis, after completion of the restructuring,
investment will reach an average of 18 billion Euros in the years
2009-2020 (in constant 2008 Euros). These amounts will finance new
equipment, major programmes as well as operational enablers, and
also maintenance. The aim is to achieve better value for money for
the nation.
Nonetheless, the initial phase of restructuring calls for specific
resources. Such provisions apply to personnel (see Chapter 14) and
support for local economies, facilitating projects to compensate for
the loss of military units or facilities. Economic support for local
authorities will be one of the keys to winning public support for
restructuring of the armed forces and to its success. This requires
setting up an appropriate body managed by the Inter-Ministerial
Delegation for Regional Planning and Competitiveness (délégation
_inter-ministérielle à l’aménagement et à la compétitivité du territoire)_
under the aegis of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Defence
Delegation for Restructuring (délégation aux restructurations). At the
local level, committees for the administrative areas concerned will
be set up under the authority of the Prefects. Concrete measures
will facilitate property disposals and financing for new economic
activities.
The overall defence effort is designed both to modernise our forces
and to improve living conditions and training for their personnel. Its
impact should be clearly felt in three to four years.


-----

##### How domestic security will contribute to National Security

The first LOPSI provided for a considerable increase in resources
for the police and the Gendarmerie in terms of both equipment and
staff.
In the forthcoming period, financing allocated to the Ministry of
the Interior to play its role in the new National Security strategy will
be increased to the appropriate level, based on analysis of threats and
needs. They will be made available by internal reform and redeployment of assets.
For the Interior Ministry, the capabilities contributing to
national security and which must be an investment priority for it,
notably concern intelligence, crisis management facilities and procedures, population alert and information, management and treatment
of nuclear, chemical, biological risks, the fight against terrorism,
and the reinforcement of personnel and equipment in certain zones
(for example overseas, which will benefit from specific financial
conditions).
The corresponding amounts represent approximately 300 to
400 million Euros in investment by the State in the next five years.
This includes in particular 80 million Euros for modernisation of the
population alert network, and 220 million Euros for the improvement
of CRBN risk prevention (joint training centre, personnel protection
gear, mobile detection and identification facilities, decontamination
units, etc.).
These targeted efforts will notably focus on investment spending
by the Ministry of the Interior. Allocations will be included in the
LOPSI to be implemented from 2009 onwards.
In addition, responsibility for the financing of civil security will
continue to be shared between the local authorities and the central
government, although the major burden of this spending will be borne
by local government. A true partnership will be established in order to
achieve the goals of national security and communicate the key points
of the new strategy at every level.


-----

##### Improved management of National Security and defence spending

In most industrialised countries, major public defence and security
spending programmes lead to budget overruns. There have also been
cases of under-evaluation in France, severely impairing the transparency and predictability of public spending. This adversely affects the
operational effectiveness of the armed forces. Also, budgetary adjustments in the course of each financial year can have ripple effects on
whole LPMs.
Considerable improvements are necessary in order to preserve the
advantages of the multi-year LPMs and better respect the vote of Parliament and facilitate its control.
First of all, the State must not only take account of the purchase
price in the procurement process but also, throughout the life-cycle of
equipment, operating costs, maintenance and dismantling at end of
use (see Chapter 16.)
Ministries will explore all avenues of improvement for the provision of services that also relieve pressure on public resources such as
_private-public partnerships, provided they offer the same quality of ser-_
vice as a State-run operation, in particular for maintenance. The State
will make savings wherever possible, also seeking to neutralise the
impact of VAT.
Forecast additional spending related to overseas military operations should also be included early in the budgeting process.
Improved budgetary planning will preserve the necessary funding for
equipment.
A permanent and independent structure will monitor the implementation of decisions and broad policy pertaining to national security, in particular their financial consequences. Economic changes in
years to come must not interfere with the orientations designed for
implementation over a period of several years. The future General Secretariat of Defence and National Security will perform this control
function.
Lastly, multiyear visibility is absolutely necessary in the area of
defence, public security and civil security. With that in view, Parliament will vote and monitor a new three-year budget and programmes
by sectors.
Nevertheless, given the long-term planning and delivery time
frames in military equipment and the implementation of ministerial
reforms, the instrument of multi-year Programme Act for each ministry


-----

over six years (LPMs for the Ministry of Defence, LOPSIs for the Ministry of Interior) will remain in use. This process will be made more
flexible, with a mid-term review to be carried out at the end of four
years leading into a new six-year timeframe.
In keeping with the spirit of the Constitutional Bylaw on Budget
Acts (loi organique relative aux lois de finances, LOLF) adopted in 2001,
which provides for management leeway over a sufficient amount of
funds, the scope of the ministerial Programme Acts will no longer be
limited to investment. It will include the entire public policy concerned
(e.g., the “Defence Mission”).
The execution of the Programme Acts and their description both to
Parliament and to the general public will be facilitated by their wider
scope.
Lastly, the White Paper will be updated before each new Programme Act.

##### Assessing total National Security spending

###### DEFENCE SPENDING AND INTERNATIONAL
COMPARISONS

In international statistics, France’s defence spending is traditionally defined as total spending by the Ministry of Defence, including
pensions and the budget of the Gendarmerie. This indicator was used
in the 1994 Defence White Paper.
The definition is wider in scope than the “Defence Mission” budget
alone within the meaning of the LOLF since it also includes a portion
of the allocations to three other missions: Security; Veterans, Remembrance; and Research and Higher Education.
In almost all of the main European countries the share of GDP
devoted to defence thus defined has decreased regularly since the end
of the Cold War. Between 1984 and 2007, the French budget share
decreased from 4% to 2.4% of GDP—at the time of the 1994 White
_Paper it represented 3.38%. The German defence budget went from_
3.2% to 1.3%, the British defence budget from 5.2% to 2.3%, the
Spanish budget from 2.4% to 1.2%. The Italian defence budget is the
only one to remain relatively stable at around 2%.
This drop in the share of GDP has gone hand in hand with stability
or moderate growth in the annual budget in constant terms.


-----

-----

-----

**Defence spending by European countries**
Expressed in purchasing power parity (*) – millions of constant Euros 2007
(NATO nomenclature = defence spending + pensions paid)

**1998** **2002** **2007**

France 41,694 42,281 44,283

United Kingdom 39,875 40,948 45,077

Germany 32,602 33,306 31,430

Italy 27,188 30,377 30,019

Spain 10,779 13,218 14,561

(*) see glossary
Source: NATO-June 2007

Starting in 2008, the financial trend chosen for France’s defence effort
looking to 2020 will result in a moderate rise of credits each year. It will
follow the aggregate trend with respect to national wealth as a share of
GDP. The ratio of defence spending to GDP will thus fall from 2.3% in
2008 to about 2% of GDP in 2020, while annual funding in real terms and
the share of equipment spending within the defence budget will rise.
Regardless of whether spending is expressed in financial terms or
as a share of national wealth, the chosen trendline will place France at
the top of the table for defence spending among European countries,
alongside the United Kingdom. Those two countries represent 42% of
European Union defence spending (2006 data).
However, international comparisons must allow for differences in
the structure of national spending. France’s overall effort thus results
in a lower proportion of spending on equipment and armed forces
operating costs than in the UK budget. Excluding the Gendarmerie and
pensions, the British budget represents a purchasing power of several
billion Euros more than France in these areas.

**Breakdown of 2007 Defence Spending by category**

in % Personnelexcl. Pensions Procurement Functioning
pensions costs and other

France 35.80 20.10 22.40 21.70

Germany 39.30 17.40 15.30 28.10

United 35.60 5.60 24.10 34.70
Kingdom

Spain 34.60 17.70 22.00 25.70

Italy 55.50 24.10 10.90 9.50

Source: NATO

|Col1|Col2|1998|Col4|2002|Col6|2007|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|France||41,694||42,281||44,283|
|United Kingdom||39,875||40,948||45,077|
|Germany||32,602||33,306||31,430|
|Italy||27,188||30,377||30,019|
|Spain||10,779||13,218||14,561|
|(*) see glossary Source: NATO-June 2007 Starting in 2008, the financial trend chosen for France’s defence effort looking to 2020 will result in a moderate rise of credits each year. It will follow the aggregate trend with respect to national wealth as a share of GDP. The ratio of defence spending to GDP will thus fall from 2.3% in 2008 to about 2% of GDP in 2020, while annual funding in real terms and the share of equipment spending within the defence budget will rise. Regardless of whether spending is expressed in financial terms or as a share of national wealth, the chosen trendline will place France at the top of the table for defence spending among European countries, alongside the United Kingdom. Those two countries represent 42% of European Union defence spending (2006 data). However, international comparisons must allow for differences in the structure of national spending. France’s overall effort thus results in a lower proportion of spending on equipment and armed forces operating costs than in the UK budget. Excluding the Gendarmerie and pensions, the British budget represents a purchasing power of several billion Euros more than France in these areas.|||||||
||Breakdown of 2007 Defence Spending by category||||||
|in %|Personnelexcl. pensions||Pensions||Procurement|Functioning costs and other|
|France|35.80||20.10||22.40|21.70|
|Germany|39.30||17.40||15.30|28.10|
|United Kingdom|35.60||5.60||24.10|34.70|
|Spain|34.60||17.70||22.00|25.70|
|Italy|55.50||24.10||10.90|9.50|


-----

###### THE OVERALL NATIONAL SECURITY EFFORT

The overall National Security effort comprises funds allocated to a
number of public policies over and beyond defence policy in the strict
sense of the term. These are budgeted separately as discrete “missions”. This separation will be maintained to ensure clarity of financial
information and performance.
Aside from the Ministries of Defence and Interior, defence and
security co-operation is financed within the budget mission identified
as France’s “Foreign Action” (action extérieure de la France) under the
responsibility of the Minister of Foreign and European Affairs. The
action of the Secretariat General for National Defence (to become the
General Secretariat for Defence and National Security) and the interministerial funds that it manages will remain under the authority of
the mission “Direction of Government Action”. (direction de l’action du
_gouvernement)._
Accompanying each draft budget, a cross-departmental policy document will be provided for the information of Parliament and the general public. This document will be prepared under the responsibility of
the Prime Minister, by the General Secretariat for Defence and
National Security, and is to provide a full overview of the action of the
State, its results and projects.


-----

CHAPTER 18

###### RALLYING THE NATION

National support for the defence and security system is the prerequisite for its effectiveness and the legitimacy of the efforts devoted
to this policy. Today, the support of French society is essential for the
major reforms made necessary by the new international context and
the very nature of the risks confronting the nation. The development of
a National Security strategy, the redefinition of the format of our
armed forces, the capacity of these armed forces to concentrate on the
strategic priorities corresponding to potential risks, and the priority
given to anticipation and crisis management with all the assets of
domestic security and civil security, are major choices which have a
substantial impact. The reasons for these choices must be explained to
the public in order for them to sign up to the objective.
National support will flow from the certainty that the authorities
are doing everything in their power to discharge their essential duty of
protecting the independence and freedom of France. The potential
risks should not be overstated, but the country should be prepared in
case a serious crisis occurs. And people must be made aware that
France could be the target of intentional or natural events causing profound disruption to their daily lives. The capacity of the population to
deal with these events depends on this awareness.
Confidence in the action of public authorities is therefore crucial.
Public opinion needs to be educated and made aware before it can be
informed. A greater understanding of defence and security issues will
improve the public’s ability to weigh events put them in perspective.
This requires the existence of a collective memory, one that is shared
within French society and, increasingly, across European society at
large.


-----

##### A collective awareness of defence and security challenges

Despite a widespread but diffuse awareness that threats have undergone a change of scale and nature, the instability and unpredictability of
today’s world are creating a sense that defence and international security issues are hard to understand. Military risks are often seen as
remote. Some threats such as terrorism are real and present, yet they
elicit a dose of scepticism. At the same time, the growing interpenetration of domestic and external risks reinforces a public concern that
potential adversaries have the capacity to bypass traditional defences.
In addition, the full professionalisation of the army may create an
impression that defence is now the purview of experts and specialists,
imperceptibly widening the gap between the civilian world and the
armed forces.
In this context, providing clear information on the national security strategy and defence policy and domestic security to the public at
large must be a constant government concern.

###### TRAINING AND EDUCATION

Training and educating those who play a key role is a priority, and
this applies more specifically to teachers, local elected officials, journalists, reserve soldiers and NGO’s and civil society leaders.

**Training and education of young people**

Our training policy must first concentrate on the future generations of
French society. They must be made aware of the main thrust of defence
and security policy, since this affects their personal lives as well as the
nation’s sovereignty and the republican institutions of their country.
The cornerstone of training and educating all young people in the
issues of defence and citizenship is a compulsory four-stage ‘citizenship initiation’ programme (parcours citoyen) consisting of: “lessons on
defence” as part of the curriculum for pupils aged approximately 15
and 17, official registration, one day of information (called journée
_d’appel et de preparation à la défense, JAPD, see insert), and enrolment_
in the armed forces, which is still a legal possibility[1].

1. By law, national service remains in being. It has merely been “suspended” but could be reinstated if the need arose.


-----

Only the JAPD has gained any real visibility for the population as
a whole, since it affects an entire age group as it reaches the age of 18.
This role justifies its confirmation. The JAPD will be overhauled. It will
focus on the fundamental mission of raising awareness of the new
environment for our defence and security. It will continue to promote
and disseminate the values of “responsible citizenship” with attendant
rights and duties while, in its new form, emphasising the armed forces
as a career opportunity. Professionals will present life in the armed
forces and new educational tools will be made available to trainers.
The one-day format will be maintained.
Young people will be prepared for the JAPD through the “lessons
on defence” for pupils of 15 and 17 years of age. This is currently
taught by teachers with little training in this subject and who lack the
necessary educational tools. Indeed they do not see the relevance of
this part of the curriculum. The introduction of appropriate goals into
the mission assigned to school principals will be examined in conjunction with the Haut Conseil de l’Education (Higher Education Council)[1].

1. The Higher Education Council is an independent advisory body that can
be asked by ministerial authorities to express opinions on issues of educational
importance.


-----

The reflection on education for the younger generations is an integral part of the reflection on a policy of remembrance and the renewal
of commemorative ceremonies. Events and ceremonies need to be redesigned with an eye to giving young people a role, which should contribute
to the preservation or emergence of a common defence culture.

**Training for local elected officials**

Practical knowledge of defence and security-related issues on the
part of elected officials must be reinforced, as they play a major role
in preserving national cohesion by virtue of their close links with the
population.
They are always involved whenever a crisis occurs, and they can
both teach and mobilise people. They must be more closely involved in
the formulation of local crisis management plans and in all exercises,
and they must be familiar with the organisation of the State in times
of crisis.
Better recognition must be given to the function of “defence correspondent”, which exists today in almost all French towns. As part of
their awareness-raising mission, defence correspondents must report
each year to the town council on the actions carried out.

**Reforming the defence and security institutes**

People from all walks of life, in both the public and private sectors,
and the media in particular, must be made aware of National Securityrelated issues.
Higher-level institutes dealing with defence and security issues
(IHEDN, Institut des Hautes Etudes de Défense Nationale, CHEAr,
_Centre des Hautes études de l’Armement, IERSE, Institut d’Etudes et de_
_Recherche pour la Sécurité des Entreprises, INHES, Institut National des_
_Hautes Etudes de Sécurité) play a key role in training and as an inter-_
face between military and police officers and representatives of civil
society. They already make a substantial contribution to raising the
awareness of professionals in the media and young people.
The mission of the IHEDN (Institut des Hautes Etudes de Défense
_Nationale), since its founding in 1936, has been to nurture a “spirit of_
defence”. It has fulfilled this wide-ranging remit through national,
regional and youth seminars, and it caters to increasingly varied audiences. In the context of its presently planned reform, it will be called
upon to reach out to an even wider array of social and professional
categories.
By autumn 2009, these institutions will be reorganised into two
poles: defence and foreign affairs on the one hand, and domestic secu

-----

rity on the other. In their present form as well as in the future configuration as of 2009, they will be called upon to diversify and broaden
their scope, both nationally and internationally, and to offer courses
adapted to a wide variety of attendees, in particular young people and
elected officials.

###### TOWARDS A NEW CIVILIAN SERVICE

The question of a civilian service is only indirectly related to matters of defence and security. However, this idea is considered attractive
due to memories of the former compulsory military draft and the
social function it fulfilled.
The current public interest, subject to young people’s reactions, in
the idea of instituting a civilian service is inseparable from the role
played by military service in the past. This historic role is still present
in the national consciousness. For more than a century the experience
of military service was a sort of initiation ritual (a “rite of passage”)
and an important element in masculine identity. Over and beyond its
initial function, which was primarily military and served to develop
the patriotic vision of the “nation in arms” inherited from the French
Revolution, military service also played other major social and educational functions. For many young men, “joining the army” was a way
to discover the outside world, in particular for young men from rural
environments who travelled rarely (if at all). It was also an opportunity
to mingle with young people from every social class. Lastly, it was an
opportunity to make up for cultural deficiencies not catered for at
school: in some cases learning to read and write.
The majority of French people welcomed the suspension of military draft, which had become a source of inequality. The new development did not undermine the positive image of the army, since the
armed forces have come to be associated in the public mind with
peace-keeping and humanitarian missions. In addition, the lengthening of compulsory schooling, greater travel opportunities and a general widening of young people’s social experience have apparently
taken over some of the functions provided in the past by the military
service. Yet many think these substitutes have not functioned, or at
least not as well as one might have hoped. To the contrary, social barriers have been reinforced, something the school system has proved
unable to prevent. Social inequality has not increased, despite a widespread misconception, but it comes with new forms of segregation, territorial separation in particular.
The project of a civilian service is an effort to offer a social
response to these concerns.


-----

This is a legitimate demand that needs to be taken seriously, alongside the favourable opinions on civilian service. To that end, the Prime
minister has mandated Mr. Luc Ferry, as chairman of the council for
the analysis of society, to submit recommendations. The challenge lies
neither in the financial constraints, however considerable, nor even in
the material difficulties in organising such a service. But a civilian service alone will not suffice to solve the major problems mentioned
above. Nor can a single homogenous solution deal with the complex
challenge of integrating young people into society. Transforming the
school system and organising access to the labour market are major
targets of government action. In light of these objectives, whichever
formula for the civilian service is chosen, we should be careful it does
not become a source of disappointment
In addition, a civilian service designed as a foundation for
common values and to ensure appropriate social integration can only
be meaningful if it is universal and compulsory. That means it will
concern 500-600,000 young people per year. It would have to be made
compatible with the diversity and demands of school and university
programmes leading to the jobs market. To be able to give young
people a socially useful mission contributing to their training and integration, this would require that all branches of public administration,
civil society at large and the armed forces absorb, train and supervise
large numbers of young people every year.
Thus any form of civil service must take account of the actual
capacity of the various structures under consideration to absorb these
numbers. Young people liable to join a civilian service are entitled to
proper material and professional conditions.
A civilian service should cover a body of identifiable, socially valuable public service tasks that young people can present as a worthwhile human and social experience on their CVs. These must imperatively be publicly useful tasks and recognised as such by the
community. They should be identified in sectors where all young
people, regardless of their social origin and training, could serve a
useful purpose, for example: civil protection, emergency relief work,
assistance to the elderly, hospital visitors, environmental tasks, community sports activities, etc. The future organisation must avoid discrimination between “prestigious” and “less prestigious” activities,
which could lead to counterproductive social and cultural segregation.
These tasks should be offered and organised by diverse and decentralised bodies (local authorities, public administration, public establishments, and recognised civil society organisations), which commit
to providing the training and backup based on precise specifications.
Young people should receive compensation for these tasks.
The organisation must be flexible and allow for adjustable schedules.


-----

The practical organisation of this service cannot be provided by
one ministry alone and, quite specifically, should not fall within the
ambit of the Ministry of Defence due to the essentially civilian nature
of the mission. It requires co-operation amongst ministries, public
establishments and territorial authorities, which implies some coordination between central and regional and academic authorities.
It is of prime importance that young people be able to build upon
the experience thus gained as well as the services rendered under the
civilian service. A “civilian service booklet”, for example, should make
it possible to keep track of what each individual has done and would
be used to validate the results and obtain recognition (priority enrolment in university courses, professional validation of experience).
Lastly, launching the new civilian service should be accompanied by a
wide-ranging nation-wide information campaign.

###### RECOURSE TO VOLUNTEERS

Voluntary activities allow all citizens to engage in active community work for the benefit of their fellow citizens. Members of the Red
Cross, of the Civil Protection and of the National Lifeboat Society are
daily evidence that many of our citizens are willing to contribute to the
general good.
The development of volunteer work in all of its various forms is a
general trend that warrants encouragement and organisation. It can
assume an important role in the context of national security. Restructuring the citizens’ reserve is part of this process.
Since the armed forces became all-professional in 1996, the so-called
citizen reserve represents the second component in the military reserve
alongside the operational reserve. It is composed of men and women who
lack the technical capacity or time to join the operational reserve but who
nonetheless want to support the armed forces. They deserve true recognition because they already contribute to national cohesion and resilience.
Although the reserve plays an important role in society, it suffers
from lack of visibility and clarity in its assigned goals. The term
“reserve” does not reflect the role of this citizen corps, given that it is
not expected to reinforce the operational reserve in operations. The
creation of a national security volunteer corps would better correspond
to requirements while taking account of the desire to participate.
These volunteers could participate in the training and supervision of
the JAPD, be called up in times of crisis and participate in campaigns
aimed at raising the profile of the armed forces and other forces and
administrations which contribute to National Security. They could also
participate as volunteers during national commemorations.


-----

##### Instruments of Research and “Horizon-scanning”

Investing in advanced research and higher education also contributes to a better understanding by society of the defence and security
system. Research and education investments are currently fragmented
between several institutions, universities, Grandes Ecoles and public
research or specialised higher education institutes.
To reorganise this sector effectively, it is necessary to consider all
areas of defence and national security-related research: fundamental
scientific and the technological research associated with it, along with
strategic research and the social and human sciences.
Four areas will be emphasised:

**Scientific and technological research**

In the “hard sciences” there are already links between the Ministries of Defence and Interior and the main research bodies: universities, public and private research institutions, agencies, both on subjects at the border of knowledge and in areas of direct application for
these two ministries (See Chapter 16).
Every financing opportunity must be used with a view to reinforcing and developing co-operation through the establishment of networks, the reinforcement of the dedicated geographical poles and calls
for projects by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (National Research
Agency, ANR) on targeted priority defence and national security
topics.

**University research in defence**
**and security-related social sciences**

Research in social and human science on defence and security
issues is relatively under-represented in university research and does
not contribute sufficiently to the construction of a scientific culture in
that area. Therefore a better balance must be created alongside scientific and technological research in strategic studies.
Although some training centres deal with defence and security
issues and provide the fundamental resources required for expert
research, in France there is no autonomous university centre that can
compete worldwide in this field with foreign institutions (such as the
_National_ _Defence_ _University_ in Washington, the _Universität_ _der_
_Bundeswehr in Germany etc.). Such a situation does not favour the_


-----

necessary dialogue and synergy between expert research and human
and social science.
It is therefore urgent to establish a multi-disciplinary, high quality
university centre that could be recognised as such and that would federate the existing research capabilities.
Setting up such an academic centre in human and social sciences
should enable better inter-disciplinary study of the issues relating to
the military field of endeavour, war as a phenomenon and new forms
of violence in the contemporary world. Dialogue and interaction must
be facilitated between strategic studies and the research in history,
sociology, anthropology, political science, law, psychology and psychopathology, economy, philosophy, cognitive sciences. Such an academic
“nexus” could also serve as an interface with other sciences involved in
every aspect of defence and security policy.
This requires the establishment of university networking of
existing resources and step-by-step enabling contact between otherwise
separate intellectual spheres. To succeed, this process must be carried
out gradually. Three steps can be defined:
— The first step is the creation of a permanent scientific network
linking the various places where defence and security research is
already being done. A flexible structure such as a “scientific interest
grouping” (Groupement d’intérêt scientifique in French law terminology) could oversee projects and publications supported by a number
of proactive universities and institutions.
— The second step is to develop a series of project bids and coordinate all those involved including the Ministry of Higher Education
and Research under the aegis of the ANR. During this phase, exchanges
amongst scientists and research teams from various institutions will be
promoted in order to establish partnerships within the GIS. This
should favour the development of teaching and training projects in the
areas of the defence and security related human and social sciences,
thereby creating within and between institutions, graduate master programmes leading to a doctoral thesis (PhD).
— The third step is more ambitious and entails the transformation
of the GIS into a Foundation for Scientific Co-operation and Research
(fondation de recherche et de coopération scientifique) under the 2006
Research Programme Act. This foundation would support the Euro_pean Doctoral School specifically dedicated to research on defence and_
security issues.

**Ongoing training**

The reorganisation of the major institutions already mentioned
(IHEDN, CHEAr, INHES, IERSE) into two operational centres by the fall


-----

of 2009 will be implemented. New synergy will be developed branching
out from the network of former attendees. These institutes will share
their documentary resources and create a common digital data base.
In addition the internship and research validation systems will be
standardised to enable participants to follow a wide range of training
courses and to enable validation of these training periods.

**Strategic studies**

French strategic studies are not sufficiently developed in comparison with our major partners. This situation bears unfavourably on the
diversity of research and the scientific quality of such studies. It is absolutely necessary to give new impetus to this sector (See Chapter 8).

##### The duty of remembrance

**Apolicyofcommemorationbasedonasharednationalmemory**

France in 2008 is characterised by a dual phenomenon of accretion
and fragmentation of collective memories.
The sedimentation of memories results from the passing of time,
as memories of major armed conflicts and collective emotions grow
more distant. Various communities have their own reading of such
events, and therefore their own ‘memory’; the memory of the great
wars and military remembrance are left to the official circles.
The purpose of a policy of commemoration is to establish a framework within which the different national memories can be debated
and compared, and treated as a matter for historical judgment. This
treatment is especially appropriate to memories of war.
The commemoration policy as defined each year by the Haut Conseil
_de la Mémoire combattante is encountering a number of difficulties_
today. The witnesses of times past are fewer by the day, younger generations are more difficult to reach, and narratives become increasingly contentious, especially when it comes to the painful memories of
colonial wars. Today there is a multiplication of the demands for commemorations. And yet the multiplication of commemorative events,
which in fact only bring together officials, is not the best response to
these difficulties. Nonetheless, it is hard to envisage reducing the
number of official commemoration days. The following must remain
major national events : May 8, June 18 and November 11.
In this context, the commemoration of the end of the First World
_War remains a popular event that contradicts the idea that just_


-----

because an event is far away in time the collective memory would be
attenuated. The national and European significance of Armistice Day
remains an important milestone. Throughout the national territory
which still bears the scars of the conflict (commemorative monuments
and battlefields) the commemoration of the end of the First World War
embodies the nation’s aspiration for unity; memories are not contentious in this instance.
Therefore, this celebration should take on particular significance
because of the quality and symbolic importance of the event, which
occurred at a precise moment in national, European and world history. The competence of elected officials, of the defence correspondents and of public authorities in charge of the celebration can be fortified by the availability of specific educational tools.
Generally speaking, an educational effort toward the younger generations is necessary, but also for all citizens. Innovative educational
experimentation must be encouraged. Places of remembrance will
receive specific teaching materials to enable the public at large to
familiarise itself with an historical approach to events while at the
same time comprehending the symbolism of such events.
Inter-ministerial consultations will be organised on the use of
annual commemorative events for pedagogical purposes. Some of
these commemorations can be used to teach the themes of peace and
war, nation and country, National Security, and the role of the State.
The reflections on commemorations and the transmission of remembrance to young generations must integrate the European dimension,
given the major role played by the EU in the construction of an area of
sustained peace in Europe formerly torn apart by internecine wars.
Lastly, military ritual has considerable power to mobilise people,
one that public opinion appreciates. The importance of rituals in civil
life is being rediscovered. Such popular events contribute to citizens’
sense of collective identity, but also to better understanding of military
questions.

**Showcasing the military heritage**

The Ministry of Defence and the armed forces possess a considerable heritage in the form of valuable historical and architectural monuments, archives kept by the Historical Department of the ministry,
libraries, national museum collections (The Army Museum, the Navy
Museum, Air Force and Space Museum), and collections in the
Museums of Traditions within military units and military schools.
This heritage enables us to better understand our national history
through military history. Consequently a vigorous effort must be made
to develop this heritage and facilitate access to it by everyone.


-----

-----

The new national security strategy lays down an inclusive framework for anticipation, preparation and action. It builds upon France’s
capacity to act on the international scene, to prevent or manage crises,
and to influence international developments in a direction favourable
to French and European interests.
In the Middle East, in Africa, in Asia, within the United Nations
or the Atlantic Alliance, our country will remain a major partner. Its
perceptions, capabilities and mediation are much in demand.
Within the European Union, France intends to remain a standardbearer in Europe’s drive to acquire a true strategic dimension, as a
global security actor able to shoulder its international responsibilities in times of crisis, either on its own or in partnership with the
United States.
The overall force strength is geared to the new strategic priorities
and to a legitimate attention to public spending. These capabilities will
confirm France as one of the foremost strategic powers with global
reach. Yet that will not happen without a thorough overhaul of armed
forces support structure and administration, and a reshaping of management processes. The resulting savings will benefit investment,
maintenance and training.
Methodology too will change in response to this need to adapt.
France’s National Security strategy will henceforth be reviewed each
time a military programme bill comes up for revision, for three
reasons:
— the international context can change quite fast, with the everpresent possibility of strategic surprise or major discontinuity, on the
one hand. This calls for regular reassessment of our strategy’s relevance and suitability, and for the necessary adjustments;


-----

— the tempo of democracy, on the other hand: it is only normal
that the President of the Republic should order a review of French
security strategy when he initiates a multiyear programme;
— lastly, it is vital to rally the public around this strategy, but this
demands periodic debate on the subject.
In order to prepare and facilitate this periodic updating of the
strategy, a process of oversight of the White Paper’s implementation
will be established, involving government, Parliament and ministries.
In particular, this process will include:
— a yearly report to the Council for Defence and National Security, attended by relevant ministries and administrations. Its preparation will involve the Advisory Board appointed by the President
(Conseil consultatif de la défense et de la sécurité nationale, see chapter
15) and will be led by the General Secretariat for Defence and National
Security;
— a yearly exchange of views to be held by the relevant committees of both houses of Parliament, specifically debating implementation of the White Paper;
— a yearly seminar on strategy, to be organised jointly by institutes led by IHEDN and INHES.

This new methodology will address demands that are fundamental
to the success of a National Security strategy, namely flexibility and
adaptation, transparency and democratic ownership. At a time when
strategic uncertainty has become a fundamental tenet of our environment, arranging for periodic debate over our main defence and security policy orientations is necessary to foster public interest and support and, if need be, the resilience of the nation.

All these decisions constitute a response to the consequences of
globalisation in the field of security. Our military capabilities and our
internal and public security resources are major sources of strength for
our country. Over and beyond their primary function of defending and
protecting our population and interests, they are instrumental in projecting the international influence of France and upholding her resolve
to remain a major player in ongoing strategic developments. They are
and will remain fundamental to a positive image of the nation, of its
calling, and its specific role in the world.


-----

###### EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1. The world has changed profoundly since the publication of the
previous White Paper in 1994, in particular under the impact of globa_lisation. The formidable acceleration of information exchanges, the_
increased trade in goods and services as well as the rapid circulation of
individuals, have transformed our economic, social and political environment in both positive and negative ways, as well as the paradigms
of national and international security. The hierarchy of powers has
changed and will continue to evolve. The world is not necessarily more
dangerous, but it has become more unstable, more unpredictable. New
crises, in particular from the Near East to Pakistan, have come to the
fore and have become more interconnected. France and Europe are in
a situation of greater direct vulnerability: jihadism-inspired terrorism
aims directly at them;. as we look to the 2025 horizon, their territory
will fall within the range of ballistic missiles developed by new powers;
new risks have appeared, be it intentional in the case of cyber attacks
or non-intentional, such as health-related or environmental crises
amplified by the deterioration of the biosphere. The White Paper aims
at presenting a strategic appraisal for the next fifteen years, and consequences are drawn in order to put together a new defence and security
policy.
2. The major innovation compared to the previous White Paper is
that the French security interests are appraised globally without restric_ting the analysis to defence issues. A national security strategy is_
defined in order to provide responses to “all the risks and threats which
_could endanger the life of the Nation.” The scope of national security_
includes the defence policy, but is not limited to it. In order to better
guarantee the defence of the interests of France and the mission of
protecting its population, the national security strategy calls upon the


-----

domestic security policy, for anything which is not directly related to
individual security of persons and property or law and order, as well as
the civil security policy. Other policies such as foreign policy and economic policy also contribute directly to national security.
3. The National Security strategy includes five strategic functions
which the defence and security forces must master: knowledge and
anticipation, prevention, deterrence, protection and intervention. The
combination of these five functions must be flexible and evolve over
time, adapting to the changes in the strategic environment. The White
_Paper will therefore be updated before the discussion of each new Mili-_
tary Programme Act (LPM) and Domestic Security Act (LOPSI).
4. Knowledge and anticipation represent a new strategic function
and have become a priority. In a world characterised by uncertainty
and instability, knowledge represents our first line of defence.
Knowledge guarantees our autonomy in decision-making and enables
France to preserve its capacity for strategic initiative. It is knowledge
which must be provided as early on as possible to decision-makers,
military commanders and those in charge of internal and civil security
in order to go from forecasts to informed action. Intelligence of all
kinds, including from space, and prospective studies, therefore take on
major importance.
5. Protection of both the French population and territory is at the
very heart of our strategy because of the existence of new vulnerabilities to which they are directly exposed. The goal is to protect the
nation in times of major crisis while increasing its resilience defined as
the “capability of public authorities and the French society to respond to
_a major crisis and rapidly restore normal functioning.” Reinforcing resi-_
lience requires a change in the means and methods of surveillance
used over the national territory including land, sea, air and now space
and to develop a more rapid and wider in scope, response capability
for French public authorities. Communication and information systems and civil warning systems lie at the centre of the crisis management and preparedness system. One novel aspect is that operational
goals in protection missions are now assigned jointly to both internal
security services, civil security services and the armed forces. Coordination between civilian and military departments and agencies is
one of the fundamental principles of the new strategy.
6. As regards our conflict prevention and intervention capabilities,
the White Paper provides for the concentration on a priority geographical axis from the Atlantic to the Mediterranean, the Arabian-Persian
Gulf and the Indian Ocean. This axis corresponds to the areas where
risks related to the strategic interests of France and Europe are the
highest. The White Paper also takes account of the growing importance
of Asia for national security and favours both presence and co-operation


-----

in this direction from the Indian Ocean. In parallel, France will preserve
its prevention and action capabilities on the Western and Eastern seaboards of the African continent as well as in the Sahel, in particular to
fight against trafficking and acts of terrorism. France will radically
change the existing system of defence and military co-operation agreements to evolve toward a partnership between Europe and Africa and
co-operation in defence and security which will favour the development
and strengthening of African peace-keeping capabilities. The armed
forces will retain sufficient assets in the West-Indies- Guyana zone to be
used for the protection of the Kourou space centre and the fight against
narcotics trafficking. The Gendarmerie and civil security forces will be
reinforced in the overseas départements and territories (DOM-TOMs).
The White Paper also sets forth a series of guidelines for the commitment of French armed forces in foreign theatres.
7. Nuclear _deterrence_ _remains_ _an_ _essential_ _foundation_ _of_ _our_
_National Security strategy. It is the ultimate guarantee of the security_
and independence of France. The sole purpose of the nuclear deterrent
is to prevent any State-originated aggression against the vital interests
of the nation, wherever it may come from and in whatever shape or
form. Given the diversity of situations to which France might be
confronted in an age of globalisation, the credibility of the deterrent is
based on the ability to provide the president with an autonomous and
sufficiently wide and diversified range of assets and options. This
requires the modernisation of two components: the sea-based ballistic
missile submarine force and the airborne missiles carried by nuclearcapable combat aircraft. Even though there may not be any direct
threat of aggression today against France, it is imperative to retain the
capability to preserve the freedom of action of France if our vital interests are threatened with blackmail. France will have the means to
develop its capability as long as nuclear armaments are necessary for
its security. However, France has taken the initiative in the area of
nuclear disarmament and will continue to do so. France is particularly
active in the fight against the proliferation of chemical, biological and
nuclear armaments as well as the delivery missiles.
8. The European ambition stands as a priority. Making the European Union a major player in crisis management and international
security is one of the central tenets of our security policy. France
wants Europe to be equipped with the corresponding military and civilian capability. The White Paper proposes several concrete goals for
European defence in the coming years, namely:
— Setting up an effective intervention force of 60,000 soldiers,
deployable for one year in a distant theatre with the necessary air and
naval forces;


-----

— Achieving the capability to deploy for a significant duration two
or three peace-keeping or peace-enforcement operations and several
civilian operations of lesser scope in separate theatres;
— Increasing the European planning and operational capability
both military and civilian, in parallel to the development of interventions outside the European Union;
— Creating an impetus for and restructuring of the European
defence industry.

In addition, the White Paper emphasises four priority areas for the
protection of European citizens: the reinforcement of co-operation in
the fight against terrorism and organised crime; the development of
European civil protection capabilities; the co-ordination of the defence
against cyber attack; and the securing of energy and strategic raw
materials supply.
Lastly, the White Paper advocates the drafting of a European White
_Paper on defence and security._

9. The White Paper emphasises that the European Union and the
_North Atlantic Alliance are complementary. France is committed to the_
renovation of NATO in particular on the occasion of NATO’s 60[th] anniversary, to be celebrated in 2009.
Europe and the North Atlantic Alliance have changed considerably,
since the decision taken by General de Gaulle in 1966 to withdraw
French forces from the NATO integrated military command, and since
the previous White Paper published in 1994. The European Union has
emerged as a major player in the international community. NATO has
maintained its responsibility for the collective defence of the allies, as
recalled in the Lisbon Treaty, but is also a peace-keeping instrument
(Afghanistan, Kosovo). There is no competition between NATO and the
European Union—the two are complementary: today we need both to
come to grips with the threats and crises.
This reality leads us to advocate the full participation of France in
the structures of NATO. This evolution will go hand in hand with the
reinforcement of the European Union in the area of crisis management
and the search for a new balance between Americans and Europeans
within NATO. As regards the position of France, the White Paper
recalls the three main principles in direct continuity with those defined
by General de Gaulle : (i) complete independence of our nuclear
forces ; (ii) French authorities must retain full freedom of assessment,
which implies the absence of automatic military commitment and the
maintenance of assets allowing for strategic autonomy in particular by
increasing our intelligence capabilities; and lastly, (iii) permanent
freedom of decision, which means that no French forces will be permanently placed under NATO command in peace time.


-----

10. The White Paper defines a consistent defence effort based on
the twofold concern to improve without delay the availability and
_modernisation of the most frequently-used equipment, and launching_
_programmes related to intelligence and preparation for the future. It the-_
refore advocates as a priority the reinforcement of the protection of
our land, sea and air combat forces (individual soldier protection,
armoured vehicles, equipment maintenance, and anti-air and anticruise missile protection of our Navy ships). The White Paper also calls
for the launching of new programmes during the same time frame, in
particular in the field of knowledge and anticipation (knowledge-based
security, observation, electronic intelligence, early warning) on land, at
sea and in the air with the development of surveillance and armed
drones, as well as both offensive and defensive cyber-war capabilities.
11. The new format of our armed forces is to be determined on the
basis of operational goals decided by the government based on the proposals made by the White Paper Commission. The main force levels
proposed are as follows:
— An operational ground force (Force Opérationnelle Terrestre) of
_88,000 men, enabling a force-projection capability of 30,000 soldiers at_
six month notice, 5,000 soldiers on permanent operational alert, and
the capability to mobilise 10,000 soldiers on the national territory to
support civilian authorities in case of a major crisis;
— An aircraft-carrier group including combat, surveillance and
rescue aircraft and helicopters, 18 first-rank frigates, six SSNs and the
_capability to deploy one or two naval groups either for amphibious ope-_
_rations or for the protection of sea lanes;_
— A joint fleet of 300 combat aircraft, regrouping the combat aircraft of both the Air Force and the Navy (Rafale and modernised
_Mirage 2000-D) under the operational command of the Chief of the_
Defence Staff and a single management by the Air Force ; this force
will allow for the permanent deployment of 5 squadrons on our national territory and a force projection capability outside of the national
territory of 70 combat aircraft with an additional capability of 10 aircraft on permanent alert;
12. France will devote a major financial effort to its defence, consis_tent with the priorities and choices made for its operational capabilities._
Therefore defence spending will not decrease. During the initial period
annual resources (excluding pension charges,) will be constant in
volume that is, increasing at the same pace as inflation. They could
include exceptional resources. Then, during a second phase, starting in
the year 2012, the budget will increase at the pace of 1% per year in
_volume, that is, 1% above the inflation rate. Between now and 2020, the_
aggregate effort devoted to defence excluding pensions will amount to
EUR 377 billion. In parallel, restructuring will lead to considerable


-----

decrease in staff over six or seven years and operating cost reductions
in the ministry and the armed forces. The resulting savings will be
totally reinvested in the procurement budget which will increase from an
_average of EUR 15.5 billion in past years to EUR 18 billion on average_
_per year for the period 2009-2020, and also in the improvement of_
defence personnel training and living conditions.
13. Defence industry must be European in order for its companies to
_become competitive worldwide. Individual European countries can no_
longer master every technology and capability at national level. France
must retain its areas of sovereignty, concentrated on the capability
necessary for the maintenance of the strategic and political autonomy of
the nation: nuclear deterrence; ballistic missiles; SSBNs and SSNs; and
cyber-security are amongst the priorities. As regards the other technologies and capacities that it may wish to acquire, France believes that priority should go to the European framework: combat aircraft, drones,
cruise missiles, satellites, electronic components etc., although procurement policy must also include acquisitions on the world market.
14. The reorganisation of public authorities is necessary in order to
_take account of this new national security strategy. The Defence and_
_National Security Council chaired by the President of the Republic will_
be established. The National Intelligence Council will be one of its
major formations. The Prime minister will be in charge of managing
the implementation of the decisions taken by the Defence and National
Security Council. The 1959 Ordinance dealing with the general organisation of defence will be reformed in order to implement this new strategy. In addition, the role of the Parliament will be reinforced considerably, in particular as regards the intervention of French armed forces
in foreign operations, the monitoring of the orientations of the White
_Paper and the policy as regards bilateral defence agreements. Parlia-_
ment plays an important role in expressing the support of the nation
for the national security strategy.
15. The security of the nation depends on the men and women who
choose to serve their country and their fellow citizens. The goal of the
strategy is to enable them to reach the highest possible degree of profes_sionalism in all sectors, both civilian and military, and for all types of_
contracts. Inasmuch as possible, joint training and shared recruitment
policies in the various ministries will be implemented. A special track to
train external and internal intelligence personnel will be set up. In every
category of the Civil Service, awareness to national security issues will
be reinforced in particular for students of the Grandes Ecoles—élite
post-graduate schools for high officials (ENA), police officers (ENSP),
and judges (ENM). The principle of mobility in public administrations
will be instituted for high-potential senior officers.


-----

16. Public support is the necessary condition for the national security
_strategy to be effective. The White Paper advocates a new impulse in the_
following areas: training of young people as well as of elected officials;
redesign of the Compulsory Defence Preparation Day (Journée d’Appel
_pour la Défense – JAPD); creation of a civilian service corps; organisation_
of a coherent and attractive array of voluntary organisations to serve the
security of France; strategic research both at the national and European
levels; creation of a scientific co-operation foundation which could support the European Doctoral School in security studies; reorganisation of
the training provided today by four major institutions into two poles
(defence & foreign affairs; internal security).


-----

-----

###### MEMBERS OF THE FRENCH WHITE PAPER COMMISSION

##### Président

M. Jean-Claude Mallet, conseiller d’État.

##### Secrétariat général

M. Francis Delon, secrétaire général de la défense nationale.

##### Membres

###### AU TITRE DE LA REPRÉSENTATION NATIONALE

Mme Patricia Adam, députée du Finistère[1] ;
M. Didier Boulaud, sénateur de la Nièvre[2] ;
M. André Dulait, sénateur des Deux-Sèvres[3] ;
M. Guy Teissier, député des Bouches-du-Rhône, président de la
commission de la défense nationale (Assemblée nationale) ;
M. Serge Vinçon, sénateur du Cher, président de la commission
des affaires étrangères et de la défense (Sénat)[4].

1. Démissionnaire le 7 avril 2008.
2. Démissionnaire le 7 avril 2008.
3. Successeur de Serge Vinçon, sénateur du Cher, président de la commission des affaires étrangères et de la défense (Sénat), décédé.
4. Décédé le 16 décembre 2007.


-----

###### AU TITRE DES ADMINISTRATIONS

**Ministère de l’Intérieur, de l’Outre-mer**
**et des Collectivités territoriales**

La secrétaire générale du ministère, Mme Bernadette Malgorn ;
Le directeur général de la police nationale, M. Frédéric Péchenard ;
Le directeur général de la gendarmerie nationale, le général d’armée
Guy Parayre.

**Ministère des Affaires étrangères et européennes**

Le directeur général des affaires politiques et de sécurité,
M. Gérard Araud.

**Ministère de l’Économie, des Finances et de l’Emploi**

Le directeur général du trésor et de la politique économique,
M. Xavier Musca.

**Ministère de l’Enseignement supérieur et de la Recherche**

Le directeur de la stratégie à la direction générale de la recherche
et de l’innovation, Mme Laure Reinhart.

**Ministère de la Défense**

Le chef d’état-major des armées, le général d’armée Jean-Louis
Georgelin ;
Le délégué général pour l’armement, M. François Lureau ;
Le secrétaire général pour l’administration, le contrôleur général
des armées Christian Piotre ;
Le directeur général de la sécurité extérieure, M. Pierre Brochand ;
Le directeur chargé des affaires stratégiques, M. Michel Miraillet.

**Ministère du Budget, des Comptes publics**
**et de la Fonction publique**

Le directeur du budget, M. Philippe Josse.


-----

###### AU TITRE DES PERSONNALITÉS QUALIFIÉES

M. Benoît d’Aboville, conseiller maître à la Cour des comptes,
ancien ambassadeur de France à l’OTAN et en République tchèque ;
M. Nicolas Baverez, avocat ;
M. Olivier Darrason, président de l’IHEDN ;
M. Olivier Debouzy, avocat ;
M. Alain Delpuech, directeur, conseiller de l’administrateur général
du Commissariat à l’énergie atomique ;
Mme Thérèse Delpech, directrice des affaires stratégiques au
Commissariat à l’énergie atomique ;
M. Jean-Martin Folz, ancien président directeur-général de PSA
Peugeot Citroën ;
Le général de corps d’armée Pierre Garrigou-Grandchamp,
commandant de la formation de l’armée de terre ;
M. François Heisbourg, conseiller spécial, Fondation pour la
recherche stratégique ;
Mme Danièle Hervieu-Léger, présidente de l’École des hautes études en sciences sociales ;
Le général de corps aérien Patrice Klein, commandant de la région
aérienne Sud et directeur central du matériel de l’armée de l’air ;
M. Thierry de Montbrial, président de l’IFRI ;
M. Bernard Pêcheur, conseiller d’État, ancien secrétaire général
du ministère des Finances, ancien directeur général de la Fonction
publique ;
M. Maurice Quénet, recteur de l’académie de Paris ;
Mme Christine Roger, ambassadrice, représentante permanente de
la France auprès de l’Union de l’Europe occidentale et représentante
permanente de la France au Comité politique et de sécurité de l’Union
européenne à Bruxelles ;
M. Bruno Racine, conseiller maître à la Cour des comptes, président de la Bibliothèque nationale de France ;
L’amiral Édouard Scott de Martinville, chargé de mission auprès
du ministre de la Défense ;
M. François Sureau, avocat, écrivain[1] ;
M. Bruno Tertrais, maître de recherche à la Fondation pour la
recherche stratégique et chercheur associé au Centre de recherches et
d’études internationales.

1. Démissionnaire le 26 novembre 2007.


-----

###### MEMBERS OF THE STAFF

**Président : Jean-Claude Mallet, conseiller d’État**

**Chargé de mission auprès du ministre de la Défense : amiral Édouard Scott de**
Martinville

**Secrétaire général : Francis Delon, conseiller d’État, secrétaire général de la défense**
nationale

**Secrétaire général adjoint : général de corps d’armée Jean Coulloumme-Labarthe**

**Chargée de mission auprès du Président : Nicole Gnesotto**

**Chargés de mission et rapporteurs :**
M. Julien Boucher
Colonel Alain Bouquin
Colonel Bernard de Courrèges d’Ustou
M. Philippe Decouais
M. Manuel Lafont-Rapnouil
M. Jérôme Léonnet
M. Patrick Levaye
Ingénieur principal de l’armement Bruno Marescaux
Mme Julia Maris
M. Dominique Mongin
Mme Jenny Monnin
Colonel Emmanuel de Romémont
M. Paul Serre
Colonel Michel Yakovleff

**Chargés de mission :**
**Contre-amiral Bertrand Aubriot**
Mme Stéphanie Daniel-Genc

**Chargée de mission communication : Mme Patricia Lewin**

**Chargé de mission « Logistique, veille et déplacements » : capitaine Xavier Idier**


-----

###### GLOSSARY

**Biometrics** A set of techniques which provide for the automatic
identification of an individual on the basis of physical
characteristics (finger prints, shape of the hand) or
behavioural characteristics (signature).

**Budgeted mission** The budget of the State is structured into ministerial or
inter-ministerial “missions”. A “mission” includes all
the programmes which contribute to a given policy,
such as defence, security, urban affairs and housing,
justice, the media etc.

**Capability** A unit or function aggregating soldiers and equipment,
organised and trained in application to doctrine.

**Carrier air group** The aircraft onboard an aircraft carrier.

**Civil Defence** Civil defence as defined in the Ordinance dated
7 January 1959 includes security of public authorities,
public order, general security of the territory and civil
security (civilian protection and rescue).

**Coastal semaphore** A coastal outpost with means of detection, traffic
monitoring and communication with ships. The semaphores strung out along the coastline constitute the
“semaphoric chain”.

**Combined arms brigades,** Large tactical units (2,000 to 6,000 strong). The combi**specialized brigades** ned arms brigade comprises several subordinate units
of various branches and is tailored to engage the
enemy directly. The specialised brigade comprises
units which specialise in a function (i.e., artillery, special operations or signals).

**Contracting authority** The contracting authority defines the objective, the
timeline and budget of a project, determines the basic


-----

concept and represents the final users of the project
(see Project manager).

**Counter-Intelligence** Operation aimed at detecting and neutralising security
threats resulting from the intelligence activities of the
services, organisations or agents who are involved in
spying, sabotage, subversion or terrorism.

**Currency, constant** Constant Euros correspond to the real value, that is
corrected for the rise in prices compared to a base or
reference.

**Currency, current** Current Euros are Euros as indicated during a particular period. The value is said to be “nominal”.

**Defence Agreement** Intergovernmental text whereby one country provides
military aid or assistance to another country in case of
a threat or aggression.

**Defence and security zone French territory is divided in “defence and security**
zones” which comprise a number of administrative
regions under the authority of a prefect. This territorial
unit ensures cooperation between civil and military
authorities, coordination of civil security assets, administration of the police and of the communications system of the ministry of the interior.

**Defence Correspondent** Town Counsellor appointed to be in charge of defence
**(municipal)** and security issues including the role of informing the
population and young people in particular (registration, JAPD).

**DOM-COM** _Départements_ _d’outre-mer,_ _collectivités_ _d’outre-mer._
French overseas territorial units. The four départements
_d’outre-mer are La Réunion (in the Indian Ocean),_
French Guyana (in South America), La Martinique and
La Guadeloupe (both in the Carribean). They are fullyfledged départements with the peculiarity of also assuming the administrative level of région. The collectivités
_territoriales_ each have a specific status. They are
French Polynesia, New Caledonia, Mayotte (in the
Indian Ocean), St-Pierre-et-Miquelon (off Newfoundland), St Martin and St Barthélémy (both in the
Caribbean), Wallis-et-Futuna (in the Southern Pacific).
Other French possessions devoid of local administration
are Terres australes et antarctiques françaises (TAAF) and
Iles Eparses (in the Mozambique channel).

**Domestic and Civil Security** Assets contributing to the security of the national
**Provisions** territory: forces and administrations in charge of
public order, intelligence, national civil security assets
(emergency warning systems, aviation, instruction
and intervention units, de-mining) and territorial assets


-----

(civilian fire brigade, Paris fire brigade, Marseille
Marine Fire Battalion, assets from other ministries
(health, transport).

**Dual-use** Something which can have both military and civilian
applications.

**Echelon, emergency** The so-called “emergency echelon” comprises land
forces on very high readiness status. The designated
force is, drawn from the Metropolitan France reserve
or from pre-positioned troops in the vicinity of the
emergency.

**Echelon, multirole** The so-called “multirole echelon” of land forces represents a compromise between rapidity of projection
and the capability to participate in medium or high
intensity operations. The force is tailored with a wide
range of assets and can adapt to the mission as it
evolves.

**Echelon, decisive** The so-called “decisive force” fields the necessary force
strength to achieve decisive tactical advantage on the
battlefield. In a high intensity operation these are
heavy forces with a high proportion of lethal, longrange, precision weapons.

**Emergency legislation** Body of specific legislation applying in case of major
crisis. In addition to the exceptional powers under article 16 of the French Constitution, the existing legislation defines “state of siege” or “state of emergency”.

**Equipment, “fleet”** The fleet or inventory refers to the equipment actually
owned and evolves in keeping with deliveries of new
equipment, decommissioning of old equipment and
losses.

**Equipment issued (“line”)** Items of equipment that have been issued to units. The
quantity is calculated in order to meet the “operational
contract” and training requirements.

**Exclusive Economic Zone** A zone extending up to 200 nautical miles from the
**(EEZ)** seashore. The coastal states enjoys sovereign rights
over the area.

**Force generation** Process involving the build-up of the force necessary to
conduct an operation.

**Forces, civil security** Civil security forces are specialized units and civil
security services under the authority of the Ministry
of the Interior, comprising training and intervention
units, bomb disposal units, air assets for rescue and
fire-fighting, fire brigades under military or civilian
status.


-----

**Forces, public security** Public security forces are those forces that provide the
day to day security of citizens and property (police and
territorial units of the gendarmerie), as well as riot
police (CRS and “gendarmerie mobile”).

**Framework Nation** A State which has received political or military mandate, on a voluntary basis, to take responsibility for the
command of an operation. It provides for the relevant
command structure and, in principle, the largest
contingent of forces required.


**General review of public**
**policies (Révision générale**
_des politiques publiques,_
RGPP)


General review of public policies launched in July 2007
whereby all State expenditures are scrutinized in order
to identify the cost-cutting reforms which would
improve the effectiveness of said policy.


**Improvised explosive** A rudimentary design used to destroy, handicap or
**device (IED)** slow down the enemy, usually camouflaged as an innocuous object.

**International waters** Maritime zone which is outside the coastal waters of
any adjacent State and which begins beyond the external limit of the EEZ (exclusive economic zone,
200 nautical miles from the coast).

**Interoperability** Capability of several systems, units or bodies to operate
together thanks to the compatibility of their organisation,
doctrine, procedures, equipment and communications.

**Life-cycle cost** Cost of an item which includes procurement as well as
operating costs, maintenance, modernisation, decommissioning and dismantling.

**Missile, ballistic** Missile where part of the trajectory is ballistic, that is
influenced only by the force of gravity and aerodynamic drag.

**Missile, cruise** Missile which flies at high speed and at very low altitude. It has an autonomous navigation system designed
to reach the target thanks to an inertial, satellite or
topographic guidance device.

**Missile, ramjet** Missile equipped with a ramjet.

**Nuclear Policy Council** Established in April 2008, the Council sets the main
orientations of nuclear policy and monitors its implementation in particular as regards exports and international cooperation, industrial policy, energy policy,
research, safety, security and environmental protection.

**Nuclear safety** The whole range of provisions made to ensure nominal
operation of a nuclear facility, to prevent accidents and
limit their effects. Nuclear safety extends throughout
the life-time of the facility, from conception to construction, operational life and decommissioning.


-----

**Operational level** The higher level of military command deployed in
theatre or responsible for a large geographical zone.
Theatre command is assumed by a single authority
(theatre commander) and includes military, civilianmilitary and political-military dimensions. It is by definition a joint command.

**Over the horizon radar** Electromagnetic wave detection system whose frequency and waveform are such that they reach beyond
the maximal theoretical limits of detection due to the
curvature of the earth.

**Parliamentary Delegation** A body established by law whose mission is to oversee
**for Intelligence** activity and assets of the intelligence services of the
Ministries in charge of domestic security, defence, economy, and budget and to formulate recommendations
and observations to the President of the Republic and
the Prime Minister.

**Pandemic** An epidemic affecting a large proportion of the population on one or several continents.

**Pay scale** Scale composed of grades used to determine salary.
The scale depends on the category, the corps or type of
employment of the employee, his/her grade and
seniority.

**Private military company** A private company taking part in military operations in
the form of assistance, advice or direct support. Some
private military companies deliver services which were
traditionally considered the preserve of regular forces.

**Project manager** The project manager guarantees the project design and
implementation of the technical solutions which meet
the requirements of the contracting authority (see
_Contracting authority)._

**Public Private Partnership Partnership** contract whereby a public authority
entrusts to a private company, a comprehensive mission including the total or partial design, building,
maintenance and management of infrastructure or
public equipment and services contributing to the
public service mission of the administration.

**Purchasing power parity** Purchasing power parity is the rate of monetary
**(PPP)** conversion which enables the expression of purchasing
power in different currencies in a common unit. The
rate gives the quantity of monetary units required in
different countries to purchase the same basket of
goods and services.

**Security Agreement** Intergovernmental text which enables the exchange of
classified information between two parties.


-----

**Security Sector Reform** Action of supporting the legitimate authority of a state
**(SSR)** after a conflict in particular its security institutions
(police and armed forces) and a fair and independent
judiciary.

**Sensor** Means and equipment used to collect intelligence by
detecting objects and activities. Sensors generally
relate to the function of knowledge and anticipation.

**Sovereign forces** Forces stationed in the national territory outside of
metropolitan France, under permanent responsibility
of a designated zone commander. These forces, for the
most part, fall under the function of protection.

**Space surveillance** A space surveillance system is made up of sensors,
communication networks and command facilities that
identify risks and threats on space-based or transiting
objects.

**Stability Programme** Created under the Stability and Growth Pact of the EU
as a tool for multilateral monitoring of economic
policy; these programmes project the state of public
finances over a period of five years. All members of the
EU send a stability programme to Brussels each year
before December.

**Stationed forces** Forces permanently deployed on the territory of states
which have signed a bilateral agreement with France
or in maritime zones.

**Time reversal signal** Procedure of physics whereby an acoustic or ultra**processing** sound wave is reversed back to its source. The applications are numerous including medical imaging, nondestructive control, and submarine imaging and telecommunications.

**UAV (Drone)** Unmanned aerial vehicle (remotely piloted vehicle).

**Visa Information System** The Visa Information System will be fielded between
European Union member states in order to facilitate
control at the external borders or within member
states.


-----

###### APPENDICIES


-----

-----

-----

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

Mr State Councillor:


Paris, July 26, 2007


Since 1994, major evolutions have impacted the international
environment and the strategic assumptions of our defence and security
policy: the 9/11 attacks, the rise of new regional centres of power, the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, effects of globalisation and
of technological evolution. In parallel the professionnalisation of our
armed forces and the end of conscription have led to radical evolutions
of our defence. As a result, the time has come to make choices which
will be decisive for the defence of our country, and which will have to
be carried out in the next Military Programme Act. This Act must reinforce the credibility of our defence whilst taking into account the financial constraints weighing on the State.

In order to take full account of these parameters in a coherent
approach, I have decided to launch a thorough review of our overall
defence policy. This should lead to the production of a new White Paper.
This work will be carried under the aegis of a Commission which I have
decided to appoint to you as Chairman.

The White Paper shall define a global concept of defence for our
country and its interests. It shall address the domains of defence and
security. It shall cover the next fifteen years, with the prospect of regular
updating.

You will base your review on an analysis of the new international
context, from an economic and strategic point of view, and an assessment of risk and potential threats, bearing in mind the protection of our
population and territory, as well as of French nationals on foreign soil,
whilst ensuring the independence of our country and the preservation of
its strategic interests, in the wider sense of these words.

Based on these considerations, your assessment, as well as the recommendations you will formulate, should in particular address an evolution of our alliances and of our defence agreements, and examine the
conditions under which our armed forces can be engaged abroad. I
expect you to focus specifically on the reinforcement of the European
dimension of our defence and security policy as well as on our contribution to the security of the Atlantic Alliance as a whole.


-----

You will examine the conditions pertaining to the credibility of our
deterrent. You will assess the relevance of the format and stationing of
our armed forces, the coherence of our effort in the field of intelligence,
of the industrial, technological and scientific foundations of our defence
capabilities, the organisation of our civil and economic defences and
how to improve co-ordination with military defence, in order to ensure
the effective functioning of public authorities, to develop means of combating terrorism and proliferation, and to improve prevention and management of crises. The economic and social consequences of the suggested orientations will have to be addressed. Lastly, you are requested
to express recommendations for a closer involvement of Parliament in
the definition and implementation of our defence policy.

Your reflection shall be free of any preconceptions. It
should lead to a candid and transparent vision of the choices to be
made in order to adapt our defence, to reinforce the link between the
Nation and its armed forces, and to organise the evolution of our
industrial and research establishment in a national and European
context. It should be based on the premise that the defence share of
GDP is to be maintained around 2%.

Your work should pay due consideration to other assessments pertaining to the Overall Review of Public Policies which I have launched,
and in particular to the strategic review of our weapons programmes.

You will chair a Commission widely involving a wide array of representatives of civil society, including representatives of Parliament to be
appointed by the Presidents of the National Assembly and of the Senate,
as well as high-ranking civil and military personnel from the administrations involved. Taking into account the priority I intend to give to European defence, I expect you to organise exchanges as appropriate with
our main European partners.

The secretariat of the Commission will be ensured by the
Secretary-General for National Defence. I have instructed the various
ministers concerned to offer their fuldl support and that of their
administrations.

You will submit the White Paper to me by early March 2008. In the
interval, I expect a progress report by the end of 2007.

Yours sincerely,

Nicolas SARKOZY


-----

###### DÉCRET

**Décret n° 2007-1144 du 30 juillet 2007 portant création**
**d’une commission chargée de l’élaboration du Livre blanc**
**sur la défense et la sécurité nationale.**

NOR : PRER0710784D
version consolidée au 4 juin 2008

Le Président de la République,

Sur le rapport du Premier ministre,

**Article 1**
Il est créé, auprès du Président de la République, une commission
chargée de l’élaboration du livre blanc sur la défense et la sécurité
nationale.

La commission peut entendre ou consulter toute personne de son
choix.

**Article 2**
M. Jean-Claude Mallet, conseiller d’État, est nommé président de la
commission instituée par le présent décret.

**Article 3**
Le secrétaire général de la défense nationale est secrétaire général
de la commission.


-----

**Article 4**
Sont membres de la commission :

1) Deux députés et deux sénateurs désignés par le président de leur
assemblée respective.

2) Au titre des administrations :

a. - Ministère de l’Intérieur, de l’outre-mer et des collectivités territoriales :
Le secrétaire général du ministère ;
Le directeur général de la police nationale.

b. - Ministère des Affaires étrangères et européennes :
Le directeur général des affaires politiques et de sécurité.

c. - Ministère de l’Économie, des Finances et de l’Emploi :
Le directeur général du trésor et de la politique économique.

d. - Ministère de l’Enseignement supérieur et de la Recherche :
Le directeur de la stratégie à la direction générale de la recherche
et de l’innovation.

e. - Ministère de la Défense :
Le chef d’état-major des armées ;
Le directeur général de la gendarmerie nationale ;
Le délégué général pour l’armement ;
Le secrétaire général pour l’administration ;
Le directeur général de la sécurité extérieure ;
Le directeur chargé des affaires stratégiques.

f. - Ministère du Budget, des Comptes publics et de la Fonction
publique :
Le directeur du budget.

3) Les personnalités qualifiées suivantes :

M. Benoît d’Aboville, conseiller maître à la Cour des comptes,
ancien ambassadeur de France auprès de l’OTAN et auprès de la République tchèque ;
M. Nicolas Baverez, avocat ;
M. Olivier Darrason, président de l’Institut des hautes études de
défense nationale ;
M. Olivier Debouzy, avocat ;
M. Alain Delpuech, directeur, conseiller de l’administrateur général
du Commissariat à l’énergie atomique ;


-----

Mme Thérèse Delpech, directrice des affaires stratégiques au Commissariat à l’énergie atomique ;
M. Jean-Martin Folz, ancien président-directeur général de PSA
Peugeot Citroën ;
M. le général de corps d’armée Pierre Garrigou-Grandchamp, commandant de la formation de l’armée de terre ;
M. François Heisbourg, conseiller spécial, Fondation pour la
recherche stratégique ;
Mme Danièle Hervieu-Léger, présidente de l’École des hautes
études en sciences sociales ;
M. le général de corps aérien Patrice Klein, commandant de la
région aérienne Sud et directeur central du matériel de l’armée de
l’air ;
M. Thierry de Montbrial, président de l’Institut français des relations internationales ;
M. Bernard Pêcheur, conseiller d’État ;
M. Maurice Quénet, recteur de l’académie de Paris ;
Mme Christine Roger, ambassadrice, représentante permanente de
la France auprès de l’Union de l’Europe occidentale et représentante
permanente de la France au Comité politique et de sécurité de l’Union
européenne à Bruxelles ;
M. Bruno Racine, conseiller maître à la Cour des comptes, président de la Bibliothèque nationale de France ;
M. l’amiral Édouard Scott de Martinville, chargé de mission auprès
du ministre de la Défense ;
M. François Sureau, avocat, écrivain ;
M. Bruno Tertrais, maître de recherche à la fondation pour la
recherche stratégique et chercheur associé au Centre de recherches et
d’études internationales.

**Article 5**
Le Premier ministre est chargé de l’exécution du présent décret,
qui sera publié au Journal officiel de la République française.

Par le Président de la République :
Nicolas Sarkozy

Le Premier ministre,
François Fillon


-----

###### TABLE OF MAPS AND CHARTS

Number of internet users – 1991-2008 (in millions) .................. 21

Contributions to UN operations in 2008 ..................................... 22

Environment and climate change : consequences in 2008 ........ 26

Major terrorist attacks since September 2001 ............................ 28

Global defence spending (in 2007 dollars billion) ...................... 30

Global defence spending (in 2007 dollars billion
– excl. Western Europe and North America) ............................. 31

Areas of conflict and tension in 2008 .......................................... 40

Ballistic capabilities and the arc of crisis-1994-2015 ................. 49

Access to internet in 2008 ............................................................. 52

The main strategic axis: from the Atlantic
to the Indian Ocean ....................................................................... 72

EU military and civilian operations in 2008 ............................... 79

The geo-energy context in the EU in 2010 .................................. 92

NATO operations and military missions in 2008 ........................ 99

EU and NATO member states in 2008 ......................................... 103

Main satellite-owning countries .................................................... 130

The new organisation for intelligence .......................................... 133

French forces overseas in 2008 ..................................................... 150

Major narcotic routes to Europe in 2008 .................................... 152

Health crises in the world in 2008 ............................................... 155

Defence and security zones ........................................................... 173

Detection and early warning ......................................................... 177

Major arms exporters 2003-2006 Estimated market share ........ 268


-----

Foreign operations (OPEX)
Change in additional costs from 1998 to 2008 (M€) ................... 275

Defence spending trends in Europe in % of GDP
(Scope: NATO, Gendamerie including pensions,
excluding veterans) ........................................................................ 283

Defence spending trends – constant prices – base 100: 1990
(Scope: NATO, Gendarmerie including pensions,
excluding veterans) ........................................................................ 284


-----

###### TABLE OF CONTENTS

Foreword by the President of the French Republic ................ 9
Introduction ................................................................................ 13

**I**
###### From globalisation to the national security strategy

CHAPTER 1: The impact of uncertainty ...................................... 19

_Positive developments since 1994 .............................................._ 19

_Worrying trends ..........................................................................._ 23
Globalisation’s downside (23) – Changing forms of violence (27) – The
rise in global military spending (29) – Major unresolved crises (32)

_Boxes: The growing role of non-State actors (24) – Jihadism, Islamism,_
_Terrorism (27)_

_The new strategic situation and instability ..............................._ 33
The progressive shift in the centre of strategic gravity towards Asia
(33) – The relative decline of the Western powers (34) – The fragilities
of the system of collective security (35) – Fragile States and lawless
areas (37) – Strategic surprises and upsets (37)

_Boxes: Strategic issues in Asia (34) – The United States – still a major power in_
2025 (36) – Russia: the return of power politics (38)

CHAPTER 2: Consequences for France and Europe ................... 41

_Four critical regions ...................................................................._ 41
The arc of crisis, from the Atlantic to the Indian Ocean (41) – Security
in sub-Saharan Africa (43) – The European continent (45) – The effect
of major conflicts in Asia (46)

_Boxes: Rising tensions from the Atlantic to the Indian Ocean (42) – Africa, still_
poor, but increasingly coveted (44) – North Africa: co-operation, risks and
hopes (45)


-----

_New vulnerabilities for Europe’s territory and its citizens ........_ 47
Terrorism (47) – Missile threats (48) – Major cyber attacks (48) –
Espionage and strategies of influence (51) – Serious criminal trafficking (51) – New natural and health risks (53) – Heightened technological risks (53) – Exposure of citizens abroad (53)

_Box: Major cyber attacks (50)_

_The new parameters of security .................................................._ 54
The growing connectivity of threats and risks (55) – The continuity
between internal and external security (55) – The possibility of sudden
strategic upsets (56) – Changes affecting military operations (56).

_Box: Hierarchy of risks and threats on French soil 2008 (54)_

CHAPTER 3: The National Security strategy ............................... 57

_The place and responsibilities of France ...................................._ 57

_National Security strategy: definition and objectives ................_ 58
Anticipation and responsiveness (59) – Resilience (59) – A capacity for
build-up (60)

_Redefining the key strategic functions ......................................._ 60
Knowledge and anticipation (61) – Prevention (62) – Deterrence (64)
– Protection (66) – Intervention (67)

_Box: Globalisation and the rise of the emerging powers (64)_

_The reform of the Ordinance of January 7, 1959 ......................_ 70

_Box: Guidelines for the commitment of French armed forces abroad (71)_

**II**
###### European and international ambition

CHAPTER 4: France’s ambition for Europe ................................ 75

_The European Union, an actor in the field_
_of international security ............................................................._ 76

_Box: Examples of the European Union’s contribution to international stability_
(77)

_Institutional developments ........................................................._ 78

_Boxes: The mutual assistance clause (80) – The solidarity clause (81)_

_Giving priority to crisis management capabilities ....................._ 82
Expanding available capabilities (82) – Reforming procedures for the
funding of external operations (84) – Training and instruction of personnel (85)


-----

_A streamlined and competitive European industry ..................._ 86

_More effective protection for the citizens of Europe .................._ 87
Enhancing European co-operation against terrorism and organised
crime (88) – The development of European civil protection (89) –
Coordinating Europe’s defences against cyber attacks (89) – Integrated management of operational co-operation at the frontiers of the
Union (90) – Securing Europe’s strategic supplies (90)

_For a European White Paper on defence and security ..............._ 90

CHAPTER 5: Renovating the transatlantic partnership .............. 93

_The European Union and NATO,_
_two complementary organisations ............................................._ 93

_Box: The European Union and NATO complement each other: the “Berlin Plus”_
agreement (94)

_NATO and international strategic developments ......................._ 97
A central international crisis management instrument (97) – Questions for the future (100) – Renewing NATO (100)

_Box: Threats or conflicts liable to involve the Atlantic Alliance (98)_

_Renewing relations between France and NATO ........................_ 101

CHAPTER 6: Collective security in the XXI[st] century ................. 105

_Multilateralism continues to be a founding principle ..............._ 105

_The central role of the United Nations ......................................._ 106
The responsibility of the permanent members of the Security Council
(107) – The legitimacy and representativeness of the United Nations
(108)

_Adapting to the demands of prevention,_
_non-proliferation and disarmament ..........................................._ 108

_Boxes: Fighting proliferation (110) – Nuclear disarmament: the action plan pro-_
posed by France (112)

_New collective institutions and regional_
_security organisations ................................................................._ 113
New frameworks for global security challenges (113) – Bolstering
regional security organisations (114)

_The defence of human rights ......................................................_ 114

_The role of the European Union_
_in international governance ........................................................._ 115


-----

**III**
###### A new strategy for action

CHAPTER 7: What operations? ..................................................... 119

_Consequences of the new balance of strategic functions .........._ 119

_Likely operational commitments ................................................_ 120
Operations on French national territory (121) – Military operations
(121) – Combined civil and military operations outside national territory (123)

CHAPTER 8: Knowledge and anticipation ................................... 125

_Intelligence .................................................................................._ 125
An indispensable focus on human resources (126) – Developing technical capabilities (127) – The National Intelligence Council (129) – An
appropriate legal framework (134)

_Boxes: Space intelligence and the fight against proliferation (128) – The French_
intelligence services (131) – The role of space in the national defence and security strategy (135)

_Knowledge of potential theatres of operation ............................_ 136
France’s presence in theatres of operation (136) – Area studies (136) –
Geophysical data requirements (136)

_Benefiting from the diplomatic network ...................................._ 137

_“Horizon-scanning” ....................................................................._ 138

_Knowledge management ............................................................._ 139

_Box: Key decisions relating to knowledge and anticipation (141)_

CHAPTER 9: Prevention ................................................................ 143

_A permanent early-warning system ............................................_ 143

_Reorientation of cooperation in the field of defence and security 144_
Better geographic distribution (144) – A new approach to bilateral
defence agreements (146) – An overall approach to defence and security co-operation (147) – Reconfiguration of pre-positioned resources
(148)

_Box: An example of partnership: the Mediterranean basin (145)_

_The fight against trafficking ........................................................_ 149
Prevention of trafficking (149) – Surveillance of European Union borders (151)

_Arms control and anti-proliferation capabilities ......................._ 153

_Preventing major unintentional crises ......................................._ 154

_Box: Massive highly-lethal pandemics (156)_


-----

_Preventive deployment in potential crisis zones ........................_ 157

_Box: Bilateral defence agreements to which France is party at January 1, 2008_
(159)

CHAPTER 10: Deterrence .............................................................. 161

_Two complementary and modernised components ..................._ 161

_Maintaining technical credibility ................................................_ 163

_Maintaining communication capability with the nuclear forces_ 164

_Resources required to ensure the safety_
_of the seaborne component ........................................................._ 164

_Resources required in support of the air component ................_ 165

CHAPTER 11: Protection ............................................................... 167

_Protecting the nation against crises on a wider scale ..............._ 168
In-depth control and surveillance of national land, sea and air space
(168) – Response to the evolving threat situation (171)

_Boxes: The fight against terrorism (168) – Defence and security zones (172) –_
Detection and early warning (176) – Large-scale natural or technological disasters (178)

_Strengthening the resilience of the nation .................................._ 179
Protecting critical infrastructure (179) – Improving the public communication, information and alert mechanisms (180)

_Box: Critical sectors (179)_

_Improving crisis management on French soil ..........................._ 183
At central level (183) – At decentralised level (185)

_Establishing objectives and operational contracts_
_for the domestic and civil security structures_
_and for the armed forces ............................................................._ 187

_Box: Crisis in the French overseas départements and territories (DOM-COM) (188)_

_Strengthening cooperation with European States ....................._ 188

_Box: Main decisions relating to the protection of the population and territory_
(190)

CHAPTER 12: Intervention ............................................................ 191

_Overall objective .........................................................................._ 191

_Box: Special operations (192)_

_Outlook for future operations ...................................................._ 193
Multinationality – Interoperability (193) – Versatility (193) – Force
protection (193) – Populations (194) – Personnel and morale (195) –
The quantitative factor (195)

_Box: Stabilisation operations (196)_


-----

_Keys to operational superiority ..................................................._ 197
Information – Communication – Space (197) – Offensive cyber-war
(199) – Technological capabilities (200) – Mobility (200)

_Box: Command, communications and control systems for overseas operations (198)_

_The main objectives of operational capabilities ........................._ 202
Major military intervention capabilities (202) – The priorities and their
phasing over time (206) – Objectives for civilian capabilities (207)

_Boxes: Commitment of French armed forces to a major regional conflict (203)_
– A second aircraft carrier? (205) – Support for fighting forces (209) – Key decisions regarding intervention (210)

CHAPTER 13: The force structure ................................................ 211

_The armed forces ........................................................................_ 211
Land component (213) – Naval component (214) – Air component
(216) – Joint capabilities (217) – Force strengths (218)

_Domestic and civil security provisions ......................................_ 218
National police (219) – Gendarmerie Nationale (219) – Civil security
(220) – Customs (221)

**IV**
###### A roadmap for change

CHAPTER 14: Professionals serving the nation ........................... 225

_A professional army geared to the new balance of its missions_ 227
The challenge of restructuring (227) – Adaptation to missions (229)

_National security human resources ..........................................._ 235
Developing inter-ministerial cooperation on human resources (235) –
Strengthening crisis management preparedness (236) – The intelligence professions (238)

_European and international outlook .........................................._ 238

CHAPTER 15: Government reorganisation .................................. 241

_A new organisation at the highest level of the State ................._ 241
The President of the Republic and the Defence and National Security
Council (241) – The Prime Minister in charge of government action (243)

_A stronger role for Parliament ...................................................._ 244

_Clarification of ministerial responsibilities_
_and better governance ................................................................._ 245
Ministry of Defence (245) – The Ministry of the Interior (247) – The
Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs (248) – The Ministry of the
Economy (249) – Other ministries (250)


-----

CHAPTER 16: Industry and research ............................................ 251

_A competitive but fragmented industry ......................................_ 251
A competitive French industry (251) – A fragmented French and European defence industry (252)

_Box: The gap between the United States and Europe (253)_

_An industrial strategy with a European focus ..........................._ 254
The three circles of industrial policy (254) – Developing world-class
European champions (254) – An industrial strategy extending to all
sectors of security (257)

_Box: The technical and industrial priorities arising from strategic National Secu-_
rity objectives to 2025 (256)

_The strategic role of research ......................................................_ 258
Pooling defence and security research efforts (258) – Promoting
synergies between civil research and defence and security research
(259) – Supporting the most innovative small firms (259) – Pooling
research efforts at European level (260)

_Box: Some of the technological and scientific breakthroughs predicted by_
2020-2030 (260)

_A new partnership between the defence industry_
_and the State ..............................................................................._ 261
More efficient procurement (261) – Modernising maintenance of operational serviceability (266) – Boosting exports (267) – Developing a
logic of influence (271)

_Boxes: The life-cycle cost of equipment (263) – Reinforcing technical, economic_
and financial control of arms programmes (264) – More responsive procurement capabilities (266) – Government support mechanisms for pre-approved
arms exports (269) – Controlling arms exports (270) – Inward investment: eleven sectors of activity subject to prior authorisation (271)

CHAPTER 17: Financing the strategy ........................................... 273

_Redefining the Nation’s defence effort ........................................_ 273
Defence spending in 2008 (273) – The general budgetary strategy
(276) – Decisions taken (277)

_How domestic security will contribute to National Security ...._ 280

_Improved management of National Security_
_and defence spending .................................................................._ 281

_Assessing total National Security spending ..............................._ 282
Defence spending and international comparisons (282) – The overall
National Security effort (286)


-----

CHAPTER 18: Rallying the nation ............................................... 287

_A collective awareness of defence and security challenges ........_ 288
Training and education (288) – Towards a new civilian service (291) –
Recourse to volunteers (293)

_Box: JAPD: Journée d’appel et de préparation à la défense A mandatory_
“Defence Preparation Day” (289)

_Instruments of Research and “Horizon-scanning” ...................._ 294

_The duty of remembrance ..........................................................._ 296

Executive Summary ....................................................................... 301

Members of the French White Paper commission ..................... 309

Members of the staff ...................................................................... 312

Glossary .......................................................................................... 313

Appendicies ..................................................................................... 319
Lettre de mission (320) – Décret (324)

Table of maps and charts............................................................... 327

Printed in France
in July 2008
by SAGIM-CANALE (Country 77181)

Setting and layout
by NORD COMPO (France)

9768908-2-X
Copyright deposit : July 2008
Printer number : 00000


-----

