# STRATEGIC UPDATE

## 2021


-----

-----

STRATEGIC UPDATE

2021


-----

FOREWORD BY THE FRENCH MINISTER OF THE ARMED
FORCES ............................................................................................7

#### 1. The proven degradation of the strategic context .....11

1.1. Confirmation of the assessments in the 2017 Defence
and National Security Strategic Review ...........................11

1.1.1. Entrenched crises and structural fragility........................11

1.1.2. Persistent threats ...............................................................14

1.1.3. Increasingly widespread use of hybrid and multifaceted
strategies ............................................................................17

1.2. Accelerating trends and overlapping crises ....................19

1.2.1. United States: disengagement versus rivalry
with China .............................................................................19

1.2.2. Development of Russian and Chinese power politics .....20

1.2.3. Emboldened regional powers in the Middle East and

the Mediterranean ...........................................................21

1.3. Implications for the international order and for
Europe .....................................................................................23


1.3.1. The international order and security architecture are
increasingly contested.......................................................24

1.3.2. The risk of a strategic downgrade for Europe and

France ................................................................................25


-----

#### 2. Adaptations underway and challenges to take up .....26

2.1. Adaptations to our defence have been initiated ...........26

2.1.1. Enhancing and adapting our defence strategy ................26

2.1.2. 2019-25 MPL: a concrete effort to rebuild our forces ..........28

2.1.3. Mobilisation of our partners and allies .........................29

2.2. What challenges do we face in order to play our role
as a stabilising power? ......................................................34

2.2.1. Adaptations to our defence have been initiated..................34

2.2.2. DTIB: consolidate through balanced cooperative

ventures and stimulate through investment .................37

2.2.3. Contributing to the Nation’s resilience ............................40

2.2.4. Ambition 2030: stepping up current efforts.......................42


-----

-----

### FOREWORD

 BY THE FRENCH MINISTER

 OF THE ARMED FORCES

Since the publication of the 2017 Defence and National Security Strategic
Review — the framework that laid the foundations for the Military Planning
Law (MPL of 13th July 2018) for 2019-2025 — our strategic environment has
been in a constant state of flux, as the President of the French Republic
noted on 7th February 2020 in his speech on defence and deterrence
strategy at the École Militaire. Certain trends that were already in play have
been confirmed, while others have accelerated and a number of disrup­
tive events have made their mark. The Covid-19 pandemic, in particular,
has provoked major social and economic upheavals, magnifying divisions
and power relationships, creating new tensions over resources and, above
all, catalysing threats. The time has therefore come to take stock of the
changes that have occurred over the past four years

For this reason, I wanted to update the French Ministry for the Armed
Forces’ analysis of the status and evolution of the strategic context. This
work, which is the subject of this publication, has involved numerous
consultations, both within the administrations involved in our defence
and security policy and with parliamentarians and experts from civil
society. Exchanges have also taken place with our main partners and allies.


-----

Now that this analysis has been completed, I note the extent to which
certain trends identified in 2017 have intensified since then. This is true
of the competition between major powers as well as the increasingly
widespread use of hybrid strategies, the emboldening of regional powers
and the disruptive effects of new technologies, particularly in the digital
and space domains.

The 2021 Strategic Update also contributes to an initial assessment of the
results of the Ministry’s action and the implementation of the military
planning law as requested by the President of the Republic, in order to
prepare the armed forces to protect France and the French people more
effectively against the threats of tomorrow. Faced with an unstable and
degraded environment, we have adapted our responses to our competitors
and developed our international partnerships, particularly in Europe, and
the indispensable effort to rebuild our armed forces is now well under way.

As well as contributing to the adaptation of our defence effort at the national
level, this document will also enable us to share our analysis of the international
security environment at a key moment, when the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO), the European Union and a large number of countries are embarking
on similar reviews.

The accelerated transformation of the international order confirms that
“Ambition 2030”, following on from regeneration and modernisation
under the current MPL, is an opportune and imperative goal enabling
France to achieve a coherent, agile and innovative armed forces model.
It is my conviction that only a comprehensive armed forces model, in
which conventional and nuclear forces support each other at all times,
will be effective across the full spectrum of possible conflicts and equal
to the challenges ahead. This is how the Ministry for the Armed Forces
will be able to achieve the objectives set by the President of the Republic:
to guarantee security, autonomy of decision-making and action, and the
capability that France, and the European Union, will need in order to act
as a driving force in tomorrow’s world.

Florence Parly


-----

-----

-----

### 1. The proven degradation of the strategic context

1.1. Confirmation of the assessments in the 2017 Defence and

National Security Strategic Review

In his speech on defence and deterrence strategy[1], the President of the French
Republic underlined the three-fold strategic, politico-legal and technological
shift in the international environment. A few months after the emergence of
the Covid-19 pandemic, the socio-economic context and the international
environment have never looked as uncertain as they do today. These uncer­
tainties confirm and amplify the negative trends identified in this speech and
in the 2017 Defence and National Security Strategic Review (DNSSR). The
deterioration of the strategic context is accelerating, jeopardising existing ba­
lances, the international security architecture, and multilateralism, while crises
persist and threats are spreading in all conflict domains, even on national soil.

1.1.1. Entrenched crises and structural fragility

France’s level of international commitment has not wavered since 2017, in
the face of multiple crises differing in nature and intensity.

The eastern and northern flanks of Europe have remained under pressure,
with conflicts in Ukraine and the Caucasus (Nagorno-Karabakh), an open
crisis in Belarus, persistent challenges in the Balkans, and recurring tensions
along the borders between NATO members and Russia, as the latter has
pursued its military modernisation and disinformation campaigns.

Africa remains a hotbed of open crises compounded by rivalries imported
by countries seeking influence. The active interference of external powers
is thus exacerbating pre-existing antagonisms in Libya, transforming the
crisis into a conflict and undermining cohesion within major multilateral
organisations. In West Africa, and particularly in the Sahel-Sahara region,
there is a growing number of potential crisis factors. Demographic pressure
and the consequences of climate change are increasing urban pressure
and heightening tensions between nomadic and sedentary populations.
Wherever State governance is absent or ineffective, Islamist preachers and
radical movements are recruiting from the ranks of unemployed youth.


-----

This breeding ground for mistrust, which is conducive to contestation
and to the extension of the terrorist threat, is advancing southwards to
the point of threatening the stability of the coastal States of the Gulf of
Guinea. Stabilisation and development efforts in the Sahel are beginning
to bear fruit, thanks in particular to the support of a broader coalition of
international organisations and partners who have committed themselves
alongside France, including via military support. However, the disintegration
of States or the fragility of their institutions is nurturing the persistence
of armed groups of all types, whether religious, ideological or criminal,
from West Africa to the Gulf of Guinea and as far as the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Somalia, and Mozambique.

Likewise, the crises in the Near and Middle East are changing but not
subsiding. Although they reflect real progress towards normalisation
between Israel and the Arab countries, the Abraham agreements signed
on 15 September 2020 have not reduced instability in the region. In Syria,
the recapture by the regime and its supporters of a large portion of the
country has in no way led to a lasting resolution of the crisis which would
alleviate the suffering of the population and allow the return of refugees.
In Iraq, political progress must not eclipse the situation of a country suf­
fering from strong popular dissatisfaction, an unprecedented economic
crisis, and tensions fuelled by Iran.

In Afghanistan, after four decades of war, the level of violence remains
extremely high, despite the agreement signed between the United States
and the Taliban on 29 February 2020 in Doha. The peace process and the
political future of the country (Taliban takeover of the Afghan State or
power-sharing) remain fraught with uncertainty and could affect our inte­
rests, through international terrorism, drug trafficking, or illegal immigration.

Crises and structural fragility feed off each other. For example, the potentially
destabilising nature of global population growth[2] exacerbates existing political
and socio-economic tensions in already fragile regions and is reflected in the
influx of migrants and refugees into Europe.

2 The world population is expected to grow from 7.7 billion in 2019 to 8.5 billion in 2030 (+10%) and

9.7 billion in 2050 (+26%), an increase concentrated in the States of sub-Saharan Africa (doubling of


-----

The European periphery has been in a state of permanent instability for
a decade. Continuing violence in the Sahel, Libya, Syria, Iraq and Afghanis­
tan, and the lack of economic prospects are triggering large population
movements. Beyond the significant drop in irregular entries at the external
borders of the European Union, recorded during the second quarter of
2020 as a result of the measures taken by States to combat the Covid-19
pandemic, new focal points for migrants in transit have developed, either
informally or under State control; these could fuel a rapid and massive
resumption of migrant flows. Finally, the migration issue can be exploited,
as shown by the pressure exerted on the European Union (EU) by Turkey,
the leading host and transit country for Syrian refugees.

As a consequence of global population growth and corresponding
economic development, we are seeing a long-term and sustained increase
in demand for water and energy. For historical and cost-related reasons, the
majority of needs are still covered by fossil fuels (oil, gas, coal), which could
still account for nearly 80% of the world’s energy mix in 2040. Although
declining, global oil consumption continues to play a decisive role in trade
and is slowing down the energy transition made necessary by climate
change. Thus, growing demand for gas, increasingly inaccessible conven­
tional oil reserves and the development of non-conventional hydrocar­
bons are redrawing the map of production and transit zones, sometimes
at the cost of growing geopolitical tensions. In future, France and Europe
will be increasingly dependent for their gas supplies on countries outside
the European area, whether historic producers (Russia), revived energy
players (United States) or transit countries (Turkey). Finally, the Persian Gulf
remains a critical source of crude oil for France and the EU — Middle East
suppliers (Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Iran, UAE, Kuwait) account for one-third of
world oil production and have a decisive impact on its price.

Among the other vulnerabilities identified by DNSSR 2017, and since
confirmed by the Covid-19 pandemic, flows in a globalised world are
denser and more numerous, which favours the spread of viruses, compli­
cates the response to health crises and spares no region of the world. The
current pandemic has illustrated in spectacular manner the risks induced
by the globalisation of production and value chains, the resulting effects
of dependency — particularly with regard to China, in health issues but
also in many everyday matters — and the need for stronger international


-----

1.1.2. Persistent threats

In addition to these crises and fragilities, the three main types of threats
identified in DNSSR 2017 are terrorism, proliferation, and the return of
strategic competition between great powers, the latter characterised in
particular by a more systematic use of hybrid strategies.

Over the next decade, the jihadist phenomenon will continue to pose
a global security challenge. Whether religious or ideological, as well as
social, political and economic, the structural factors that favour the rise
of jihadist groups in theatres of operations are multiple and have not
disappeared. Jihadists have always been able to exploit them and take
advantage of the opportunities available to them. The presence of several
thousand supporters and fighters, often held in refugee camps in Syria
and Iraq, but also scattered in neighbouring countries and as far away
as Afghanistan, is feeding a dynamic of revenge and violent engagement
and preparing the next generation of jihadists. Among the many risks
to be anticipated, apart from the dispersion of foreign jihadists from the
Levant, the continued marginalisation of Sunni populations and Sunni-Shia
tensions must be considered as the main lever for a jihadist resurgence in
the Near and Middle East in the short to medium term. Indeed, it is on this
fertile soil that jihadist organisations have recently succeeded in provoking
full-fledged armed insurrections.

After the disappearance of the pseudo-caliphate in 2019, the Islamic State
organisation (IS) reverted to a clandestine configuration and continued to
expand its franchises in Africa and Asia. Still firmly rooted in the Levant,
despite the military setbacks suffered from 2017 to 2019, it retains a strong
disruptive potential by maintaining an insurgent terrorist capacity, as well as
by its ability to influence minds via social networks. Faced with the current
crises and different regional contexts (Sahel, Yemen, North Africa, Syria,
Afghanistan, Somalia...), the Al-Qaeda (AQ) movement is also experiencing
a revival. In Yemen, for example, although divided and weakened by the
loss of key personnel, Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) continues
to pose a threat. In the Sahel, the Support Group for Islam and Muslims
(SGIM) has also been weakened by the elimination of important leaders
and its fight against Islamic State in the Greater Sahara (ISGS), but it has


-----

Islamic State and Al-Qaeda, therefore, still have significant operational
competences (bomb makers, military trainers, specialists in clandestinity,
financiers...) and could have access to more sophisticated weapons in the
future.

We cannot exclude the hypothesis of a re-emergence of territorialised
proto-States, following the collapse of governance as well as difficulties in
establishing post-conflict stability. The reappearance of jihadist sanctua­
ries, possibly linked to emerging insurgencies, would once again raise the
spectre of a militarised and belligerent jihadist threat.

The recent jihadist attacks in France and Austria confirm the fact that
Western countries remain targets of choice for jihadist organisations.
Moreover, the endogenous threat has never been so high and is likely to
increase further in the near future.

Finally, the situation in the countries around the Mediterranean should
be closely monitored.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems
is a growing threat, as illustrated by the worsening North Korean and Iranian
nuclear proliferation crises, as well as the continuous upgrading of certain
ballistic missiles and the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian theatre[3].
The CBRN threat has also diversified and is no longer limited to theatres
of operations. The repeated use[4] of chemical agents to spread terror or to
poison has reinforced the sense that a taboo has been broken. The threat
is therefore real, including on national soil, and it could be amplified by
expected developments in synthetic biology.

While a major health crisis and not a chemical or biological threat, the Covid-19
pandemic has exposed real fragilities in Western States, from warning mecha­
nisms to health systems, which could foster opportunistic exploitation.

In the nuclear field, the adoption by some States of opaque, or even useoriented, nuclear postures seems increasingly at odds with the classic
codes of deterrence, as it forms part of a strategy of intimidation or even

3 Since 2013, more than 30 chemical attacks have been carried out by the Syrian regime.
4 Since the Litvinenko case in November 2006, there has been a series of incidents — the assassination of


-----

blackmail that could provoke escalation. At the conventional level as
well, we note the dissemination of effective anti-access / area denial (A2/
AD) capabilities, modern combat aircraft or missiles of all types which, in
becoming accessible, help to embolden regional powers.

Thus, Iran is pursuing its nuclear programme in violation of its commit­
ments under the JCPoA, particularly with regard to its stockpiles of low
enriched uranium and heavy water, authorised enrichment levels, R&D
and the installation of centrifuges. In addition, Iran is failing to cooperate
fully with the IAEA in verifying its nuclear obligations. Tehran is also pur­
suing the development of its ballistic and space programmes, conducting
numerous operational launches and tests aimed at improving the range,
accuracy and penetration of its delivery systems — in violation of UN
Security Council Resolution 2231. Iran also continues to transfer ballistic
systems and technologies to regional non-state actors, both in Lebanon
and Yemen.

Similarly, the strategic challenge posed by North Korea, which is disrup­
ting regional and ultimately global strategic balances, has only increased
since 2017: the United States failed to obtain concrete guarantees on the
country’s denuclearisation at the 2018 and 2019 summits, while Pyongyang
has shown its determination to develop an operational nuclear arsenal
of intercontinental range and has made continuous, significant progress.
Since May 2019, North Korea has resumed conventional and short-range
tests and, at the end of December 2019, openly raised the possibility
of resuming its long-range nuclear and ballistic tests, on which a mora­
torium had been agreed in 2018. Beijing and Pyongyang also appear to
have realigned their regional ambitions. While China is still promoting the
“denuclearisation of the peninsula”, it seems that neither the definition
of the terms nor the purpose of the process satisfies the expectations of
the international community.

Contestation of the international order is leading to multi-dimensional
competition between the international powers extending to all domains
of confrontation. The resumption of strategic and military competition,
whether by Russia or China, is now acknowledged.

Relying first and foremost on a range of non-military resources (instru­


-----

etc.), the strategic intimidation posture developed by Russia is also based
on the political priority given to the development and modernisation
of sophisticated military capabilities, whether conventional (A2/AD),
non-conventional (private military contractors or proxies) or nuclear. The
resurgence of Russia’s military power, in contrast to the country’s econo­
mic and demographic decline, is based on upgrading nuclear components,
developing new weapon systems, some of which are destabilising[5], and
modernising conventional forces. For example, by establishing anti-access
and area denial (A2/AD) capabilities along its borders, designed to force
any attacker into a major escalation, Moscow could pursue both defen­
sive and coercive aims (“aggressive sanctuarisation”), depending on the
circumstances. Moscow can now project forces (occupation of the Crimea
and the Donbass, intervention in Syria), deploy a strategy of intimidation
throughout neighbouring States and beyond (Arctic, Caucasus, Balkans,
Mediterranean), degrade the Western powers’ freedom of action and
make itself a key player in the management of regional crises. As has been
demonstrated, particularly in the Levant, Russia has become an opportu­
nistic and agile power, with a rapid projection capability.

The People’s Republic of China, meanwhile, has doubled its defence budget
since 2012, making it the second largest in the world, while expanding its
nuclear arsenal and developing new systems[6]. The deployment of a carrier
battle group beyond the South China Sea illustrated these new ambitions
in terms of power projection. In response, the United States, whose mili­
tary budget had stabilised[7] below $700 billion between 2012 and 2017, has
since increased expenditures to $720 billion and has made competition
between the major powers the main determinant of its defence policy[8].

1.1.3. Increasingly widespread use of hybrid and multifaceted

strategies

Globalisation of competition also leads to extended fields of confronta­
tion, particularly in areas that lend themselves to ambiguous aggression.
Cyber and space now constitute acknowledged domains of permanent
strategic rivalry, or even conflict. This is illustrated by the operations

5 So-called ‘exotic’ new weapons announced in Vladimir Putin’s speech on 1 March 2018: four new missiles

(ICBM, ALCM), but also an intercontinental nuclear torpedo and a nuclear-powered cruise missile.

6 ICBM, SLBM, anti-ship missiles and hypersonic MRBMs, as well as a supersonic UCAV.


-----

conducted by States in outer space, materialised in irresponsible or even
dangerous behaviour, “unfriendly” activities or demonstrations of power
(ASAT launches, proximity manoeuvres, jamming of positioning systems,
etc.). The seabed is also increasingly becoming the setting for power strug­
gles (seabed warfare), with the key issue of submarine cables in particular.

In these areas of confrontation without borders, identified in DNSSR 2017,
China and Russia are the most active, but regional powers are also antago­
nistic and taking advantage of the unprecedented accessibility of space as
well as the low cost of certain courses of action in cyberspace, often using
affiliated non-state intermediaries. Attribution is a challenge of its own.

Some of our competitors, state and non-state, use “hybrid strategies”, i.e.
combining military and non-military, direct and indirect, legal and illegal,
but always ambiguous, courses of action designed to remain below the
estimated threshold of retaliation or open conflict. At the top end of the
“hybrid spectrum”, non-state armed groups can be used for covert, or at
least unacknowledged, armed aggression.

At the lower end of this spectrum, the increasing digitisation of developed
societies and the resulting interconnection of data increase their vulnera­
bility to information manipulation, which is contrary to democratic values.
More or less discreet, disinformation efforts, magnified by hyper-connec­
tivity and artificial intelligence, are today leading to a form of surreptitious
subversion, which aims to increase internal tensions in the targeted society,
to influence it and to foster political paralysis by sowing confusion. The
fast-changing nature of these informational manoeuvres, and their refine­
ment, make the phenomenon difficult to characterise and attribute. The
information sphere, flooded with digital resources, has become a key part
of conflicts, impacting forces, institutions and populations.

Finally, the use of lawfare, through the unilateral promotion of standards,
the reinterpretation of existing standards or the extensive use of extra-ter­
ritorial sanctions, is also one of the many power levers available to achieve
strategic and economic objectives..

All along the “peace-crisis-war continuum”, the new hierarchy of powers
thus translates into unfettered strategic competition, comprising intimida­


-----

1.2. Accelerating trends and overlapping crises

The multidimensional crisis caused by the pandemic is acting as a catalyst
for the major threats and trends previously identified, while at the same
time degrading the response capacities of States. Widespread health pro­
tection measures have had unprecedented consequences on the global
economy, leading to the most severe economic recession since 1929. The
remedial measures announced by States (relocation of activities, repatria­
tion of strategic production, etc.) foreshadow an at least partial decline in
the internationalisation of the economy. The crisis is also focusing almost
all the attention of the international community, at the risk of neglecting
other issues that are just as worrying but long-term.

1.2.1. United States: disengagement versus rivalry with China

American security policy is undergoing a long-term refocus, already initiated
under the Obama administration (“nation building at home”) and now
formalised in several official documents. Washington intends to reduce its
engagement in theatres perceived as secondary, in order to concentrate on
strategic competition with the major powers. In particular, the emergence
of China as a strategic rival — its considerable military and technological
investments, its expansionism in all directions and the resulting tensions in
Asia — as well as Russia’s military modernisation efforts and the posture of
intimidation adopted by Moscow, pose a challenge to the pre-eminence
of the United States. In return, the firmer stance towards China in parti­
cular is the subject of bipartisan consensus in Washington. This focus on
strategic competition is accompanied by a more or less gradual military
disengagement from theatres of operations in which U.S. forces have long
been engaged, such as Afghanistan and Iraq. Washington also expects its
allies and partners, in particular those hosting U.S. forces on their territory,
to take on a greater share of the “burden”, thus allowing resources to be
redirected towards American priorities (innovation, multi-dimensional
force model refocused on high-intensity operations).

Analyses on the return of strategic competition, at the heart of this refo­
cus, are shared by many of the United States’ allies, starting with France.
However, the conclusions that have been drawn by Washington since 2017
are problematic in several respects. The weakening of the international


-----

arms control, rather than a move away from them. Similarly, it would be
dangerous to overlook the continuing threat of jihadist terrorism or to
leave regions plagued by instability to fend for themselves, as they pro­
vide opportunities for the ambitions of emboldened global and regional
powers. Finally, the overly exclusive focus on competition with Beijing,
and the resulting temptation to restore a form of bipolarity based on
the alignment of allies, could be inconsistent with a complex, resolutely
multipolar world.

Between a general aspiration to disengage, demands to allies, and occasio­
nal military re-engagement, the global orientation of U.S. policy is unclear
and makes transatlantic consultation indispensable. Since 2017, the Trump
administration had multiplied signs of mistrust towards multilateral organi­
sations, whilst also giving the impression of mixing commercial and security
interests according to a transactional approach. On all these issues, the
new American administration could opt for international cooperation, in
contrast to the unilateralism pursued since 2017; it would then be up to
the Europeans to firmly seize any such overtures.

1.2.2. Development of Russian and Chinese power politics

Russia and China have actively developed their power strategy, exploi­
ting available opportunities and neglected areas, as illustrated during the
Covid-19 pandemic.

Although its economic leverage is constrained, Moscow today remains
determined to deploy its strategic ambitions, particularly in the Middle
East and Africa, and even in South-East Asia and Latin America. Its renewed
military capabilities, its private military contractors, its immaterial capa­
bilities and its diplomatic influence allow it to project itself more easily
into more distant theatres. Faced with Moscow’s strategic opportunism,
and given the central role played by Russia on issues that directly affect
national security interests, France has opted for a balanced response that
combines firmness and engagement, which has made it possible to initiate
a candid dialogue with Russia.

As far as the People’s Republic of China is concerned, the Covid-19 pan­
demic has exposed some of the strategic ambitions and modes of action


-----

Washington and exploiting all the opportunities that have presented
themselves, over the last three years, Beijing has developed a diplomacy
that is both active and aggressive; raised its actions of influence to a global
level; bolstered efforts relating to espionage, technological appropriation
and wielding its new economic and industrial weight; and, finally, demons­
trated its military resolve. Reinforced by Xi Jinping since 2012, this basic
trend marks a turning point in the development of Chinese power: now
endowed with unprecedented capabilities, Beijing intends to weigh more
directly on global issues and to assert its strategic aspirations.

As an international plea from a rising great power, the Belt and Road Initiative
(BRI) testifies at another level to China’s intent to exert a greater influence
on its environments, to reshape certain configurations (even beyond the
South China Sea) and to become the central hub for the trade flows of
globalisation. In this perspective, the development of a first-rate military
capability is as much a quest for status as an operational ambition. The
extension of its interests beyond its regional periphery requires China to
invest in operational armed forces with an expeditionary capability. Visible
in the construction of its naval base in Djibouti or the development of its
naval aviation capacities, this desire to project itself aims to give Beijing
the capacity to reduce vulnerabilities along maritime corridors, but also
to protect its interests, as well as its nationals abroad, more directly. Mo­
reover, while its public nuclear doctrine remains centred on “no first use”,
the rapid development of China’s deterrent capabilities raises questions.

Capable of promoting diplomatic alignments, weighing more directly on
international organisations such as the WHO or the WFP, taking long-term
action in the field of information or exerting influence on major political
groupings such as the European Union (use of the “17+1”), China has beco­
me a "systemic rival" for the EU, while remaining an economic competitor
and sometimes an important diplomatic partner.

1.2.3. Emboldened regional powers in the Middle East and the

Mediterranean

The American refocus on rivalry with China is also bolstering the confidence
of countries such as Iran and Turkey, which are seeking to assert themselves
as regional powers and are tempted to seize strategic opportunities to


-----

adventurism. In so doing, these countries are participating in the contes­
tation of the world order in the same way as Russia and China, or even in
concert with them. Indeed, while these powers are often competitors, they
have at the same time shown that they can overcome their divergences
in order to squeeze out Western powers. This trend, of which the Astana
format (Russia, Turkey, Iran) on Syria is the most significant illustration, can
be seen in a large number of crises: Libya, Venezuela, Afghanistan, etc. It
further weakens international and regional organisations by developing
transactional models for resolving crises.

In spite of the economic loss caused by the restoration of U.S. sanctions
and serious internal setbacks (impact of the Covid crisis, destruction of a
Ukrainian Boeing aircraft, regular demonstrations), Iran is seeking to main­
tain its status as a regional power through its involvement in the Syrian and
Iraqi conflicts. Its support for the regime of Bashar al Assad has enabled it
to strengthen its strategic corridor towards Lebanon and its regional eco­
nomic interests. Iran is also striving to turn Iraq into their own “strategic
backyard” and to provoke an American withdrawal. Tehran relies on political
and military proxies, in particular certain Popular Mobilisation militias, and
gives them support, including transfers of military equipment. These same
militias are today jeopardising the establishment of a truly representative
Iraqi military and thus the stabilisation of the country, while at the same
time being an instrument of the struggle led by Iran against the United
States on Iraqi soil. In Lebanon, Tehran can also count on Hezbollah which,
while increasing its political role, has reinforced its regional stature thanks
to its intervention in Syria and its role as advisor to other Iranian proxies.

Moreover, Iran intends to strengthen its influence by linking the theatres
of crisis together. By supporting the Houthi rebellion or by capitalising on
the frustrations felt by the Shia communities of the Arabian Peninsula, as
well as by the Palestinians, to promote the “axis of resistance” concept,
Tehran is trying to influence or force the hand of its Gulf neighbours.

A NATO member since 1952, Turkey occupies a key position in the defence
and security posture of the Alliance (control of the straits, military bases).
In spite of its domestic difficulties, R. T. Erdogan wants to make Turkey
an indispensable player in Central Asia and the Middle East but also in
Europe. Ankara has thus developed an offensive foreign policy aimed at


-----

impose itself using strong arm tactics, in the Mediterranean, Libya or the
Caucasus, using all the levers at its disposal, sometimes regardless of its
Alliance membership or international law.

Since January 2020, Turkey has positioned itself as a major player in the
Libyan conflict, providing military support to the Government of National
Accord, including violations of the arms embargo. Through its military
intervention, it has succeeded in changing the local balance of power but
has also reduced the possibility of a diplomatic settlement of the crisis by
provoking an increased Russian presence.

The ongoing reconfigurations are in turn leading to changes in the posture
of the other regional players: the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Saudi Arabia,
Israel or Egypt, which are seeing their strategic environment deteriorate,
while the U.S. seems hesitant over its regional involvement.

The Mediterranean is emblematic of all these developments. The Arab
uprisings of 2011 and the conflicts that broke out in Syria and Libya have
encouraged an exponential increase in illegal migration flows to Europe.
The collapse of some States (Libya, Syria), but also the political and
socio-economic fragility in the Levant, the Maghreb or in sub-Saharan
and Eastern Africa, are all factors that amplify and entangle migration,
environmental, and criminal issues. In the Mediterranean, criminal activity
is constantly on the rise: trafficking in drugs, arms and human beings,
money laundering, hidden investments, oil smuggling, particularly with
Libya. This trafficking is now combined with the instability caused by
energy issues and the projection of regional powers, particularly Turkey,
in the Mediterranean periphery. Furthermore, the stronger Russian and
Chinese influences and the Western military drawdown potentially open
up the southern flank of Europe for conflicts of all kinds.

1.3. Implications for the international order and for Europe

The evolution of the geostrategic environment since 2017 thus testifies to
an accelerated degradation of the international order, leading to an even


-----

European response, this context of instability brings new risks to Europe’s
doorstep and raises the spectre of a strategic downgrade.

1.3.1. The international order and security architecture are increa­

singly contested

While global challenges should entail more cooperation between States,
the erosion of the international order and the weakening of its institutions
are being confirmed. Attacks on multilateralism, noted in DNSSR 2017,
have continued since then. The international order is being undermined
by the effects of strategic competition and the behaviour of global and
regional actors that favour bilateral arrangements and power games to
ensure that their national interests prevail or to modify the hierarchy of
powers to their advantage. Developments in the Levant and Libya, as well
as tensions in the Middle East and Asia, are concrete illustrations of this
challenge to the international order and the associated risks of escalation,
particularly in regions lacking collective crisis resolution mechanisms.

In parallel with the contestation of an international system and standards
described as “Western”, first and foremost by China and Russia, the United
States has taken several decisions since 2017 that call into question multi­
lateral institutions and agreements. These national shifts are accelerating
the deconstruction of the international order.

This serious turn of events is evident in Europe, with the continuous weake­
ning of the security architecture inherited from the Cold War. In addition
to Russia’s suspension of its participation in the Treaty on Conventional
Forces in Europe (CFE) in 2007 and its violation of the Budapest Memo­
randum and the Helsinki Final Act in 2014, the American withdrawal from
the Open Skies Treaty in 2020 and the current stalemate over revisions
to the Vienna Document, confirm the gradual disintegration of the exis­
ting regulatory frameworks. The termination of the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty in August 2019, due to its violation by Russia,
marked the disappearance of the only bilateral arms control instrument
eliminating a category of missiles, increasing the risk of a new arms race in
Europe, while uncertainties remain over the extension of New START beyond
February 2021. The partial obsolescence of the arms control instruments
defined according to the strategic equation of the Cold War, coupled


-----

space) and now proven nuclear multipolarity, are producing cumulative
effects that significantly increase instability on the European continent.
Europeans are hoping to engage in a constructive dialogue with the new
U.S. administration on the future of strategic stability in Europe in accor­
dance with their own interests.

Finally, the prohibitionist dynamic, marked by the signing of the Treaty
on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW) in 2017 — which is due to
enter into force shortly, despite the fact that it fails to fully represent the
international community — is part of this contestation of the international
order and of the balances enshrined in existing treaties, first and foremost
the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).

1.3.2. The risk of a strategic downgrade for Europe and France

Faced with these observable realities, and even if the effort remains une­
ven, European nations have begun to adjust their defence budgets, which
are still lower than those of some regional powers. However, the looming
economic crisis could severely affect this upswing. With €7 billion for the
European Defence Fund and €1.5 billion for military mobility[9], the result
achieved within the new EU multiannual financial framework is significant
but below the level of our initial ambition — and could bode badly for
some national defence budgets. The crisis years between 2008 and 2012
already resulted in major cutbacks in budgets and capabilities, and the
latter have only just returned to 2008 spending levels[10]. Were Europeans
to make further major cutbacks in their budgets, they would deal a fatal
blow to the most fragile militaries and to Europe’s capacity for collective
action. In this respect, the willingness shown by a large majority of our Al­
lies within NATO to maintain the growth of defence expenditures, despite
the economic crisis, is a positive sign that needs to be confirmed in the
long term. However, our allies and partners still have different sensitivities
regarding the prioritisation of threats, some being tempted by unilateral
solutions or bilateral arrangements that weaken our unity.

France’s efforts to give more political meaning to NATO and more substance
to “European Defence” (combining cooperation in ad hoc arrangements and
stronger European Union action) are aimed precisely at enabling Europeans


-----

to respond to the challenges they face. Europe is indeed at a crossroads
and it must get its acts together to deal with the worsening security envi­
ronment on all fronts. Our country regularly reaffirms its common destiny
with the Europeans, but it cannot face on its own all the perils weighing on
the continent, despite its strategic assets (deterrent, full-spectrum armed
forces model, support points in overseas territories, DTIB).

### 2. Adaptations underway and challenges to take up

In the face of growing disorders and persistent threats, the adaptation
of our defence system has been initiated by an ambitious review of our
posture and resources, as well as by the mobilisation of our partners and
allies. Building a real capability for action through a full-spectrum, modern,
and coherent defence capabilities will allow Europeans to be credible allies
within NATO and consolidate their own national sovereignty. For France,
this means maintaining armed forces that are resilient and capable of ac­
tion across the entire spectrum, from hybrid operations to high-intensity
conflict, thus pursuing this path between national autonomy, cooperation
and acknowledged dependencies in the context of shared interests.

2.1. Adaptations to our defence have been initiated

Following on from the 2017 analyses, three lines of adaptation have been pursued:
the consolidation of our defence strategy, the permanent mobilisation of our
partners and allies and the modernisation of our military establishment thanks
to a Military Planning Law (MPL) that combines regeneration and innovation.

2.1.1. Enhancing and adapting our defence strategy

In his speech on defence and deterrence strategy, the President of the
Republic recalled why nuclear deterrence remains the “keystone of our
security and the guarantee of our vital interests”. In an environment mar­
ked by the return of nuclear reality and strategic competition between
powers, our armed forces are being deployed close to nuclear powers, in
Europe but also in distant theatres. The function of nuclear forces — in
their two complementary components, airborne and submarine-based
— is to ensure deterrence and in particular to prevent a “major war”,
i.e. direct confrontation between great powers. They also guarantee the


-----

them from being circumvented “from above” through escalation. Robust
conventional forces also force an aggressor to reveal his intentions quickly
and prevent a possible bypass “from below”, especially in the event that
an aggressor seeks to quickly establish a “fait accompli”. In this way they
contribute to the exercise of deterrence. Thus, nuclear and conventional
forces “support each other at all times”.

After recalling France’s commitment to the principle of strict sufficiency
and to arms control, as well as to the need to reconcile ethics and strategy,
the President of the Republic also stressed the European dimension of our
deterrence – “France’s vital interests now have a European dimension” –
and proposed to interested European partners a strategic dialogue on
deterrence. This approach is complementary to our efforts to promote a
nuclear culture within the Alliance[11].

Always seeking to reconcile strategic lucidity, readiness, respect for the
law and a spirit of responsibility, the adaptation of our defence strategy
has focused on new fields (cyber, space, AI) and has been implemented
by successive enhancements. Investing in these domains is essential for
our freedom of action, in view of the widespread use of hybrid strategies.

After creating the Cyber Defence Command in May 2017, conducting a
cyber defence strategic review and publishing elements of cyber offensive
doctrine in January 2019, France has shown that it is capable of conducting
offensive cyber operations for military purposes, in compliance with the
law. In this regard, France has carried out a clarification and transparency
exercise that has been acknowledged internationally, to define its vision
of the applicability of international law to cyber operations.

In the same spirit, the Ministry for the Armed Forces has created the
Space Command, attached to the Air and Space Force, and, in consul­
tation with our European and American allies, has drawn up a new space
defence strategy. This strategy has a threefold objective: to guarantee
the peaceful and responsible use of space, to adapt to the opportuni­
ties and risks associated with routine access to space (“New Space”),
and to respond to the increased strategic competition between space
actors, which is leading to a form of weaponisation of this domain.


-----

Finally, the ministerial strategy for “effective, robust and controlled” artificial
intelligence[12] has given birth to both the Artemis programme, which will pro­
vide sovereign decision-making tools, and an ethics committee to advise the
Minister of the Armed Forces on issues relating to new technologies. These
efforts are also in line with NATO’s acknowledgement of space and cyberspace
as “operational domains”, and with the European Union’s increased efforts
to take better account of security issues in these new areas of competition.

2.1.2. 2019-25 MPL: a concrete effort to rebuild our forces

The 2019-25 Military Planning Law (MPL) marks the determination to re­
build our forces, through an unprecedented financial effort that breaks
with the last 30 years of almost continuous stagnation or decline. It aims
to give the armed forces the resources to carry out their missions over the
long term, while pursuing the modernisation that is essential to meet the
challenges of the future, which herald a tougher operating environment.
The first two annual instalments of the MPL have reflected this desire for
recovery, which must be pursued in view of the intensification of threats
and their increasing proximity to national soil. Within the framework of
the 2030 operational ambition, this effort will trickle down to many areas,
from general management of the ministry[13] to high value-added capabilities
in a coalition, particularly in the new areas of confrontation.

With regard to human resources, this MPL “on a human scale”[14] includes
various measures to improve personnel conditions (Family plan) and the
exercise of the military profession. It puts an end to a long period of staff
deflation and even initiates a recovery, with an increase of 6,000 positions,
including 1,500 between 2019 and 2022. An effective and dynamic human
resources policy also requires appropriate management levers and tools,
in particular to meet the challenges of attracting and retaining staff.

The operational preparation of the forces has been consolidated overall.
This effort, however, must be stepped up, due to the negative impact of the
Covid-19 crisis on personnel training, but above all to meet the challenge

12 “Revue stratégique de Cyberdéfense”, January 2018; “Stratégie spatiale de défense”, 2019; “L’intelli­

gence artificielle au service de la défense”, September 2019.

13 Digitisation of processes and secure teleworking, accelerated by the aftermath of the Covid-19 pande­

mic, review of projects, new information systems for human resources and command, modernisation
of the purchasing function and real estate policy.


-----

posed by new trends in conflicts. This is an indispensable condition for
preserving our military edge, at a time when all competitors are improving
their capabilities, both technologically and operationally.

With regard to equipment, the first years of implementation of the MPL
have set in motion both the regeneration of the fleets in service, weake­
ned by intense operational engagements, (with a particular effort in terms
of maintenance, from organisational reforms to investments), and the
modernisation of weapon systems. These efforts, covering all strategic
functions, constitute one of the main thrusts of the MPL.

A significant effort is devoted to renewing the two components of the nuclear
deterrent. At the same time, the land, sea and air domains[15] will benefit from
the modernisation of conventional capabilities, accompanied by sustained
investment in intelligence and cyber capabilities as well as in the space domain[16].

Finally, key long-term programmes have been launched. Some are being
pursued in a national framework[17], while others are part of international
cooperation, in a NATO[18] and above all a European[19] framework.

Budgetary resources in 2019 and 2020 reflect the President’s ambitions and
priorities: modernisation and transformation of the armed forces to achieve
a sustainable model, based on long-term operational superiority, but also
on the strategic functions of “prevention” and “knowledge and anticipation”,
in order to guarantee our autonomy of assessment, decision, and action.

2.1.3. Mobilisation of our partners and allies

In the emerging world of unfettered strategic competition, Europe must
make the necessary political effort and allocate the resources to define
and defend its interests and assume greater responsibility for its security.
The President of the Republic has placed the revival of European defence

15 Land: focused on the medium land segment, with commissioning of the first Griffon, Jaguar and Ser­

val vehicles, and collaborative combat with Scorpion; sea: delivery of the first Barracuda class SSN; air:
operational employment of the first Phénix MRTTs, arming of the MALE Reaper UAVs.

16 CUGE, ALSR, IRIS, CELESTE systems.
17 New space ambitions, new-generation aircraft carriers, improved resilience of positioning and naviga­

tion information thanks to the Operation to Modernise the Armed Forces’ GNSS Equipment.

18 Air Command and Control System (ACCS) and Alliance Future Surveillance and Control (AFSC) initia­

tive to replace the AWACS fleet.


-----

at the core of France’s international action[20]. Notwithstanding its possible
knock-on effect on our European partners, both in terms of strategic
culture and effective capabilities, our national effort will not be enough
to cope with the acceleration of destabilising strategic trends: the search
for convergence and increased cooperation with our partners is therefore
indispensable and requires a credible linkage between the EU, NATO and
ad hoc cooperation arrangements between multiple partners, in particular
the European Intervention Initiative (EI2).

Significant progress has been made since the publication of the EU’s
Global Strategy in June 2016. At the political level, Permanent Structured
Cooperation (PESCO), as provided for in the Treaties, was activated in 2017.
On the capability side, the European Defence Fund will support capability
projects in cooperation from 2021 onwards. With the introduction of the
PESCO projects, most of which are capability-based, and the Coordinated
Annual Review on Defence (CARD), the European capability cycle is being
structured to foster cooperation and ensure continuity between priority
setting, funding and equipment fielding in the armed forces. Finally, at the
operational level, the Military Planning and Conduct Capability (MPCC)
is getting up to speed, with the aim of enabling an “executive operation”
involving up to 2,500 troops. The European Peace Facility (EPF) is being
set up to support military missions. French efforts to develop the EU’s
intervention capability to include more demanding military engagements
have borne fruit, with a strengthening of the mandate of EUTM Mali from
2018, which will make it possible to assist the Malian armed forces up to
pre-deployment, and also the setting up in a few weeks of Operation Irini[21].
France’s action in the Mediterranean is aimed at bringing together European
efforts to block coercive actions against our partners and restore stability
in the Mediterranean area, which is located at the gateway to Europe and
is essential to its security.

At the same time, NATO remains the bedrock of collective defence of
the European continent and of the transatlantic link, as well as of Europe’s
nuclear culture. The Atlantic Alliance stays committed to crisis manage­
ment operations and missions in Afghanistan, the Balkans, the Middle East

20 Speech for a sovereign, united, democratic Europe; 26 September 2017.
21 Operation EUNAVFOR MED Irini was launched on 31 March 2020 to strengthen oversight of the arms


-----

and the Mediterranean. It also faces multiple challenges, with increasing
threats in its immediate environment, tensions between its members and
a more distant approach from the United States. France is playing its full
part in collective defence, actively participating in air policing in the Baltic
States and, since 2017, in the Enhanced Forward Presence (eFP), alternately
in Estonia and Lithuania, and is even the leading contributor to the NATO
Readiness Initiative (NRI). It is also supporting the Alliance’s adaptation
efforts and its deterrence and defence posture and knows that NATO is
irreplaceable in achieving lasting interoperability among Allies.

However, the insistence on the Alliance’s political and military credibility
which France signifies through its engagement presupposes an updated
political contract. This work on cohesion is at the centre of the strategic
reflection initiated by the Heads of State and Government in London in 2019.
The parameters of this new contract should make it possible to redefine
the contours of both allied solidarity and the transatlantic relationship,
counting on a growing role for Europeans to contribute to the common
defence effort and assert their security concerns in a 360° perspective. This
presupposes both that Europeans continue their budgetary efforts and the
modernisation of their forces and that they become active stakeholders
in building a new security architecture capable of guaranteeing strategic
stability on the European continent.

The European Air Transport Command (EATC) also contributes to the
interoperability and sharing of its members’ projection capabilities. In this
respect, it represents one of the most successful European operational
cooperation efforts.

In addition to our engagements in the EU and NATO, in 2017 France pro­
posed to a group of “able and willing” European States to work more clo­
sely together. EI2 is thus contributing to the establishment of a common
strategic culture through concrete cooperative projects. The initiative now
has 13 members[22] and serves as an incubator for projects that improve
collective readiness or encourage our partners to invest in regions or sub­
jects that are key to Europe’s security.


-----

In the Sahel, France has also mobilised several European countries to de­
ploy Special Forces in support of African forces in Mali and Niger, within
the framework of the Takuba [23] Task Force. At the same time, the EMA­
SoH-Agénor maritime surveillance operation in the Persian Gulf has rallied
several European partners willing to contribute to regional de-escalation.

Europe’s defence is also being enhanced through bilateral cooperation.
France is thus continuing to develop its key partnerships in Europe: with
the Treaty of Aachen, the Franco-German relationship has reached a new
level, in particular thanks to the establishment of a privileged relationship
in land systems[24] and unprecedented cooperation in terms of operations
and capabilities[25], the latter also including Spain. An unprecedented major
partnership has also been established with Belgium in the field of land
mobility[26], in connection with the Scorpion programme, and with Italy in
the field of naval cooperation (creation of the NAVIRIS Joint Venture in
2019). As far as the UK is concerned, and despite Brexit, the 10[th] anniver­
sary of the Lancaster House Treaties provides an opportunity to measure
the progress made, in particular on the Combined Joint Expeditionary
Force (CJEF) and the two key capability programmes FC/ASW and MMCM,
and to open up shared perspectives for the coming decade. In addition,
France has in recent years strengthened its already close ties with Spain,
but also with many other European countries, including Finland, Denmark,
the Netherlands, Portugal, Sweden, Norway, the Baltic States, Switzerland,
and Greece

Because Africa and the Middle East are areas of major interest affecting
the interests and security of French citizens, both abroad and at home, the
French armed forces are developing the concept of operational military
partnership (PMO)[27] for crisis prevention purposes. French forces support
partner forces, from training to combat, including equipment, so that
they can eventually acquire the capability to ensure the security of their
countries autonomously. Thus, in the Sahel, France is resolutely committed

23 Sweden, Estonia, the Netherlands, Portugal, Denmark, Belgium, Italy and the Czech Republic (ongoing

process).

24 Nexter and KMW merged to form KNDS.
25 Future Combat Air System (FCAS) and Main Ground Combat System (MGCS) projects; Franco-German

air transport squadron.


-----

to mobilising its international partners and the G5 Sahel countries in a
comprehensive approach: combating armed terrorist groups; strengthe­
ning the military and security forces of the States in the region; supporting
reinstallation of governance and administrative structures in the region;
and providing development aid.

The Indo-Pacific is today the theatre of profound strategic changes, from the
intensification of Sino-American competition to Sino-Indian and PakistaniIndian tensions, not to mention transnational threats and the implications
of climate change. These changes have direct consequences on all popula­
tions and infrastructures in the region, including French overseas territories.

In this region, which is home to seven of the 10 largest defence budgets
in the world, heightened strategic and military imbalances constitute a
threat with global consequences – 30% of trade between Asia and Europe
passes through the South China Sea. Unlike most European countries, the
majority of Indo-Pacific States have invested in modern, yet large militaries
for more than a decade. Combined with technological progress, this trend
results in tougher operational environments and a potential disruption of
regional and global balances.

As a European nuclear power with global interests, France cannot define
its interests solely in terms of geographical proximity to the homeland:
it must imperatively maintain a geostrategic reach in line with current
developments and its ambitions, which are first and foremost to protect
its citizens and territories, but also to preserve its influence and freedom of
action. France’s defence strategy in the Indo-Pacific was presented by the
Minister of the Armed Forces at the Shangri-La Dialogue 2019 in Singapore.

France’s action in the Indo-Pacific also aims to contribute to multilateral
security efforts and to preserve the freedom of maritime and air naviga­
tion. This implies intensifying our cooperation efforts, by encouraging our
European partners to become more involved in the Indo-Pacific, and by
developing major strategic partnerships beyond Europe, in particular with
India, Australia and Japan, as well as by supporting regional cooperation
formats (ASEAN, IONS, IORA, SPDMM, etc.).

Present in Europe as well as in the Indo-Pacific, active in the Middle East and


-----

ally. Beyond recurring political differences, France intends to preserve the
excellence of its bilateral defence relationship with the United States, our
historical ally, based on shared values and interests.

2.2. What challenges do we face in order to play our role as

a stabilising power?

2.2.1. Uniting around European sovereignty and shared interests

As tensions and sources of instability accrue at Europe’s borders, uncer­
tainty as to the political will of the United States to become engaged in
regional crises is leaving European States to face their responsibilities. While
significant progress has been made since June 2016 and the recognition
of the need for “shared strategic autonomy”, it is necessary to go beyond
what has already been done in order to build a genuine European pillar of
security and defence, consistent with developments in NATO. This implies
progress in three directions: consolidating European defence, reducing our
dependencies, and developing common responses to hybrid aggression.

Europe’s convergence around common defence and security interests will
be one of the issues in efforts to define a “strategic compass”, launched
by Germany and due to continue until the French Presidency of the EU in
the first half of 2022. The operationalisation of Article 42.7 of the Treaty
on European Union should also make it possible to strengthen the effec­
tiveness of solidarity mechanisms between Europeans.

The level of ambition of the EU’s operational engagements, particularly in
the Mediterranean, the Sahel and more generally in Africa, remains insuf­
ficient considering the interests to be defended and should therefore be
augmented. The continued operationalisation of the European command
structures (EUMS/MPCC), the strengthening of EU action in the maritime
and air domains, the increased sharing of operational assets and support
bases in strategic areas, the improvement of European situation assess­
ment tools and the establishment of the European Peace Facility (EPF) are
all priority areas for efforts to contain terrorist threats and the push of
expansionist powers.

Harmonising the capability instruments (PESCO, CARD and EDF) and


-----

base are major challenges, which must be taken up to open the possibility
of real European strategic autonomy. Provided that it is sustainable and
funded over the long term, the EDF will benefit all industries, both large
groups and SMEs, will promote processes capable of bringing the different
industrial bases closer together on a long-term basis, and will give Member
States access to new-generation technologies and key equipment mee­
ting the capability objectives of the Member States of both the European
Union and NATO. France intends to play a leading role in this respect[28]
and supports the new DG DEFIS in its increasing involvement in defence
issues, which should be supported, while consolidating the respective roles
of the EEAS and the EDA.

To strengthen their sovereignty and assume their shared responsibilities,
Europeans will have to increase their technological and industrial inde­
pendence. Dependencies can be mutual and consensual — particularly
between European partners, whether they involve industrial consolidation
or major programmes in progress — or they can be unilateral and imposed,
in which case remedial solutions are called for. Europeans will therefore
have to clarify what constitutes their national critical infrastructures in
transport, energy, space and digital[29] technologies — infrastructures that
must be protected from predatory actions and external influences. EU
Member States are only beginning to converge on these key sovereignty
issues. The new Commission illustrates the increasing importance of issues
relating to defence and the protection of Europe’s technological perimeter.

The need for greater independence can be seen in all key sectors: 5G,
AI and data storage, quantum computing, energy — and their mostly
imported regulatory standards — or critical supplies of raw material.
In terms of artificial intelligence (AI), upscaling requires a global data
architecture, allowing for massive data processing tools and artificial
intelligence applications to reach their full potential. Similarly, the energy
transition required by climate change is transforming the global energy mix.

28 French participation in 36 of the 46 of the Permanent Structured Cooperation projects, participation

of French companies in 14 of the 16 industrial consortia selected following the 2019 call for projects
of the EDIDP (European Defence Industrial Development Programme).

29 Cf. act no. 2019-810, known as “5G”, which aims to preserve the security, integrity and resilience of


-----

European countries should therefore start to diversify their sources of supply now
in order to reduce their strategic dependencies[30]; concerning gas, the EU
intends to encourage a process of diversification of suppliers, routes, and
means of supply. In addition, electrification and digitisation are creating
new, structural dependencies on certain technologies (digital systems)
and energy sources (renewables, electricity, batteries), as well as on the
raw materials underlying their production. Whether in terms of access to
critical materials, control of industrial value chains, definition of standards
or data processing, the digital and “low-carbon” technology sectors consti­
tute new areas of economic, technological, and normative competition.

The dual advances made possible by certain technologies thus extend
economic confrontation to new areas of competition (digital, automation,
financial or scientific computation, commercial artificial intelligence, highspeed telecommunications), in which European States are not sufficiently
coordinated, with cumulative R&D budgets that are undersized, particularly
in comparison with Chinese and American efforts. These inadequacies
are likely to deprive Europe of its residual advance and influence in these
fields, and to complicate or even subordinate to others its capacity for
action and ultimately its sovereignty.

The risk of an irreversible downgrade, or even the withdrawal of the European
continent from world affairs can no longer be ruled out today.

Faced with such challenges, we must both take into account our most critical
dependencies and draw up an inventory of those that could be reduced, in order
to limit risks and identify solutions to reduce our common dependencies and
secure our supplies. While preserving technological interoperability between
Allies over the long term, we must complement and develop further the tools
already available at a national and European level[31].

Moving towards greater European sovereignty also means reducing our shared
vulnerabilities. Some of our competitors are resorting to “comprehensive” or

30 The EU imported 74% of its gas by pipeline in 2019, from Russia (31%), Norway (28%) and Algeria (5%).

In the same year, LNG accounted for around 25% of EU gas imports, from Qatar (28%), Russia (20%),
the U.S. (16%) and Nigeria (12%) - see BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2020.

31 PACTE Act (expanding the list of critical technologies, lowering the threshold of voting rights held that


-----

“hybrid” strategies aimed at making gains by orchestrating the effects of their
diplomatic, military, economic, informational and legal actions according to an
overall dynamic that is ambiguous and often difficult to detect or denounce.

The increasingly widespread use of these “grey area” strategies and actions[32]
requires, in return, the ability to anticipate, detect, understand and, if
necessary, attribute the adversary’s actions, which will make it possible to
discourage them or at least to limit their effects and regain the initiative.
Credibility requires organisation to be able to respond. While the response
to hybrid threats must first of all be national and integrated, the contri­
bution of external resources (partners, allies, NATO and particularly the
EU, which brings significant added value to civil-military interaction) can
enhance its effectiveness[33]. Greater European strategic autonomy would
thus contribute directly to the preservation of our national sovereignty,
as well as that of other European countries.

Defining a posture and potentially an appropriate European response
will require close coordination of our diplomatic, legal, economic, and
informational resources, as well as certain national intelligence and action
capacities, including cyber operations.

2.2.2. DTIB: consolidate through balanced cooperative ventures

and stimulate through investment

The defence industry is an essential component of national autonomy
and a key sector for the national economy. Capable of producing all types
of equipment in all domains, it guarantees our security of access to the
technologies needed to provide equipment essential to our sovereignty
and critical weapon systems.

In addition to the major industrial contractors and their network of equip­
ment manufacturers, subcontractors and suppliers, the DTIB is a unique
ecosystem comprising the major public and parapublic research players[34]

32 Speech by the President of the Republic on 7 February 2020: “the frontier between competition and

confrontation, which used to distinguish times of peace (...) crisis (...) war, is today deeply diluted. It is
replaced by many grey areas where, under the guise of asymmetry or hybridity, actions to influence,
disturb or even intimidate are put in place, with a risk of degeneration”.


-----

with the scientific and technical expertise needed to meet defence re­
quirements. It also includes entities of the Ministry for the Armed Forces
responsible in particular for equipment maintenance[35] or procurement
programmes, with strong interaction between State agencies and industrial
stakeholders, reinforced by new methods for managing arms programmes.

The broad and constant quest for cooperation on a European scale must
contribute to the emergence of true innovative European champions,
both prime contractors and subcontractors, capable of meeting the needs
and satisfying the sovereignty ambitions of the various nations. In this
respect, the four degrees of independence/cooperation — sovereignty,
cooperation with nationally preserved skills, cooperation with mutual de­
pendency, “market-based” solution — introduced by DNSSR 2017 are even
more relevant in light of the economic effects of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Whether intergovernmental or industrial, cooperation implies, through in­
duced specialisation and the quest for efficiency, the creation of mutual
dependencies with our partners. In order to be consensual and not imposed,
these dependencies must be identified a priori so that the desired autonomy
can be restored if necessary, and be accompanied by agreement between
partners as to the desired degree of autonomy with respect to the other actors.

Like the European economies in general, the defence sector sometimes de­
pends on monopoly manufacturers based abroad, particularly in China, for
its day-to-day supplies. This is true for the support and day-to-day operation
of the armed forces (IT equipment, medicines, masks) as well as for supplies
to arms manufacturers. Both national needs and the ambition of European
sovereignty must therefore fully integrate independent access, in a timely
manner and with guaranteed quality, to certain transverse technologies that
are essential for the production of our major systems. For example, expertise
in high-performance steels, from their elaboration to the manufacture of
the associated mechanical parts, is indispensable for the production of the
most sensitive platforms, while expertise in the design of printed circuits
and electronic components is necessary to maintain our electronic systems
in the long term; finally, our needs for rare metals and critical minerals (rare
earths, lithium, cobalt, tantalum, etc.) are increasing.


-----

First of all, it is necessary to better identify supply chain risks, even if it
means developing our own supply chains if need be. Certain strategic
industrial sectors also require particular attention, which could go as far
as providing capital support. The same applies to emerging technology
fields (AI, hyper-velocity, stealth, cyber including networks, control of the
electromagnetic environment, combat cloud, nanotechnology, etc.): in the
absence of national or European suppliers and sufficient investment, new,
highly critical dependencies will develop to the point of becoming irreversible.

A pivotal element in the economic health of the defence industry, exports
must meet a threefold requirement: guarantee compliance with interna­
tional commitments through strict oversight, satisfy the demands of our
partners, who are increasingly demanding production and technology
transfers and offsets, and preserve our industrial base by extending pro­
duction runs. Transfers and exports must therefore be chosen so as not to
disrupt our sovereign, long-term access to critical technologies, sometimes
buried deep in the subcontracting chain.

Finally, innovation is at the heart of our DTIB. It is both long-term — in order
to prepare critical investments, anticipate technological breakthroughs
or ensure expertise in emerging technologies of a strategic nature — and
short-term, in order to rapidly capture innovation from the civilian market
and from the armed forces, directorates and departments through the
actions of the Defence Innovation Agency (DIA) created in 2018.

Our DTIB not only contributes directly to the country’s security and so­
vereignty, but also has a remarkable economic impact, in terms of jobs,
trade balance, investment, and research. It is a key sector of the national
economy, accounting for 10% of industry, more than 20% of R&D and
about 11% of French exports of goods in 2019. Because the DTIB has been
preserved from the waves of offshoring of the last 30 years, it constitutes
a real local network; defence investment therefore has a direct knock-on
effect on the many regions where the defence industry remains firmly
established, and more generally on the economy as a whole.

The activity of the DTIB’s 4,000 companies of all sizes generates about
200,000 direct and indirect (subcontractor) jobs, intrinsically industrial and
qualified: engineers, blue-collar workers, technicians, researchers, etc.


-----

national trade balance of €6.9 billion in 2018 and €8.5 billion in 2019. In
addition to the DTIB, there are 26,000 companies supplying the Ministry
for the Armed Forces throughout the country. Since laboratories and pro­
duction lines are located on national soil, public spending in this sector,
which represents 80% of State investment, has a particular macroeconomic
multiplier effect — equivalent to a factor of two over 10 years.

2.2.3. Contributing to the Nation’s resilience

Five years after the terrorist attacks of 2015 and three years after the
hurricanes that devastated part of the West Indies, the Covid-19 crisis
has illustrated the need for a versatile military, capable of strengthening
the Nation’s resilience through its ability to take action in a wide variety
of critical situations, from health or environmental disasters to terrorist or
hybrid attacks in metropolitan France or the overseas territories.

Thus, in the spring of 2020, and despite the Covid-19 crisis, the armed forces
continued to fulfil all their permanent missions and all their operational
commitments (nuclear deterrence, homeland protection, internal and
external operations), while visibly contributing to the national effort to
combat the virus through the three components of Operation Resilience:
health, logistics, and protection.

However, in the light of lessons learned from the pandemic, among other
things, the armed forces’ capabilities need to be strengthened to deal with
large-scale crises. In this respect, the implementation of a strategic “pro­
tection-resilience” function is now clearly necessary. Indeed, the notions
of protection and resilience complement each other, as resilience is an
essential prerequisite for ensuring the protection of the French people
and the national territory and guaranteeing the continuity of the nation’s
essential functions. The rationale behind this function could moreover be
extended to our European partners and our Allies.

With the Vigipirate system and Operation Sentinelle, the armed forces
have shown for several years now that they are able to provide homeland
security forces with valuable assistance that can be adapted to the evol­
ving terrorist threat. This increased role in domestic security has required
specific resources and training. Similarly, in the face of the CBRN threat,


-----

the equipment dedicated to this threat, as well as the acculturation of
all personnel, and to pursue research programmes in the biological and
chemical fields.

The armed forces, set to act in situations of sudden crisis, constitute — to­
gether with the entire ministry and within an inter-ministerial framework — an
essential link in the Nation’s resilience, particularly with regard to strategic
or vitally important infrastructure. Because of their specific capabilities
and know-how, for example in planning, they also play an important role in
the inter-ministerial response to hybrid attacks, particularly in the face of
repeated, low-intensity actions that require long-term follow-up in response.

At the same time, in the cyber domain, the emerging confrontations with
regional and major powers confirm the need to continue strengthening
the capabilities of the armed forces to operate in cyberspace and exploit
technical intelligence.

In terms of resilience, the geographical location of our overseas territories is
significant. The health crisis has shown the reality of the strategic continuity
between the homeland and our overseas territories and the need for reas­
surance in the face of predatory actions and information manipulation. Our
“presence and sovereignty” forces, currently sized as tightly as possible given
our interests[36], could be reconfigured to be able to receive, at short notice
and for extended periods, detachments deployed as reinforcements from
mainland France. In addition to all the services and resources of the State,
a credible global posture should also mobilise the cooperation of Western
or regional partners, who have their own resources or support bases. Faced
with the need for a global response, our Basing Overseas and Outside France
(OME) system is a precious lever that from now on must integrate the entire
conflict spectrum, including competition between great powers.

Reinforced resilience involves reconsidering certain in-service support de­
pendencies. Faced with a crisis that affects delivery flows, supplies for the
armed forces cannot be based solely on a logic of efficiency, inspired by a
private sector model. It is essential to have strategic stocks and to accept
the associated additional costs. Outsourcing of services must also take
account of resilience issues. What is true in the light of the Covid-19 crisis


-----

would also be true in the event of a surprise of a completely different nature
(digital or environmental), and a fortiori in the context of a high-intensity
engagement possibly threatening the homeland.

Furthermore, the armed forces are increasingly subject to legal standards
that sometimes ignore the special nature of the military profession. The
indiscriminate application of regulatory constraints to ordinary activities
as well as to operational or combat training activities risks in the long run
reducing our ability to engage in operations. Positive laws applied to the
armed forces must therefore be adapted in a necessary and proportionate
manner to enable the forces to fulfil their missions in all circumstances.
Respect for defence issues must therefore be given due consideration by
all the national or European bodies that define the regulatory framework in
a multitude of areas (labour legislation, environmental code, social rights,
laws governing digital and data issues, etc.).

Finally, it is important to continue to ensure the full support of our fellow
citizens for the defence effort, by demonstrating very concretely its contri­
bution not only to their security, but also to the economy, employment
and social cohesion. This requires continuing efforts to ensure that the
armed forces reflect the diversity of society to an even greater degree.

2.2.4. Ambition 2030: stepping up current efforts

The geopolitical disruptions noted above are reflected at the military
level by tougher operating environments and the multiplication of fields
of confrontation. As a result of all these developments, the hypothesis of
a direct confrontation between major powers can no longer be ignored.
The engagement of the armed forces on home soil is also set to continue
in the implementation of protection postures, for the benefit of civilian
authorities and in all fields of confrontation. Between now and 2030 and
beyond, current tensions and possible upheavals therefore require us to
prepare ourselves for scenarios of “engagement (...) in a major conflict”[37]
and to continue to build up our capabilities and adapt our general posture.

In critical areas such as deterrence, intelligence, access to space, power
projection or first and forcible entry capability, the objective of controlled
sovereignty remains a priority. Our freedom of action thus requires us to


-----

ensure the credibility and renewal of our deterrent, and to guarantee our
autonomy of assessment and decision-making, based on national intelli­
gence and command capabilities with guaranteed resilience.

Wherever possible, we need to retain a national intervention capability,
covering the widest possible spectrum of action, from counter-terro­
rism to high-intensity conflict to responding to hybrid attacks. Having a
full-spectrum armed forces model, fully equipped and capable of acting in
both physical and immaterial fields will also make it easier for us to rally
our European partners.

However, the French armed forces cannot completely free themselves
from dependence; they rely on their closest partners, the European and
American armed forces in particular, for operations, intelligence, or the
provision of certain specific capabilities.

In terms of capabilities and operations, the United States is thus the prima­
ry provider of support for the French armed forces, directly in a bilateral
format, or more indirectly via NATO or within ad hoc coalitions. To this
must be added the resources of our European partners, which carry out
all kinds of missions for our benefit, as well as contributing financially to
some of our efforts. The strategic and military alliance between Europe
and the U.S. remains essential. While preserving transatlantic solidarity, bur­
den-sharing needs to be rebalanced to enhance engagement capabilities.

At the same time, it will be necessary to strengthen force protection, both
on bases and combat platforms. This will particularly apply to the areas
of health, CBRN, air defence and missile defence, but also counter-UAV
systems — the latter applies to French territory as well as to our deployed
forces, given the intensive use of armed UAVs, as attested by recent exa­
mples (Libya, Syria, Nagorno-Karabakh). The same logic applies to the
improvement of communication and information systems, with a special
focus on interoperability with domestic security forces.

Our forces will also have to retain a capacity to operate in a technological
environment that is both digitised and degraded, combining constant
challenges to the electromagnetic spectrum, the risk of paralysing or
deceptive cyber attacks, and the proliferation of missiles of all types to


-----

informational environment presenting more and more risks and opportu­
nities, where they will need to have the capacity to implement defensive
as well as offensive postures.

Engaged in possible high-intensity combat against adversaries with multi­
ple modern capabilities, they will also have to strengthen their capability
for joint collaborative combat, and thus their capability for multi-domain
integration alongside our Allies and partners. Even within multinational coa­
litions, conflicts could involve a maximum level of engagement, difficulties
in accessing areas of confrontation, and direct, kinetic, electromagnetic
and cyber attacks.

The French armed forces will also have to gradually build up sufficient critical
mass, in terms of manpower and equipment, in order to simultaneously
rebalance the odds in their favour, endure by compensating for potentially
high attrition, and engage in several theatres.

Finally, they will have to continue to diversify their offensive capabilities at
the top end of the spectrum, particularly for deep penetration of anti-ac­
cess / area denial (A2/AD) postures. This implies “scaling up” our capability
to conduct operations at divisional or even corps level (and their air and
naval equivalents), thanks to interoperability with our partners and allies,
and reinforced reserves.

Substantial modernisation is already under way: reception of FDI frigates
and operational commissioning of the first four Barracuda class SSNs with
enhanced combat capabilities, from 2021 to 2025; delivery by 2025 of a
large number of medium armoured vehicles (Griffon and Jaguar), followed
by the Leclerc battle tank upgrade; enhanced connectivity and collaborative
air combat thanks to the deployment of the F4 standard on Rafale in 2024
and improvement of our air defence systems (SAMP/T-NG) in 2027, etc.

In addition, major programmes have been launched, in cooperation or
open to cooperation, to prepare for the renewal of the capabilities nee­
ded beyond 2030. These include in particular the Franco-British FC/ASW
missile system, the future Franco-German land combat system in 2035,
the new-generation aircraft carrier in 2038 and the future combat air sys­
tem, being developed with Germany and Spain — its initial operational


-----

projects[38] that will follow will ensure the connectivity and credibility of
our forces and incorporate the requirements of collaborative combat in a
joint and combined environment, in order to guarantee their operational
superiority in the face of future threats. Developed over the longer term
and continuously modernised, these major capabilities will be designed
to allow upgrades to ensure they can adapt to conditions of engagement
that are still remote and uncertain, but which will constitute the challenge
of future high-intensity combat.

It is necessary to continue the build-up initiated in 2017, whether it involves
countering A2/AD postures in all domains, ensuring the projection and
reinforcement of our forces, or guaranteeing our intervention capability.

The accelerated transformation of the international order thus confirms
that Ambition 2030 combined with the MPL should be seen as an interme­
diate but indispensable step towards a full-spectrum, coherent, agile and
innovative, and therefore effective, armed forces model, in which conven­
tional and nuclear forces permanently complement each other. In this
way we will be able to guarantee our security and self-sufficiency as well
as our capacity to rally others in Europe and beyond.

- 

-  - 

As a stabilising power dedicated to peace and security, France promotes
effective multilateralism that respects human rights, fundamental freedoms
and democratic principles. In a world marked by heightened competition,
our political efforts must be backed by a strengthened, effective and agile
defence apparatus. It is by pursuing our national military modernisation
efforts, but also by developing European and global partnerships based on
trust, reciprocity and these common values, that we will be able to confront
the deteriorating international environment and its multiple challenges.


-----

-----

APPENDIX


-----

Impact of economic crises on European defence expenditure,
2009-2019 & international trends (billions of 2019 USD)


-----

Sources : IISS, Military Balance. 2025 data are based on two hypotheses: a
high ceiling, where defence expenditure trends over the period 2020-2025 are
based on the last three years (2016-2019), and a lower trajectory based solely
on the change from 2018 to 2019. For European defence expenditures, a third


-----

LIST DES ACRONYMS

|A2/AD|Anti-Access/Area Denial|
|---|---|
|ALCM|Air-Launch Cruise Missile|
|ALSR|Avion Léger de Surveillance et de Reconnaissance (light surveillance and reconnaissance aircraft)|
|AQPA|Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula|
|ASAT|Anti-satellite|
|ASEAN|Association of Southeast Asian Nations|
|CARD|Coordinated Annual Review on Defence|
|CBRN|Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear|
|CEA|Commissariat à l’Énergie Atomique et aux énergies alternatives (French atomic energy and alternative energies commission)|
|CFE|Conventional Forces in Europe|
|CJEF|Combined Joint Expeditionary Force|
|CNES|Centre National d’Études Spatiales (the French space agency)|
|CUGE|Capacité Universelle de Guerre Électronique (universal electronic warfare capability)|



DG DEFIS Directorate General for Defence Industry and
Space


DG DEFIS


-----

|DMAé|Direction de la Maintenance Aéronautique (Aeronautical Maintenance Directorate)|
|---|---|
|DNSSR|Defence and National Security Strategic Review|
|DTIB|Defence Technological and Industrial Base|
|EATC|European Air Transport Command|
|EDA|European Defence Agency|
|EEAS|European External Action Service|
|eFP|enhanced Forward Presence|
|IS-GS|Islamic State in the Greater Sahara|
|EMASOH|European-led Maritime Awareness in the Strait of Hormuz|
|EUMS|European Union Military Staff|
|EUROMALE/MALE RPAS|European Medium Altitude Long Endurance Remotely Piloted Aircraft System|
|EUTM Mali|European Training Mission in Mali|
|FAO|Food and Agriculture Organization|
|FCAS|Future Combat Air System|


FC/ASW Future Cruise and Anti-Ship Weapon


-----

|GNA|Government of National Accord (Libya)|
|---|---|
|ICBM|Intercontinental Ballistic Missile|
|INF|Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces|
|IONS|Indian Ocean Naval Symposium|
|IORA|Indian Ocean Rim Association|
|ISL|Institut franco-allemand de recherches de Saint-Louis (Franco-German research institute for science and defence)|
|JCPoA|Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action|
|LNA|Libyan National Army|
|MEDOR|Méditerranée Orientale (Western Mediter­ ranean)|
|MENA|Middle East and North Africa|
|MGCS|Main Ground Combat System|
|MMCM|Maritime Mine Counter Measures|
|MPCC|Military Planning and Conduct Capability|
|MPL|Military Planning Law|
|MRBM|Medium Range Ballistic Missile|


-----

|New START|Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty|
|---|---|
|NGWS|Next Generation Weapon System, portion de­ veloped in cooperation|
|NRI|NATO Readiness Initiative|
|ONERA|Office National d’Études et de Recherches Aérospatiales (French aerospace research centre)|
|PESCO|Permanent Structured Cooperation|
|SGIM|Support Group for Islam and Muslims|
|SIAé|Service Industriel de l’Aéronautique (main­ tenance service of the French Air and Space Force)|
|SIMMT|Structure Intégrée du Maintien en condition opérationnelle des Matériels Terrestres (mainte­ nance service of the French Army)|
|SIRH|Système d’information de gestion des res­ sources humaines (human resources informa­ tion and management system)|
|SLBM|Submarine Launched Ballistic Missile|
|SPDMM|South Pacific Defence Ministers’ Meeting|
|SSF|Service de Soutien de la Flotte (maintenance service of the French Navy)|
|WHO|World Health Organisation|


-----

STRATEGIC UPDATE

2021


Translation: AéroTraduction

DICoD - Bureau des Éditions - Janvier 2021


-----

