# STRATEGIC DEFENCE REVIEW 2017-2020


-----

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. INTRODUCTION 48

2. DEFENCE PLANNING SYSTEM 51

2.1. Strategic Planning Documents 51

2.2. Strategic Planning Process 52

3. GEORGIA’S SECURITY ENVIRONMENT 53

3.1. Security Environment 53

3.1.1. Local 53

3.1.2. Regional 53

3.1.3. Global 53

3.2. Planning Assumptions 54

3.2.1. Georgia 54

3.2.2. The Russian Federation 54

3.2.3. United States of America 55

3.2.4. NATO 55

3.2.5. European Union 58

3.2.6. Regional Conditions 58

3.2.7. Transnational Threats 58

3.3. Threat Assessment 58

3.4. Planning Scenarios 58

4. CAPABILITY ASSESSMENT 59

4.1. Mission and Task Requirements 59

4.2. Assessment of Current GAF Capabilities 59

4.3. Analysis of Current Capability Deficiencies 59

5. FORCE OPTIMISATION 60

5.1. Force Optimisation Aims and Principles 60

5.2. Resource Allocation Objectives and Budget Projection 61

5.3. Force Structure Option 62

5.4. Implementation of Recommendations 63

5.5. Objective Force 2020 63

5.5.1. MoD Civilian Office 63

5.5.2. Georgian Armed Forces 66

5.5.3. General Staff 67

5.5.4. Land Force East and West Commands 68


-----

5.5.5. Special Operation Force 68

5.5.6. Aviation and Air Defence Command 69

5.5.7. The National Guard 70

5.5.8. Logistic Support Command 71

5.5.9. Training and Military Education Command 72

6. IMPLEMENTATION OF SDR RECOMMENDATIONS 73

6.1. SDR Implementation Plan 73

6.2. Execution Priorities 73

6.3. MoD Decision-Making Process 74

6.4. Standard Methodology for Analysis of SDR Recommendations 75

6.5. Institutional reforms for implementing SDR 2017-2020 recommendations 75

6.5.1. Strategic Directions and Management 76

6.5.2. Force Optimisation 76

6.5.3. Force Readiness 76

6.5.4. Institutional Reforms 77

6.5.5. Multinational and Bilateral Engagement 80

7. CONCLUSION 82


-----

## 1. INTRODUCTION

The Strategic Defence Review (SDR) determines the structure and directions for the
development of institutional and operational capabilities of the Ministry of Defence (MoD)
and the Georgian Armed Forces (GAF). The document also describes the current security
environment, reviews the threats and challenges facing Georgia and serves the purpose
of creating a reliable, capable, NATO interoperable and task-oriented Armed Forces. The
SDR takes the limited resources into the account and provides a set of time-phased and
incremental development recommendations.

In view of the volatile security environment, Russia’s aggressive foreign policy agenda
represents a major threat to Georgia’s national security. The SDR 2017-2020 provides
recommendations for transforming the GAF and determines how the GAF structure will be
reshaped by 2020 (Objective Force 2020).

Given existing threats and limited resources, the MoD focuses on coordinated management
of resources and deepening of interagency cooperation to ensure effective organisation of
national defence. Effective defence planning must be based on the “Total Defence” approach,
which implies ensuring the defence of the entire territory with full national efforts, using
both military and civilian resources. This approach takes into account both conventional and
unconventional methods of warfare. The successful implementation of this approach will
require the formation of civil defence system, development of relevant infrastructure and
creation of effective Reserve and Mobilisation System. Following measures must be taken
within the framework of the “Total Defence” approach:

      - Enhanced coordination and cooperation within interagency processes to consolidate

national capabilities in times of crisis and war;

      - Development of a more mobile, lethal and capable Armed Forces based on the balance

of active and reserve forces for ensuring national defence;

      - In case of relevant resource allocation, the MoD will provide the Basic Combat Training

for conscripts called up by different agencies;

       - Formation of the new Reserve and Mobilisation System, which will be directed at preparing

reservists, improving their level of Command and Control and increasing population’s
wider engagement in ensuring national defence. The cooperation with partner countries
and sharing their experience is important for the development of Reserve and Mobilisation
System;

      - Mobilisation of the reserve force in times of war, including the use of conscripts to

augment the combat capabilities of the Armed Forces;

      - Sustainment of an unwavering commitment to international missions for ensuring

international security and stability, which also aims at developing the GAF and its military
interoperability with NATO;

      - Supporting the Substantial NATO-Georgia Package (SNGP) through consolidation of

bilateral and multilateral security assistance programmes for the purpose of Georgia’s
integration into NATO.

The GAF is an important component for deterrence and defence. In case of aggression against
Georgia, the GAF must be ready for using trained reserve to support professional combat
units. Sustaining a pool of trained reservists and conscription system are key components
of the “Total Defence” approach. The Ministry of Defence introduced the new conscription
system within the framework of the “Total Defence” approach. Further sustainment of the
use of conscripts also allows better utilisation of professional personnel in critical warfighting


-----

positions. Continued use of conscripts requires changes in legacy practices. In the future,
all conscripts will attend the Basic Combat Training, be treated more equitably and receive
increased financial and social compensation.

The GAF transformation, modernisation and enhancement of its combat readiness level are
the basis for the development of a comprehensive defence system. Improving the GAF’s
combat readiness level (see the diagram N1) requires the allocation of additional recourses
and renewal of existing policy and practice.

Diagram N1

The Ministry of Defence is continuing the development of effective resource and force
management systems and improvement/modernisation of operational capabilities and
equipment, the main challenge of which remains limited defence resources. In order to respond
to these challenges, it is important to elaborate a long-term strategic plan for the development
of defence capabilities with the relevant financial estimates, supporting the development of the
country’s defence industry and improvement of existing bilateral and multilateral cooperation.
To assess the force structure, the Ministry of Defence, is elaborating its third Strategic Defence
Review, which is taking into account the previous experience into account.

An initial SDR was completed in 2007, using a capabilities-based methodology that addressed
a wide range of potential threats. Due to the 2008 August War, few of these recommendations
were implemented. Following this conflict, Georgia’s national security environment has radically
changed and a SDR 2013-2016 was completed in 2012, which followed a threat-based
methodology, focusing primarily on the threats posed by Russia’s occupation of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali region.


-----

Since Georgia now faces an emboldened Russian foreign policy, the SDR 2017-2020 also
follows a similar threat-based approach. Georgia must now be prepared for responding to the
full spectrum of threats, including hybrid conflict scenarios.

Throughout the next four years, the implementation of SDR recommendations will represent
the top priority for the Ministry of Defence. The implementation of these recommendations will
ensure the formation of mobile, adequately equipped, capable, NATO interoperable Armed
Forces, with effective management and structure, which will also be capable of defending
Georgia’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, will take part in international
missions and provide help to the government during natural and manmade disasters.

Within the framework of the “Total Defence” approach, the MoD recognises the importance
of actively participating in all efforts to improve interagency coordination and cooperation with
the President and the Prime Minister’s offices to enhance the whole-of-government approach
to defence planning. The MoD will elaborate specific measures to energise the interagency
process.

According to the “Law of Georgia on National Security Policy Planning and Coordination”,
a wider SDR working group was created, that included representatives from different state
agencies, international experts and partners. The draft copy of the SDR was introduced to
the Permanent Coordinating Interagency Commission for the Implementation of Georgia’s
National-level Conceptual Documents operating within the Council for State Security and
Crisis Management. Following the specific procedures, the document was approved.


-----

## 2. DEFENCE PLANNING SYSTEM

2.1. Strategic Planning Documents

The Constitution and legislation of Georgia represent the foundation for defence system
management and determine the key principles and mechanisms for defence planning.
Collectively, the Constitution and laws provide the foundation for civilian and military leaders
to Command and Control the force, and establish specific principles, policies and procedures
that must be followed in planning and managing defence institution. The MoD is an active
participant in the interagency working group process that collaboratively produces key
strategic guidance, prescribed by the Law of Georgia on National Security Policy Planning
and Coordination. According to the Law, national security policy planning is implemented by
means of national and agency-level conceptual and organisational documents.

     - National Strategic Planning Documents:

o An Agency-Level Concept
o The Threat Assessment document of Georgia
o National security strategies[1]

     - Agency-Level Conceptual Documents:

o An Agency-level concept
o An Agency-level strategy
o A Doctrine
o A Programme

Diagram N2

1. National security strategies:  National Military Strategy, Strategic Defence Review (SDR) and other strategic documents


-----

2.2. Strategic Planning Process

The National Security Concept addresses the fundamental values and interests of the country.
It also provides key directions for national security policy as well as its foreign, social and
economic policy priorities. Considering the values and interests highlighted in the National
Security Concept, Threat Assessment document identifies the threats and risks that threaten
or may threaten state interests. In response to the threats and risks facing Georgia’s national
values and interests, the National Military Strategy provides the strategic military objectives
for the GAF and required capabilities that are necessary to accomplish those objectives.

To achieve the goals and tasks set by the National Military Strategy, the SDR 2017-2020
determines four key directions for the development of the Ministry of Defence and Georgian
Armed Forces, Objective Force structure, as well as means for enhancing GAF interoperability
with NATO.

The SDR 2017-2020 provides the recommendations for the GAF transformation, modernisation
and improvement of its combat readiness level and elimination of its capacity shortfalls.

Accomplishment of these objectives will adhere to several principles:

      - Improving the integration of defence planning, management and internal coordination

mechanisms;

      - Implementing measurable policies, procedures and systems that directly contribute to

substantially improving force readiness;

      - Determining through the ongoing SDR 2017-2020 an affordable GAF structure that best

optimises the balance of forces, resources and capabilities necessary for territorial defence;

      - Developing programmes that improve the skills, knowledge and competencies of our

military and civilian personnel that contribute to improving institutional stability, resilience
and efficiency;

       - Effective use of cooperation formats with NATO (ANP, PARP, SNGP etc.) for the development

of defence capabilities and enhancing NATO interoperability;

      - Integrating the Substantial NATO-Georgia Package (SNGP) initiatives within the

development/reform process;

      - Synchronising the cooperation mechanisms with NATO and bilateral formats.

The White Paper sets the key defence development strategic directions for the MoD and GAF
and translates values, interests, threats and tasks from the key national strategic planning
documents.

The White Paper’s strategic directions are:

      - Strategic Directions and Management – actions designed to increase the interagency

cooperation and quality of integration of defence planning and management systems to
effectively address and allocate resources on the basis of priorities;

       - Force Optimisation – aims to create the optimal balance in military capabilities

       - Force Readiness – initiatives designed to improve the systemic development of personnel,

equipment, education/trainings and readiness functions;

      - Institutional Foundation – actions related to improving MoD management mechanisms in

order to ensure the effective support for the operational requirements of the Armed Forces;

       - Multilateral/Bilateral Engagement – initiatives related to enhancing interoperability and

cooperation with NATO and partner countries and accomplishment of Georgia’s commitment
to international missions.


-----

The execution of many recommendations determined by the SDR 2017-2020 requires
financial resources that must be planned, programmed and budgeted within the Defence
Program Guidance (DPG) document. The following document provides guidance covering the
upcoming budgetery year and three future programme years.

## 3. GEORGIA’S SECURITY ENVIRONMENT

For the development Force 2020 military capability requirements and assumptions are
necessary to hypothesise the political and military environment, within which the GAF will
have to operate. These assumptions are based on expert analysis and predict future political
and military factors upon which force options and risks can be assessed. The assumptions
addressed in this chapter are based on the National Threat Assessment 2015-2018 document.
This process lays the foundation for military planners to develop the most dangerous and
most likely threat scenarios facing Georgia’s national security.

3.1. Security Environment

Georgia’s security environment has become increasingly complex and dynamic and is therefore
facing a number of direct and indirect challenges, impacting country’s further development. In
order to evaluate and determine the security environment, it is necessary to take into account
current local, regional and global dimensions to security environment.

3.1.1. Local
In August 2008, military aggression by the Russian Federation, occupation of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali region and permanent deployment of the Russian troops and military infrastructure
on Georgian territories, considerably worsened Georgia’s security environment. Russia’s
recognition of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali region’s independence, followed by the “creeping
occupation” of Georgia, represents a violation of Georgia’s sovereignty, international law and
the fundamental rights of the local population.

Active cooperation between the de facto governments of occupied territories (Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali region and the Russian Federation – including the growing militarisation, ratification
of the so-called Alliance and Integration Treaties and absence of international peacekeeping
forces – increases the risk of renewed military aggression. In addition to military threats,
the current developments in the occupied territories create a fertile ground for the spread of
transnational/organised crime.

Furthermore, the use of elements of “soft power” and economic tools by the Kremlin against
Georgia’s national security represents the challenge for its security environment.

3.1.2. Regional
The complex and unstable security environment in the Black Sea region, annexation of
Crimea and developments in eastern Ukraine, instability in the North Caucasus and the
unresolved conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh have a negative implication on regional and Georgian
security environment. Instability created by these security challenges also impacts sustainable
economic development of all states in the region.

3.1.3. Global
In the context of globalisation, climate change, migration, transnational terrorism and cyber
threats have a negative impact on Georgia’s security environment. Furthermore, Russia’s
growing international ambitions have fostered increasingly hostile confrontations with the
West, including actions, which challenge both European and Georgia’s national security.


-----

3.2. Planning Assumptions

3.2.1. Georgia

Georgia will continue further development of democratic institutions and remain committed to
its European and Euro-Atlantic aspirations.

The Georgian Government will continue to support the development and transformation of the
GAF. Within the framework of the whole-of-government approach, the MoD will strengthen
interagency cooperation to effectively manage country’s defence capabilities.

The whole-of-government approach and ongoing reforms within the MoD is aimed at enhancing
Given the key economic trends, no considerable changes in the defence budget are expected,
with the budget assumed to be sustained at around 2% of the GDP. This may include national
funding for selected financing of new acquisition projects (air defence, reserve and mobilisation,
anti-armour systems, engineer etc.).

In response to present challenges, the MoD will continue its ongoing defence transformation
process and elaboration of innovative approaches. As a result of structural optimisation,
additional resources will be re-allocated to higher priority readiness and modernisation areas.
Georgia’s partner nations and international organisations will continue to support the country’s
defence transformation process.

3.2.2. The Russian Federation
Russia’s willingness to disregard international law, violate the sovereignty of its neighbouring
countries through open military aggression and the use of hybrid warfare, remain key
challenges. Russia’s growing militarisation, modernisation of its Armed Forces and attempts to
strengthen its influence over the region will continue to create more favourable conditions for
the continuation of the Kremlin’s aggressive behaviour, as it has done in Crimea and eastern
Ukraine.

Given the military presence of the Russian troops in the occupied territories and the violation
of the ceasefire agreement signed on 12 August 2008, Russia continues its attempts to call
Georgia’s peace order into question, thus, the renewal of a large-scale aggression remains
possible. In addition to the stationing of substantial military forces in the occupied territories,
Russia continues its efforts to create a legal basis for its presence by violating the international
law. Furthermore, there is a risk of occupation of territories around the occupation line,
seizure of strategic infrastructure and escalation of other provocations by Russia. Instability
on Georgia’s occupied territories is fostering regional volatility and an environment that
encourages terrorists, organised crime and traffickers to operate freely.

Russia will strengthen its efforts to undermine Georgia’s national unity and attempt to initiate
conflict among ethnic and religious groups to create managed destabilisation. The Kremlin
will particularly focus on reinforcing the elements of its soft power to ensure the weakening
of state institutions, strengthening of pro-Russian civil and political movements and discredit
pro-Western foreign policy agenda.

Using political, economic and information tools, Russia continues its attempt to limit international
political support for Georgia and weaken cooperation directed at strengthening Georgia’s
defence capabilities.


-----

3.2.3. United States of America
Strategic partnership between the United States and Georgia and the firm political support of
the U.S. will remain as a main deterrent to Russian aggression against Georgia’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity.

The U.S. will continue to support Georgia’s independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity
and inviolability of its borders within the framework of the U.S.-Georgia Charter on Strategic
Partnership and Memorandum on Deepening the Defence and Security Partnership between
the United States and Georgia. Continuous military cooperation with the U.S. will facilitate
further development of Georgia’s defence institutions. The successful implementation of the
Georgian Defence Readiness Program (GDRP) will ensure the enhancement of GAF’s combat
capabilities and increase its combat readiness level.

3.2.4. NATO
Georgia obtains all practical tools to prepare for joining NATO and successfully continues
its cooperation with the Alliance. Successful implementation of NATO-Georgia cooperation
mechanisms (NATO-Georgia Commission, Annual National Programme, Substantial NATO-
Georgia Package etc.) and strengthening of bilateral and multilateral relations with NATO
member states will facilitate Georgia’s integration into the Alliance. In case of reaching a
political consensus, Georgia is preparing for its full NATO membership

Georgia will continue to actively participate in international missions, exercises and other
activities led by NATO. In 2017-2018, the Georgian infantry company will continue its
participation in NATO Response Force (NRF). This will contribute to the strengthening of
GAF’s defence capabilities and enhancing its interoperability with NATO and will demonstrate
that Georgia is a reliable partner and an important contributor to international security.

As an enhanced opportunity partner of NATO, Georgia aims to continue to develop mutually
beneficial partnership on a broad range of issues in the Black Sea region.


-----

-----

-----

3.2.5. European Union
Further political-economic integration with the EU is positively reflected on Georgia’s stable
development. Georgia’s participation in the EU missions and its close cooperation within
the framework of EU’s Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) will create additional
preconditions for ensuring regional stability. Georgia will continue its active participation in
international missions led by the EU (EUTM RCA, EUTM MALI), as well as the bilateral and
multilateral cooperation with the EU within the framework of CSDP.

The European Union Monitoring Mission (EUMM) continues to exercise its mandate in Georgia
and will act as the only effective monitoring mechanism in the nearest future.

3.2.6. Regional Conditions
Russia’s growing potential on NATO’s Southern military flank and development of its naval
capabilities in the Black Sea region will weaken the West’s access to the Caucasian region,
consequently reducing its ability to balance Russia.

Russia’s key strategic objective remains to gain and maintain control over regional energy
sources and distribution networks. Ensuring energy security and maintaining its transit
function for energy supplies will remain the main challenge for Georgia. Therefore, Georgia is
committed to deepening its cooperation with regional partners over energy, political, economic
and military issues.

3.2.7. Transnational Threats
Cyber and international crime, transnational terrorism and natural and manmade disasters
will remain a significant challenge to the international community, requiring close cooperation.
The GAF will continue to have a supporting role in responding the above-mentioned threats
on Georgian territories.

3.3. Threat Assessment

The development of the SDR 2017-2020 is based on a comprehensive analysis of Georgia’s
security threats. While Georgia cannot ignore the global threats potentially impacting the
nation, the dangers posed by Russia must dominate Georgia’s national security and defence
planning.

Given the large-scale military aggression by the Russian Federation, during the August War of
2008 and developments in Ukraine, a threat-based approach was applied to the SDR 2017-
2020.

During the elaboration of the Risk and Threat Assessment diagram, the Threat Assessment
document 2015-2018 and above-mentioned military and political assumptions were taken into
the consideration.

3.4. Planning Scenarios

To determine the necessary GAF capabilities for the provision of effective response to the
existing threats and challenges, the GAF defence planners developed hypothetical planning
scenarios for wargaming, based on existing doctrines. The wargaming was conducted following
the two specific scenarios – the worst case scenario and most likely case scenario.
Based on the wargaming process, the GAF experts developed specific military capability
requirements necessary to adequately respond to each contingency. As a result of this
process, the analysis of required capabilities was used as the basis for the SDR document.


-----

While this report focuses on the most dangerous (large-scale military operation) and most
likely (limited military operation) threat scenarios, it is fully recognised that the development
of other requirements need to be considered.

## 4. CAPABILITY ASSESSMENT

As a result of the wargaming process based on the planning scenarios, the GAF’s required
capabilities for the existing structure and the Objective Force 2020, were identified in detail.

During the wargaming process, results from the analysis were recorded using a template
of doctrinal warfighting functions – Command and Control, intelligence, movement and
manoeuvre, fire, force protection and sustainment. In addition to these warfighting functions,
considerations related to institutional training and education implications were also analysed.
As a result of the analysis conducted against both scenarios, specific capability requirements
and shortfalls were identified for GAF’s organisations – General Staff, Land Force Commands,
Aviation and Air Defence Command, Special Forces, Logistic Support Command, Military
Intelligence Department, Military Police Department and National Guard Department and the
Training and Military Education Command.

4.1. Mission and Task Requirements
As a result of the analysis, critical tasks and requirements were identified that each organisation
must fulfil in respect to each planning scenario. The following process provides the basis for
further capability assessment.

4.2. Assessment of Current GAF Capabilities
Following the identification of required capabilities for the GAF’s major organisational units,
further analysis was conducted to determine whether each organisation had an acceptable
capacity to perform the specified mission or task. Acceptable capability is defined as having
an adequate number of qualified personnel with proper equipment and training.

4.3. Analysis of Current Capability Deficiencies
An integrated list of capability deficiencies was compiled following the assessment of GAF’s
major organisational units, missions, tasks and current capabilities

A comprehensive action plan will be needed for the Implementation of the necessary actions
to address the identified deficiencies. Details concerning these implementation actions will
require an analysis using the DOTLMPF framework (D – doctrine, O – organization, T –
training, L – leadership, M – materiel, P – personnel, and F – facilities). Additional details
on the above-mentioned actions will be addressed in Chapter 6: Implementation of SDR
Recommendations.


-----

## 5. FORCE OPTIMISATION

This chapter provides recommendations that collectively define Objective Force 2020. The
SDR 2017-2020 provides the basis for the reorganisation of each component of the MoD’s
civilian office and the General Staff, which serves the purpose of optimal resource allocation
and significant enhancement of GAF’s force readiness. As the SDR recommendations are
incrementally implemented, senior leadership will carefully monitor readiness impacts and
adjust planning when required.

5.1. Force Optimisation Aims and Principles
In order to respond to the traditional threats and new challenges, the GAF must be adequately
trained, well organised and possess a high readiness level. One of the main preconditions
to accomplish the enhancement and maintenance of structural units’ readiness level is
transformation of existing forces into more mobile Armed Forces, capable of defending local
population, ensuring territorial defence and providing help to the government during crisis.

Enhancement of GAF’s combat capability, improvement of Command and Control, creation of
personnel management system and logistic support, formation of Mobilisation and Reserve
System, provision of adequate equipment and enhancement of NATO interoperability are
necessary to accomplish the abovementioned requirements. Comprehensive allocation of
limited resources remains the main challenge for meeting these requirements.

Principles and approaches were elaborated based on the analysis of the GAF’s readiness
level. Necessary actions for achieving optimisation within the framework of the SDR 2017-
2020 and relevant recommendations for accomplishing GAF’s transformation and forming
future structure were identified, taking the principles and approaches into the consideration,
that were elaborated based on the analysis of the GAF’s readiness level.


-----

The necessary principles and conditions that have to be taken into the consideration during
the optimisation process are as follows:

      - Similar structural organisation of the GAF in peacetime and war;

      - Centralised planning with decentralised execution – delegation of authority to lower level

commanders to increase flexibility and freedom of action;

     - Enhance combat readiness of the Armed Forces with a mobile and more capable force

and modern equipment capable of responding to regional threats;

      - Optimise balance in the allocation of limited defence resources;

      - GAF transformation for enhancing its effective response capability to existing threats and

challenges;

      - Sustain Georgia’s commitment in Afghanistan and other international missions;

     - Further enhancement of NATO interoperability and assistance offered through the

Substantial NATO-Georgia Package (SNGP);

     - Support GDRP objectives.

5.2. Resource Allocation Objectives and Budget Projection

In optimisation process, fulfilment of the aims related to reduction of the amount of defence
budget resources allocated to personnel costs and reallocation of funds to Operations &
Maintenance, the GAF modernisation and acquisition of major systems to increase its combat
readiness level, represent a significant challenge.

The calculation of the defence budget projections adopted a conservative approach (see the
diagram). Using data drawn from the annual Ministry of Finance Basis Direction and Data
2017-2020 document, defence experts determined the relative accuracy of future defence
budget estimates and extrapolated a conservative growth rate for future defence budget
growth. In addition, budget projections presented in the appendix of Georgian Law on 2017
fiscal year budget (“Main Economic and Financial Indicators”) takes into the consideration the
ratio of existing data on the nominal GDP with percentage indicators of defence expenditure.
Should the defence budget exceed the projected conservative budget indicators, additional
funds will be allocated for GAF modernisation.

Diagram N3


-----

5.3. Force Structure Options

Force readiness, NATO interoperability and security cooperation as well as interagency
cooperation are required for the GAF to successfully accomplish its tasks. Force readiness
can be achieved through developing capable, adequately manned, equipped and trained
Armed Forces.

Land Forces represent the main component of the GAF, whereas Manoeuvre Brigades are
the main combat elements that consist of 70% of total Armed Forces and main component of
armament and equipment. Manoeuvre Units’ requirements determine the Table of Organisation
and equipment, personnel manning of all other combat support and combat service support
units. Therefore, during the Strategic Defence Review, Table of Organisation of Manoeuvre
brigades was emphasised, which determines the structure of Land Forces and the GAF.

The analysis below is based on the following criteria/indicators:

       - Projected defence budget ceiling for 2020;

      - Desired manning level of Combat Units, Combat Supporting Units and Other Supporting

Elements;

      - Appropriate reallocation of defence resources in accordance with resource allocation

objectives – personnel, operations and maintenance, construction, equipment, research
and development.

Three functional components of the Armed Forces have been analysed for the force
optimisation assessment: Combat Units, Combat Support Units and other units. Unit manning
is determined by different doctrinal requirements.

Budget allocation objective – personnel cost (no more than 50%) and equipment acquisition
(no more than 20%) – meets with target set by NATO, which is non-binding. Taking the limited
resources into consideration, meeting with these targets became a priority of force options
assessment. It is worth mentioning that these realities are not isolated to Georgia; all NATO
countries have suffered from significant cuts over the last decade and have dramatically
reduced their overall capabilities, size and readiness. Only a few NATO countries are funding
their defence budget at or above the 2% level desired by the Alliance.

Three force structure options have been elaborated based on the abovementioned criteria/
indicators, existing force structure and equipment status, brigade tasks, doctrinal requirements
and directions from the General Staff.

**Risk Assessment**
Reliable Armed Forces are necessary to ensure deterrence and defence, as well as adequately
respond to any aggression. Implementation of SDR 2017-2020 recommendations will result
in formation of adequately trained and equipped Armed Forces, which will be ready to defend
the country and prevent the enemy from reaching desired goals.

The expansion of major NATO and bilateral exercises to some extent will ensure the mitigation
of the risks for every option. Exercises such as: Agile Spirit, Noble Partner and NATO-GEO
EX16, highlights the readiness of Georgia’s partners to place boots-on-the-ground while
further contributing to Alliance interoperability.


-----

5.4. Implementation of Recommendations

The successful implementation of the SDR recommendations relies on efficient functioning
of two defence management systems - the force management system and the personnel
management system.

The force management system includes the development of unit organisational structures
and required equipment designed to optimise and prioritise the allocation of personnel and
equipment reflected on Tables of Organisation (TO) and Tables of Equipment (TE).

The key measures taken to optimise TOs and TEs include the following:

      - Improve mobility of infantry units by optimising elements and equipment;

     - Eliminate obsolete equipment and replace with NATO compatible systems;

      - Streamline headquarters, administrative staff and supporting structures;

      - Define priorities for force modernisation (see paragraph 6.2) and provide with relevant

resources (see paragraph 5.2);

      - Optimise the allocation of current equipment.

Implementation of the SDR 2017-2020 recommendations will also depend on the effective
functioning of the civilian and military personnel management system to recruit, develop
and retain the most qualified individuals.

A number of steps were taken and will be taken till the end of 2020, to implement the
requirements of personnel (military and civilian) management system:

     - Optimise all TO to support and develop hierarchical management of officers and NCOs;

     - Rebalance officer and NCO rank/grade structures to promote effective career management;

     - Professional development of civilian personnel and merit-based career management;

     - Optimise the number of civilian positions within the GAF and standardise management of
GAF’s civilian personnel (recruitment, career management and development);

     - Prioritise manning of Combat Units, Combat Support Units and other supporting structural
units at desired manning proportions;

     - Elaborate new conscription approach to ensure cost effectiveness, the support of professional
army with conscripts and availability of personnel for reserve force.

5.5. Objective Force 2020

This paragraph addresses specific recommendations concerning each component of the MoD
and GAF. It provides the current structure, a brief rationale describing the recommended
changes and proposed final organisational diagram.

5.5.1. MoD Civilian Office
Aiming to further develop the GAF and force readiness capabilities, the MoD is responsible
for developing and supervising implementation of defence policies that provide democratic
control over the Armed Forces. Furthermore, the MoD determines the strategic-operational
organisation of the GAF and ensures the execution of military cooperation in accordance with
international agreements signed by Georgia.

**Rationale for Reorganisation**
The structural reorganisation of the MoD was implemented aiming to achieve the elimination of
functional duplication and increased structural effectiveness. Force optimisation, development
of organisational and personnel management systems are required for the effective functioning
of the MoD and accomplishment of its aims and objectives.


-----

**Implemented Actions:**

      - Merging of the MoD Wounded Warriors Supporting Department with General Staff’s

Psychological Selection and Monitoring Department, and creating Social Issues and
Psychological Support Department;

      - Merging of Public Affairs Division with Strategic Communications Department;

      - Merging of Defence Policy and Planning Department, Analytical Department and Reforms

Coordination and Monitoring Division and formation of a new Department of Defence
Policy and Development;

      - Merging of Quality Control Department with Financial Management Department;

       - Integrating Legal Support Division of the Administration into the Legal Department;

       - Integrating International Law Division into the International Relations and Euro-Atlantic

Integration Department;

      - Coordination and Monitoring of the Substantial NATO-Georgia Package Section was added

to International Relations and Euro-Atlantic Integration Department;

       - Creation of Public Information Division within the Administration

       - Reform of star positions, as a result of functional analysis, a part of star positions were

transformed into military positions, while another part into civilian positions;

      - Transfer of administrative functions of civilian personnel into the Human Resources and

Professional Development Department of the Ministry;

       - Separation of technical and functional position

Diagram N4

Ministry of Defence


-----

**Recommendations:**

      - Regularly conduct and institutionalise organisational analysis to ensure the accomplishment

of MoD’s aims and objectives and increase its organisational effectiveness and efficiency;

      - Standardise and institutionalise the research of organisational environment to improve

MoD’s functional efficiency;

     - Use the decision making mechanisms of the Decision Making Board, Management Team

and Permanent Working Groups to improve defence planning and management systems
and institutionalise reforms;

      - Use effective mechanisms for internal reporting to increase transparency and accountability

at the MoD;

      - Elaborate, implement and institutionalise the personnel management policy in accordance

with the best international practices and in line with the Civil Service Bureau reform;

     - Develop electronic data management systems to support defence management

requirements - personnel, logistics, financial and training - in line with a long-term
institutional requirements;

      - Transfer operational and investigative functions from the Military Police to the designated

MoD structure in conjunction with implementation of Military Police reforms.

Diagram N5

Georgian Armed Forces


-----

5.5.2. Georgian Armed Forces
The key aims of the Georgian Armed Forces are: defending country’s independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and accomplishment of international obligations (including
participation in the international peacekeeping missions), support of civilian government during
natural disasters.

**Rationale for Reorganisation**

Within the framework of the Strategic Defence Review, the GAF’s structural reorganisation
was implemented. The aim of the reorganisation is the formation of flexible and combat
capable structural units, enhancement of combat readiness and optimal resource allocation. In
consequence of reorganisation, functional duplication was eliminated, the level of manning and
equipment was increased, Command and Control was improved and structural reorganisation
and elimination of unnecessary administrative units were implemented.

Diagram N6

Proposed Structure of GAF


-----

**Recommendations:**

      - Continue structural reorganisation for creating flexible, mobile and NATO interoperable

and task-oriented Armed Forces ;

      - Ensure the support of GAF’s critical force readiness requirements through General Staff’s

organisational structures;

     - Review and update the GAF Command and Control Concept;

     - Review and update the existing Reserve Concept;
Create the Army Reserve, Territorial Reserve and Specialists Reserve for the support and

enhancement of Armed Forces personnel;

     - Following the approval of the Reserve Concept and allocation of relevant financial

resources, the MoD will start executing relevant actions related to reserve training;

     - Improve Command and Control system in order to enhance operational command

effectiveness;

     - Elaborate and develop doctrines and lessons learned system based on the GAF

requirements;

      - Create and develop sustainable combat readiness enhancement training capabilities for

GAF’s Tactical Level Units;

      - Improve the GAF’s logistic capabilities and develop Logistic Concept for enhancing the

logistic operations.

5.5.3. General Staff
The tasks of the General Staff are: strategic-operational Command and Control of subordinate
units; interagency coordination; planning; conducting and monitoring of the joint operations;
determination of necessary demands for capability developments.

**Rationale for Reorganization:**

In ongoing process of the Strategic Defence Review, structural reorganisation of the General
Staff was implemented. Objectives of the reorganisation are: staff optimisation, structural
optimisation, elimination of functional duplications, reduction of high rank officer positions and
enhancement of necessary capabilities for fulfilment of combat functions.

**Implemented Actions**

      - Eliminate Board of advisers at the General Staff;

      - Eliminate the Naval Planning Department and create a naval capability planning cell within

the J-3 Planning Department;

      - Eliminate the Psychological Recruitment and Monitoring Department and distribute its

functions among other MoD and GAF structural units;

      - Logistic Support Centre - Provision of logistic support and planning of Sports activities,

distribution between Logistical Support Command and Administrative Department of the
General Staff;

      - Reshape J-5/9 Strategic Planning, Military Policy and CIMIC Department as J-5 Strategic

Planning Department. CIMIC functions were transferred to J-3 Operative Planning
Department;

      - Transform J-4/8 Logistic and Resources Planning Department into J-4 Logistical Planning

Department;

     - Eliminate Medical Supply Base and create Medical Supply Service within the Medical

Department;

      - Establish standardised Table of Organisations of departments and divisions at the General

Staff.


-----

**Recommendations:**

       - Continue structural reorganisation of the General Staff in accordance with doctrinal and

operational requirements to ensure formation of effective and flexible organisational
structure that will provide effective Command and Control of the armed forces during
crisis and war;

      - Enhance the General Staff’s capabilities in unit formation, supply and maintenance

system institutionalisation and capability development;

       - Structural reorganisation of existing military police battalions.

5.5.4. Land Force East and West Commands
The tasks of Land Forces East and West Commands are: conducting a full spectrum of
defence operations in their respective areas of responsibilities; Command and Control of the
subordinate units; sustainment of combat readiness high level; training of own reserve.

**Rationale of Reorganisation**

During the Strategic Defence Review process, the number of infantry brigades was reduced
from five to four and their internal structures were modified. Armour and mechanised infantry
assets were also realigned. Standardised battalion and company structures were implemented.
These changes have collectively optimised the Land Force Commands’ capability to execute
their General Defence Plan requirements. As a result of structural changes, equally manned,
equipped, and task–oriented combat, combat support and combat service support units were
created.

**Recommendations:**

      - Eliminate the Support Centre and integrate Guard Company into Military Police force

structure;

       - Create a plan for infrastructure development in line with operational requirements;

      - Elaborate vision for enhancement of intelligence, mobility, fire support and logistic

capabilities in East and West Commands;

       - Implement structural optimisation of artillery units and maintenance/modernisation of the

existing equipment;

      - Equip manoeuvre units with modern engineering (counter-mobility) equipment.

5.5.5. Special Operation Forces
This unit provides the GAF with unique strategic reconnaissance and direct action capabilities
needed for defence operations as well as for the threats posed by hybrid warfare. SOF can
also provide support to various military units, government bodies and international partners
in military and civilian formats. SOF combat personnel require special skills and intensive
trainings for sustainment experience and capabilities that are needed for adequate actions in
various circumstances.

SOF should be developed based on the “Special Operation Forces Development Strategy
2015-2020”. This targets substantial capability enhancement of SOF in the unified system of the
Georgian Armed Forces, hence to enable fulfilment of tasks in the full spectrum environment
by 2020. SOF development is also important for enhancement of interoperability with NATO
and successful participation in the international operations.


-----

**Rational for Reorganisation**

During the Strategic Defence Review process, the recommendations were determined for
SOF’s structural optimisation. The aim of recommendations: SOF optimisation to better
allocate financial resources in accordance with operational requirements. Structural changes
considerably decreased the costs for successful execution of tasks, required manning, training
and equipment.

**Implemented Actions:**

      - Structural optimisation;

      - Eliminate Administration of SOF;

     - Transfer of TMEC Sniper and Ranger School to SOF Training Center.

**Recommendations:**

     - Optimise and standardise SOF Command and Control system in accordance with GAF

and NATO requirements;

      - Personnel reorganisation of SOF combat unites’ (special operations battalion, special

naval operations group);

      - Personnel reorganisation of SOF Combat Support unit (Ranger Battalion) to support the

execution of special missions operations and tasks;

     - Organise SOF support elements of manoeuvre units within the structural unit of the

support battalion;

      - Personnel and structural reorganisation of Special Operations Training Centre to develop

special schools and courses.

5.5.6. Aviation and Air Defence Command
This aim of the Aviation and Air Defence Command is to ensure Command and Control of
airspace, air defence of strategic units, provide close air support of Manoeuvre Brigades,
Combat Service support, MEDEVAC, search and rescue and reconnaissance.


-----

**Rationale for Reorganisation**

The importance of having an adequate air defence system was underscored during the August
2008 War. Georgian Armed forces do not obtain Air Defence systems, capable of adequate
response to the existing challenges; its air support cannot meet operational requirements in
case of a large-scale aggression.

Therefore, acquisition of the new air defence systems will significantly improve Georgia’s air
surveillance and short-range and mid-range Air Defence systems.

**Implemented Actions:**

      - Structural reorganisation;

      - Eliminate Aviation Brigade;

     - Eliminate Guard and support battalion;

     - Reorganisation of Mixed Aviation Squadron.

**Recommendations:**

**Air Defence:**

      - Unify Radar Battery/company under division/battalion level unit for Command and Control

enhancement;

      - Effective exploitation of NATO interoperable complex to be ensured through new air

defence capabilities;

       - Ensure the preparation of required personnel and infrastructure for arrival of the new air

defence systems;

      - Establish NATO interoperable Air Operation Centre as a result of Central Command Post’s

reorganisation;

       - Allocation of resources for trainings to ensure the maintenance of high level force readiness

and adoption of new combat skills within GAF’s Air Defence units.

**Aviation:**

      - Detailed assessment of Rotary and Fixed Wing’s life cycle and modernisation of aerial

vehicles, which are needed for Armed Forces to complete tasks set by the General
Defence Plan;

       - Retrain personnel after the reorganisation of Aviation Brigade;

      - Elaboration of UAVs capability development concept and initiation of new systems

acquisition;

       - Elaboration of combat helicopters’ capability development vision and concept.

5.5.7. The National Guard
This National Guard has a number of tasks including participation in military operations and
supporting active force during crisis/war, coordination of military support to civil authorities
during manmade or natural disaster preparation of the population for civil defence and
execution of various ceremonies. In peacetime, the National Guard is training its own reserve.
Rationale for Reorganisation

Restructuring of the National Guard Department will be based on an approved Reserve
Concept that stipulates rational, affordable and realistic operational tasks.


-----

During the Strategic Defence Review process, structural optimisation of the National Guard
was executed. However, further effective reorganisation of existing structure is necessary to
transform NG as a Combat and Combat Support capable unit.

**Implemented Actions:**

     - Eliminate National Guard’s administration;

     - Eliminate G-2 section and transfer of its functions to G-3 section;

     - Establish the Civil Defence section as a result of Civil Defence Service reorganisation;

     - Training centre “Bazaleti” joined the NG school.

**Recommendations:**

     - Establish NG as a key supporting element for government during natural and man-made

disasters;

      - Support the Government in ensuring civil defence during emergency situations and war;

     - Perform structural reorganisation of NG; refine Administration, Command and Control

system;

      - Gradual formation of NG’s reserve units for structural reorganisation and creation of

material and technical base;

      - Following the approval of Reserve and Mobilisation Concept, plan and implement relevant

activities for formation, training and use of Army Reserve.

5.5.8. Force Logistic Support Command
This organisation provides logistic support to the GAF during peace, crisis and war by providing
supply, services, transportation, maintenance and topography and polygraph capabilities. It
also supports peacetime training, exercises and professional military education requirements.

**Rationale for Reorganisation**

During the Strategic Defence Review process, structural reorganisation of the Logistic Support
Command was executed, that resulted in reduction of bureaucracy and increase of structural
unit. It is recommended to continue the following process to create effective and flexible
organisation that will ensure support of GAF’s Combat Units in peacetime and war.


-----

**Implemented Actions:**

      - Eliminate Planning, Programming and Budgeting division;

       - Eliminate Construction Projects Bureau;

       - Create G-4 at the General Staff.

**Recommendations:**

      - Relevant structure of the Logistic Support Command must be based on doctrinal and

operative requirements, that will provide support to the Land Forces Commands during
war and crisis;

       - Establish effective logistic support system and improve logistic support capabilities;

      - Optimise administrative management by merging structural units;

       - Establish logistic data tracking system (electronic database).

5.5.9. Training and Military Education Command
The mission of the Training and Military Education Command is to develop professional
military education courses; provide training and re-training to Georgian personnel/units;
training and evaluation of Georgian and partner countries’ units; pre-deployment training/
retraining of units participating in international missions within the framework of Partnership
for Peace (PfP) programme and bilateral and multilateral cooperation; elaboration of operation
and tactical level field manuals, Basic Combat Training; and support to planned GAF trainings
and exercises with technical and simulation facilities and equipment.


-----

**Rationale for Reorganisation**

During the Strategic Defence Review process, internal structural optimisation was conducted,
as a result of which, current structure was refined and human and technical resources were
distributed in an optimal way among subordinate structural elements.

**Implemented Actions:**

     - Eliminate training and Military Education Command’s Administration;

     - Eliminate Special Training Centre;

    - Merge existing courses at the Armour Training Centre with course at Combined Armed
Training Centre’s Manoeuvre school.

**Recommendations:**

     - Consolidation of professional development courses for officers at the Combined Arms

Training Centre to achieve greater synergy and reduce overhead expenses;

      - Continue transformation of all programmes of instruction based on ADDIE principles to

meet SNGP standards;

      - Leverage the use of the Doctrine Development Centre to produce critical, GAF tailored

readiness doctrine;

      - Develop necessary combat training capabilities (personnel, infrastructure and manning) at

JTEC for successful implementation of GDRP;

      - Eliminate Armour Training Centre.

## 6. IMPLEMENTATION OF SDR RECOMMENDATIONS

The implementation of SDR recommendations will require:

    - SDR Implementation Plan;

     - Clearly identified execution priorities;

     - Institutionalised decision-making process;

     - Integrated execution methodology;

     - Institutional reforms

6.1. SDR Implementation Plan
The development of the SDR IP will include specific responsibilities, milestones and anticipated
outcomes for each recommendation. The MoD Defence Policy and Development Department
will be responsible for monitoring overall execution of the IP and providing periodic reports to
senior MoD and General Staff leadership. The development of this document is scheduled for
approval by the end of March 2017. Development of this IP will be coordinated with SNGP
experts, foreign advisors and NATO.

6.2. Execution Priorities

Due to financial constraints, execution of the SDR 2017-2020 recommendations will require
a clear set of priorities. Criteria for establishing these priorities will be driven by each
recommendation’s contribution to improve the GAF readiness. The following set of priorities
provides the basis for aligning defence funding and acquisition requirements for enhancing
the following GAF capabilities:


-----

      - Manoeuvre (infantry, mechanised infantry and armour) units;

       - Air defence;

       - Anti-armour;

       - Engineer (counter-mobility);

        - Artillery;

       - Intelligence.

6.3. MoD Decision-Making Process

The accomplishment of the SDR objectives requires the monitoring of the implementation
process of SDR Recommendations, strategic decisions for readjusting the plans if needed
and better optimisation in the allocation of limited MoD resources – both personnel and
financial. Managing this process is structured around a tiered decision-making mechanism
as depicted in the diagram. The Decision Making Board (DMB) is chaired by the Minister of
Defence and comprises all Deputy Ministers, the CHOD and all DCHODS.

Diagram N7

The Management Team (MT) is directly subordinated to the DMB, is chaired by a designated
Deputy Minister and contains key senior management supervisors at the Head of Department
level. The MT supervises six permanent Working Groups, responsible for reassessing
proposals scheduled for review by the MT prior to submission to the DMB for approval.


-----

6.4. Standard Methodology for Analysis of SDR Recommendations
The execution of each recommendation will require a comprehensive analysis of all DOTLMPF-
related requirements. The SNGP experts, foreign advisors and other relevant agencies will be
engaged in the analysis process.

The diagram illustrates the actions that are based on the White Book’s strategic directions. As an
example of the actions necessary to implement SDR recommendations, the following diagram
provides a few of the major DOTMLPF-related requirements to execute a reorganisation of
the Military Police Department.

Diagram N8

6.5. Institutional reforms for implementing SDR 2017-2020 recommendations.

The following provides institutional foundation for an effective implementation of the SDR
2017-2020 recommendations. The implementation of this SDR recommendations will require
considerable improvements in virtually all defence management systems to accomplish the
objectives.

Significant improvement in the GAF readiness and increasing resources for modernisation
will be achieved by improving personnel, equipment, training and sustainment processes that
will facilitate the re-allocation of defence resources to more critical requirements and support
the ‘Total Defence’ approach. Accomplishing these objectives will require unity of effort and
sustained engagement of senior MoD and General Staff leadership over the next four years.
Execution of this ambitious programme relies on leveraging the expertise of SNGP experts,
external advisors and NATO agencies.


-----

6.5.1. Strategic Directions and Management

       - Interagency LoS

o Determining interagency cooperation mechanisms, as well as concrete actions during

crisis (in peacetime and war);

o General Defence Plan Approval – provides the basis for improving interagency national

defence coordination as well as internal MoD defence planning process and defence
development directions;

o Intensification of Inter-agency exercises (Didgori, Info, Fari etc.) and elaboration of

new formats for trainings and exercises.

      - MoD Guidance LoS

o The review of the “Law of Georgia on the Defence of Georgia”;
o MoD Acquisition Strategy – development of a comprehensive strategy supports

execution of priorities identified by the SDR and provides a basis for integrated defence
planning and management systems support;

o Defence Program Guidance – provides clear, prioritised direction for the development

of the Defence 2018 Budget and following three Years Program.

6.5.2. Force Optimisation

      - Force Management LoS

o Force Management System (FMS) – ensures the implementation of SDR force

optimisation recommendations in accordance with the policies and procedures of the
system that disciplines GAF force structure management;

o Reserve and Mobilisation Concept – provides a basis for refining GAF force generation

capabilities in the rapid call-up and deployment in support of operational requirements.
The concept provides the reserve system with a flexible organisation tools and easy
access to material, financial and human resources, as well as interoperability of
reserve’s C2 with the GAF.

      - Resource Requirements LoS

o SDR Personnel and Financial Reallocation Objectives – ensure sufficient financial

resources are allocated to accomplish the goals reflected in paragraph 5.3;

o SDR IP Resource Requirements – ensure required financial resources are considered

during all steps in the development of the MoD defence Budget;

o Program based budget elaboration and further development of the defence system.

6.5.3. Force Readiness

       - Unit Status and Evaluation Reporting System (USERS) LoS

o USERS Regulation – refines/updates reporting criteria for personnel, maintenance and

training;

o Special Georgia Defence Readiness Program (GDRP) Unit Reporting – identifies

parameters for submission of special reports for units nominated for GDRP participation.

       - Unit Readiness LoS

o Readiness Policies – identify policies relevant to units preparing to participate in the

Georgian Readiness Program (GDRP);

o Readiness Policies – refine/update in accordance with lessons learned following

initiation of the GDRP;

o SOF Unit Readiness – developing the capabilities of SOF Units for the accomplishment

of special tasks.


-----

      - Georgia Readiness Program Implementation Planning LoS

o GDRP Implementation Plan – provides a comprehensive set of policies, responsibilities,

milestones and objectives for preparing GAF units for participation in GDRP;

o GDRP Unit Reports – provide special reports for units nominated for participation in the

programme designed to confirm the accomplishment of all precondition requirements.

      - Georgia Defence Readiness Program Resource Requirements LoS

o 2018 GDRP Budget Requirements – ensure the identification of adequate funds to

support readiness training for GDRP designated units;

o Budgeted GDRP Resources – validates that the necessary financial resources are

considered during all steps in the development of the MoD defence Budget.

6.5.4. Institutional Reforms

      - Personnel LoS

o Military Personnel Management System – further development and improvement

of the system, which includes a transparent and objective recruitment, selection,
appointment, professional development, maintenance, reintegration into the civil sector
after retirement and provision of social care;

o Civilian Personnel Management System - further development and improvement

of the system, which includes a transparent and objective recruitment and job
execution management, as well as merit-based professional development and career
management (elaboration of individual professional development plan based on job
execution evaluation, regular professional development courses are available for
civilian personnel);

o GDRP Personnel Fill Plan – determines when units designated for participation in the

GDRP should be filled in accordance with the GDRP Implementation Plan guidance;

o Tables of Organization (TO) – following the approval of the SDR, virtually all TO will

need to be updated, to include standardisation of rank structures at all levels of the
GAF;

o Conscription Concept – document that describes the new programme and objectives

of the conscription system. The Concept will be based on three key changes: 1.
Each conscript will attend Basic Combat Training; 2.Conscripts will have free weekend
privilege; 3. The salary will increase;

The new conscription system will further contribute to the integration of ethnic and

religious minorities. The concept will be elaborated within the framework of the inter-
agency working group, which will become a part of SDR 2017-2020 IP and will take into
consideration the requirements of all those state agencies, where Georgian citizens
are undergoing compulsory military service.

      - Intelligence LoS

o Intelligence Transformation Plan – provides a DOTMLPF-based document as a

foundation for improving intelligence capabilities;

o Doctrine Development– supports the elaboration of two critical manuals – the Scout

Platoon Manual and Reconnaissance Company Manual.

      - Training LoS

o Improving the quality of training, provision of relevant infrastructure, development of

doctrines in accordance with the requirements of METL and GAF;

o Standard Infantry METL –provides a basis for territorial defence-focused training as

well as an initial proposal for structuring the GDRP;


-----

o JTEC – supports the integration of live, virtual and constructive training simulation

technologies during training and exercises to enhance GAF readiness;

o Doctrine Development– supports the elaboration of three critical manuals – the Infantry

Squad and Platoon Manual, Infantry Company and Battalion Manual, as well as the
Direct Support Artillery Battalion Manual.

       - Education LoS

o Professional Military Education Improvement Plan – provides initiatives and specific

benchmarks for improving leadership training across the GAF. Ensures the development
of professional and career development programmes for sergeants and officers in
accordance with NATO standards;

o David Agmashenebeli National Defence Academy of Georgia (NDA)– in coordination

with the MoD and the General Staff, NDA provides first level of higher education
programmes, determines priority areas for officers’ preliminary military education and
provides planning and management of education process. It also provides further
development of officers’ intermediate and higher education programmes and ensures
its interoperability with GAF requirements. NDA develops second cycle of higher
education programmes and provides further optimisation of foreign languages training
system in line with GAF requirements. NDA aims to create a foundation for research
activities;

o Combined Arms Training Centre – facilitates the overall improvement and standardisation

of educational curricula;


-----

o Defence Institution Building School – provides professional development courses for

enhancing the skills and knowledge of our military and civilian personnel.

      - Logistic & Medical LoS

o Doctrine Development - supports the elaboration of three critical documents – a Logistic

Concept, GAF Joint Publication 4.0 Logistics as well as the Infantry Support Battalion
Manual;

o SNGP Logistic Capability Development Project – provides the framework for improving

Georgia’s Host Nation Support capabilities and identifying future requirements to
improve Reception, Staging and Onward Movement capacity;

o Infrastructure Master Plan – annually prioritises and directs financial resources to the

garrisons and MOD facilities;

o Medical Care plan of the GAF – describes how all MOD and GAF capabilities will be

integrated into the established and internationally proven medical care of civilian and
military personnel, wounded warriors and their families.

      - Information System, Communications and Cyber Security LoS

o MOD INFOSYS Enhancement Plan – provides a baseline for resource allocation to the

highest priority requirements;

o Cyber-security – identifies important security hardware/software requirments for the

procurement and installation throughout MOD and the GAF.


-----

      - Command and Control LoS

o Strategic Command and Control Concept;
o Command & Control Command Posts – identify requirements for General Staff command

posts (primary and alternates) including redundant C3I communication capabilities.

      - Resource Management LoS

o Defence Resource Management System (DRMS) – continues to mature current policies

and procedures to further improve transparency and accountability for the allocation
and use of defence resources;

o Budget Review – periodically assesses the accuracy of budget planning and actual

execution to improve leader awareness and experience in dealing with resource issues.

6.5.5. Multinational and Bilateral Engagement

       - International LoS

o International Operations – participation in NATO and EU-led missions, including

continued participation in NATO Response Force (NRF);

o Partnership Goals – Fulfilling the specific requirements within the framework of NATO-

Georgia cooperation mechanisms, including Partnership Goals and other commitments
with partner countries to enhance interoperability;

o Improving GAF capabilities at strategic, tactical and operational levels through

implementation of SNGP initiatives.


-----

      - Multinational/Bilateral Engagement

o Exercise Participation – balances the benefits of continued participation in multinational

and bilateral exercises against competing SDR IP requirements to optimise the
allocation of limited resources;

o Exercise Design – emphasises exercise objectives that contribute to territorial defence

capacity building (annual field and command post exercises at tactical, strategic and
operational levels);

o Bilateral Relations – deepening cooperation with partner and neighbouring states;
o Close cooperation with NATO allies and partner countries – to ensure security and

stability in South Caucasus and the Black Sea region.


-----

## 7. CONCLUSION

In order to respond to the security challenges, it is imperative to transform the defence
system, which, together with economic, diplomatic and information deterrence factors, will
develop military capabilities, as this will ensure that Georgia’s vital interests are protected.
The Georgian Armed Forces must represent the main component for deterrence against
aggression and an important factor for the prevention of war to ensure Georgia’s peaceful
development and protect its sovereignty and independence.

The assessment of GAF’s existing capabilities was conducted during the elaboration of the
Strategic Defence Review 2017-2020 (SDR). Optimal and rational organisational structure of
GAF’s combat and supporting elements was formed based on the security environment and
existing resources.

The leadership of the Ministry of Defence of Georgia is fully responsible for the abovementioned
process and acknowledges the difficulties and challenges that accompany the transformation
process of the defence system. The MoD expressed its readiness to implement SDR
recommendations through close cooperation with the defence and security sector. The
successful implementation of SDR recommendations will ensure the transformation of defence
system, creation of modern, ready and affordable armed forces capable of adequately
responding to country’s security threats.


-----

