## www.matsne.gov.ge /ka/document/view/43156

#,,საქართველოს ეროვნული უსაფრთხოების კონცეფციის“ დამტკიცების შესახებ

56-71 minutes

### Resolution of the Parliament of Georgia

 On the approval of the "National Security Concept of Georgia"

 The Parliament of Georgia shall establish:

 1. In accordance with Article 2 1 of the Organic Law of Georgia on the National Security Council and Paragraph 4 of Article 182 2 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Georgia, the “National Security Concept of Georgia” shall be approved.

 2. This Resolution shall enter into force upon its publication.

 Parliament of Georgia

 Deputy Chairman M. Machavariani

 Tbilisi,

 July 8, 2005.

 951895 – rs

 Georgian National Security Concept

 The "unshakable will of the citizens of Georgia is to establish a democratic social institution, economic freedom, social and legal state, to ensure universally recognized human rights and freedoms, to strengthen state independence and peaceful relations with other peoples ..."

 Preamble to the Constitution of Georgia

 1. Introduction

 Georgia today is at an important stage in its centuries-old history After


-----

### internal conflicts backed by external forces. Nevertheless, the people of Georgia have made an unwavering determination to build a democratic and free state that guarantees the rule of law, human rights, security, the well-being of its citizens and a market economy.

 The 2003 Rose Revolution has once again demonstrated that democracy and freedom are traditional values  vital to the people of Georgia. Georgia, as an integral part of the European political, economic and cultural space, whose fundamental national values  are based on European values  and traditions, aspires to integrate into the European political, economic and security systems. Georgia seeks to return to its European tradition and remain an integral part of Europe.

 The National Security Concept of Georgia is a founding document that reflects the vision of the country's secure development, fundamental national values  and national interests, describes the threats, risks and challenges facing national security and sets out the main directions of security policy. This concept underscores the aspirations of the Georgian people to fully integrate the country into the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the European Union and to contribute to strengthening the security of the Black Sea region as an integral part of the Euro-Atlantic security system.

 Based on the National Security Concept, the Government of Georgia takes appropriate long-term measures to ensure the protection of fundamental national values  and the pursuit of national interests by adequately responding to threats, risks and challenges to national security.

 Various sectoral strategies and plans are developed based on the national security concept. With the change of the national security concept, certain sectoral strategies and plans are being updated.

 2. Fundamental national values  of Georgia

 Georgian statehood is based on its fundamental national values, the protection of which is essential for the existence and security of Georgia, for the safety and well-being of its citizens. Georgia will protect its fundamental national values  by all available legal means. The fundamental national values  of Georgia are:

 2.1. Independence: Georgia is a sovereign, independent state that respects the sovereignty, territorial integrity of other countries and demands appropriate treatment from them. It is unacceptable for Georgia for other countries to interfere in its internal affairs.


-----

### Declaration of Human Rights and the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms are fundamental national values. Georgia creates guarantees for the protection of the universally recognized human rights and freedoms of all citizens and groups living in its territory, respects their right to free choice and creates a favorable environment for the realization of the opportunities of each citizen.

 2.3. Democracy and the rule of law: Georgia is committed to universal democratic values  and principles, on the basis of which it establishes a democratic system of government, where state power is defined by law and distributed among branches of government. The strength and independence of the judiciary are guaranteed in the Georgian political system. Georgia promotes the development of civil society and ensures the independence of the mass media.

 2.4. Welfare: To enhance the well-being of every citizen and to create decent living conditions, Georgia will ensure the sustainable economic development of the country on the basis of democratic, transparent rules and the implementation of effective social policies. The Government of Georgia promotes the development of a free market economy, creates a favorable environment for the development of free enterprise, the expansion of foreign trade and the attraction of investments.

 2.5. Peace: Georgia aims to establish relations with all states based on internationally recognized norms. It is especially important for Georgia to develop friendly relations with neighboring countries. Georgia will use the peaceful methods provided by the norms of international law to resolve the disputed issues. A free, independent, united, developed and peaceful Georgia will make a significant contribution to strengthening regional security and stability.

 2.6. Security: The Georgian government seeks to ensure the security of the Georgian state, its institutions and its citizens within the state borders recognized by the international community. To ensure security, Georgia is guided by internationally recognized norms.

 3. National interests of Georgia

 Georgia's national interests stem from the modern international system and the situation in the country. National interests are based on the fundamental national values  of Georgia. The realization of national interests ensures the stability and development of the state, the well- being of the citizens of Georgia, security, protection of their rights and freedoms. The insecurity of national interests threatens fundamental


-----

### and maintaining territorial integrity and ensuring the inviolability of internationally recognized borders. Georgia will use all legal means at its disposal to resolve peacefully and legally the problems that may arise during the restoration of constitutional order on the territory of Georgia.

 3.2. Ensuring national unity and civic consent: Georgia ensures the protection of the interests, rights and freedoms of all citizens, ethnic and religious groups living in the country. To do this, Georgia is building a society based on the principles of pluralism, tolerance, justice, solidarity and non-discrimination. Georgia seeks to strengthen its citizens' respect for the Constitution and to ensure their self- identification as citizens of Georgia.

 3.3. Regional stability: The security environment in which Georgia is located is determined, first of all, by the ongoing processes in Europe, at the same time, it is seriously influenced by the developments in the Middle East and Central Asia. Georgia attaches special importance to the ongoing processes in the Black Sea basin, the Caucasus and Russia. Maintaining peace and security in this area and resolving the existing disputes peacefully is extremely important for Georgia. Georgia contributes to the strengthening of the regional security system through international cooperation in multilateral and bilateral formats.

 3.4. Strengthening Freedom and Democracy in Neighboring Countries and Regions: Georgia welcomes and promotes the strengthening of democracy, freedom and civil society in neighboring countries and regions as an important condition for ensuring stability and security.

 3.5. Strengthening the country's transit function and energy security: Georgia attaches special importance to strengthening the transit and energy corridor function. To this end, it is actively involved in international energy, transport and communication projects. Ensuring the supply of alternative energy sources and other resources of strategic importance, as well as the development of strategically important regional infrastructure is linked to strengthening stability in Georgia, the economic development of the country and the well-being of its citizens.

 3.6. Environmental security of the country and the region: The quality of environmental protection and the rational use of natural resources are closely related to public safety and health. Given the biodiversity and transit function of Georgia, the ecological safety of large-scale international and local projects is of paramount importance.


-----

### with a centuries-old history and rich cultural heritage, considers the preservation of cultural diversity and national identity as an important element of ensuring national security.

 4. Threats, risks and challenges facing national security

 4.1. Violation of Territorial Integrity: Violated territorial integrity is a major threat to Georgia's national security. Externally inspired and supported aggressive separatist movements escalated into armed conflicts, leading to the de facto secession of the former South Ossetian Autonomous Region and Abkhazia from Georgia and the loss of control of Georgian authorities in those territories.

 Violation of territorial integrity is a major source of some of the problems that undermine the country's political, economic and social stability: up to 300,000 Georgian citizens have been forced to flee their legal residences; State borders remain undefined; Illegal armed formations are present in uncontrolled areas, creating a favorable environment for the activities of terrorist groups and fertile ground for smuggling and transnational organized crime; Separatist regimes systematically violate human rights. Violated territorial integrity, if this problem is not resolved in a timely and effective manner, could jeopardize Georgia's functioning as a full-fledged state.

 4.2. Conflict overflow in neighboring countries : Conflict overflow from Georgia to neighboring countries is a serious threat to Georgia's national security and could destabilize the country. These conflicts could lead to provocations from other state and non-state actors, which has repeatedly occurred in the Pankisi Gorge. Conflicts in neighboring countries can lead to a mass influx of refugees into Georgia and create favorable conditions for transnational organized crime and smuggling.

 The lack of control over the sections of the Georgian state border with Abkhazia and the former South Ossetian Autonomous Region exacerbates the above-mentioned threat and creates additional impediments to dealing effectively with the problem. The unresolved and protracted conflicts in neighboring countries and the destabilization in Russia, especially in the North Caucasus, may lead to Georgia's involvement in the conflict. In addition, the presence of military formations of the Russian Federation on the territory of Georgia is in some cases a risk factor for the stability of the country.

 4.3. Military Intervention: The possibility of open military aggression against Georgia is small, but the armed violation of the border and invasion of the country by state and non-state actors is real and still threatens the security of the country. Georgia's sovereignty and


-----

### launch of a military offensive on the country's territory.

 The presence of illegal armed formations in areas not controlled by the Georgian authorities and near the country's borders significantly increases the possibility of resumption and destabilization of armed conflicts in Georgia. In addition, granting citizenship of the Russian Federation to the population of the breakaway regions of Georgia is a potential threat, as in some cases it may be used to justify interference in Georgia's internal affairs.

 4.4. International Terrorism: International terrorism is a significant threat to Georgia's national security, especially given the terrorist hotspots located in neighboring regions.

 Georgia, as an active member of the International Counter-Terrorism Coalition, could become a target for international terrorist acts. Terrorist acts may be carried out on infrastructure and / or facilities of strategic importance for national security, especially on international oil and gas pipelines and facilities owned by other states in Georgia.

 4.5. Smuggling and Transnational Organized Crime: Existing unresolved conflicts in neighboring countries, widespread lawlessness in Abkhazia and the former South Ossetian Autonomous Region, and weak border controls create conditions conducive to smuggling and transnational organized crime, leading to serious national security; These issues undermine the stability of Georgia and the region, hinder the establishment of order and legality in the state. A special threat to Georgia is the possibility of using its natural transit location to commit these transnational crimes.

 4.6. Military Bases of the Russian Federation: The military bases of the Russian Federation located in Georgia no longer pose a direct threat to the sovereignty of the country, although the presence of Russian military formations on the territory of Georgia before their full withdrawal is a risk factor for the country's security and still negatively affects it. Georgia welcomes the transition to the withdrawal of Russian military bases and believes that the unwavering implementation of the "Joint Statement of the Foreign Ministers of Georgia and the Russian Federation" of 30 May 2005 will help normalize bilateral relations and strengthen mutual trust.

 4.7. Corruption and inefficient governance : A weak tradition of governance and a weak mechanism of mutual control and equilibrium have contributed to the rise of corruption. In recent years, corruption has permeated all spheres of public life and has become so systematic and dramatic that it has threatened national security by squandering


-----

### affecting public unity and unity. Georgia's recent experience shows that corruption and an inefficient system of government, if not addressed, can pose a threat to the country's national security.

 4.8. Economic and Social Challenges: A poorly developed economy is a serious challenge to Georgia's national security, as the competitiveness of Georgia's national economy remains low without sustainable development.

 Economic backwardness has contributed to the deterioration of living conditions of the population, the degradation of health care and education systems, the deteriorating demographic situation, high unemployment and the increase in the number of people living in extreme poverty, which has led to the involvement of citizens in illegal activities.

 Unequal social and economic development and the absence of a strong middle class lead to disproportion in living conditions between different social groups. Social and economic inequality between the center and the regions aggravates the situation and may contribute to the escalation of social and political extremism. Social tensions can threaten the country’s sustainable development, stability and national security.

 4.9. Energy Challenges: Georgia's dependence on the energy resources of a state where a free market and property rights are not guaranteed, as well as insufficient development of local energy sources, unstable energy supply and poor maintenance of energy infrastructure weaken Georgia and create favorable conditions for external pressure. Energy challenges, if not addressed in a timely and effective manner, could threaten not only economic development but also national security.

 4.10. Information Challenges: The weakness of the unified state information policy and its implementing infrastructure, as well as the reliance on insufficient and unreliable public administration information, can pose a threat to national security. In addition, the state-owned, incompletely classified information protection system, illegal intrusion into state information systems for the purpose of obtaining or damaging information, and the launch of information attacks against the Georgian state by external forces pose a serious challenge to national security.

 4.11. Ecological Challenges: Deterioration of the natural environment, disasters caused by natural and man-made activities can endanger the natural environment of Georgia, the well-being of its citizens and biodiversity. Georgia's location in a seismically active zone increases


-----

### Damage to large industrial facilities in neighboring countries could also lead to significant environmental damage and other negative consequences.

 5. Main directions of Georgian national security policy

 The goal of Georgia's national security policy is to protect national interests based on fundamental national values, to respond to the threats facing the country, and to prevent risks and challenges from escalating or reinforcing existing threats.

 5.1. Strengthen public administration and strengthen democratic institutions

 The strong will of the citizens of Georgia is to build a free and democratic society and to establish a system of governance based on the rule of law and equality of all citizens before the law, transparent and accountable to the people, which will guarantee human rights and freedoms for all citizens of Georgia. Such a political system is the main basis for the further development of the country.

 The Constitution of Georgia provides for the separation of functions between the legislature, the executive and the judiciary, which is the basis of a democratic system of government. In parallel with the reform of the legislative and executive bodies and the optimization of their activities, the reform of the law enforcement bodies and the judiciary is actively underway. A government commission on public administration reform has been set up to ensure the effective implementation of structural and functional governance reforms. A "good governance strategy" is being developed to improve governance, strengthen public sector transparency and public participation, establish the rule of law, and ensure the independence of all three branches of government.

 Georgia attaches special importance to the establishment of an effective system of local self-government and governance. The "State Commission for Effective Governance and Territorial Arrangement Reform" has been established and is working to implement reforms in this area and to decentralize the public administration system.

 Georgia will ensure the creation of appropriate conditions for the development of the non-governmental sector and the mass media. It promotes a strong and active civil society and increases government accountability to the public.

 Establishing a democratic system of government is impossible without reducing corruption in the public sector, which will significantly increase th t d t bilit f th t d th


-----

### guarantees. Institutional and legislative changes are being made to strengthen anti-corruption mechanisms. The “Georgian National Anti- Corruption Strategy” has been developed and approved, which envisages the implementation of relevant anti-corruption measures. The Government of Georgia will develop and approve an action plan for the implementation of the anti-corruption strategy, which will define the measures to be taken, the responsible agencies and the deadline for implementation.

 5.2. Improving state defense capabilities

 To enhance its defense capabilities, Georgia is developing its armed forces, strengthening its civil defense mechanisms, cooperating with the international community to establish world peace and security, and establishing crisis management mechanisms.

 Georgia is implementing large-scale defense reform, resulting in the creation of a modern, efficient, and sustainable Armed Forces in line with the standards of the North Atlantic Alliance, capable of overcoming military threats to national security. The Georgian Armed Forces should be able to participate in international counterterrorism and peace support operations, as well as assist civilian authorities in resolving the effects of the state of emergency, maintaining public order and ensuring the safety of citizens. This reform envisages not only structural changes, but also the modernization of armaments, equipment and infrastructure and the optimization of the number of armed forces tailored to possible tasks.

 The Individual Partnership Action Plan with NATO and the Strategic Review of the Current Defense System underlie the implementation and sustainability of the above reforms.

 Establishing effective democratic civilian control over the armed forces is one of the central elements of defense reform. The Ministry of Defense of Georgia has been transformed into a civilian agency headed by a civilian minister; There is a separation of functions between the Ministry of Defense and the General Staff. The accountability of the defense system is guaranteed by the Parliament of Georgia, which determines the state defense policy, approves the defense budget, controls the defense expenditures, adopts the laws in the field of defense and controls their implementation.

 The Georgian government considers it necessary to reform the mobilization system and develop a reservist training system in order to increase the country's defense capabilities. In addition, civil defense must be developed to ensure the security of the population. Civil


-----

### ensures the protection of material and cultural values  in the country by reducing or eliminating the damage caused by emergencies.

 Georgia has a wealth of experience in participating in multinational counter-terrorism, peacekeeping, rescue and humanitarian operations, but more importantly, it contributes to strengthening Euro-Atlantic security. As a member of the World Anti-Terror Coalition, Georgia is contributing to the strengthening of peace and stability in various regions of the world. Georgian servicemen have participated in NATO operations in Afghanistan and are currently on a peacekeeping mission in Kosovo and Iraq.

 Georgia is creating a crisis management system that will be able to prevent and respond to crises, resolve post-crisis situations in a timely and effective manner, and ensure instant decision-making and implementation. The crisis management system should ensure the coordinated action of state bodies, as well as the precise definition of the functions and responsibilities of state, non-governmental, international and humanitarian institutions involved in crisis resolution. A centralized and unified crisis management system is being established with the National Security Council of Georgia.

 5.3. Restoration of Georgia's territorial integrity

 Violated territorial integrity and the existence of uncontrolled territories within the borders of Georgia prevent its establishment as a full-fledged democratic state. Accordingly, the reintegration of the Georgian state and the restoration of the rule of law throughout the country is one of the top priorities of the national security policy. The policy of state reintegration implies the participation of Abkhazia and the former autonomous region of South Ossetia in determining the constitutional order of Georgia.

 The Georgian government is committed to taking timely and effective steps to resolve conflicts peacefully, based on the principles of international law, and is ready to ensure the protection of the civil, political, economic, social, religious and cultural rights of all ethnic groups living in its territory.

 Georgia has stimulated political dialogue with the existing authorities in Abkhazia and the former South Ossetian Autonomous Region on the political status of the respective regions and the separation of powers with the central government, based on the principle of non-invasion of Georgia's territorial integrity and broad regional autonomy.

 The new initiative of the President of Georgia on the issue of the former S O f G f


-----

### serious basis for restoring trust and resolving the existing controversy. This initiative offers the former South Ossetian Autonomous Region the status of autonomy, rejects the use of force and is based on the unwavering adherence to the principles of cultural identity and self- determination, minority rights, human rights and freedoms and equality of citizens provided by the Constitution of Georgia.

 The document on the Abkhazian issue, developed at the initiative of the United Nations and with the direct participation of the Group of Friends of the Secretary-General (United States, Germany, Great Britain, Russian Federation, France) - "Basic Principles on Separation of Powers between Tbilisi and Sokhumi" is a framework for Abkhazia Granting broad powers and special status and ensuring the rights and interests of the multinational population of Abkhazia. The activities of the UN Secretary-General's Group of Friends and the continuation of the Georgian-Abkhazian talks within the framework of the Geneva peace format are important for the settlement of the Abkhazian conflict.

 The return of internally displaced persons, refugees and displaced persons to legal places of residence and the provision of security guarantees shall be carried out in full respect of justice, equality, human rights and freedoms and in accordance with the principles of international law.

 Georgia welcomes all peace proposals and initiatives that will contribute to the peaceful and just settlement of existing conflicts. More active participation of the international community is needed on the basis of the initiatives proposed by Georgia to successfully resolve these conflicts. This will put an end to the monopolization by one of the actors in the peace process.

 5.4. Integration into the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the European Union

 Georgia, as a state in the Black Sea region and Southeast Europe, has historically been a geographical, political and cultural part of Europe. Integration into European and Euro-Atlantic political, economic and security systems is a strong will of the Georgian people. Georgia welcomes the enlargement of NATO and the European Union and believes that the integration of the countries of the Black Sea region into NATO and the European Union will significantly strengthen the security of this region as Europe's south-eastern border. Joining the North Atlantic Alliance and the European Union is a top priority of Georgia's foreign and national security policy.

 5.4.1. Membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization


-----

### mechanism for ensuring security and stability in the Euro-Atlantic area. NATO- Georgia's cooperation with NATO contributes to the strengthening of democratic values, democratic reforms, especially - in the defense sector, as well as a secure and stable environment. By joining NATO, Georgia will not only receive unprecedented guarantees of military and political security, but will also contribute to strengthening the security of Europe, especially the Black Sea region. Georgia has already demonstrated its readiness to share responsibility for collective security by sending troops to Afghanistan and Kosovo.

 On October 29, 2004, NATO approved Georgia's Individual Partnership Action Plan (IPAP), the implementation of which is essential for NATO membership. This plan envisages complex reforms in the fields of politics, defense, security, economy and others, which are necessary to turn Georgia into a stable democracy and a reliable partner of NATO.

 Georgia is implementing the above-mentioned action plan, which outlines the specific measures necessary for its implementation. Institutional reforms are underway to facilitate the NATO integration process. Georgia is committed to adhere to the IPAP measures, which will significantly contribute to Georgia's involvement in the NATO Membership Action Plan (MAP).

 Georgia actively cooperates with NATO member and partner countries within the framework of the Partnership for Peace Program and the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council. Georgia attaches special importance to bilateral and multilateral cooperation with NATO member states in the fields of politics, security and defense.

 5.4.2. EU integration

 Georgia views the European Union as a community of states that ensures peace and prosperity in Europe. Cooperation with the European Union contributes to the implementation of democratic reforms in Georgia, the strengthening of a free market economy and security. Georgia shares common values  and goals for the EU, and believes that EU membership is an important guarantee of the country's economic and political development. At the same time, Georgia's accession to the European Union will strengthen Europe by restoring the Black Sea region as a European Stability and Trade Zone.

 The main legal framework for relations between Georgia and the EU is the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement. The goals of the partnership are to strengthen political dialogue, market economy, democracy, trade, investment and harmonious economic relations and


-----

### of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement, Georgia implements the "National Program for Harmonization of Georgian Legislation with European Legislation."

 In June 2004, Georgia became involved in the European Neighborhood Policy, which is an important mechanism for rapprochement with the European Union. Neighborhood policy provides the opportunity to ensure four freedoms (movement of goods, services, capital and people), increase the efficiency of state institutions and scientific- educational cooperation. In addition, there is the opportunity for cooperation in the areas of political dialogue, border protection, crisis management and the rule of law.

 Georgia attaches great importance to the development of the European Neighborhood Policy Action Plan and its implementation to make full use of the opportunities offered by the European Union. After making significant progress in the social, economic, institutional, legal and political spheres, Georgia intends to develop a format ensuring a higher level of integration before it becomes possible to join the European Union. Legal and institutional reforms in line with EU standards are underway in Georgia.

 Georgia fully agrees with the EU Security Strategy document - "Safe Europe in a Better World", and expresses its readiness to participate in its implementation.

 EU assistance to Georgia through projects under the CIS Technical Assistance Program (TACIS) and the EU Rule of Law Mission play a key role in implementing reforms in various areas.

 5.5. Strengthening external ties

 Foreign policy is one of the main directions of Georgia's national security policy and aims to create a favorable international environment for Georgia. To achieve this goal, Georgia cooperates with the international community in bilateral and multilateral formats.

 5.5.1. Strategic Partnership with the United States

 Georgia continues to develop a strategic partnership with the United States. Since Georgia gained independence, the United States has actively supported its statehood, democracy, defense, and economic development. The United States' continued assistance to Georgia, as reflected in various cooperation programs, has significantly contributed to the development of democracy and a market economy in Georgia, and to Georgia's aspiration to join Euro-Atlantic structures. Also i t t th d ti l i l t d b th U it d


-----

### Georgian students.

 Georgia's defense capabilities have been significantly strengthened through US assistance programs. The Georgian Training and Equipping Program (GTEP), initiated by the United States, is a significant success in the development of the modern Georgian Armed Forces. The new Maintenance and Stability Assurance Operations Program (SSOP) raises Georgia's defense capabilities to a qualitatively high level. The units trained by these programs are the core of the Georgian Army.

 Georgia actively continues to provide political and military support to the United States-initiated anti-terrorist coalition. Parts trained under US assistance programs successfully participate in counterterrorism and peacekeeping missions in Georgia and abroad. Georgia is currently assisting the US-led peacekeeping operation in Iraq with 850 troops.

 5.5.2. Strategic partnership with Ukraine

 The "Rose" revolutions in Georgia and the "Orange" revolutions in Ukraine, which are an expression of a common belief in the values  of democracy and freedom, ushered in a new era in relations between the two countries.

 The strategic partnership between Georgia and Ukraine is based on the historically friendly and good neighborly relations between the two nations. After gaining independence, relations between the two countries were institutionalized by the unprecedented 1993 Agreement on Friendship, Cooperation and Mutual Assistance between the Republic of Georgia and Ukraine. Georgia and Ukraine have established partnerships in various fields: free trade, industrial cooperation, military education and assistance. Georgia seeks to make the most of the opportunities for strategic partnership with Ukraine.

 Georgia and Ukraine cooperate in the field of foreign and national security policy not only in bilateral formats, but also in such multilateral formats as: UN, OSCE, Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization and GUAM (Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, Moldova). Georgia welcomes the possible inclusion of Ukraine in the UN Secretary General's Group of Friends of Georgia. Cooperation with Ukraine in the process of EU and NATO integration is extremely important for Georgia. Georgia welcomes Ukraine's "Intensified Dialogue" with NATO and the European Union's European Neighborhood Policy Action Plan. Coordinating activities in foreign and national security policy will be beneficial for both countries on the path to NATO and EU


-----

### Turkey is Georgia's leading regional partner, supporting Georgia's efforts to build stable economic, political and military institutions.

 Turkey has been an important trade and economic partner of Georgia since the restoration of Georgia's independence. The deepening of economic relations and the successful implementation of joint regional transport and energy projects, such as Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan and Baku- Tbilisi-Erzurum, are of strategic importance for both countries. In addition, it is important to deepen cooperation with Turkey within the Black Sea region.

 Turkey is an important military partner for Georgia. Turkish assistance in training Georgian military units, improving technical and logistical capabilities, and modernizing military infrastructure has significantly strengthened the Georgian Armed Forces. Turkey also plays an important role in training military personnel, promoting the development of the National Defense Academy, and implementing other educational programs.

 5.5.4. Partnership with Azerbaijan and Armenia

 Georgia has historically established traditional good neighborly relations with Azerbaijan and Armenia. It is clear that it is of great importance to develop joint approaches to the future development of the region. Deepening regional cooperation, creating a single economic space and establishing a common market will significantly contribute to the stability and prosperity of the region.

 The existence of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict threatens the stability of the countries of the region. Georgia welcomes the peaceful resolution of this conflict and the more active involvement of the international community in the peace process, which will contribute to strengthening security in the region and enhancing cooperation.

 Georgia seeks to deepen close partnership relations with Azerbaijan and Armenia through cooperation in the field of mutual interests. The implementation of large economic projects in the region, in addition to economic importance, also has the function of strengthening security in the region - by establishing cooperation and sustainable business partnerships.

 Georgia's relations with Azerbaijan have been established as a strategic partnership. Joint energy, transport and communication projects significantly contribute to the stability and prosperity of the two countries. The two most important regional energy projects - the Baku- Tbili i C h il i li d th B k Tbili i E i li


-----

### stability in the region. After the implementation of these projects, alternative energy resources will be supplied to the world market. To achieve this goal, Georgia is closely cooperating with Azerbaijan on pipeline safety issues.

 Georgia also closely cooperates with Azerbaijan in the fields of politics and security and in the process of Euro-Atlantic integration. Georgia- Azerbaijan Partnership Within GUAM, Azerbaijan's participation in the European Neighborhood Policy and NATO's Partnership for Peace program promotes the harmonization of security interests and the establishment of common positions on various strategic issues.

 Georgia has a close partnership with Armenia in all areas of mutual interest. Georgia believes that deepening good-neighborly relations and mutually beneficial cooperation with Armenia is in the national interest of both countries and contributes to the strengthening of traditional friendship between the two countries, economic prosperity and political stability.

 Georgia and Armenia should use the goodness of joint economic, communication and transport projects. Georgia believes that Armenia should benefit from Georgia's transit location by transporting Armenian products to Georgia. Georgia and Armenia are actively cooperating in a regional forum such as the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC). Georgia supports Armenia's participation in the European Union's European Neighborhood Policy and welcomes its more active cooperation with NATO.

 5.5.5. Partnership with the Russian Federation

 Georgia seeks cooperation with Russia based on the principles of good neighborliness, equality and mutual respect. Georgia welcomes the transformation of the Russian Federation into a stable democracy with a functioning market economy that respects European values. The democratization of the Russian Federation and the predictable foreign policy will have a positive impact on Georgia and regional security.

 Georgia is ready to intensify political dialogue with the Russian Federation, deepen trade, economic and socio-cultural relations, and cooperate in resolving regional conflicts and the fight against terrorism and transnational organized crime. Georgia believes that concluding a framework agreement on friendship and cooperation will help improve relations between the two countries. Georgia reiterates its readiness to sign the agreement.

 The Russian Federation must unwaveringly fulfill its commitments
 OSC S


-----

### undoubtedly improve relations between Georgia and the Russian Federation.

 5.5.6. Cooperation within the Black Sea region

 The Black Sea region is an integral part of Europe. The new European security system, based on the transformed European and Euro-Atlantic organizations, cannot be fully developed without establishing the Black Sea security system as an important element of Euro-Atlantic security. NATO and the European Union have a unique opportunity to work together to support the efforts of the states of the Black Sea region to ensure sustainable regional stability and security.

 Georgia's national security policy is based on the principle of the indivisibility of the security of the Euro-Atlantic area and Georgia's belonging to this area as a state of the Black Sea region. Georgia welcomes the ongoing integration of the Black Sea region countries into NATO and the European Union and expresses confidence that Georgia's future lies in an even more secure and stable Black Sea region and, consequently, in NATO and the European Union. The integration of Georgia and other countries in the Black Sea region strengthens the security of NATO and the EU's significant southern border.

 Georgia welcomes NATO's active participation in Black Sea security cooperation. NATO's involvement in the fight against drug trafficking and arms trafficking and human trafficking on the Black Sea, as well as the spread of terrorism and weapons of mass destruction, is important.

 It is extremely important for Georgia to deepen cooperation with the countries of the Black Sea region. In this regard, Georgia attaches great importance to participation in the following regional initiatives.

 5.5.6.1. GUAM (Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, Moldova): Georgia views GUAM as a regional organization of partner states united in the common interests of democracy, prosperity and security. Georgia is keenly interested in transforming GUAM into a full-fledged organization that promotes economic and social development, democratic stability and security. Implementing projects such as the Trade and Transportation Development Facility and the Virtual Center under the US GUAM Framework Program will enhance cooperation between Member States in areas such as trade and transport, law enforcement, the fight against organized crime and international terrorism, and mass destruction. Non-proliferation of weapons.

 5.5.6.2. Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC): Georgia views
 S C


-----

### and security. Georgia seeks to enhance cooperation within the BSEC in areas such as trade, energy, communications, information technology, transport, tourism and infrastructure development.

 5.5.6.3. In the framework of the Black Sea Naval Cooperation Group (BLACKSEAFOR) and the Black Sea Naval Confidence and Security Measures (CSBM) (the so-called "Ukraine Initiative") as part of the Black Sea Basin for Peace and Stability and By participating in initiatives to enhance maritime cooperation, Georgia contributes to ensuring the security of the Black Sea region and strengthening trust between the states of the region. Georgia welcomes BLACKSEAFOR cooperation with other partner countries and international organizations, which will contribute to strengthening security and stability on the Black Sea.

 5.5.7. Interregional cooperation

 Georgia actively cooperates with the Baltic States on a wide range of issues. It is especially important for Georgia to share the Baltic experience in European and Euro-Atlantic integration. These countries' support for Georgia in the process of integration into NATO and the European Union plays an important role in the harmonization of national legislation and institutions, reforms in defense and other areas of the public sector.

 It is important to deepen economic and political cooperation with Eastern and Southeastern European countries and to support the ongoing reforms in Georgia. The participation of Romania, Bulgaria, Poland, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia in the Group of "New Friends of Georgia" contributes to Georgia's aspirations for European integration.

 Georgia, as a natural link between Europe and Asia, pays great attention to the development of close cooperation with Central Asian countries. The main goal of this cooperation is to promote the free flow of energy resources, cargo and information between the West and the East .

 5.5.8. Multilateral Cooperation Forums

 Cooperation with the international community in multilateral formats is an important priority of Georgia's foreign and national security policy.

 5.5.8.1. Georgia believes that the United Nations (UN) must play a leading role in the process of establishing world peace and a just settlement of existing conflicts. To do this, it is necessary to increase the effectiveness of the UN and to reform its activities to this end. G i t th i t t l f th U it d N ti i li i ti


-----

### ecological disasters.

 5.5.8.2. Georgia considers the Organization for Security and Co- operation in Europe (OSCE) to be an important collective security organization with a major role to play in strengthening stability in Europe. Georgia considers itself to be conventionally armed in Europe The force agreement remains a cornerstone of European security. Georgia attaches special importance to the timely and unwavering implementation of the decisions taken at the OSCE Istanbul Summit. It is important for Georgia to assist the OSCE in strengthening democratic institutions and ensuring stability in Georgia. The Georgian authorities welcome the OSCE's more active involvement in resolving the conflicts in Georgia. The terminated OSCE border monitoring mission has played an important role in ensuring stability on the Georgian border. Although an important OSCE-led training program for Georgian border guards is under way, Georgia believes that the problem of border monitoring is still relevant. Georgia continues to work with the international community to address this issue.

 5.5.8.3. Georgia considers cooperation within the Council of Europe as the best opportunity to establish European values  and norms in the political, legal, social and cultural spheres. Georgia is committed to the standards of the Council of Europe, which is an important precondition for the creation of a democratic state with Western values  and norms. Georgia seeks to implement the Council of Europe Recommendations on issues such as: the development of democracy at local and regional level, the strengthening of mechanisms necessary for the protection of national minorities and human rights, and the rule of law.

 Georgia attaches great importance to the participation of Georgian parliamentarians in the Parliamentary Assemblies of the OSCE and the Council of Europe, which it considers an important mechanism for reaching consensus at the political level.

 5.6. Fight against international terrorism, smuggling and transnational organized crime

 Georgia opposes any form of terrorism and recognizes the growing threat of international terrorism and its new forms. The goal of Georgia's state anti-terrorism policy is to ensure the security of the country's citizens and state and other institutions.

 To this end, the Georgian government is developing counter-terrorism means, including special forces for the armed forces and law enforcement agencies. To prevent the threat of terrorists using the Georgian territory for transit purposes, the Georgian government is


-----

### measures should also aim to establish clearly defined procedures for investigating terrorist acts, strengthen counterterrorism intelligence and counter-intelligence capabilities, and identify those involved in ordering and carrying out terrorist acts.

 By participating in multinational counterterrorism operations, Georgia is gaining rich experience and, most importantly, contributing to the activities of the counterterrorism coalition.

 Particular importance is attached to the protection of transport and energy infrastructure, in particular oil and gas pipelines. Georgia is actively cooperating internationally to effectively fulfill this task.

 One of the top priorities for Georgia is to take decisive action against smuggling, arms and drug trafficking, human trafficking and other transnational organized crime. Successful resolution of these problems requires political will, consolidation of efforts, and reform of relevant agencies.

 After the "Rose Revolution", the Georgian government has shown a strong will to solve the above-mentioned problems. As a result of the state-targeted policies, smuggling and transnational organized crime have been significantly reduced, which has been reflected in a sharp decline in the northern economy, an improvement in the economic situation and an increase in state revenues.

 To ensure the sustainability of this process, it is necessary to implement reforms and adapt the legal framework to the requirements of the fight against smuggling, transnational organized crime and terrorism. There is a need for institutional reform of the law enforcement system, its decentralization and coordinated action of relevant state institutions. However, dealing with these threats without restoring constitutional order to the entire territory of Georgia and establishing lasting peace along its borders will result in the depletion of enormous resources, while the quality of security will remain low.

 The Ministries of Interior and Security were modernized and merged into the Ministry of Internal Affairs. This put an end to duplication of functions and uncoordinated actions between these agencies. The intelligence system is being optimized. The Counterintelligence Service was transferred to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and the Foreign Intelligence Department was directly subordinated to the President of Georgia. The State Border Guard Department is being transformed from a paramilitary service to a border police service with civilian-police functions. Further reforms are needed with the support of foreign aid programs to complete the establishment of an institutional system for


-----

### Georgia's economic security policy aims to create the necessary economic conditions for Georgia's development and strengthening national security. The revival of the economy is the result of current policies that serve the sustainable development of an economy based on market principles in the long run.

 The priorities of Georgia's economic security policy are:

 განმ Strengthen macroeconomic stability by improving the budget system and tax administrations, pursuing adequate monetary policy, implementing medium-term expenditure policy principles, and effectively servicing public debt;

 ● Private sector development and job creation through institutional deregulation of the economy, stimulation of small and medium-sized businesses, improvement of the investment climate and protection of private property rights;

 გაუმ Improving the investment climate in the agricultural sector and developing the land market;

 ● traditional and innovative industry sectors for the development of the business environment;

 ● The development of tourism and full exploitation of tourism potential;

 ● regions and the capital of the social and economic disparities reduction in regional policy development and implementation, regions of equal conditions for support to development of mountainous regions through special programs;

 ● basic infrastructure and the development of the country's comparative advantages - its transit, transport and communication potential, including through the development of road-building;

 აქტი Active participation in international economic projects, which will facilitate Georgia's integration into the global economy;

 ხელშე Promotion of Georgia's export potential;

 ● healthy competitive environment and equal opportunities in business conditions and the privileged, restricting competition by prohibiting exclusive rights, especially in the communication and energy sectors.

 Significant progress has been made in the field of economics since the Rose Revolution. The level of shadow economy and corruption has


-----

### infrastructure has begun to recover. These reforms are implemented by Georgia on the basis of the "Government Program for Economic Development and Poverty Alleviation".

 5.8. Social security policy

 In order to strengthen the social security and social unity of the population of Georgia, Georgia implements a social security policy.

 The priorities of Georgia's social security policy are:

 ● poverty and social exclusion, reducing poverty, improving living standards and a strong middle class promote the development;

 შემცი Reduce unemployment, promote job creation in the country, especially in the regions, and increase social mobility;

 ჩამოყალიბ Establishment of a modern education system; Providing universal primary and secondary education; Improving the quality of higher education and adapting it to international standards and labor market requirements;

 ორმ Reforming the pension and social protection system; Ensuring the purposefulness of social assistance programs; Complete repayment of pensions and other debts;

 ირება Reforming the health care system to ensure affordable and quality health care; Establishment of an effective social insurance system; Promoting a healthy lifestyle and environment;

 ● socially dangerous diseases (tuberculosis, AIDS, drug addiction) prevention.

 The Georgian government is pursuing an active social security policy. Significant progress has been made: the Georgian education system is being intensively reformed, a significant part of the old pension debt has been repaid, and social assistance programs are being implemented smoothly.

 5.9. Energy security policy

 Georgia is part of the East-West and North-South energy corridors, which is of great importance for the country's political independence and economic development. The country's government is aware of the role that Georgia is given in the process of supplying energy resources from the Caspian Sea and Central Asia regions to the rest of the world. The Baku-Supsa and Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipelines are already


-----

### ensuring the effective functioning of these projects.

 The country's energy security and independence require diversification of energy generation and import sources, promotion of energy efficiency, and establishment of an energy crisis prevention and management system. It is necessary to develop favorable conditions for attracting investments, strengthen international cooperation in the field of energy and actively participate in European energy projects.

 The Georgian government has begun reforming the energy sector. Short-term priorities in this area include the following measures:

 ● energy eradication;

 ● Rehabilitation of natural gas and electricity infrastructure;

 ● energy recovery and financial liberalization;

 ● energy distribution system and certain hydropower stations.

 5.10. Information Security Policy

 Georgia recognizes the need for a unified state information policy and the establishment of a decision-making system based on reliable information for the effective management of the state. Consistent and convincing representation of the state position, both domestically and internationally, is one of the most important elements of any country's security system. Georgia pays close attention to the issues of securing confidential information, information technology regulatory security, and protection of critical state information systems. Possession of reliable and protected information during emergencies is a necessary prerequisite for effective crisis prevention and management.

 Georgia is creating the appropriate legal framework and infrastructure necessary to improve information technology and ensure information security. A special government liaison and information agency has been set up with the National Security Council. A Situational Center will be established with the National Security Council to facilitate the smooth delivery of information, inter-agency coordination, and coordinated crisis and emergency management.

 5.11. Environmental safety policy

 Georgia's environmental security policy aims to protect the security of the population and the environment by significantly reducing natural resources, preventing environmental pollution and natural and man- made disasters. Particular attention is paid to large-scale industrial


-----

### assessments, public awareness campaigns, and develop effective crisis prevention and post-crisis management programs.

 The priorities of Georgia's environmental security policy are:

 ება Take measures against environmental pollution; Establish control over air pollution sources; Prevention of soil contamination; Cleaning the territory of Georgia from radioactive waste and rocket fuel;

 ● food security;

 ეტაპ Gradual approximation of Georgian legislation with European and UN environmental standards.

 The government realizes that protecting Georgia's environmental security requires close regional and international cooperation. Successful cooperation in the field of environmental protection between Azerbaijan, Armenia and Georgia contributes to the strengthening of environmental protection and ecological security in the region.

 5.12. Protection of cultural heritage

 The Georgian government recognizes that the development of the cultural sphere is a necessary condition for the sustainable development and security of the country.

 Georgia seeks to develop the country's unique cultural heritage, which enriches the world cultural heritage. In this direction, it is necessary to pursue a policy of protection of cultural heritage, promotion of modern and traditional Georgian art, care for architectural and landscape monuments. Georgia creates appropriate conditions and guarantees for the protection of the cultural heritage of all national minorities living on its territory. Georgia cares for and protects the state language and strives to ensure respect for the Georgian language throughout the country.

 6. Conclusion

 For the first time since the restoration of independence, Georgia has published the concept of national security. Through this document, Georgia shows its people and the rest of the world the direction it will follow on the path to building a strong society and state. The people of Georgia are determined to join the community of nations that have democratic governance and respect for human rights and the rule of law.

 Each Ministry of Georgia and other state agencies within its scope and


-----

### plans. Only with such a goal and a correct perception of the direction of state development will it be possible to ensure the fundamental national values  and national interests established in the concept.

 This document outlines some of the steps that Georgia is already taking in this direction and sets out an ambitious but necessary path that stems from the aspirations of the Georgian people. Georgia is fully aware that going through this path requires time, dedication and hard work. There are many problems along the way, but there are also opportunities that should be used to the maximum. With the purposeful efforts of the Georgian people and government and with the support of the international community, Georgia will be able to create a state that inspires pride in its citizens, is guided by the principles of peaceful coexistence and democratic values, and has a worthy place in the Commonwealth.

 The President of Georgia M. Saakashvili                        


-----

