# The European Security  and Defence Policy


-----

# The European Security  and Defence Policy


-----

**Table of Contents**

**1.** **Introduction.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7**

**2.** **Germany in Europe – opportunities and risks**
**in a changed security environment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10**

**3.** **European Security Strategy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12**

**4.** **Milestones and fundamentals of ESDP.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15**
Legal basis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

Milestones. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

**5.** **Military capabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18**

**6.** **European Defence Agency (EDA). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21**

**7.** **Civilian capabilities.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23**

**8.** **EU and NATO: Strategic partnership.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25**

**9.** **European Union Satellite Centre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27**

**10.** **EU crisis management operations.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29**
EU NAVFOR ATALANTA:
Combating piracy off the coast of Somalia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
EU Police Mission in Afghanistan (EUPOL Afghanistan). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
EULEX Kosovo – The largest civilian ESDP mission
to date fully operational. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Serving on behalf of the EU: German experts take part
in the EU monitoring mission in Georgia –
Current situation as of May 2009.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38


-----

# The European Security  and Defence Policy


**1. Introduction**

This year marks the end of the first decade of the European Union’s European
Security and Defence Policy (ESDP). In this relatively short period, the European Union has not only established the required structures, procedures and
concepts; since 2003, 24 civilian, military or civil-military operations and
missions have been undertaken within the framework of the ESDP and a number of these have already been successfully completed. Today, with its ESDP
instruments, the EU is a recognized actor in the field of international crisis
management whose capabilities are sought around the world.

Through the ESDP and the instruments available to the European
Commission and the EU member states, the European Union has the complete
range of tools for crisis prevention, crisis management and post-crisis rehabilitation at its disposal. It has both military and civilian capabilities, provided
by the member states, that enable it to respond quickly to crises (e.g. EU
Battlegroups and Civilian Response Teams). This is what makes the ESDP so
attractive.

The European Union has proven its ability to take action in a number

of instances, most recently in the August 2008 war in Georgia where its swift
response and presence on the ground greatly contributed to defusing the conflict and to overcoming the lack of dialogue between the conflict parties.

The European Union is carrying out its first maritime operation off the

Horn of Africa, which aims to combat piracy off Somalia’s coast. It is closely
coordinating this operation with NATO, the United States, Russia, Japan and
China, as well as with countries in the region. By protecting the World Food
Programme’s ships, it is becoming increasingly possible – despite the many
difficulties – to provide the people in Somalia with essential supplies of food.

In Kosovo the European Union is carrying out its first executive ESDP

mission which, with nearly 2000 staff, is also the largest civilian mission to
date. EULEX Kosovo is a police and rule-of-law mission that has assumed tasks
in the police, judiciary and customs areas through¬out Kosovo from the UN
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). The mission is making a
substantial contribution to the country’s stabilization and helping to establish
rule-of-law structures.


-----

The ESDP is and will continue to be open for cooperation with third

countries because often its goals can only be reached by working with partners, particularly partners from the affected crisis region. The capabilities
of the EU complement those of the other important actors in international
crisis management such as NATO, the UN or the OSCE. The EU maintains, and
continually strives to deepen, close working relationships with these organizations at all levels and coordinates its activities within the framework of missions and operations.

In addition, the European Union is increasingly partnering with regional organizations in the field of crisis management in order to strengthen
their ability to assume responsibility in their respective regions. Through this
approach, the EU is actively supporting the African Union in building up its
own crisis-management capabilities.

“As a union of 25 states[1] with over 450 million people producing a quarter of
the world’s Gross National Product (GNP), the European Union is inevitably
a global player … It should therefore be ready to share in the responsibility
for global security and building a better world.”
(European Security Strategy; Introduction)

1 After the accession of Bulgaria and Romania on 1 January 2007 the European Union now has 27 member states

Regular opinion polls have shown that the vast majority of EU citizens

support a Common Foreign and Security Policy for the EU. Clarity as to the
objectives and the means to achieve them is required to enable the EU to do
justice to its responsibility as a player in security policy. The European Security
Strategy of December 2003 was the first document to formu¬late corresponding guidelines for the EU. Germany was instrumental in drafting the document and worked to ensure that the Strategy emphasizes the importance of
international law and the role of the United Nations. In its first review of the
implementation of the European Security Strategy in December 2008, the
European Council reiterated the Strategy’s content and goals.

Germany is making a significant and widely acknowledged contribution

to the ESDP. From the very start we have lent our support to the equal development of civilian and military capabilities and are currently participating in
nearly every civilian ESDP mission with police officers, customs officials and
experts. The reform of the Bundeswehr (Federal Armed Forces) will allow
Germany to meet the demands of military crisis management even better
in the future, within the framework of the EU and NATO.


The strategic partnership between the EU and NATO is and will remain

indispensable to the success of the ESDP. The EU and NATO complement rather
than compete with each other. A dynamic ESDP strengthens the European
pillar of the Alliance and therefore NATO as a whole. France’s return to the
military structures of NATO at the April 2009 NATO summit in Strasbourg and
Kehl further reinforces this partnership. It is only by working together that the
democracies of Europe and North America can ensure their security.


-----

3 German security policy is largely defined through the European Union. The Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) of the European Union and the ESDP as an
integral part of the CFSP have assumed ever greater importance. In this context, the
ESDP plays a decisive part in developing a balanced partnership with NATO and the
United States.

3 The United States is an important actor in the global pursuit of peace and stability.
It will not be possible to master the great challenges without close cooperation
with the United States. Today the United States recognizes that the European Union
clearly expands the range of crisis management tools available to the international
community. The US is therefore participating as a third country in, for instance, the
police and rule-of-law mission led by the EU in Kosovo (EULEX) and has seconded
a liaison officer to the EU mission focused on reforming the security sector in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (EUSEC).

3 The interdependence that links states around the globe makes it necessary to
have a comprehensive understanding of security. Risks and threats must be met
with a coordinated set of tools that includes diplomatic, economic, development
policy, police and military activities.

3 The United Nations has primary responsibility for preserving stability and peace
around the world. The UN Security Council remains the central decision-making
body within the framework of international peacekeeping as well as the most
important source of legitimacy under international law.

Over the last 19 years Europe has become a zone of stability and security.

Our goal is to systematically expand this area of security by using the European Neighbourhood Policy to help stabilize the neighbouring regions of the
EU. At the same time, we face threats due to developments in distant regions.
Conflicts on other continents can have a direct impact on our security. Terrorist groups, for instance those linked to Islamic fundamentalism, have set their
sights not only on the US but also on Europe.

It is important against this background that the Europeans assume
an even greater responsibility for their security in the future, both in the EU
and in NATO. The adoption of the European Security Strategy in December
2003, which was reaffirmed by the European Council in December 2008,
is an expression of this recognition. We need a comprehensive approach that
combines civilian and military crisis management instruments to prevent
conflicts from escalating whenever possible. European integration and the

l i hi ill i b h i ill f


3 Secretary-General of the Council and High Representative for the CFSP Javier Solana and
Foreign Minister Frank Walter Steinmeier

**2. Germany in Europe – Opportunities and risks**
**in a changed security environment**

Our security environment changed fundamentally following the events of
1989 1990. Germany and Europe now face completely different challenges
than they did when our continent was divided into East and West. The events
of 11 September 2001 made this absolutely clear. The main parameters of these
challenges can be summarized as follows:

3 Today, threat analysis focuses on terrorist groups operating worldwide, dangers
emanating from failed or failing states and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. The significance of traditional national and Alliance defence has diminished considerably by comparison. Conflict prevention and conflict management

missions abroad have become increasingly important.

3 Today’s international system is no longer determined by a few blocs but by a multi

-----

portant global challenges and risks and identifies the instruments the EU has
at its disposal to counter them. In doing so, the Strategy assumes a comprehensive understanding of security.

The Strategy identifies five principal threats to our security: international terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, regional
conflicts, state failure and organized crime.

Against this background, it defines three overall goals:

3 These new threats must be countered early on and with the full range of instruments available to the EU. Priority is given to timely action and to addressing the
causes of conflict where they occur.

3 The Security Strategy defines the European Union’s will to act on a global scale.
At the same time, the Strategy places emphasis on establishing security in our immediate neighbourhood. In doing so, the EU is pursuing the goal of helping establish
a ring of stable and responsibly governed states from the eastern borders of the EU
to the Mediterranean.

3 The EU is committed to a global order based on effective multilateralism and international law, an expression of the Europeans’ conviction that no nation can meet the
new global challenges on its own.

The Strategy advocates a more active EU foreign policy and the targeted

use of the wide range of instruments at its disposal for the prevention and
management of conflicts, as well as for post-conflict reconstruction. Specifically, these include political, diplomatic, trade and development policy activities
in addition to civilian and military crisis management tools.

A number of important German concerns are reflected in the Security

Strategy. For instance, the document places great emphasis on the need for
the EU to take preventive action to keep conflicts from escalating. Its commitment to the United Nations Charter underlines that military force may be used
only as a last resort and only in accordance with the Charter. The document
reaffirms that the primary responsibility for peace and security rests with
the UN Security Council. Moreover, the Strategy highlights the importance
of arms control for global security as well as the significance of the strategic
partnership between the EU and NATO for crisis management.


3 The multi-national EU Operation Headquarters in Potsdam. Among other things, the military-strategic command
for the EU operation EUFOR RD Congo was carried out from here.

**3. European Security Strategy**

On 12 December 2003, the European Council adopted the European Security
Strategy (ESS) “A Secure Europe in a Better World”. The ESS outlines the European Union’s strategic position following the paradigm shifts incurred by the
events of 1989 1990 and 11 September 2001. It serves as a basis both for strategic
dialogue with our most important partners, especially the United States, and
for defining the European Union’s common security interests.

The Strategy also directly addresses the citizens of the European Union.

It was the first document to outline, in terms that the general public could
relate to, a framework for the Common Foreign and Security Policy that will
continue to serve as a guideline for the EU member states and institutions.

Surveys have demonstrated that citizens have high expectations of the

European Union’s security policy. The Security Strategy analyzes the most im

-----

Germany firmly supported the adoption of the European Security Strategy. The Strategy remains true to the identity and values that characterize the
EU as a power based on the rule of law. However, it also underscores the fact
that the EU has become a “civilian power with bite” – willing to take robust
action if rules are broken.

In December 2008 Javier Solana, High Representative for the Common

Foreign and Security Policy, submitted a report of the implementation of the
European Security Strategy to the European Council. The report confirms the
Security Strategy’s continuing role as a solid basis for the European Union’s
actions.

The evaluation presents a more detailed analysis of the threats posed

in the areas of cyber, environmental and energy security as well as by climate
change. It analyzes the role of emerging countries and commits to providing
better protection for women and children in armed conflicts.

To achieve an even more capable foreign policy, the report calls for the

EU and its member states to make greater efforts to develop the instruments
necessary to implement the strategy, to utilize EU policies and instruments in
a more coherent and coordinated manner, and to intensify cooperation with
international organizations like the UN, NATO and the OSCE.


3 Signing ceremony of the Treaty of Lisbon on 13 December 2007

**4. Milestones and fundamentals of ESDP**
Legal basis

The groundwork for the development of the CFSP/ESDP was laid starting in
the mid 1990s, induced by the realization that the European Union had limited
security policy options during the violent break-up of Yugoslavia.

The goal of a Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) for the European Union was formulated for the first time in the Maastricht Treaty, which
entered into force in 1993.

The Amsterdam Treaty, which entered into force in 1999, incorporated

the ‘Petersberg tasks’ of the Western European Union (WEU; humanitarian
and rescue tasks, peacekeeping tasks and tasks of combat forces in crisis
management, including peacemaking) into the EU framework. Initially
these tasks continued to be carried out by the Western European Union at
the behest of the EU. The creation of the High Representative for the CFSP,

h ld b i l i b f i


-----

The Nice Treaty, which entered into force in 2003, created the institutional prerequisites necessary for the European Union to carry out crisis
management activities on its own. The treaty established the Political and
Security Committee (PSC), which exercises political control and strategic
direction of crisis management operations and can draft decisions for the
Council in this context.

The further institutional development of the ESDP is also encompassed

in the Lisbon Treaty which, according to the European Council conclusions
of December 2008, should enter into force by the end of 2009 and is currently
still in the process of being ratified. There are three very important provisions
in the Treaty for the further development of the ESDP:

3 The Treaty contains a political solidarity clause, which is very similar to the political
solidarity clause in the WEU Treaty. It takes the obligations of NATO member states
into account as well as the special character of the constitutional provisions of the
neutral member states of the European Union.

3 Permanent structured cooperation will enable a group of member states to take
further steps, under the auspices of the European Union, towards integration in
developing their military capabilities.

3 In addition, the coherence of the European Union’s actions in the area of external
relations will be decisively improved through the creation of a new post: the High
Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy. This post combines the functions of three existing positions: the High Representative for the CFSP,
the EU Commissioner for External Relations and the Chair of the External Relations
Council. The High Representative will also be explicitly responsible for the ESDP.
He will be supported by the new European External Action Service which will be
composed of representatives from the European Commission, the EU Council
Secretariat and the diplomatic services of the member states.

Milestones

The ESDP was conceived at the Cologne European Council in June 1999.
It was preceded by a joint British-French declaration on developing Europe’s

bili k i i hi fi ld i d i i l i l h


the common European policy on security and defence” which stated the
central objective of the European Security and Defence Policy: the conduct
of inter­national crisis management operations and the establishment of the
necessary structures and the required civilian and military capabilities.

The same year the Helsinki European Council stated: “The European

Council underlines its determination to develop an autonomous capacity
to take decisions and, where NATO as a whole is not engaged, to launch and
conduct EU-led military operations in response to international crises.” The
Council also agreed to build up the military capabilities necessary for such
operations by 2003, also known as the ‘Helsinki Headline Goal’.

The ESDP is an integral part of the CFSP and functions according to the

traditional rules of intergovernmental cooperation. Decisions must be unanimous and are usually made by the General Affairs and External Relations
Council (GAERC). The defence ministers have also met in the GAERC format
since 2004. They can make decisions regarding the European Defence Agency
and military capabilities.

In order to be able to carry out crisis management operations, the EU

had to create the relevant structures and develop the necessary procedures.
The required structural decisions were made at the Nice European Council
in 2000. The most important bodies are:

3 The Political and Security Committee (PSC): The PSC comprises ambassadors from
the 27 EU member states who deal with all Common Foreign and Security Policy
issues. It exercises political control and strategic direction of crisis management
operations on behalf of the Council.

3 The Military Committee of the EU (EUMC): The Military Committee is made up
of the member states’ Chiefs of General Staff or their representatives. The Military
Committee advises the PSC on military crisis management issues and the development of military capabilities. The Chair of the Military Committee also acts as an
advisor to the Secretary-General/High Representative on all military issues. The
Military Staff, part of the EU-Council Secretariat, does the preparatory work for the
Military Committee.

3 The Committee for Civilian Aspects of Crisis Management (CIVCOM): CIVCOM is
comprised of diplomats and civilian crisis management specialists and advises the
PSC on all issues of civilian crisis management.


-----

AN 124–100 planes based in Leipzig. In 2003 the Capability Development
Mechanism was adopted to analyze demand, available capabilities and
existing deficiencies.

Following the events of 11 September 2001 and the adoption of the

European Security Strategy, the headline goal was adjusted in 2004 and
adopted with a new target date as the Headline Goal 2010. The most important
development was expanding the range of tasks to include observation, training and support of third countries in countering terrorism. A key element was
the call to develop the EU’s rapid response capability for a military crisis which
stemmed from a proposal by Germany, France and the United Kingdom. This
led to the creation of the EU Battlegroups (EU BG) in 2005. They reached their
full operational capacity in 2007, meaning that two Battlegroups are always
available, each for a period of six months. They are rapidly deployable and
capable of conducting limited independent operations or the initial phase of
a larger operation. An EU Battlegroup is comprised of an infantry battalion,
mobile headquarters and the required support staff. The core of a Battlegroup
consists of about 1500 soldiers.

Five nationally-provided Operation Headquarters are available for commanding military ESDP missions (in Germany, France, the United Kingdom,
Italy and Greece) and can be staffed with personnel from the EU member
states upon activation. In addition, NATO makes its SHAPE headquarters
available for EU operations that are to be carried out with recourse to NATO
assets and capabilities. Moreover the EU has its own Operations Centre that
can command military operations of limited size if no national headquarters
is available.

To implement the Headline Goal 2010, the entire European demand
for military capabilities was determined. This was then compared with the
national forces and capabilities offered voluntarily. The result of the comparative analysis was mainly the discovery of shortfalls that were assessed in terms
of their operative risk and then categorized. Afterwards, the shortfalls that
had been identified were prioritized. A host of individual projects were initiated on this basis and are currently being implemented.

In December 2008 the European Council raised the bar in a declaration

on enhancing the ESDP. It is based on the framework of the military and civilian headline goals and serves to align the spectrum of tasks and operational
scenarios with the operations and missions most likely for the EU.


3 Aboard the frigate „Mecklenburg-Vorpommern“: Federal Minister of Defence Franz Josef Jung and the ship‘s captain,
Commander Kay Achim Schönbach

**5. Military capabilities**

At its meeting in Helsinki in 1999, the European Council set a ‘headline goal’
for the development of military capabilities in order to be able to manage the
entire spectrum of military crisis management tasks set out in the EU Treaty.
The goal stated that, for EU led operations, by 2003 the member states should
be able to deploy within 60 days and sustain for at least one year forces of
50,000 60,000 soldiers capable of carrying out the full range of Petersberg
tasks. The 2001 Laeken European Council conclusions included a declaration
on the operational capability of the ESDP. In quantitative terms, the headline
goal had been met to a large degree by 2003. However, there were a number
of primarily quantitative capability shortfalls, particularly in the areas of
strategic transport, strategic reconnaissance and command and control
capability. The European Capability Action Plan (ECAP) constituted a first step
towards addressing those deficiencies. ECAP achieved concrete results such
as the Strategic Airlift Interim Solution (SALIS), which provides the member

i h d l i i f lik h


-----

The EU should thus be capable of simultaneously planning and conducting the following operations:

3 two major stabilization and reconstruction operations, with a suitable civilian
component, supported by up to 10,000 troops for at least two years;

3 two rapid-response operations of limited duration using the EU Battlegroups;

3 an evacuation operation for European nationals, bearing in mind national responsibilities and making use of the “Lead State Concept”;

3 a maritime or air surveillance/interdiction mission;

3 a civilian-military humanitarian assistance operation lasting up to 90 days;

3 a dozen ESDP civilian missions of varying formats (particularly police, rule-of-law,
civilian administration or disaster response missions, security sector reform and
observation missions) including one major mission (with up to 3000 experts)
possibly lasting up to several years.


**6. European Defence Agency**

The European Defence Agency (EDA) was established in 2004 “to support the
Member States and the Council in their efforts to improve European defence
capabilities in the field of crisis management and to sustain the European
Security and Defence Policy as it stands now and develops in the future”.
Along with developing defence capabilities, the EDA is to promote armaments
cooperation, improve the industrial and technological basis in the field of
defence, support the establishment of a competitive market for European
defence equipment and promote cooperative research in defence technology.

For the first time at the EU level, the areas relevant for the initiation
and preparation of cooperative programmes – capability analysis, research
and technology and armaments – are thus integrated in a single organization,
the EDA.

The EDA quickly began its work and now has over 110 staff members

i l i j i ll f f h i d b


-----

Strategic documents were adopted for each of the areas to serve as a set of
guidelines for future work.

In particular, the agency is to assume a coordinating function between

existing structures and organizations, pool activities and achieve maximum
synergy in its areas of responsibility.

As part of the process developed to implement the Headline Goal
(Capability Development Mechanism), the European Defence Agency is responsible for identifying priorities for capability development and continually
implementing specific projects to this end. An initial Capability Development
Plan was adopted in 2008 to guide the EDA in this function.

The European Defence Agency is part of the European Union’s over­

arching institutional framework. It works under the political control of the
Council of Ministers and is directed on matters of substance by the Steering
Board composed of the participating member states and chaired by the
Secretary-General/High Representative of the EU. The Council meets in the
Defence Ministers format to discuss and decide on issues affecting the EDA.
The EDA allows the participation of third countries and is free to cooperate
with other institutions. Norway has already concluded an administrative
agreement with the EDA and is actively cooperating on a number of projects.
Additionally, the Joint Action on the Establishment of the EDA envisages
cooperation and coordination with the Organization for Joint Armament
Cooperation (OCCAR) in order to achieve optimal interagency cooperation.

The Joint Action also envisages cooperation with Turkey, Norway and

NATO.


**7. Civilian capabilities**

The experience gained in the Balkans and in Afghanistan has shown that
civilian instruments are an indispensable part of crisis management and,
in most cases indeed preferred. Civilian forces are essential to conflict
prevention. Moreover, it is often necessary to rebuild state structures after a
violent conflict has ended. Generally, police officers and civilian experts in
the fields of police, rule of law, civil administration and customs are needed to
restore and maintain stability. This usually goes hand in hand with long-term
commitment within the framework of reconstruction or a domestic reform
process in the country.

A trademark and particular strength of the ESDP is the parallel and balanced development of civilian and military capabilities. The European Union
therefore has the entire spectrum of crisis management tools at its disposal,
ranging from diplomatic negotiation efforts to the imposition of sanctions or
the secondment of a police or rule-of-law mission to the use of military force.

l h i h ’ i ili bili i


-----

The Feira (June 2000) and Göteborg (June 2001) European Councils
formulated corresponding objectives for the different areas of civilian
crisis management. The heads of state and government agreed to develop
capabilities in the areas of police, rule of law, civil administration and civil
protection.

In December 2004, the European Council adopted a consolidated

headline goal for civilian crisis management, the Civilian Headline Goal 2008.
Its main objective is to identify and develop the civilian capabilities the EU
requires until 2008 to complete its tasks. During the German Council Presidency, the time horizon was aligned with the military Headline Goal 2010.

The Civilian Headline Goal is intended to bring about qualitative and

quantitative improvements in the area of civilian crisis management; these
are to be achieved through the following measures:

3 Mobilizing adequate resources for civilian crisis management. The aim is to have
the capability to carry out several civilian missions, including a larger ‘substitution
mission’ in a non-benign environment, concurrently over a longer period of time.

3 Enhancing the rapid response capability in the civilian sector (for example by
seconding integrated civilian Crisis Response Teams).

3 Linking civilian and military crisis management more closely. The EU and its
member states offer a range of programmes that prepare police officers and
civilian experts for missions within the framework of the ESDP. Cooperation with
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) is very important in this context.
One organization that stands out is the Berlin based Zentrum für Internationale
Friedenseinsätze – Center for International Peace Operations – ZIF) which was
founded in April 2002 in close cooperation with the Federal Government and
the Bundestag (German Parliament). Today ZIF is one of Europe’s leading
institutions for recruiting and training civilian personnel.


3 NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer and the Secretary-General of the Council and High Representative
for the CFSP Javier Solana at a meeting on 21 January 2004 at NATO Headquarters in Brussels.

**8. EU and NATO: Strategic partnership**

The EU and NATO complement rather than compete with each other. In cases
“where NATO as a whole is not engaged”, the EU is to be able to launch and
conduct its own military operations. In this respect there are two possibilities:
EU led operations with recourse to NATO assets and capabilities (examples:
Operation CONCORDIA in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia;
Operation ALTHEA in Bosnia and Herzegovina) and those without such
recourse (examples: Operation ARTEMIS and Operation EUFOR RD Congo in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo; Operation ATALANTA; EUFOR Tchad/
RCA). The latter are referred to as “autonomous” operations.

Germany considers it very important for NATO assets and capabilities
to be used whenever it is possible and logical to do so. That is why concluding
the permanent arrangements between the EU and NATO (“Berlin Plus” agreement) in March 2003 was such a significant milestone. Most member states of

h d b f b h i i d h f h


-----

At the Washington Summit in April 1999, NATO made the EU an offer

building upon the existing cooperation between NATO and the Western
European Union (WEU). It was named the “Berlin Plus agreement” because
the offer was a reiterated and improved version of an offer that the NATO
Foreign Ministers had made the WEU in 1996 at a meeting in Berlin.
Basically, NATO offered the EU recourse to the Alliance’s collective “assets
and capabilities” as well as continuous access to NATO planning capabilities
for EU led operations. This is important because, in contrast to NATO, the
EU does not have its own military command organization. In order for this
assistance to be provided, NATO “as a whole” cannot be involved in crisis
management in the specific situation.

Close coordination between the EU and NATO is also central to the
development of military capabilities. Each of the 21 countries that are members both of the European Union and NATO draws its military contributions
to both organizations from a single pool of national forces. It therefore makes
sense that efforts to further develop military capabilities in the EU and NATO
should be “mutually reinforcing”. To achieve such an effect, the planning
processes of both organizations must be synchronized and harmonized –
something Germany strongly advocates and supports. According to the
communiqué of the November 2002 Prague NATO Summit, the NATO
Response Force (NRF) and the related work of the EU Headline Goal should
also be mutually reinforcing. The development of military capabilities undertaken within the framework of the ESDP also strengthens the interoperability
of American and European forces within NATO.

NATO is and will continue to be the foundation of our collective defence.

No other organization will be able to assume this key task in the foreseeable
future. But a strong alliance also requires capable partners in Europe. From
the German perspective, a dynamic ESDP ought to strengthen the European
pillar of the Alliance and therefore NATO as a whole. The German Government
views close cooperation between NATO and the EU as indispensable.


3 A satellite image of Kinshasa

**9. European Union Satellite Centre**

The European Union has had a satellite centre since 1 January 2002 that is
tasked with supporting EU decision-making within the framework of the CFSP
and the ESDP. To this end, the Centre assesses satellite imagery and collateral
data such as aerial imagery and produces analyses that are made available to
the Council Secretariat and, usually, also to the member states. It is located in
Torrejón de Ardoz near Madrid.

The Political and Security Committee (PSC) exercises political super­

vision over the Centre which with regard to its operational work reports
directly to the Secretary-General/High Representative for the Common
Foreign and Security Policy. According to the European Security Strategy
(ESS), the European Union seeks to actively pursue its strategic goals. The
security challenges Europe faces are global in nature. In order to meet these
challenges, Europe must be able to decide and act globally; in this respect,

l b l lli i k l bl ib i


-----

The Centre’s priorities reflect those outlined in the ESS. Special emphasis

is placed on the following issues: preventing the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery, combating international terrorism, defusing regional conflicts and offering support in the areas of crisis and
conflict management. Supporting the planning, preparation and execution
of EU missions and operations is becoming increasingly important. Reliable
and up to-date information on the geography of the deployment location is
the basis of every operation. The Satellite Centre has prepared image analyses
for all EU operations to date. Specifically, this includes the operations in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (ALTHEA) and off the coast of Somalia (ATALANTA).

Under certain conditions, international organizations can also submit

requests to and receive products from the Centre. For instance, the Satellite
Centre is assisting the United Nations mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). It also cooperates closely with NATO, the African Union
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).

Member states usually task the Centre in connection with their
contributions to humanitarian and peacekeeping missions. Lebanon is
a current example of such an operation, but past examples include the
assistance provided following the 2005 tsunami in Asia or the 2006 earthquake in Pakistan.

The training capacity of the Satellite Centre, originally intended for
the continuing training of its own personnel, is increasingly being used by
the member states. Additionally, representatives of the member states meet
several times a year in Torrejón to discuss the practical aspects of satellite
imagery analysis for gathering intelligence on issues concerning foreign
and security policy. In this way, the Centre is helping to develop European
cooperation in the area of digital satellite imagery analysis.

In order to provide the Satellite Centre with high-quality satellite
imagery, agreements were signed in November 2008 with countries
participating in the Helios II satellite system and with Italy (which operates
the COSMO-SkyMed satellite). A declaration of intent was also concluded
with Germany (which operates the SAR-Lupe satellite).


3 Soldiers approach a ship off the coast of Somalia.

**10. EU crisis management operations**

Since 2003 the EU has undertaken 24 operations, some of them rather
complex. Nine of these missions have already been successfully completed.
Four of the most important operations and missions are described below.

Operation EU NAVFOR ATALANTA:
Combating piracy off the coast of Somalia

The European Union began its first maritime operation, EU NAVFOR
ATALANTA, on 9 December 2008. The operation is Europe’s contribution

b i i ff h f f i h h l di


-----

armed robbery” and are also authorized to “arrest, detain and transfer persons
who have committed … acts of piracy or armed robbery” as well as seize evidence (Article 2, Joint Action 2008/851/CFSP).

Several frigates with on-board helicopters, a supply ship and a maritime

patrol aircraft were needed to establish operational capability. The mission’s
Operational Headquarters is located in Northwood, near London. Tactical
command in the theatre of operation is carried out from a frigate and rotates
every four months. Operation ATALANTA cooperates closely with other navies
in the area. This includes NATO as well as the US led Combined Task Force 151,
which combats piracy under the auspices of Operation Enduring Freedom,
and warships from China, Russia, India, the Republic of Korea, Malaysia and
Japan. Operational Headquarters in Northwood also works closely with other
countries in the region.

On 19 December 2008 the German frigate “Karlsruhe” was assigned
to Operation ATALANTA. The Federal Cabinet had given its approval for
Germany’s participation in the operation on 8 December on the basis of the
Joint Action. On 19 December 2008 the Bundestag (parliament) agreed by
a large majority to the deployment of the German navy within the framework
of ATALANTA.

For the duration of the operation, Germany will contribute at least one

frigate with an on-board helicopter and protection teams known as Vessel
Protection Detachments (VPD). Moreover, the upper limit of 1400 soldiers
specified in the Bundestag mandate allows for the temporary assignment
of additional naval units, if necessary. This explains why at times there are
several German frigates and supply ships taking part in ATALANTA. The
maritime patrol aircraft P3C Orion, which is temporarily stationed in Djibouti,
can also support ATALANTA if necessary. While the Standing NATO Maritime
Group (SNMG) was in transit, the German ships belonging to that group were
assigned to ATALANTA.

In addition to military and operational challenges, Operation ATALANTA

raised a number of legal questions that had to be addressed at both the EU and
national levels. These issues primarily concern what to do with pirates taken
into custody. Because the courts and correctional facilities in Somalia do not
meet even the most basic requirements, it was necessary to find alternative
means of prosecuting suspects. The European Union therefore concluded an
agreement with the Republic of Kenya that allows persons taken into custody

b f d f i i l i i l ki


Puntland in Somalia) had attacked and captured a number of merchant
vessels in the Gulf of Aden off the eastern coast of Somalia.

There has been fighting between various groups and clans in Somalia

since the fall of Siad Barre’s government in 1991. By now, there are hardly any
state structures or functioning authorities left. Across large sections of the
country lawlessness is common and much of the population lives in extreme
poverty. The absence of effective administrative structures and the precarious
conditions the Somali people live in contribute greatly to the piracy off the
coast of Somalia.

Several ships serving the United Nations World Food Programme (WFP),

delivering food to the starving Somali population, were attacked by pirates.
As a result, it became increasingly difficult for the United Nations to charter
ships to carry out this humanitarian task. Moreover, the Gulf of Aden is part
of the most important trading route between Europe and Asia. Annually, well
over 20,000 ships pass through the waters off the Somali coast.

In light of the worsening maritime security situation off the coast of
Somalia, the UN Security Council adopted Resolutions 1814, 1816, 1838 and
1846 in 2008. These resolutions permitted, under certain conditions, war­ships
from other countries to enter Somalia’s coastal waters in order to combat
piracy. According to customary international law and the 1982 UN Convention
on the Law of the Sea, any warship is authorized to fight acts of piracy on the
high seas.

Furthermore, the resolutions call on the international community
to take action against the escalating acts of piracy. The European Union
responded to this call by adopting a comprehensive crisis management
concept on 5 August 2008. Following extensive work in the Council bodies,
Council Joint Action 2008/851/CFSP was adopted by the Council of the
European Union on 10 November 2008. A concept of operation and operation
plan were subsequently developed. Approval to begin the operation was
received from the Council on 8 December 2008 and it was launched on the
following day. Thus, EU NAVFOR ATALANTA became the first operation with
the specific goal of combating piracy off the Horn of Africa.

ATALANTA is mandated with protecting ships chartered by the WFP
and merchant vessels in the area and keeping watch over those stretches of
the Somali coast that pose a danger to maritime traffic. Forces participating
i “ k h i l di h f f


-----

Despite the vast area of sea to patrol and a number of logistical and
operational challenges, ATALANTA had a successful start. As of May 2009,
ATALANTA had safely guided over 150,000 tons of food from the WFP through
the dangerous area so that it could be distributed to the suffering Somali
population. In this way, well over a million people were able to be fed.
In many cases it was possible to fend off pirate attacks on merchant vessels.
By cooperating with other actors in the area, ATALANTA succeeded in making
passage through the Gulf of Aden relatively safe.

At the same time, attacks on civilian ships in the area have continued.

Their crews are often taken hostage. This shows that the fight against piracy
will take time and that even better coordination is necessary between the
limited number of forces. Yet it also demonstrates that the military answer to
piracy off the coast of Somalia must be accompanied by efforts to establish a
functioning state on land. Creating reliable state structures, especially in the
field of security, remains a daunting task in the Horn of Africa.


3 An Afghan police officer receives her certification after completing an EUPOL course.

European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan
(EUPOL Afghanistan)

After much careful preparation and many decisions on the part of the
European Union, EUPOL Afghanistan began its work on 15 June 2007 with
45 international police officers, 27 civilian experts and 35 Afghan staff
members. The aim was and still is to build up a democratic, multi-ethnic
police force that fulfils its responsibilities to the population in accordance
with international standards and on the basis of principles such as human
rights and the rule of law. Simultaneously, special attention was given to
promoting effective cooperation between police and judicial authorities, in
particular with the prosecutor-general and the Afghan Ministry of Justice.

Envisaged for a period of three years, the mandate originally encompassed 234 police officers and civilian experts. However, since 1 December
2008 the mandate has permitted up to 400 international staff members.
At the beginning of May 2009 the mission comprised 152 international police
officers, 72 civilian experts from 19 EU countries and the supporting countries
Norway, Croatia, Canada and New Zealand, including 40 police officers and

i ili f d f h


-----

EUPOL staff members do not have executive powers. The seconded

police officers carry weapons for their own safety. The civilian experts working
on the operation are unarmed; protection is provided by a private security
firm. Staff are housed in protected residences that are required to meet EU
security standards. Outside of the homes, armed vehicles must be used for
transport and bullet-proof vests must be worn at all times.

The mandate encompasses the following main points:

3 supporting the Afghan Government in reforming the police; in particular,
providing strategic consulting to the Ministry of the Interior;

3 supporting the Afghan National Police (ANP) by helping to fight crime and
develop the border police, uniformed police, Kabul city police as well as nationwide
training and anti-corruption systems along with the relevant action plans;

3 improving cooperation and coordination among international actors working
in the police sector;

3 streamlining the judicial process by advising the prosecutor-general’s office
and the Ministry of Justice in particular.

Police work focuses on the following areas: analysis and evaluation of

capabilities, criminal prosecution, information-gathering, ANP inspection
and patrolling activities, city security and training and education for the ANP,
including the border police.

Together with the ANP, EUPOL is developing an information-gathering

and assessment system. Additionally, courses are offered on topics including
crime-scene investigation techniques, investigation procedures and covert
operation and surveillance measures.

Since February 2009 the EUPOL Kabul City Security Project and other

international partners have helped the ANP implement a comprehensive
security concept for Kabul (population 4.5 million) and introduce the model
in other cities. Over 1200 members of the ANP have already received training
in Kabul and a further 1800 will be trained in the coming weeks.

A number of pilot projects including aviation security training, a single

nationwide emergency number and setting up cooperative investigation

d f li ffi d bli


A comprehensive information technology concept was developed
with the ANP in order to make possible self-sufficient IT system maintenance
and upkeep, as well as the necessary vocational and special training.
With the approval, budget and land for building an IT centre now at hand,
implementation can begin.

EUPOL is currently running a “Train the Trainer” programme. By the end

of the year, roughly 1000 police officers will have been trained as instructors to
work in the field of ANP training.

In the run-up to the presidential elections, set to take place in August

2009, EUPOL is implementing a number of training measures together with
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) that will benefit a total
of 35,000 ANP police officers. At EUPOL’s initiative, the Senior Police Advisory
Group was established. It coordinates the police-related activities of all international actors at the strategic level and presents political decision-makers
with recommendations for developing the ANP.

In the area of the rule of law, EUPOL promotes cooperation among

the police, public prosecutor’s office and judiciary, advises the office of the
prosecutor-general and the Ministry of Justice and supports the drafting of
legislation. EUPOL was thus able to help considerably in drafting the new code
of criminal procedure, police legislation and administrative law governing
the police.

A strategy and structure for promoting equal opportunity and human

rights are currently being developed in the Ministry of the Interior. Joint
seminars and working groups ensure better cooperation among police, public
prosecutors and judges by institutionalizing working methods.

EUPOL has taken an impressive lead on the anti-corruption campaign
in the Interior Ministry. Together with its international partners EUPOL
developed an implementation concept and identified the required measures
to be taken in detailed action plans, which were approved by the Minister of
the Interior.

The main tasks in the next few months will be implementing the projects

and introducing the pilot projects across the whole country. Extending the
mission in the individual regions and provinces and bolstering rule-of-law
activities are further priorities.


-----

within the UN framework and with Serbia delayed the transfer of authority
from the UN interim administration (UNMIK) to the authorities of Kosovo and
EULEX. On 24 November 2008, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki moon submitted
a report on reducing UNMIK’s presence and underscored the larger role
the EU would play in the future. All members of the UN Security Council
welcomed the report with a Presidential Statement on 26 November 2008.
From Serbia’s perspective, this legitimized the deployment of EULEX throughout all of Kosovo. The EU issued a declaration supporting the UN report on
28 November 2008. On this basis, an exchange of letters between SecretaryGeneral/High Representative Solana and President Tadic took place on
28 November 2008, in which Serbia expressed its political support for the
buildup of the EULEX mission across all of Kosovo.

EULEX was able to report its first success in the first half of 2009:
EULEX staff are advising and supporting all police stations across the country.
More multi-ethnic police patrols are being established. Over 100 criminal
hearings and trials have been carried out and the first war crimes trial has
been concluded. Civil cases are gradually being processed. Border crossings
1 and 31 on the border between Serbia and Kosovo are open around the clock
for the first time, with statistics on the number of people and amount of goods
that passes through them being recorded in preparation for a future toll.

Close cooperation between the NATO mission KFOR and EULEX has
been able to guarantee a stable security situation in Kosovo so far.

A number of (international) legal, political and practical issues still
need to be resolved; for example, to what extent do residents of the country
recognize and abide by legislation Kosovo’s parliament passes under the
“umbrella” of the UN? Another example is achieving a fully functional court
in north Mitrovica, which is viewed as especially important by the people of
Kosovo. The same is true for filling positions in Kosovo’s police force in order
to ensure a proportional representation among ethnicities.

The success of the EULEX mission will continue to depend on the
commitment, energy, team spirit and communication skills of our EULEX
experts, who manage to do their jobs under logistical circumstances that
are anything but simple. Their work is guided by the principle: by the people,
for the people.


3 A German police officer in the Serbian part of Mitrovica, Kosovo, 5 May 2008.

EULEX Kosovo – The largest civilian ESDP mission
to date fully operational

After beginning operations on 9 December 2008, the ESDP rule-of-law mission
EULEX Kosovo reached its full operational capability on 6 April 2009 with
around 1750 international (and some 800 local) staff. It is the first civilian
ESDP mission to have an executive mandate. Within the general framework
of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244, the mission is tasked with
assisting the authorities of Kosovo in establishing a professional, multi-ethnic
judiciary, police force and customs service and helping them meet the EU’s
rule-of-law standards. Germany is playing a substantial role in the mission: it
currently has around 100 police officers and over 20 civilian experts (judges,
public prosecutors, administrative experts) serving in Kosovo.

Originally, EULEX was to reach its full operational capability on 15 June

2008 when Kosovo’s constitution entered into force. But difficult negotiations


-----

since 1 October. Its tasks are to contribute to stabilization, normalization and
confidence-building in the country and to brief European policy-makers on
the situation there.

Germany is participating in the mission with a total of 44 experts
that include both police officers and experts from ZIF. They patrol the
administrative boundary lines of South Ossetia and Abkhazia daily in order
to monitor the deployment of Georgian, Abkhazian, South Ossetian and
Russian security forces. They visit shelters for refugees and talk to people
in the villages in the conflict zone in order to find out about their living
conditions. The impressions they gather can result in proposals for aid
projects to be initiated in coordination with the European Commission.
The regular reports EUMM sends to Brussels and the capitals of the member
states keep policy-makers up-to-date on the current situation on the ground.

The most difficult task is building fresh confidence. Eight months
after the war, the conflict parties deeply distrust each other and contact is
practically non-existent. The sight of the conflicting parties’ security forces
alone, manning Georgian, Abkhazian, South Ossetian or Russian checkpoints
in bullet-proof vests and carrying machine guns, does not exactly encourage
mutual trust. The EU observers pay regular visits to the checkpoints,
communicate information between the different sides and sometimes
even succeed in getting the checkpoint commanders of both sides to speak
to each other directly.

A mechanism for preventing further incidents was developed within
the framework of the Geneva talks led by EU Special Representative Pierre
Morel. Under the direction of EUMM, the OSCE and UNOMIG, representatives
of all sides are to meet weekly on the ground to discuss security issues and,
in the mid-term, build confidence. An initial meeting regarding South
Ossetia took place along the administrative boundary line at the end of April.
It demonstrated that there is still much work to be done.

After eight months, the EUMM patrols have become a familiar sight in

the villages along the administrative boundary lines. The people there and
the Georgian government affirm that EUMM is making a considerable
contribution to security in those areas. It is also due in no small part to the
EUMM presence that the Russian troops withdrew from the areas bordering
South Ossetia and Abkhazia at the beginning of October, allowing the people
who had fled to return home.


3 EU election observers in the Georgian village of Muchrani, 1 October 2008

Serving on behalf of the EU: German experts
take part in the EU monitoring mission in Georgia –
Current situation as of May 2009

In the summer of 2008, a situation requiring action by the European Security
and Defence Policy arose in the EU’s immediate neighbourhood: a dispute
over South Ossetia and Abkhazia that had long been brewing turned into a
violent conflict between Russia and Georgia. As the United States was limited
in its ability to take action in foreign policy due to the presidential election
campaign, it fell primarily to the EU to end the fighting quickly and restore
stability to the region.

Nicolas Sarkozy, the EU Council President at the time, was able to
negotiate a ceasefire with the help of shuttle diplomacy. On 12 August the
parties agreed on the “six-point Agreement”, which was further refined in
an implementation agreement on 8 September. The EU assumed the role of
guarantor of stability in the region and, with its Special Representative Pierre
Morel, was also a decisive force in the political talks on resolving the conflict.

i i i i i ( ) i h


-----

3 On patrol in Kinshasa in the Democratic Republic of the Congo: A German soldier from Parachute Battalion 261 based in
Lebach in the German federal state of Saarland waves at onlookers.


-----

**Imprint**

**Published by**
**Federal Foreign Office**
Division 202
Werderscher Markt 1
10117 Berlin
Tel.: +49 (0) 30/50 00-0
Fax: +49 (0) 30/50 00-34 02
E-Mail: poststelle@auswaertiges-amt.de
Homepage: www.auswaertiges-amt.de


**Design**

Atelier Hauer + Dörfler, Berlin

**Printed and produced by**
Bonifatius GmbH, Paderborn


The Federal Foreign Office sets great store
by the use of language which treats men
and women as equals. In this publication,
however, not all formulations are gender
neutral as the explicit naming of both forms
would make it more cumbersome to read
some texts.


**Federal Ministry of Defence**
Division Fü S III 4
Stauffenbergstraße 18
10785 Berlin
Homepage: www.bundeswehr.de
www.bmvg.de

Last updated on 1 June 2009


-----

-----

