###### Robust. Resilient. Sustainable.

#### Integrated Security for Germany

###### National Security Strategy


-----

-----

##### Robust. Resilient. Sustainable.
### Integrated Security  for Germany

##### National Security Strategy


-----

-----

###### Dear readers,

Providing security for its citizens is the most
important job of every state, of every society.
Without security there can be no freedom, no
stability, no prosperity.

Germany is doing this. We are a country with
a solid democracy, a vibrant civil society and a
vigorous economy. We have friends, partners
and allies in the world, who share our values and
interests. This is what makes us strong.

We need them. After all, Russia’s brutal war of
aggression against Ukraine fundamentally chal­
lenges the European security order. In parallel, the
global order is changing: new centres of power
are emerging, the world in the 21st century is
multipolar. Human-induced climate change
poses a threat to our livelihoods and also impacts
the stability of entire countries and regions.

We are adapting to such strategic shifts. With
the watershed moment that Russia’s war of
aggression signifies, we have decided to finally
equip our Bundeswehr appropriately. So that it
can perform its core task also in the future: to
defend our country and our allies against each
and every possible attack. In just a few months,
we have liberated ourselves from dependence
on Russian energy and created alternatives. This
path towards more security and less dependence
is one we are resolutely following.

We are basing this on a broad concept of security.
We need a secure supply of energy and raw
materials for our country. That is why we are
investing in new partnerships with the up and


coming countries in Asia, Africa and America
and are widening our trade relations. Similarly,
we are ensuring that our society is prepared and
resilient, for example in the face of disasters and
cyber­attacks but also targeted disinformation
campaigns.

Our compass here is this National Security Strat­
egy, the first in the history of our country. Its goal
is clear: to maintain security for our citizens and
make our contribution to Europe’s security.

Our roots in Europe, our firm anchoring in the
transatlantic alliance, the strength of our econ­
omy but above all the cohesion of our society
provide a firm foundation enabling us to achieve
this goal together.

**Olaf Scholz,**
Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany


-----

###### Dear readers,

Our peace is fragile. Our freedom is precious. For
too long we in Germany considered our security
in Europe to be something we could take for
granted. However, our peaceful order is not set in
stone, as has been plain at the latest since Russia’s
war of aggression against Ukraine. The climate
crisis also threatens the security of the people
in our country bringing floods and heatwaves.
The COVID 19 pandemic, cyberattacks, disinfor­
mation campaigns – all these threats show how
vulnerable we are. Making us more robust in all
areas of life is the aim of this our first National
Security Strategy. After all, in the 21st century,
security also means making sure our heating
works in winter. Security means being able to
find medication for our children in our phar­
macies. Having smartphones that work because
supplies of the necessary microchips are reliable.
Getting to work safely because our trains are not
paralysed by cyberattacks.

Precisely because the new threats are complex
and affect all areas of state, society and the econ­
omy, we are applying our policy of Integrated
Security to all these spheres. Integrated Security
means consistently taking account of security
issues: not just when it comes to decisions on
equipping the Bundeswehr, but also to the ques­
tion as to the reliability of our supply chains or
the freedom of our media landscape.

During conversations in recent months, many
citizens have told me how very aware they are
now that we need to pay more attention to our
security. To my mind, we as a society with 84 mil­
lion people can turn to this task with confidence:


because we have the good fortune to live in a
free, open minded and prosperous country. In
a strong country at the heart of Europe sur­
rounded by partners who stand by one another.

What we are talking about are the three dimen­
sions of security. Firstly, protection from war
and violence, the inviolability of our lives. Our
country must be wehrhaft (robust) to protect
itself and its allies from external violence. That
is why we are investing in our Bundeswehr. That
is why we are consolidating the European pillar
of NATO and the eastern flank of our Alliance.
We are strengthening the European Union. After
all it is our life insurance, our insurance policy
for peace. What is clear is that with its economic
strength, its diplomatic clout and its history,
Germany has a special responsibility – in future,
we will contribute more to security on the Euro­
pean continent.

However, security does not just mean the
absence of war. Security also means having
the freedom to be able to shape our lives, our
democracy, our economy the way we want.
Without political constraint, without economic
dependencies. Protecting this freedom is the
second dimension of our security.


-----

To strengthen this freedom, we as a society have to
become more resilient – more resilient to attacks
on our freedom from the outside and to vulner­
abilities on the inside. That is why we are ending
our dependency on energy from Russia. We paid
for every cubic metre of Russian gas twofold and
threefold with our national security. In future,
we will focus more on security when it comes to
decisions on economic policy. This holds true for
the question as to where we buy medication, raw
materials and energy. But also when it comes to
deciding what actors are allowed to invest in our
critical infrastructure. We are diversifying our
economy to make it more stable.

Also at international level, we are committed
to an order governed by rules and the law not
power and despotism. This is anything but easy
in a world marked by rising systemic rivalry. We
will have to stand up even more for our funda­
mental values – for the principles of the United
Nations Charter, of human rights and interna­
tional law. We are committed to partnerships
that benefit both sides, are sustainable and do
not create one sided dependencies. We will thus
increasingly dovetail our instruments – from
crisis prevention and stabilisation measures to
sustainable development cooperation.

None of the changes of our age is as profound as
the climate crisis. Today, more people are fleeing
the impact of the climate crisis than armed con­
flict. Security in the 21st century thus also means
protecting the natural resources on which all life
depends – this is the third dimension of security.
As a major industrialised country, Germany has
a special responsibility to reduce its emissions.
But also to identify new technological solutions
and to strengthen partnerships with countries


suffering greatly from ever more dramatic
storms, droughts and heatwaves. Investing in
our climate helps people all over the world to
forge a path to prosperity and development and
promotes our security.

As we have seen in other crises, it is women,
children and marginalised groups who suffer
the most from climate-related damage. In the
wake of natural disasters, children have to drop
out of school to work; violence against women
increases. Women’s rights and the rights of vul­
nerable groups are a barometer for the state of
our societies and thus for our security. Integrated
Security means focusing on people’s individual
security needs.

This is the first time we are formulating our
policy so comprehensively in a National Security
Strategy. This Strategy is not the end of the road
but a start. The Strategy will be as strong as the
people who implement it: our security matters to
us all. We have the opportunity to work together
to protect what we cherish and value: security
for the freedom of our lives. Wehrhaft (robust),
resilient and sustainable.

For us and our children’s future.

**Annalena Baerbock,**
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Federal Republic of Germany


-----

# 18

**Germany in**
**Europe and**
**the world**


# 30

_Wehrhaft_ (robust): Defending
peace and freedom


# 46


Resilient: Safeguarding
our values through inner
strength


**Sustainable: Safeguarding**

**our natural resources**
# 64


-----

## Contents

**FOREWORD ** **5**

Chancellor Olaf Scholz  5

Federal Minister Annalena Baerbock  6

**EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ** **10**

**GERMANY IN EUROPE AND THE WORLD ** **18**

Our security identity  19

Our values and interests  20

Our security environment  22

**INTEGRATED SECURITY FOR GERMANY ** **28**

_Wehrhaft (robust): Defending peace and freedom _ 30

Resilient: Safeguarding our values through inner strength  46

Sustainable: Safeguarding our natural resources  64

**BUILDING INTEGRATED SECURITY TOGETHER ** **73**


-----

## Executive Summary


-----

###### “To promote world peace in a united Europe”

– on the basis of this mission enshrined in the Grundgesetz (Basic Law), we want to shape a free
international order that respects and upholds international law, the Charter of the United Nations,
the sovereign equality of states, the prohibition on the threat or use of force, the right of all peoples
to self-determination, and universal human rights.


In this National Security Strategy, the Federal
Government describes what this means for us
now and what conclusions we draw from that in
order to ensure the security of our country and
its people in the future. The Federal Government
firmly believes that this aim can be achieved
through a policy of Integrated Security. By this
we mean the collaborative interaction of all
relevant actors, resources and instruments that,
in combination, can comprehensively guarantee
the security of our country and strengthen it
against external threats.

###### What shapes us

_Germany in the world_

As the most populous country and the largest
economy in the heart of Europe, Germany bears
special responsibility for peace, security, pros­
perity and stability, as well as for the sustainable
use of our natural resources. We also assume this
responsibility in awareness of our history. That is
why we are grateful for the reconciliation with our
European neighbours and why we will continue
to take on responsibility for Israel’s right to exist.


The overarching guiding principle for the Federal
Government’s actions is to protect our country, its
free democratic order and our values. Our foreign
and security policy is committed to a free inter­
national order based on international law and the
Charter of the United Nations. We and our neigh­
bouring country France enjoy a close friendship,
in which we have overcome historical perceptions
of enmity and to which we owe major steps in
European integration, a process we view as indis­
pensable. At the same time, we are firmly rooted
in the transatlantic alliance, which expresses our
close ties and partnership with the United States.

###### Where we stand

_Germany and Europe in a changed_
_security environment_

Germany’s security environment is undergoing
profound change and we are living through a wa­
tershed era, a Zeitenwende.

Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine is a vi­
olation of international law and of the European
security order. Today’s Russia is for now the most


-----

significant threat to peace and security in the
Euro-Atlantic area.

We are living in an age of increasing multipo­
larity. Some countries are attempting to reshape
the current international order, driven by their
perception of systemic rivalry.

In this international context, China is a partner,
competitor and systemic rival. We see that the ele­
ments of rivalry and competition have increased in
recent years, but at the same time China remains a
partner without whom many of the most pressing
global challenges cannot be resolved.


Wars, crises and conflicts in Europe’s neighbour­
hood are having an adverse effect on Germany’s
and Europe’s security. Fragile states are becoming
a cradle and safe haven for terrorism, while inter­
nal conflicts are spilling over into other states.

In addition to this, our society and economy face
complex threats: terrorism, extremism, organised
crime, and illegal financial flows are on the rise,
as are cyberattacks, which cause significant
damage and pose risks to security and stability.
Our critical infrastructure is being increasingly
targeted by significant threats and disruptions.
A secure supply of energy sources and raw


-----

materials is at risk. International economic and
financial relations also have a security dimen­
sion. One-sided dependencies in these fields can
develop into security risks.

The climate crisis is threatening our livelihoods
and the very foundations of our economies. It al­
ready has security implications today. We can no
longer entirely prevent the effects of this crisis,
merely curb them. Poverty, hunger, diseases and
the destruction of natural habitats pose a threat
to millions of people around the world.

###### What we are doing

_Integrated Security_

Germany is a solid democracy with a vigorous
economy and strong partners in Europe and
around the world. We are therefore tackling the
challenges of our age with confidence and opti­
mism. In a changed world, we are redoubling our
efforts with a view to keeping our country secure
and free. Through a policy of Integrated Security,
we will make sure that Germany is wehrhaft (ro­
bust) and resilient, and that it acts sustainably.

###### Wehrhaft (robust)

_Defending peace and freedom_

The paramount task of German security policy
is to ensure that we can continue to live in our
country in peace, freedom and security. Ger­
many’s security is indivisible from that of our
European partners and allies. Our commitment
to NATO and the EU is unshakeable. We stand


resolutely by the mutual defence pledge under
Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty. We are
strengthening the Bundeswehr as a cornerstone
of defence in Europe. National and collective
defence is the core task of the Bundeswehr, and
this task includes our contribution to NATO’s
deterrence capabilities. We will allocate two per­
cent of our GDP, as an average over a multi-year
period, to reaching NATO capability goals, ini­
tially in part via the newly created special fund
for the Bundeswehr. At the same time, we will
bolster investments in critical-infrastructure
protection, cyber capabilities, effective diplo­
macy, civil protection, stabilising our partners,
and dedicated humanitarian assistance and
development cooperation.

We aim to strengthen civil preparedness and
protection through a comprehensive approach
involving the whole of society, with the Federal
Government, the Länder, the municipalities,
the business sector and the public taking on
responsibility together. We are improving Federal
Government support for the Länder in the field
of disaster prevention and relief and making our
critical infrastructure more resilient.

Our goal remains a Europe united in peace and
freedom. We want to ensure that the European
Union (EU) is able to act geopolitically and
to uphold its security and sovereignty for the
coming generations. The Federal Government
supports further EU integration, cohesion, and
enlargement to include the Western Balkan
states, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and,
in the longer term, Georgia. In order to prepare
the EU for this enlargement and to ensure its
continued ability to act, reforms within the EU
are essential.


-----

NATO Headquarters

Our security is linked to the security and stability
of other regions in the world. The EU’s Common
Security and Defence Policy plays a key role in our
crisis management. Integrated Security means
joining up civilian, military and police capabilities
in crisis prevention, conflict management and
peacebuilding and including these capabilities in
our actions at international and multilateral level.
In this context, the Federal Government will also
take particular account of the interests of women
and disadvantaged groups, in line with a feminist
foreign and development policy.


The Federal Government will increase its engage­
ment to fight poverty, hunger, social inequality
and the climate crisis. Where governments
undermine security and the rule of law, we will
focus our cooperation to a greater extent on
non-state actors, the local level and multilateral
approaches. At the same time, we will strengthen
those partner governments that, like us, are
committed to upholding the international order
based on international law. The Federal Govern­
ment will align its development policy to an even
greater extent with its strategic goals.


-----

We will increase our efforts to uphold the global
arms-control architecture, nuclear disarma­
ment and non-proliferation on the basis of the
Non-Proliferation Treaty. Our goal remains a safe
world free of nuclear weapons.

As regards the control of arms exports, the Fed­
eral Government will continue to adhere to its
restrictive baseline policy. When deciding on arms
exports, it will take into account in particular hu­
man rights, democracy and the rule of law in the
importing country. At the same time, the Federal
Government takes into account alliance and se­
curity interests, the geostrategic situation and the
needs of enhanced European arms cooperation.

###### Resilient

_Safeguarding our values through_
_inner strength_

Our open society allows all people in Germany to
live their lives in freedom. We therefore defend
our free democratic order against illegitimate
foreign interference, disinformation and all
forms of extremism.

We are committed to upholding a free interna­
tional order based on the Charter of the United
Nations, universal human rights and interna­
tional law. We actively support multilateralism
and the strengthening of the United Nations.
We counter attempts to divide the world into
spheres of influence by promoting the positive
model of such a rules-based order. We know that
we see eye to eye here with partners who share
our values and interests. At the same time, we en­
deavour to work more closely with countries that


may not share all our values, but which, like us,
are committed to this type of international order.

We implement an active human-rights policy,
promote the elimination of discriminatory
power structures and strive to foster partici­
pation and diversity. Where human rights are
protected, crises and wars are less likely.

Our national economy is founded on rules-based
access to markets, raw materials, technologies,
and financial and human capital. We will reduce
current one-sided dependencies in the supply
of raw materials and energy, as well as in other
strategically relevant areas, by diversifying our
supply relationships and taking targeted steps
to safeguard supply, for example of crucial raw
materials; we will also uphold our country’s eco­
nomic openness and innovativeness.

Germany’s resilience and competitiveness are
based on its high level of innovativeness and
on technological and digital sovereignty. The
Federal Government will therefore provide
targeted support for science and research, as well
as for innovativeness in the business sector, and
will take measures to protect against illegitimate
interference and knowledge flows.

The state, the business and research sectors, and
society as a whole must strengthen cybersecurity
together. The Federal Government will not ac­
cept rule-breaking or aggressive conduct on the
part of cyber actors; it will modernise its cyberse­
curity architecture and strengthen its abilities to
defend against cyberattacks.

The free and unimpeded use of outer space is vi­
tal for our security. The Federal Government will


-----

Crises and disasters are successfully tackled through the cooperative efforts of various authorities and institutions.


expand its space capabilities and work to further
develop the international order in space.

###### Sustainable

_Safeguarding our natural resources_

Curbing the climate crisis and dealing with its
consequences is one of the fundamental and
most pressing tasks of this century. Global emis­
sions need to be drastically reduced. At the same
time, a global, sustainable, green and socially just
transformation presents great opportunities, as
it not only means clean energy, but also fewer


dependencies. We need climate-crisis adaptation
strategies to protect people and natural spaces.
We require equally great dynamism to overcome
the biodiversity and ecosystem crisis. In order
to counter these global crises, all states must
participate.

Hunger and malnutrition impair people’s health,
jeopardise the economic foundations of entire
societies and lead to setbacks in development
work. The Federal Government wants to
strengthen global food security via transforma­
tion to sustainable agricultural and food systems.
In doing so, we will focus in particular on disad­
vantaged and vulnerable people. In addition, we


-----

The logo represents the 17 sustainable development
goals of the 2030 Agenda for achieving socially, econom­
ically and environmentally sustainable development.
Implementing them is part of the Federal Government’s
Integrated Security approach.

are advocating more strongly for fair trade and
the removal of trade restrictions in accordance
with human-rights standards.

The global prevention of and swift reaction
to pandemics is key to guaranteeing human
security. The Federal Government is therefore
intensifying its international endeavours in this
field. In this context, it is pursuing a One Health
approach that focuses on the links between the
health of humans, animals and the environ­
ment. At the same time, we will enhance our
national resilience by ensuring our long-term
ability to provide medical care and maintain
our supply chains, training specialised experts,
improving early detection of pandemic risks
and investing in research and development with
security relevance.


###### Building Integrated
 Security together

Security is an issue of relevance to everybody in
our country; everyone shares responsibility for it
and can contribute to it. That is why the Federal
Government wants to use this National Security
Strategy to promote an ongoing process of inter­
action between all state levels, the business sector
and society, thus further developing the strategic
culture in Germany.

In pursuing this policy of Integrated Security, our
aim is to work with our allies, neighbours and
partners to foster security in Europe and around
the globe. We want to shape our future together
– in awareness of the risks, but with confidence
and with every faith in our strengths.


-----

## Germany in Europe and the world


-----

###### “To promote world peace in a united Europe”:

This objective of Germany’s foreign and security policy is stated in the preamble of the Grundgesetz
(Basic Law). On this foundation, we want to shape a free international order that respects and
upholds international law and the United Nations Charter, the sovereign equality of states and the
prohibition on the threat and use of force, as well as the right of all peoples to self-determination and
universal human rights, with a view to ensuring a sustainable future in security and freedom.


We regard security as a comprehensive concept:
as protection from war and violence, as the
freedom to live within the framework of our
free democratic order, and as safeguarding the
very resources on which our lives depend. This
requires investment and effort from society as a
whole. The Federal Government is determined
to continue creating the right conditions for this.
There is a great readiness in our country to work
together to protect everyone’s lives, freedom and
natural resources. This first National Security
Strategy of the Federal Republic of Germany is
conceived as the basis and guideline for this en­
deavour. It primarily addresses external threats,
albeit in the awareness that external and internal
security are ever harder to separate.

The Federal Government firmly believes that
we can meet the challenges of our age through
a policy of Integrated Security. By this we mean
the collaborative interaction of all relevant
actors, resources and instruments that, in
combination, can comprehensively guarantee
and strengthen the security of our country. Our
country must be wehrhaft (robust) and have the
necessary capabilities to protect and defend itself
and its allies. Our society and economy must
be resilient to ensure that we can develop and
duly exert our influence: they must be strong,


adaptable and steadfast in their core. At the same
time, we must be sustainable, in order to protect
the natural resources on which our lives depend.

###### Our security identity


Germany bears a special responsibility, within
Europe and at international level, for peace,
security, prosperity and stability, as well as for
the sustainable use of our natural resources. We
are the most populous country and the largest
economy in Europe. We act in awareness of our
history and of the guilt our country bears for
unleashing the Second World War and for per­
petrating the Shoah, that betrayal of all civilised
values. Reconciliation with our European neigh­
bours and responsibility for Israel’s right to exist
remain an enduring obligation for us.

In the early years of the Federal Republic,
our country received help without which our
present prosperity would have been impossible.
During the Cold War, hundreds of thousands
of our allies’ soldiers protected the Federal
Republic. The work of people from around the
world in our country made a considerable con­
tribution towards Germany’s economic clout,


-----

and that remains so today. These experiences
have shaped our country’s identity. That is one
of the reasons why we assume responsibility; we
are the second-largest donor nation worldwide
and play an active role in the United Nations and
other international organisations.

The transatlantic alliance and the European pro­
ject of peace and integration have brought our
country and Europe security, stability, peace and
prosperity. Initially these gifts were confined to
the Western parts of Europe and Germany, but
the people of Central and Eastern Europe went
on to gain their freedom by waging peaceful
revolutions, thereby laying the groundwork for
German reunification and for integration within
the European Union. The two are inextricably
linked. The deepening of the European Union
and the consolidation and enlargement of Eu­
ro-Atlantic structures are therefore cornerstones
of German foreign and security policy. Germany
owes its security, as well as peace at the heart of
Europe, to the United States of America and our
European neighbours.

###### Our values and interests

Our values are the bedrock on which our commu­
nity is built. Protecting and strengthening them is
the supreme task and purpose of the state.

German foreign and security policy is therefore
values-based and interest-driven. It is in our
fundamental interest to defend our values.
These are based on the inviolable dignity of each
and every individual and encompass democracy,


the rule of law and human rights, in particular
the right to life and physical integrity, freedom
of opinion, the press, assembly and religion,
equal rights for all and the right to free develop­
ment of personality.

Our security interests are shaped by our geo­
graphical location, our membership of the Eu­
ropean Union and NATO, our outward-looking
and internationally integrated social market
economy and our responsibility for our natural
resources. We set out these interests on the firm
foundation of our values:


-----

Bundeswehr recruits at their
swearing-in ceremony

»fostering prosperity and social cohesion in
our country by protecting our social market
economy;

»promoting an international order based on
international law, the United Nations Charter
and universal human rights;

»fostering peace and stability worldwide and
championing democracy, the rule of law,
human development and participation by all
population groups as a prerequisite for sustain­
able security;


» protecting the people, sovereignty and terri­

torial integrity of our country, the European
Union and our allies;

»protecting our free democratic order;


»promoting the sustainable protection of natural
resources, limiting the climate crisis and man­
aging its impacts, securing access to water and
food, as well as protecting people’s health;

»maintaining an open, rules-based international
economic and financial system with free trade
routes and a secure, sustainable supply of raw
materials and energy.


»strengthening the European Union’s ability to act
and its internal cohesion and further deepening
the profound friendship we share with France;

»consolidating the transatlantic alliance and our
close partnership based on mutual trust with
the United States of America;


-----

Joint declaration on cooperation between the EU and NATO

###### Our security environment

We live in a world undergoing profound change.
Our international and security environment is
becoming more multipolar and less stable, and
is increasingly defined by the existential threat
posed by the climate crisis.

Today’s Russia is for now the most significant
threat to peace and security in the Euro-Atlantic
area. Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine
is a blatant violation of the United Nations


Charter and of the cooperative European secu­
rity order. Its aim is to destroy the state sover­
eignty, territorial integrity, cultural identity and
political existence of a peaceful neighbour and
to give effect to an imperialistic policy of spheres
of influence. By thus wrecking the European
peaceful order, Russia is directly threatening
our security and that of our allies in NATO and
the EU. Neither Germany nor NATO seek any
rivalry or confrontation with Russia. However,
we are prepared and able at any time to defend
our sovereignty and freedom and that of our
allies. Russia is building up its conventional and


-----

nuclear forces and thereby jeopardising strategic
stability; in its war of aggression against Ukraine,
it has repeatedly made nuclear threats, including
threats directed at Europe. It is purposefully
trying to destabilise the democratic societies of
Europe, to weaken the EU and NATO, and is pur­
suing its interests on the international stage with
a policy that seeks to undermine international
law and human rights. Its energy and raw mate­
rials policies are a part of this strategy.

We are living in an era that is increasingly
multipolar and marked by rising systemic rivalry.
Like us, the overwhelming majority of states are
committed to the United Nations Charter and a
free international order based on international
law. However, as a result of their perception of
systemic rivalry, some states seek to undermine
this order and give effect to their revisionist no­
tions of spheres of influence. They view human
rights, civil liberties and democratic participation
as a threat to their power. As part of hybrid strat­
egies, they are increasingly engaging in targeted
attacks on the freedom of other states, and are
trying to interfere in political processes, public
debate and elections in those states. Germany
must effectively tackle these many different
forms of hybrid threat through increased inter­
national cooperation.

China is a partner, competitor and systemic
rival. We have observed that rivalry and compe­
tition have increased in the past years. China is
trying in various ways to remould the existing
rules-based international order, is asserting a
regionally dominant position with ever more
vigour, acting time and again counter to our
interests and values. Regional stability and


international security are being put under
increasing pressure and human rights are being
disregarded. China makes deliberate use of its
economic clout to achieve political goals. At the
same time, China remains a partner without
whom many global challenges and crises cannot
be resolved. That is why we must grasp the op­
tions and opportunities for cooperation in these
fields in particular.

Wars, crises and conflicts in Europe’s neigh­
bourhood also have an impact on the security of
Germany and Europe. Conflicts are ongoing, and
in some cases have been for years, in places such
as Syria and Iraq, Libya, the Horn of Africa and
the Sahel. Fragile states thus become the cradle
and safe haven for violent non-state actors,
including extremists, who pose a direct threat
to these states and their neighbours. Internal
conflicts spill over into other states and desta­
bilise entire regions, but indirectly affect us, too.
At the same time, external actors increasingly
utilise any growing instability and fragility to
consolidate their own power and to extend
their spheres of influence. In global terms, the
Indo-Pacific, too, remains of special significance
to Germany and Europe.

Our open and free society is a target of terrorism
and extremism. The threat of attacks remains
high. This risk is becoming greater due to rad­
icalisation and experienced fighters returning
from crisis zones and conflict areas. Although
there have been major successes when it comes
to combatting terrorist organisations and ex­
tremist groups, these groups continue to exist
and are increasingly forming international net­
works. This is true with regard to their financing,


-----

the recruiting of supporters and the preparation
of crimes, for example, and makes combating
them ever more complicated. Furthermore,
these international networks make it easier
for individuals to become radicalised through
contacts, including in the digital sphere. Acts of
terror committed by individual perpetrators are
another increasing challenge. In addition, new
forms of extremism have arisen that risk divid­
ing our society and tipping into violence. They
are aimed at undermining and delegitimising
democratic decision-making processes and state
institutions. They often resort to conspiracy
ideologies, some of them antisemitic. These
anti-democratic forms of extremism also jeop­
ardise our security.

The erosion of the arms control, disarmament
and non-proliferation architecture has negatively
impacted the security situation in Europe and
worldwide; Russia’s actions have played a major
role in this regard. In addition, the risks of on­
going nuclear proliferation remain. North Korea
is steadily expanding its nuclear and missile tech­
nology programme and is a threat to regional se­
curity. Iran is not only violating the human rights
of its own citizens but also continues to pursue
its nuclear ambitions, producing ever more
highly enriched fissile material, and has blocked
efforts to revive the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action of 2015. In addition, Iran’s missile pro­
gramme and its regional policy actions are fuel­
ling escalation and may give rise to new regional
proliferation momentum.

Chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
threats pose a risk that should not be neglected –
from the wilful damaging of chemical or nuclear


facilities in Europe to the targeted deployment
of non-conventional weapons by state or nonstate actors.

International economic and financial relations
are also ever more informed by considerations of
power and influence. Many trade agreements are
now fairer than they used to be. However, some
states are increasingly putting the principles of
free economic cooperation at risk and use their
economic clout to advance their foreign and
security policy agendas. International economic
and financial institutions are more frequently
an arena in which political power struggles are
fought, and are often the target of such manoeu­
vres. The establishment of new, parallel institu­
tions with divergent rules is designed to wilfully
circumvent existing organisations. Such actions
are intended to erode the international rules for
open and fair markets and undermine a stable
financial system. A further complication is the
fact that many states do not have the structures
needed to combat corruption, tax evasion and
economic and financial crime effectively.

The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the
Russian war of aggression against Ukraine have
likewise shown that economic dependencies in
critical areas can quickly evolve into significant
security risks. This is particularly true with
respect to goods such as semiconductors and
medical products, as well as critical raw materials
in our industrial value chains, but it also applies
to the pursuit of new energy sources and the
transition to renewable energy.

The intensified international competition with re­
gard to technology can give rise to security risks if


-----

Furthermore, in cyberspace there are no geo­
graphical limits to crime, terrorism, espionage or
sabotage; the potential damage is immense, and
can only be ascribed to specific actors with con­
siderable difficulty. In particular, ransomware at­
tacks have become a serious threat to companies,
public institutions and critical infrastructure.

Foreign intelligence services and other actors
continue to invest considerable human resources
and sums of money in order to spy in Germany,
which also generates risks in terms of subversion
and sabotage. Espionage and attacks against pol­
iticians, the administration and the Bundeswehr,
the economy, infrastructure and research are
aimed at gathering information by both analogue
and digital means.

Serious and organised crime poses a threat to al­
most all countries in the world. The perpetrators
work through international networks, encrypt
their communications and use cutting-edge
technologies to look for new, profitable areas
of activity. They increasingly resort to extreme
violence. In Germany, too, internationally active
criminal groups, including those with clan struc­
tures, harm people and inflict suffering. They
cause economic damage worth billions of euros,
for example by moving illegally gained assets
into the legal economy. They are also increas­
ingly attempting to subvert our state structures
and economic structures.

Illegal financial flows deprive states around the
world of billions of euros, thus contributing to
the destabilisation of the social order.


Germany highly values its exchange with G7 partners
on current global challenges.

the free access to certain technologies is no longer
guaranteed and one-sided dependencies arise.

Critical infrastructure is absolutely essential and
is increasingly the target of serious threats and
interference. The maritime dimension, above
and underwater, is particularly important with
respect to Germany’s security of supply and eco­
nomic security.

The extent, frequency and scope of cyberattacks
are increasing. This shows that security risks and
international conflicts can also originate in the
digital sphere. Ever more frequently, cyberattacks
seek to destabilise our government and society,
or our partners’ governments and societies.


-----

One of the fundamental challenges of this
century is the climate crisis, which has been
caused by human activity: increasing droughts,
rising sea levels, altered precipitation patterns,
the loss of biodiversity and the depletion of nat­
ural resources all threaten people’s livelihoods
and the very foundations of our economies.
Climate-induced extreme weather events with
devastating consequences are happening with
greater frequency and intensity, also in Germany.
This places critical infrastructure under addi­
tional pressure. In many regions of the world, the
climate crisis is fuelling conflict, contributing to
hunger and other humanitarian emergencies.
The climate crisis also exacerbates existing
inequalities. It already has security ramifications
today. Human security also depends on how we


deal with this existential threat to vital resources.
We cannot, however, completely eliminate these
impacts; the best we can do is limit them. At the
same time, a sustainable, green and socially just
transformation presents great opportunities, for
it not only means clean energy and a secure food
supply but also fewer dependencies.

Poverty and hunger, war and conflict, the im­
pacts of the climate crisis and the destruction of
natural habitats pose a constant threat to people
in developing and newly industrialised countries
in particular. Insecurity, social hardship, fears
for the future, and a lack of options for personal
development undermine many people’s faith in
their governments. Weakened governments and
states are only able to a limited degree to provide


-----

Plenary debate on the Zeitenwende
in the German Bundestag on
27 February 2022

public services and resolve conflicts. Inequality is
a key driver of conflict.

Various factors can result in flows of refugees
and migrants as people are displaced by crises. Ir­
regular and involuntary migration, as well as mi­
gration instrumentalisation, often put migrants’
lives in danger. Furthermore, large movements
of refugees and migrants can jeopardise state
security and social cohesion in transit states and
countries of destination. In contrast, regulated
immigration enriches Germany; indeed our
country is reliant on it, not least because of de­
mographic trends.


-----

## Integrated Security for Germany


-----

###### Wehrhaft (robust) – resilient – sustainable

We need a comprehensive approach to address the range of challenges and threats facing us. Security
policy is more than the sum of diplomatic and military means; it must integrate our actions across all
policy fields. The Federal Government will therefore pursue a policy of Integrated Security.


We want our security policy to be defined
broadly and to focus on the individual. Enhanc­
ing the security of the individual and guaran­
teeing their democratic rights and freedoms
also enhances the stability of the state and of
society. In keeping with a feminist foreign and
development policy, we are championing the
rights, resources and representation of women
and marginalised groups.

We will include the projects described in this
Security Strategy in the relevant ministerial
budgets within the federal budget by means of
prioritisation, should funds not already have
been allocated to them. Given the considerable
demands on our public finances at present, we
will strive to implement this Strategy at no addi­
tional cost to the overall federal budget.


To the extent that the competences of the
Länder are affected in this Security Strategy, the
Federal Government will uphold the existing
rights of participation and consultation when
implementing it.

When defending our values and asserting
our interests, we must face up to conflicts of
aims, which require political deliberation and
decision-making. The Federal Government will
tackle such conflicts openly and discuss them in
a transparent way.


-----

**_Integrated Security for Germany_**

_Integrated Security means bringing together_
_all issues and instruments that are relevant_
_to protecting ourselves from external threats._

_Security in this sense is an integral part of_
_all policy areas and a goal common to them_
_all. If the security situation deteriorates, each_
_and every policy field is affected. Likewise,_
_each policy field can play a part in improv­_
_ing the security of our country. Integrated_
_Security is thus more than coordination, co­_
_operation and connectivity. By purposefully_
_interlinking various policy fields in depth,_
_it frames answers to complex threats and_
_identifies the suitable instrument in each_
_instance._

_Integrated Security must be effective, both_
_within Germany and externally. Because_
_internal and external security are interde­_
_pendent, we can only protect ourselves from_
_external threats if we are steadfast in our_
_core and ready to defend ourselves. That is_
_why strengthening the resilience of our state,_
_our economy and our society, as well as the_
_protection of our natural resources, are of_
_central importance._

_Integrated Security combines preventative_
_action with intervention and follow-up_
_measures. Already today, it seeks to address_
_medium to long-term challenges._

_By pursuing this policy of Integrated Secu­_
_rity, we want to work with our neighbours,_
_partners and allies to contribute even more_
_than before to security in Europe and around_
_the globe. We want to join forces with them_
_to actively shape our future._


###### Wehrhaft (robust):
 Defending peace and freedom

_National and collective defence:_
_protecting ourselves and our allies_

The Federal Government and the German
Bundestag are drawing the necessary conclu­
sions from the dramatically changed security
situation and, as a first step, have paved the way
to significantly strengthening the Bundeswehr’s
capability for defence and collective defence
with a special fund. In this context, the Federal
Government is focusing in particular on NATO’s
capability targets and on bridging capability gaps
quickly. We will eliminate the structural deficits
that impede this goal.

The paramount task of German security
policy is to ensure that we can continue
to live in our country at the heart of
Europe in peace, freedom and security.
Germany’s security is indivisible from
that of its allies and European partners.
Collective and national defence are one
and the same. The Federal Government
will resolutely resist any military
aggression or attempts at intimidation
aimed at us or our allies. The Bundeswehr
remains the guarantor of Germany’s
deterrence and defence capability. The
Bundeswehr is a parliamentary army.


-----

The Bundeswehr’s Puma infantry fighting vehicle and Leopard battle tank

Credible deterrence and defence capability
in the transatlantic alliance of NATO is the
indispensable foundation of German, European
and transatlantic security. NATO is the primary
guarantor of protection against military threats.
It links Europe and North America politically. The
purpose of the Alliance is to protect the people in
its territory and to defend our security, our values
and our democratic way of life. We stand reso­
lutely by our mutual defence pledge under Article
5 of the North Atlantic Treaty. Our commitment
to NATO and to our obligations within the Alli­
ance is unshakeable, as is our commitment to the
EU’s mutual assistance clause in Article 42 (7) of
the Treaty on European Union and our mutual
assistance commitment with France under Arti­
cle 4 of the Treaty of Aachen.

The Federal Government wants to fur­
ther strengthen the European pillar of the


transatlantic defence community. The more our
European allies contribute militarily and polit­
ically to NATO, the more solid the transatlantic
Alliance will be. Europe’s ability to act on its own
is increasingly a prerequisite for German and Eu­
ropean security. This ability to act entails modern,
capable armed forces in the EU member states, as
well as a high-performance and internationally
competitive European security and defence in­
dustry that creates the foundations for the armed
forces’ military capabilities. Joint arms projects
and their exportability in accordance with the
benchmarks set out in the future arms-export
control law play a part in furthering Europe’s
ability to act and thus strengthen the European
pillar in NATO.

Effective defence includes credible deterrence
aimed at preventing an armed conflict from aris­
ing in the first place. In the transatlantic Alliance,


-----

we need to be able and determined to counter all
military threats, be they nuclear or conventional,
but also to provide cyber defence and to deal with
threats to our space systems. As long as nuclear
weapons exist, maintaining credible nuclear de­
terrence is essential for NATO and for European
security. Germany will continue to do its part in
nuclear sharing and will constantly provide the
dual-capable aircraft this requires. The purpose of
NATO’s nuclear deterrence is to preserve peace,
to deter aggression and to prevent nuclear coer­
cion. We will counter the increased nuclear risks
with credible nuclear deterrence, as well as by en­
deavouring to reduce such risks and by support­
ing negotiations on nuclear arms control, disar­
mament and non-proliferation. Any employment
of nuclear weapons would fundamentally alter
the nature of a conflict. The Federal Government
shares the view that a nuclear war cannot be won
and must therefore never be fought.

We are strengthening the Bundeswehr as a cor­
nerstone of conventional defence in Europe We
will therefore make targeted efforts to expand
our military presence in Allied territory and place
it on a more permanent basis, all in accordance
with the planning of the Alliance. We will also
continue to meet our responsibilities as a logis­
tical hub at the heart of the Alliance. The Federal
Government will thus focus on expanding
national capabilities in logistical support, health­
care, traffic routing and protecting all allies while
they are in Germany. Furthermore, together with
the Länder we want to establish the necessary
infrastructure and legal framework, and firmly
support initiatives in the EU and NATO aimed at
fostering military mobility.


Furthermore, the Federal Government will strive
to strengthen European air-defence capabilities
within the NATO framework.

Allied defence also encompasses cyberspace
and space. Attacks in or from these dimensions
can have the magnitude and impact of an
armed conflict and thus necessitate collective
action. The Federal Government will promote
the development and introduction of highly
advanced capabilities. By defining guidelines for
the responsible use of new technologies, we will
ensure that ethical and legal standards are upheld
and continue our endeavours to achieve this at
international level, too.

»National and collective defence is the core task
of the Bundeswehr, with all other tasks subor­
dinate to this task. The Federal Government will
maintain the military capabilities required for
this task and bridge capability gaps quickly.


-----

NATO’s Baltic Air Policing mission

to reaching NATO capability goals, initially in
part via the newly created special fund for the
Bundeswehr.


»A strong Bundeswehr, effective diplomacy and
dedicated development cooperation in various
forms are equally vital for our security. The
inclusive approach in Germany’s international
engagement laid down in the coalition agree­
ment serves as an important guiding principle
for the Federal Government. Accordingly, the
Federal Government will boost investments
in areas including critical infrastructure pro­
tection, cyber capabilities, effective diplomacy,
resilient disaster prevention and relief, stabi­
lising our partners and engaged humanitarian
assistance and development cooperation, and
where necessary – also as part of an integrated
approach – further develop these fields.

»While meeting NATO’s planning targets, the
Federal Government will make the Bundeswehr
one of the most effective conventional armed
forces in Europe in the coming years, one that is
able to respond and act rapidly at all times.

»The Federal Government will further expand
its military presence in Allied territory for the
protection of our NATO allies and will place this
presence on a more permanent basis, also so
that Germany can act as a framework nation for
our fellow allies.

»The Federal Government is endeavouring to
improve the parameters for the security and
defence industry and will enable govern­
ment-to-government sales.


»The Federal Government is committed to
strengthening NATO and implementing all
elements of the Alliance’s Strategic Concept of
June 2022, including human security.

»The Federal Government strives to strengthen
Europe’s defence capabilities and ability to act
in complementarity with NATO. The German
security and defence industry’s competitiveness
and ability to engage in cooperation within
the EU and in Europe is crucial and must be
improved. To this end, the Federal Government
will update its strategy paper on the security
and defence industry.

»Integrated Security requires investments in
our future. In view of the dramatically changed
security situation, we must prioritise invest­
ments in our robustness and in our defensive
capabilities. We will allocate two percent of our
GDP, as an average over a multi-year period,


-----

The Bundeswehr
supported clean-up
efforts after the
devastating floods in the
Ahr valley.

The high level of interdependence
between external and internal security
means that Germany’s ability to act
externally also increasingly depends on
its internal resilience. This resilience is
the joint responsibility of the state, the
private sector and society. In order to
protect our population more compre­
hensively against disasters and crises, we
need an approach that encompasses soci­
ety as a whole. The Federal Government,
the Länder, the municipalities, the private
sector and civil society organisations, but
also each and every individual, can and
should play a role in this.


»The Federal Government will expand its cyber
and space capabilities, as well as its space
situational awareness capabilities, so that these
capabilities can play a major role in collective
deterrence and defence in NATO.

»The Federal Government will promote the
development and introduction of highly
advanced capabilities, such as precision deepstrike weapons.

**Civil preparedness, civil protection, and**
**disaster prevention and relief**

Our civil preparedness is being fundamentally
reviewed and enhanced as part of our overall
defence in order to develop the resilience needed


-----

should a conflict arise. By strengthening civil
preparedness, the Federal Government will ensure
that state and government functions are main­
tained, the population is protected and supplied
with essential goods and services, and the armed
forces are provided with both civil and logistical
support. In this way, Germany will meet its com­
mitment under Article 3 of the North Atlantic
Treaty to constantly increase its resilience.

Citizens who are willing to play their part in this
respect are the very foundation of our robustness.
To this end, we need to be able to count on a
reliable network of actors and resources, including
well-trained security authorities, non-police
emergency-response organisations, resilient
structures in the voluntary sector, wide-ranging
engagement by volunteers, a vigorous economy
and a strong security-research sector. The rules on
releasing volunteers from their regular employ­
ment and on the parameters for voluntary work
need to be simplified, while voluntary work must
be more highly valued. Neighbourhoods and com­
munities that demonstrate solidarity also play an
important role in protecting our state and society.

In view of an increasingly complex and wide
spectrum of threats, civil protection is of funda­
mental importance for human security and our
communities’ resilience. The Federal Government
will strengthen civil protection across the board
by way of cooperative federalism. Particularly
where threats are especially severe or involve
more than one Land, efficient cooperation be­
tween the federal level and the Länder will ensure
better support for affected Länder and regions,
including in the response to acute threats. The
newly created Joint Centre of Excellence on Civil


Protection in the Federal Office of Civil Protection
and Disaster Assistance will improve the standard
of cooperation between the federal level and the
Länder as regards preparing for and responding
to crises. In addition to advising and guiding
crisis-management efforts at the federal level and
the Länder, this Centre of Excellence will set up
comprehensive resource management and pro­
vide joint situation reports on civil protection.

Protecting critical infrastructure, including sys­
tematically significant companies, is of crucial im­
portance for the security of our lives and freedom.
Redundancies in the form of additional systems
play an important role here. Overall, efforts are
needed from society as a whole in order to protect
critical infrastructure.

The strengthening of European cooperation
on disaster prevention and relief demonstrates
European solidarity and is an investment in effec­
tiveness and efficiency.

» In compliance with the principles of subsidi­

arity and proportionality, the Federal Govern­
ment will make the Länder more resilient to
crises and disasters so that they in turn can
strengthen the resilience of towns and munici­
palities. This also applies to city centres, residen­
tial districts and infrastructure, in line with the
guiding principles of the New Leipzig Charter
on Sustainable European Cities.

» The Federal Government will fully implement

its Strategy for Strengthening Resilience to
Disasters so that people and their livelihoods
are better protected against disasters. Accord­
ingly, we will expand the structured resilience


-----

dialogue between the federal level, the Länder
and the municipalities and include stakeholders
from the private sector and civil society in it.

» The Federal Government will actively include the

population and the private sector in strength­
ening resilience to disasters and crisis situations
in society as a whole and will do more to join up
endeavours to this end. It will raise awareness of
and sensitivity to resilience and provide informa­
tion on practical prevention and possible courses
of action. It is the aim of the Federal Government
to further develop the design of the crisis-man­
agement exercises (LÜKEX), which encompass
various Länder and ministries.

» The Federal Government will redraft the

Framework Guidelines for Overall Defence, in
part to implement NATO’s baseline require­
ments for national resilience.

» Furthermore, the Federal Government will

review legislation on maintaining services and
supplies in emergency situations, and if neces­
sary, amend it or present legislative proposals.

» By drawing up an act on health security, the

Federal Government will ensure in particular
that there are efficient and decentralised stocks
of medicinal products and devices, and that
medical staff conduct regular emergency exer­
cises on health crises.

» In order to maintain the effectiveness of pub­

lic authorities and organisations tasked with
security work, as well as that of the non-police
emergency-response services, suitable equip­
ment must be procured.


» The national reserves for food, the healthcare

sector and human care will be reviewed and,
where necessary, further expanded to enable a
better response in emergency situations. Reg­
ular reviews will also be conducted of what is
needed to maintain a precautionary approach
to, and the security of, the energy supply, with
adjustments being made as necessary.

» In order to be better prepared to deal with chem­

ical, biological, radiological or nuclear threats
(CBRN), the Federal Government will expand
its CBRN protection capabilities, draw up emer­
gency plans and conduct emergency exercises.

» In an umbrella law on critical infrastructure,

the aim of the Federal Government is to estab­
lish a comprehensive legal framework that will
make critical infrastructure more resilient and
improve cooperation between the federal and
Land levels and with the private sector. This
will include a specific evaluation of the security
risks that the climate crisis poses to Germany.

» The Federal Government will further the

research on civil security which helps to success­
fully prevent, respond to and overcome crises.

» At EU level, the Federal Government will seek

to further develop the EU Civil Protection
Mechanism and the European reserve rescEU.
We will endeavour to expand transnational
exercises and to develop European standards for
the EU-wide exchange of information before,
during and after crises and for the training of
civilian personnel. In addition, we will take
issues involving cross-border links with our
European neighbours’ critical infrastructure
into account to a greater extent.


-----

The meeting room
of the European
Council in Brussels

Peace, freedom and prosperity in Europe
are crucial to German security. In order
to be able to continue providing joint
European responses to the dramatically
changed security situation, we need to
further develop the European Union
in a way that enables it to preserve its
security and independence effectively for
future generations in the face of external
challenges.


_Strengthening the European peace project_

The Federal Government supports the goal of a
united European Union that is capable of acting
globally and uses its influence to shape the
rules-based international order. In this context,
our strength also derives from the stability of
our democracies, the strength of our internal
market, efficient social services and reliable
public infrastructure.

Particularly in view of the significantly dete­
riorated security environment, the European


-----

Union needs to be able to protect its security and
stability. To this end, we want to further develop
the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP)
with our European partners and resolutely carry
out the Strategic Compass projects.

Greater endeavours to stabilise our neighbour­
hood are a part of this. The European Union and
its wide-ranging instruments play a central role
here. This includes the prospect of EU accession
for all European countries that are committed
to EU values. In order to prepare the EU for this
enlargement and to ensure its continued ability to
act with over 30 member states, reforms within the
European Union are essential. Our goal remains a
Europe united in peace and freedom and open to
all European countries who share our values.

By supporting Ukraine, we are strengthening
its resilience against Russian aggression, while
making a fundamental contribution to our
own security. We stand by a free, independent
and democratic Ukraine in its internationally
recognised borders. At the same time, it is vital to
prevent the war from spreading to neighbouring
countries. We will support EU and non-EU coun­
tries that are affected by the war.

The Federal Government is determined to
further strengthen the European security and
defence industrial base. This includes protecting
key technologies at national and European level.
The Federal Government is endeavouring to
harmonise military capability requirements with
its partners and allies. In terms of procurement,
it will focus primarily on European solutions if
this can be achieved without losing capabilities.
Rapidly bridging capability gaps remains the
crucial criterion.


The Federal Government supports a targeted
and flexible use of EU sanctions and ensures that
sanctions are implemented effectively at national
level. International cooperation, particularly
among the G7 countries, increases the effective­
ness and efficiency of sanctions measures and
thus plays a part in ensuring adherence to inter­
national standards. The Federal Government will
do more to protect itself against sanctions and
coercive economic measures targeted at us and
our EU partners; to this end, it supports the fur­
ther development of instruments of a deterrent
nature at EU level.

As regards countering external terrorist and
extremist threats, the EU also plays a crucial role
for Germany’s security. The Federal Government
will intensify this cooperation, as well as collab­
oration via Europol and Eurojust, to ensure the
security of people in our countries. Identifying
threats at an early stage and combating trans­
national terrorism effectively requires close na­
tional, international, European and transatlantic
cooperation using political, legal, intelligence,
police and military means. To this end, effective
skills and international coordination are needed
to investigate transnational terrorist structures
and their financial flows, including cryptocurren­
cies. In addition to countering threats, it is vital
to address the ideological, societal and socioeco­
nomic causes of radicalisation and terrorism.

Irregular and involuntary migration, as well
as migration instrumentalisation can only be
dealt with effectively through joint, coordinated
action by national and European partners. The
European Border and Coast Guard Agency plays
an important role here and is supported by
Germany. It is particularly important to further


-----

develop the border police’s pre-border activities
strategy and the fight against organised people
smuggling systematically. Protecting our joint
EU external borders effectively enables the
preservation of our common area of freedom,
security and justice. In this context, the Com­
mon European Asylum System (CEAS) is of
great significance.

The profound friendship with France is of par­
ticular importance to Germany. We are aware
of our joint responsibility to further the EU’s
integration and ability to act at international
level. We are united with France by a profound
friendship, which arose through the overcoming
of historical perceptions of enmity and is also
expressed in terms of security policy in the mu­
tual assistance commitment under Article 4 of
the Treaty of Aachen and in our cooperation on
major arms projects.

Human security on the European continent can
only be achieved if human rights, the rule of
law and democracy are guaranteed effectively.
Adherence to the European treaties, particu­
larly as regards the rule of law, is a prerequisite
for this. The Federal Government strives to
ensure that implementation of the treaties is
closely monitored.

The Federal Government supports the Council
of Europe, which laid the foundations for
peaceful coexistence in Europe on the basis of
shared principles and monitors adherence to
them. The Organization for Security and Co-op­
eration in Europe (OSCE) continues to serve as
an important platform for further developing
Integrated Security in Europe. That is why we
support the OSCE and its institutions as actors


that preserve democracy and human rights. We
welcome the European Political Community
as an informal forum for political exchange
on peaceful cooperation on the European
continent that sends a clear message against the
return of imperialism to Europe.

»In order to increase the EU’s ability to act and
resilience at international level, the Federal
Government will work on further integration
of the European Union and strengthening of its
cohesion. Where necessary and jointly defined,
we are also willing to amend the European
treaties.

»The Federal Government actively supports the
gradual shift towards and greater use of major­
ity voting in the CFSP. The Federal Government
also wants to make use of greater cooperation
between individual member states under Arti­
cle 44 of the Treaty on European Union, if this
facilitates European action.

»The Federal Government supports enlarging
the European Union to include the countries of
the Western Balkans, as well as Ukraine, Mol­
dova and, at a later stage, Georgia.

»The Federal Government is committed to the
further development of Permanent Structured
Cooperation (PESCO). In order to achieve the
EU’s security goals, the Federal Government
wants to strengthen European instruments
such as the European Peace Facility.

»The Federal Government will help to make the
political instrument of sanctions even more
effective under the CFSP. Capabilities for the
strategic use of sanctions – including the ability


-----

_International crisis engagement: taking on_
_responsibility, taking preventive action_

Our security is linked to the security and
stability of other regions in the world. It thus
remains in Germany’s and Europe’s interest to
continue making substantial contributions to
international crisis management. We will fur­
ther develop the Federal Government’s current
networked approach into an Integrated Security
policy. To this end, we will strengthen, expand
and combine our political, diplomatic, devel­
opment-cooperation, military, police and civil
instruments in the field of international crisis
engagement. We intend to continue enhancing
successful instruments such as building up
partners’ military capabilities to enable them to
take on responsibility for their own security. In­
tegrated peace engagement combines all relevant
capabilities, incorporates measures into interna­
tional and multilateral efforts, and embeds this
engagement in our political actions.

The Federal Government is committed to
the primacy of preventing crises. We will
increasingly pursue our crisis engagement
via civilian and military missions and op­
erations under the EU Common Security
and Defence Policy. Our instruments for
crisis prevention, conflict management
and peacebuilding will serve coherent
and realistic objectives. They combine
civilian, police and military capabilities,
with the Bundeswehr continuing to play
an important role.


to analyse their potential impact – need to be
improved both at national and EU level.

»The security union must be expanded along­
side other EU integration steps and sufficient
resources must be allocated to the EU justice
and security agencies.

»Cooperation between the security authorities
at European and international level plays a key
role in combating serious and organised crime.
These and other measures will be furthered in
the Strategy on Combating Serious and Organ­
ised Crime.

»The Federal Government seeks the further
development of Europol into a European police
office with its own operational capabilities.

»The Federal Government continues to advo­
cate reform of the Common European Asylum
System (CEAS).


-----

German civilian personnel and police staff are deployed as part of the EUCAP Sahel Niger mission in support of the Niger’s
security forces that are engaged in the fight against drug, weapon and human trafficking.


At all stages of a conflict, the Federal Govern­
ment aspires to promote political processes
leading to resolution and to create incentives
for rapprochement and reconciliation with the
help of our instruments. Our main focus here
is on prevention, which we seek to achieve by
addressing the structural causes of conflicts and
strengthening peacebuilding actors. The Federal
Government takes on responsibility for interna­
tional crisis engagement under the auspices of
its alliances and international organisations.

»The Bundeswehr will continue to play a key
role in international crisis management in
the future. Armed Bundeswehr missions
abroad are always conducted in accordance
with international law, the Grundgesetz (Basic
Law) and the respective legal requirements.
The Federal Government will take on special
responsibility for establishing the EU Rapid
Deployment Capacity.


»The Federal Government will continue to sup­
port the United Nations in its task of fostering
international peace and security and countering
the causes of conflicts. We will endeavour to
ensure that United Nations peace missions
have a clear political mandate and receive the
resources they need. To this end, we will con­
tinue to play our part, including in the form of
military participation in UN peace missions.

»Deadlock in the UN Security Council impedes
peace and security. The Federal Government
thus supports discussions on peace and security
issues at the UN General Assembly in the spirit
of “Uniting for Peace”.

»The Federal Government is committed to its guide­

lines on crisis prevention, conflict management and
peacebuilding. With our values serving as a guiding
principle, we will base decisions on our inter­
national crisis engagement on strategic interests.


-----

»The Federal Government will further intensify
its engagement in an integrated approach that
combines international crisis prevention, stabi­
lisation, peacebuilding, humanitarian assistance
and development cooperation. These measures
will take climate needs into account and put
the focus on protecting the individual. In line
with our feminist foreign and development
policy, we will take the interests of women and
disadvantaged groups particularly into account
when drawing up integrated peace-engage­
ment measures.

»The Federal Government advocates greater
use of science-based approaches in early crisis
detection, strategic foresight, crisis prevention,
stabilisation and peacekeeping.

»In order to prevent and cushion the impact of
famines and food crises on a long-term basis, the
Federal Government supports the sustainable
transformation of the food systems – together
with the Food and Agriculture Organizations of
the United Nations in Rome (FAO, WFP, IFAD
and CFS) and with the involvement of all rele­
vant stakeholders in the food sphere.

»The Federal Government will further
strengthen the Federal Agency for Technical
Relief in order to be able to deploy it worldwide
in disaster relief and in setting up and further
developing civil preparedness and disaster
relief. The Agency is to be actively included in
EU and UN relief mechanisms.

»The Federal Government will also further the
expansion of targeted migration partnerships
and collaborations between the EU and global
partners. Alongside these partners, our aim is


to improve opportunities for regular migration
and to promote local integration for those
seeking protection, while preventing irregular
flows of refugees and migrants. To this end, the
Federal Government aims to conclude bilateral
migration and repatriation agreements with the
main countries of origin.

»In order to be able to offer better and long-term
options, the Federal Government will expand
its global partnerships in a targeted way. Its goal
here is fair, respectful and long-term coopera­
tion between sovereign and equal partners. It
also systematically includes this approach in
talks in the EU and G7.

»By providing partners with both civil and
military programmes, including via the Enable
& Enhance Initiative, the Federal Government’s
aim is to help them to consolidate their own
civil instruments and military capabilities for
conflict resolution.

»In order to also strengthen even further the
important role of the police in international
endeavours in civil crisis prevention and civil
crisis management, we are expanding our
engagement with police officers specially
trained for missions abroad. Our aim is to have
a higher number of qualified officers at our
disposal and to create additional incentives to
further increase our participation in interna­
tional missions.


-----

By promoting vocational education and training for women, Germany is strengthening social resilience in partner countries.

_Development policy as sustainable_
_security policy_


Based on cooperation, our development policy
supports partners to enable them to address
poverty, hunger, conflicts and the impact of
the climate crisis in a better way. It focuses on
prevention by playing a part in establishing and
strengthening autonomous conflict-management
structures. Furthermore, it strengthens democ­
racy, support for which also depends on the
extent to which it promotes prosperity, security,
the rule of law and participation for large parts of
the population. Accordingly, we provide targeted
support for the provision of public services, the
establishment and expansion of social security
systems around the world, the fight against cor­
ruption, freedom of the press and opinion,


By furthering human development and
security, development policy plays a
crucial role in an Integrated Security
policy. We are creating new networks and
alliances with our development-policy
engagement aimed at achieving the goals
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Devel­
opment. Development policy strengthens
multilateral cooperation by formulating
a positive and integrative ownership
approach. The Federal Government will
base its development policy to an even
greater extent on its strategic goals.


-----

_Preserving and further developing the global_
_arms-control architecture_

The Federal Government supports strategic risk
reduction and the fostering of predictability, as
well as the maintenance of reliable political and
military channels of communication in relations
between NATO and Russia. We remain open to
reciprocal transparency measures where the
prerequisites for them exist. We strive to foster
the practical instruments of arms control and
military confidence-building under the auspices
of the OSCE.

The military use of new technologies poses
additional challenges to traditional arms control.
Complementary arms control must also address
these challenges, but without preventing tech­
nical progress. That is why we are endeavouring
to develop new behavioural approaches to arms
control. In this context, we are working closely
with researchers and civil society in line with the
concept of Integrated Security.

In view of the increased proliferation risks, the
Federal Government will further intensify its
work on nuclear non-proliferation on the basis

Preserving and further developing the
global arms-control architecture, re­
ducing risks and preventing escalation
continue to be of great importance to the
Federal Government. Effective and verifi­
able arms control, non-proliferation and
disarmament help to foster our security
and complement deterrence and defence.


the development of democratic security struc­
tures and good governance. We will expand our
programmes aimed at strengthening civil society,
as civil society is a key element in achieving social
and political participation. Our feminist develop­
ment policy takes the rights of women as well as
vulnerable and disadvantaged groups particularly
into account. Our development policy thus
strengthens individual and societal resilience and
creates trust, primarily between people, but also
within and between societies and countries.

Furthermore, our development policy plays a
part in ensuring security of supply in Germany
while fostering sustainable development in
our partner countries. To this end, the Federal
Government will work with its partners to foster
greater use of alternative and sustainable sources
of strategic raw materials that respect human
rights. We will also work at international level to
ensure the implementation of human rights due
diligence, as well as adherence to sustainability
standards in global supply and value chains.

»The Federal Government will deepen its coop­
eration with all countries that support a free
international order based on the United Nations
Charter and international law, and augment
its endeavours to fight poverty, hunger, social
inequality and the climate crisis.

»In countries whose government is undermining
security and the rule of law, the Federal Gov­
ernment is focusing its cooperation to a greater
extent on the non-state and local levels, as well
as on multilateral approaches, while strength­
ening partner governments that are committed
to democratic principles.


-----

of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. Our goal remains
a safe world free of nuclear weapons. To this end,
the prerequisites for disarmament steps must
be created, particularly in the framework of the
Non-Proliferation Treaty, but also in dialogue
with the signatories to the Treaty on the Prohibi­
tion of Nuclear Weapons.

As regards the control of arms exports, the Fed­
eral Government will continue to adhere to its
restrictive baseline policy and set benchmarks
in an arms-export control law. Human rights,
democracy and the rule of law in a recipient
country will be taken into account in particular
in decisions on arms exports. At the same time, a
responsible arms-export policy takes into account
our alliance and security interests, geostrategic
challenges, support for partners facing direct
threats, and the requirements of enhanced Euro­
pean arms cooperation.

We support the harmonisation of arms-con­
trol decisions at European level and want to
strengthen and deepen cooperation in the arms
sector in the EU.

»The Federal Government remains committed to
nuclear arms control and reciprocal and verifia­
ble disarmament. We call on all nuclear powers
to participate in international strategic and
sub-strategic arms-control efforts. The Federal
Government will therefore maintain its engage­
ment at multilateral level to ensure concrete,
verifiable steps.

»The Federal Government will increase its
endeavours to contain chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear risks, in particular as


regards the monitoring regimes of the relevant
organisations and conventions and the safety of
nuclear plants, high-security biological labora­
tories and critical chemical infrastructure.

»The Federal Government will expand its
engagement in the field of humanitarian arms
control. Our goal is to protect people more
effectively against the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas; we are also promoting initia­
tives to curb the risk of the proliferation of small
arms, light weapons and ammunition.

»The Federal Government supports a ban on
lethal autonomous weapon systems that are not
under any human control. It is also striving to
achieve the universalisation of existing bans on
indiscriminate weapons.

»The Federal Government actively supports the
further development of the international export
control regime. In part to be able to provide
better support to vulnerable countries in their
right to self-defence, we want to see greater
harmonisation of European arms-export con­
trol. We thus support the plan to develop an EU
regulation on arms exports.


-----

###### Resilient:
 Safeguarding our values through inner strength

_Protecting and strengthening our democracy_

One of the greatest achievements of our
pluralistic democracy is the protection and the
mutual acknowledgement of diverse, sometimes
contradictory convictions and opinions.

In open and democratic societies, confidence
in societal institutions must constantly be won
afresh. That also protects these societies from
illegitimate interference from both inside and
out. In line with the principle of Integrated
Security, we need to work throughout society to
strengthen our competence in countering open
and hidden attacks on our democratic values,
also in the European Union. At the same time,
we have to counter attacks on the integrity of
democratic opinion-forming processes and the
systematic undermining of our open societies
and liberal democracies.

Our free democratic order is the founda­
tion and the guarantee of our free, open
and diverse society. We defend this basic
order against espionage, sabotage and
illegitimate foreign interference as well
as against disinformation and all forms
of extremism, thereby fostering public
confidence in a robust democracy.


Identifying targeted dissemination of
disinformation by domestic or foreign players is
particularly important in this context. The free
and independent media have a key societal role
to play in this area.

In order to strengthen our resistance in the
face of disinformation and the resilience of our
democracies, we will implement the following
measures in cooperation with the Länder:

» The Federal Government is drafting a compre­

hensive strategy for a strong, robust democracy


-----

and an open and diverse society in order to
foster democracy and effectively counter the
threats posed by all forms of extremism, in
particular right-wing extremism.

» The Federal Government will set out a strategy

to increase our capability to act in the face
of hybrid threats, with the aim of expanding
its skills for identifying, analysing and coun­
tering hybrid threats and further developing
its response instruments. This also includes
enhancing the analytical capabilities of our
intelligence services.


» The Federal Government will focus on using

the existing mechanisms and structures to
counter hybrid threats in the EU and NATO, the
G7 and the OSCE, and develop them further.
This includes expanding the Hybrid Toolbox
adopted in the EU’s Strategic Compass and
building on NATO-EU cooperation in this area.

» The Federal Government will set out a strategy

on tackling disinformation. This strategy will
improve the tools for the early identification
of manipulative communications in the
information arena, improve our resilience and


-----

_An international order based on_
_international law_

We are determined to defend and uphold the
principles of a rules-based international order
with a strong United Nations at its heart together
with our allies and partners worldwide:

»rights and rules that create protection and
obligations for all states equally;

»sovereign equality of all states;

»a peaceful balance of interests and conflict
prevention;

»multilateral cooperation for the benefit of
humanity and the protection of our natural
resources;

»opportunities for all people to realise the free
development of their personality, as set out in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;

»promotion of human development in all parts
of the world in line with the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals.

The Federal Government advocates the
strengthening and further development of
a free international order based on interna­
tional law and the United Nations Charter.
Such a rules-based order creates stability
and the conditions for peace, security and
human development. It also provides our
open and interconnected country with
protection and scope for development.


responsiveness and also target our ability to
defend our democratic values and our positions
convincingly on the international stage.

» Through its public relations work, the Federal

Government will ensure easy access to trans­
parent reliable information about government
action in order not to leave relevant media
space open for disinformation campaigns to fill.

» The Federal Government will increase its

support for applied research and development
on the subject of disinformation. We therefore
intend to put forward strategies to strengthen
digital, data and media competence and to draft
concepts for boosting resilience in educational
institutions in cooperation with the Länder.

» In order to prevent the spread of radicalising

content via the internet, unlawful content
needs to be identified and deleted even more
rapidly. Those behind such acts must be found
and held criminally responsible.

» The Federal Government will continue to

strengthen its efforts to counter espionage and
sabotage. In view of the threat situation, we will
substantially increase our resources and greatly
improve framework conditions by ensuring
there is an appropriate legislative basis on
which decisive action can be taken.


-----

Germany actively supports multilateralism and the United Nations.

Germany states its commitment to multilater­
alism and to strengthening the United Nations.
We are taking the 50th anniversary of our
membership of the United Nations as an oppor­
tunity to further develop our comprehensive
engagement in the area of UN policy. Germany
is willing to shoulder global responsibility. We
confidently embrace competition with states that
are opposed to a free international order based
on international law and the United Nations
Charter. We take the consequences of systemic
rivalry seriously and take them into account in
our policymaking.

We resolutely defend the free and rules-based
international order, which protects our values
and interests. In this, we know that we see eye to
eye with partners who share our values and in­
terests. Furthermore, we consciously endeavour
to cooperate and enter into new partnerships
with countries that do not share all our values
or whose societal and economic model is not


identical to ours, but that, like us, are committed
to a free international order based on the United
Nations Charter and international law. In doing
so, we want to take the concerns and interests of
these global partners into account.

In the EU and together with our transatlantic
and global partners we are countering attempts
to establish spheres of influence with the positive
model of a free international order based on
international law. The G7 – also in collaboration
with the G20 – has proved to be a particularly
effective forum for trust-based cooperation
in the current crises. We are pushing for the
strengthening and the reform of the WTO in
order to ensure a level playing field and to make
the multilateral trade system sustainable and fit
for the future.

The geopolitical conflicts on the horizon will not
only play out between countries but increasingly
also at societal level. We are strengthening our


-----

cultural relations and education policy and
science diplomacy, which drive forward our
exchange with the world on values and interests
and thereby also safeguard Germany’s oppor­
tunities for connection and communication. In
this area, we draw particularly on competent
intermediary organisations. We are working
actively in Europe and throughout the world for
the protection and strengthening of the freedom
of science, research and teaching.

» The Federal Government is actively shaping UN

policy and is committed to necessary reforms
and, in the long term, the reform of the UN
Security Council so that it reflects the realities
of today’s world. In the course of comprehen­
sive reform of the Council, Germany is prepared
to serve as a permanent member and thereby
assume greater responsibility.

» Germany is applying again for a non-perma­

nent seat on the UN Security Council for the
2027-2028 term.

» The Federal Government is committed to

strengthening multilateral structures to resolve
global challenges and thereby counter the
emergence of new blocs.

» The Federal Government regards an open, fair

and sustainable EU trade policy as a tool that
takes account of our interests and those of our
partners. In this area, free trade agreements
between the EU and partners all over the world
play an important role. Sustainability chapters
play an important role in this.

» The Federal Government wants to offer attrac­

tive programmes for partners throughout the


world to promote their development in line
with climate change targets and make a sus­
tainable contribution to infrastructure develop­
ment, through rapid implementation of the EU
Global Gateway initiative and the G7’s Partner­
ship for Global Infrastructure and Investment.

» The Federal Government is working to intensify

its relations with global partners in the long
term and is entering into new partnerships with
countries which, like us, are committed to a free
international order based on the United Nations
Charter and international law.

» The Federal Government is increasing its

engagement in existing multilateral bodies such
as the G20 in order to intensify cooperation
with global partners.

» In the United Nations and international (finan­

cial) institutions, the Federal Government is
identifying negotiation and reform processes
that are of particular significance for partner
states, getting more involved in these processes
and taking partners’ concerns into account
where possible.

» The Federal Government will take into consider­

ation the concerns of global partners within the
context of the negotiations on European Union
trade agreements and the further development
of the Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development
as well as in connection with climate action and
measures to tackle the pandemic.


-----

The Federal Government promotes the human right to education all around the world.

_Global commitment to human rights_


Peace and security are a prerequisite for safe­
guarding human rights. Our guiding principle
here is the universality of human rights for all
individuals throughout the world. We reject any
attempt to downplay this. It also includes an
active human rights policy.

After years of progress, the COVID-19 pan­
demic, the impact of the climate crisis and the
increasing number of conflicts have significantly
worsened the situation for the world’s poorest.
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine has
exacerbated food crises worldwide. Ensuring


Global commitment to human rights is
a moral obligation. Yet this commitment
is also in the interests of our security, for
human development and security are pre­
requisites for lasting peace and stability.
Where human rights are respected and
protected, crises and wars are less likely.


-----

human security also means overcoming poverty
and hunger and reducing inequality. In many
countries in the world, women have fewer rights
than men. In line with a feminist foreign and
development policy, the goal is therefore to
strengthen the rights of women and margin­
alised population groups, to drive forward the
elimination of discriminatory power structures,
to foster participation and diversity, to enable
all population groups to participate in deci­
sion-making at all levels on an equal basis and
to ensure that they have access to resources.

We declare our commitment to the principle
of the international responsibility to protect.
Serious violations of human rights are not do­
mestic affairs of individual states. For this reason,
Germany introduced its own Code of Crimes
Against International Law and works particularly
to ensure accountability following serious in­
ternational crimes and human rights violations.
Building on the experiences gained in the last
two decades and in view of the current chal­
lenges presented by Russia’s war of aggression,
international criminal law is to be developed and
strengthened further.

At the same time, we take seriously our responsi­
bility for protecting refugees and those subjected
to political persecution and are firmly committed
to the Convention relating to the Status of Ref­
ugees. Our goal is for refugees throughout the
world to be able to live in safety and with dignity
and for them to be offered future prospects, with
Germany’s support.

» The Federal Government will further intensify

its engagement for human rights through an
integrated approach combining humanitarian


assistance, development cooperation and
peacebuilding.

» The Federal Government will intensify its

commitment to the Women, Peace and Security
Agenda adopted in UN Resolution 1325. We
support the increased participation of young
people in line with the Youth, Peace and Secu­
rity Agenda.

» The Federal Government wants to strengthen

the rights of minorities at international level
and in the EU in particular and is calling in the
United Nations for a convention on the rights
of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transsexual and inter­
sexual (LGBTI) people.

» The Federal Government supports international

courts and accountability mechanisms, particu­
larly the International Criminal Court (ICC), and
works with other states towards strengthening
and improving them.

» The Federal Government is pressing for the

reform of the Rome Statute in order to expand
the currently limited jurisdiction of the ICC to
include the crime of aggression and align it to
its jurisdiction for the other three core crimes.
As in the case of the other crimes under inter­
national law, it should be enough for the crime
to have been committed in the territory of a
state that has recognised the ICC’s jurisdiction.


-----

To safeguard its energy security, Germany is also promoting the establishment of LNG terminals off its coast.


_Boosting economic and financial resilience and_
_raw materials security_

The social market economy is the basis of our
prosperity, our innovative capacity and our
model of society. In this respect, it is also of
special relevance for security policy. At the
same time it forms the basis of sustainable state
finances and an effective welfare state, including
social security systems. Shaping it sustainably is
essential for societal cohesion, social peace and
our capability to act. Solid financial and budget
policy, as well as generally balanced public
budgets that adhere to the check on borrowing


The German economy is anchored in
the European single market and its free
movement of goods, persons, capital and
services. It is founded on rules-based
access to markets, raw materials and
technology. The Federal Government will
strengthen its raw materials and energy
security through diversification and boost
the resilience of our economic and finan­
cial system. In an open economy, state
and private stakeholders must assume
responsibility for security.


-----

as set out in the Grundgesetz (Basic Law), are vital
for ensuring sustainable public finances. For that
is the only way we can maintain our capability
to act in future crises, both financially and, as a
consequence, in terms of security policy.

There must be a focus on reducing critical de­
pendencies in strategically relevant sectors in or­
der to maintain and expand our capability to act
in a global context without impairing Germany’s
economic openness and innovative capacity. Our
goal is to ensure that economic ties do not have
a negative impact on our security. We will there­
fore reduce existing critical dependencies and
concentration risks and prevent new dependen­
cies emerging by means of diversification.

The global markets are changing due to rising de­
mand, driven by digital and ecological transforma­
tion as well as geopolitical tensions. The constant
availability of many raw materials and commod­
ities on the global market is no longer a given.
The aim must therefore be to reduce existing
one-sided dependencies, prevent the emergence
of new dependencies, provide targeted support
for raw materials projects in cooperation with
business and set up strategic reserves. Although
the energy transition is reducing dependence on
fossil fuels, Germany will remain an importer
of energy for the foreseeable future. The Federal
Government is therefore pursuing the goal of a
carbon-free energy supply that is also safe and af­
fordable. To this end, it is prioritising technological
innovation, diversification of supply sources and
the procurement of strategically important raw
materials from reliable partners wherever possible.

Extracting raw materials and using energy
sources in Germany responsibly are other


significant factors with a view to ensuring the
security of our supply. The Federal Government
will therefore focus more closely on the potential
of the circular economy, resource efficiency and
the potential of domestic raw materials extrac­
tion, taking account of environmental concerns,
where this could help diversify our raw materials
and energy supply and reduce one-sided depend­
encies. We will take greater account of security
considerations in decisions concerning new raw
materials extraction projects. The Federal Gov­
ernment will strengthen crisis management for
critical raw materials and supports the creation
of adequate framework conditions to promote
raw materials projects in Germany’s and the EU’s
strategic interests as well as to ensure a fair and
sustainable market framework.

In a world of globalised flows of goods and trade
flows, supply chains must be assessed more
closely with regard to potential critical depend­
encies. At the same time they must align with our
foreign trade and investment policy, its principles
and sustainability standards. Value and supply
chains are the responsibility of enterprises, but
the Federal Government will keep its eye on the
competition disadvantages and supply needs of
German companies and is engaged in an ongoing
dialogue with German enterprises and associa­
tions on these issues.

Reducing dependencies can only succeed in
cooperation with a large number of reliable
partners and allies. We will intensify this cooper­
ation and expand it in specific areas – bilaterally,
within the EU and multilaterally. Cooperation
projects with global partners are designed to
benefit both sides and are a decisive step to pre­
vent the formation of blocs.


-----

We want to be even more effective in tapping
the strategic potential of European Union trade
agreements for German and European security
and resilience as well as for the prosperity of the
nations involved. The Federal Government there­
fore supports an ambitious EU trade agenda and
the strengthening and expansion of the EU single
market, both of which are relevant for further di­
versification and sustainable development. In the
case of decisions relating to competition policy,
there should in future be a more strategic focus
on the European and global dimension. What is
more, the instruments of foreign trade and invest­
ment promotion should be deployed, not least in
order to help foster economic diversification.

We will improve financial asset transparency
to more effectively tackle money laundering,
better implement sanction regimes and be able
to identify in good time any purchases of land
that could jeopardise security. That also leads to a
better understanding of financial and economic
influence from a security policy perspective.
Optimisation of the structures and resources in
fighting money laundering is also a goal.

Greater resilience of our economy, our financial
stability and our financial infrastructure also
protects the state, the economy and society from
the interference of certain authoritarian states.

»The Federal Government is driving forward its
strategy for the supply of raw materials, focus­
ing on security of supply, diversification, sus­
tainability and innovation. In so doing, we are
creating a framework for consistent monitoring
of raw materials supply chains, promoting
diversified value chains and avoiding one-sided
dependencies on individual suppliers.


»The Federal Government will support measures
aimed at the strategic exploration, extraction,
further processing and provision of critical
raw materials by the business sector and draw
up suitable conditions, including institutional
frameworks, in support of their implemen­
tation. We will work with companies and
encourage them through adequate incentives to
strategically stockpile critical raw materials and
to build up strategic reserves.

»We support the European Action Plan on Critical
Raw Materials and the rapid adoption of EU
regulations on safeguarding the supply of raw
materials. We will expand our partnerships in the
field of raw materials and in the development of
sustainable value added and supply chains.

»The Federal Government is working on a hydro­
gen import strategy, not least with a view to pre­
venting the emergence of critical dependencies
and reducing existing ones. It will dovetail this
with the existing National Hydrogen Strategy.

»The Federal Government will continue to
closely examine all investments in critical infra­
structure in order to avoid dependencies and
eliminate opportunities to apply political pres­
sure. With the same goal, we will also examine
the existing need to adapt land purchase rights.

»The Federal Government supports the strength­
ening of the EU single market, which is a funda­
mental pillar of European integration.

»On the basis of the new EU trade strategy and
the new sustainability approach, the Federal
Government is striving for the rapid conclusion
of further ambitious trade and investment


-----

agreements with global partners and supports
the swift ratification of agreements that have
already been signed. By so doing, the Federal
Government will also drive forward the diversi­
fication of trade relations and supply contracts.

»The Federal Government will analyse critical
dependencies and supports an EU-wide early
warning system and the monitoring of critical
supply chains in order to identify the raw materi­
als and intermediate goods where dependencies
need to be lessened. Here, the priority is boosting
efficiency, diversification, transport and stockpil­
ing as well as developing a circular economy to
obtain secondary raw materials. To achieve this,
the Federal Government will create appropriate
framework conditions for enterprises.

»The Federal Government intends to ensure, in
cooperation with the Länder, that the transport
infrastructure necessary for functioning supply
chains is in place for all forms of transport and
make it more resilient. In this context, goods
transport and logistics will be placed on a Euro­
pean and global footing.

»The Federal Government will work actively for
open international shipping routes in a world of
global flows of goods and trade flows.

»The Federal Government will promote diver­
sification and take care to spread risks through
clearly defined standards in the context of
foreign trade and investment promotion. In
this way, critical dependencies can also be
eliminated. Foreign investment in Germany
is strongly welcomed and crucial for an open
and prospering economy. We will consistently
use investment screening in the context of the


Foreign Trade and Payments Act and the For­
eign Trade and Payments Ordinance to prevent
threats to our security.

»The Federal Government is working with the
Länder, enterprises and international partners
to develop and improve measures to tackle
economic sabotage and espionage. The Federal
Government is driving forward the National
Economic Security Strategy and the corre­
sponding action plans.

»The Federal Government is working at national,
international and EU level to tighten existing
measures to combat financial crime and money
laundering and create supplementary measures
where appropriate to identify financial flows in
the area of organised crime more effectively and
further close gaps in finding criminally acquired
money and assets. We are doing this not least
within the context of the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF). We are thereby helping to ensure
that criminals cannot use their illegally gained
assets and that these are taken from them.

»At national level, the Federal Government will
bolster the strategy to tackle financial crime and
money laundering, both organisationally and
with personnel. In order to effectively combat
money laundering, competences will be evalu­
ated and the recommendations from the FATF
Mutual Evaluation Report on Germany rapidly
incorporated into German law where necessary.

»The Federal Government is continuing the close
cooperation within the G7 on economic resil­
ience and security.


-----

_Protecting and promoting_
_technology and innovation_

The freedom of science, research and teaching
is an expression of our free democratic order.
Germany’s security and prosperity are closely
intertwined with our capacities for technological
innovation and our industrial skills. The Federal
Government will intensify its efforts to specif­
ically promote research and development and
thereby also protect these fields from illegitimate
interference. Key technologies are increasingly a
tool and driving force behind global political and
economic competition. The Federal Government
will increase its skills in evaluating these technol­
ogies and developing key scientific and techno­
logical competences and boost its engagement
in setting technological norms and standards,
particularly within the context of the EU.

Attaining technological and digital sovereignty
requires a targeted selection process, knowledge
development and dissemination, definition of a
framework, resource mobilisation and market
development for strategic lines of technology,
which will in future play a key role for business
and society. Here, technological research and
innovation, with the aim of transfers and market
launches, play a central role in preparing for the
future and eliminating one-sided dependencies.

At European level the Federal Government will work
to encourage greater investment in digital tech­
nologies. Within the EU we will continue to work
towards strengthening the legal framework for the
development and use of new technologies. We will
drive forward the standardisation of key technologies
and work towards increasing design and production
capacities for highly innovative technologies.


»The Federal Government is improving digital
infrastructure, not least by expanding fibre optic
connections and high-speed mobile networks.

»The Federal Government is pursuing the goal
of developing and consolidating regulations for
new technological spheres in cooperation with
state and civil society partners.

»The Federal Government will assess which key
technologies require national and European
capabilities to protect our technological and
digital sovereignty. The Federal Government
will specifically support providers of key critical
technology, for example through state anchor
contracts, in order to maintain and build on its
own research and development capabilities in
critical technologies.

A high innovative power is crucial for our
resilience and competitiveness, which
is why we consider technological and
digital sovereignty to be an essential
component of Integrated Security. This
sovereignty allows us to use and help
shape key technologies internationally in
line with our values. In order to maintain
and expand this ability, the Federal
Government will focus specifically on
promoting science, research and the
introduction of technology and digital
applications onto the market. The
Federal Government will improve its
digital infrastructure and support the
Länder and enterprises through relevant
programmes.


-----

The Federal Government specifically promotes research into, and the introduction of, new technologies.


»The Federal Government will continue to use
the tool of investment screening to reduce the
risks for security of supply, prevent dependen­
cies with regard to critical infrastructure and
counter the problematic transfer of sensitive
technologies.

»Furthermore, the Federal Agency for Disruptive
Innovation (SPRIND) will be strengthened and
developed further. The Federal Government
intends to promote applied research and trans­
fer in order to establish and strengthen regional
and cross-regional innovation ecosystems. To
this end, we will set up the German Agency for
Transfer and Innovation (DATI).


»Our economic innovative capacity also
demands a sufficient number of skilled workers.
The Federal Government will invest in educa­
tion and further training and, at the same time,
facilitate targeted migration by means of an
intelligent recruitment policy.


-----

_Protection against threats from cyberspace_

As a leading nation in the field of technology and
thanks to our globally minded, knowledge-based
society, we will seize the opportunities that digi­
tal transformation opens up for our private sector,
our scientific community, our society and the
state. A free internet allows the global exchange of
ideas and information and can be a driving force
for democratic movements in autocratic states.
Within the framework of our cyber foreign policy
we are therefore committed to global compliance
with human rights standards in the regulation of
cyberspace, including the protection of privacy,
freedom of opinion and the right to encryption.

Companies and civil society must enhance their
risk awareness, assume responsibility for their
cybersecurity and build the necessary capabili­
ties, also with a view to being properly prepared
and able to help themselves. In a crisis situation,
cyberattacks on critical infrastructure and enter­
prises that are particularly in the public interest
can rapidly pose an existential threat. Here, we
must ensure that the highest level of protection is
in place. For this reason, when implementing the
EU NIS2 Directive on cybersecurity, we will focus
particularly on improving cooperation between
authorities and thereby make an important
contribution to the level of cybersecurity in the
EU. We will effectively combat the serious threat
posed by cybercrime, particularly the main threat
of ransomware.

Cybersecurity is inseparably linked to our digital
sovereignty. We will seek to meet this challenge
through both our targeted promotion of tech­
nologies and our further development of the
respective security standards. To this end, the


The Federal Government defines
cybersecurity as a task to be shared by the
state, the business and research sectors
and society as a whole. Considering
the significance of the digital sphere,
cybersecurity is a key building block of
Integrated Security. We will continue to
develop our cybersecurity architecture,
pursue the targeted promotion of
technologies and intensify cooperation
with business. Furthermore, we will
strengthen our capabilities to defend
against cyberattacks and we will, by
expanding and using our cyber diplomacy
network, enhance security in cyberspace.
In the regulation of cyberspace, we are
committed to global compliance with
human rights standards.

Federal Government will also boost cooperation
with the industry in the relevant international
bodies. We are continuing to focus our cybersecu­
rity research on technological revolutions, such as
artificial intelligence, quantum computing, quan­
tum cryptography and speech recognition. The
Federal Government is researching current and
future challenges in IT security research through
the research framework programme Digital.Sou­
verän.Sicher (Digital.Sovereign.Secure).

Germany will not accept rule-breaking or aggres­
sive conduct on the part of cyber actors. When­
ever possible, the Federal Government will work
to find and name the perpetrators of cyberattacks
– through attribution at national level and in co­
ordination with EU partners, our NATO allies and


-----

In our increasingly digitally connected society, the security of our IT systems is becoming ever more important.


other affected countries – and then take specific
action against them in the form of sanctions.

As a globally interconnected country, we depend
not only on our own ability to confront the in­
creasing number of cyberattacks, but also on that
of our partners. Within the framework of pro­
active cyber diplomacy efforts we are therefore
placing a new focus on capacity-building with
partners with whom we cooperate to uncover
breaches of rules and hold destructive actors to
account. We will develop capabilities for provid­
ing cyber first aid for partners and allies affected
by massive cyberattacks and channel them into
NATO’s planned virtual cyber capability, as well
as into corresponding EU instruments. Main­
taining close liaison, particularly within the EU,
NATO and the G7 or through the International


Counter Ransomware Initiative, on the activities
of aggressive cyber actors strengthens our ability
to prevent and react to incidents. We are also
seeking to cooperate with technology firms
and are establishing platforms for coordinating
immediate response to cyberattacks and for
developing long-term capabilities involving both
state and private-sector actors.

Our cybersecurity architecture is being further
developed with a view to establishing resilience
throughout our state institutions and guarantee­
ing the state’s ability to act so that our respon­
siveness and robustness are ensured at all times
in cyberspace, too. With this in mind, we will
improve cooperation between state institutions
in the spheres of cybersecurity and criminal pros­
ecution, as well as between intelligence services,


-----

diplomacy and the military on defending against
cyberattacks in line with the concept of Inte­
grated Security.

»The Federal Government will continue to
develop its cybersecurity strategy and thereby
also bolster the cybersecurity of the federal
administration across the board.

»The Federal Government will arrange for all rel­
evant stakeholders to contribute to a compre­
hensive cyber situational awareness picture. The
information it contains will be analysed and
evaluated from a national perspective. To this
end, the Federal Government will specifically
improve the reconnaissance and early warning
capabilities of the authorities and institutions
concerned, particularly the intelligence services.
The coordination function necessary for the
situational awareness picture will initially be set
up in the National Cyber Response Centre.

»The national capacity to coordinate damage
repair and restoration measures for affected
systems in the event of a crisis will be expanded.

»Based on joint cyber situational awareness, the
Federal Government will maintain readiness in
its day-to-day operations by developing flexible
coordination and decision-making procedures
that can be activated in times of crisis.

»The Federal Government will consistently
expand the federal administrative authorities’
interministerial high-security communi­
cation and information systems, including
those of the ministries and organisations with
security responsibilities and the Bundeswehr,
with a view to enabling the swift exchange of


confidential information, including during
crisis situations around the world.

»The Federal Government will make the Federal
Office for Information Security more auton­
omous and transform it into a central hub
for the combined efforts of the federal level
and the Länder, thereby also strengthening
situational awareness in the context of infor­
mation security as part of the national cyber
situational awareness picture. We will facilitate
lasting institution-based cooperation with
the Länder and will include mutual briefings,
information-sharing and providing advice,
support and assistance.

»The Federal Government wants to establish
information channels between enterprises that
provide critical infrastructure and the situation
centre of the Federal Office for Information
Security (BSI), and look into setting up Computer
Emergency Response Teams (CERTs) for specific
sectors. We will support investment in cyberse­
curity and the formation of rapid response teams
by operators of critical infrastructure.

»The Federal Government can prevent attacks
through our ability to check system-critical
components in our communication networks.
For this purpose, we will, among other things,
strengthen the Federal Office for Information
Security (BSI). We will swiftly conduct an assess­
ment of the effectiveness of our previous ability
to carry out checks and, if needed, implement
the respective legislation.

»The Cyberagency will be expanded so it can
promote technologies in a targeted manner and
help maintain digital sovereignty in cyberspace.


-----

»The Federal Government will strengthen the
federal administrative authorities’ information
security management system and establish
a centre of excellence to provide operational
advice on security-related issues.

»The Federal Government’s capacities for data
analysis will be enlarged, including for high-se­
curity data. At the same time, the Federal Gov­
ernment will further improve its high-security
lines of communication with partner countries.
To make sure that the Federal Government
maintains its ability to act in times of crisis, we
will make available several IT infrastructures
that are independent of one another.

»We must be able to identify aggressive cyber
activities early on, as well as swiftly defend
against attacks as they occur. The Federal
Government therefore aims to broaden the
legal basis to enable a swift, all-of-government
response in cyberspace so as to effectively
counter any general threats that may arise, with
clearly defined responsibilities. To this end, the
Federal Government aims particularly to create
a competence at the federal level for defending
against severe cyberattacks originating within
Germany and abroad through an amendment
of the Grundgesetz (Basic Law).

»The Federal Government will examine what
capabilities and legal authority it requires to
defend against threats in cyberspace – including
for an ongoing or imminent cyberattack – while
respecting the principle of proportionality; it
will also develop standards for their use, while
meeting our obligations under international
law and respecting the norms of responsible


state behaviour in cyberspace. We fundamen­
tally reject the idea of using hack-backs as a
means of cyber defence.

»The Federal Government will build on the exist­
ing cooperation framework with trustworthy
stakeholders from the private sector to safe­
guard defence, prevention, responsiveness and
recovery in the case of security incidents.

_Outer space_

Only by acting together with our partners will
we be able to find satisfactory answers for most
issues related to space security. For us, the EU and
NATO provide key frameworks for these efforts,
as well as our close cooperation with other
space-faring partner countries. We will make
satellite communication, navigation and earth
observation data more resilient, both in space and

For several years now, outer space
has become an ever more important
part of our security. The safe use of
space, especially in the form of satellite
communications and navigation as well
as earth observation satellites, has become
indispensable for many spheres of
civilian life. At the same time, the military
use of space has become increasingly
significant for modern armed forces. The
Federal Government will therefore place
a stronger focus on space as a strategic
dimension and expand its capabilities in
this domain.


-----

on the ground, through space infrastructure and
ground stations, because it is on these that our
critical infrastructure, our diplomatic missions
abroad and our armed forces depend. Wherever
we can, we will make preparations so that we
can rapidly replace systems that have failed; we
will also keep alternatives ready that can take the
place of space-based data links.

Outer space is not a rules-free area. Germany
is therefore working to strengthen and further
develop the rules-based order in space based on
international law. To mitigate the risks of esca­
lation and conflict, we are seeking the establish­
ment of internationally recognised principles
of responsible behaviour in space. Germany is
a role model with its voluntary commitment
not to conduct any destructive anti-satellite
tests with ground-based, air-based or sea-based
anti-satellite missiles.

»The first step for protecting against space threats
is to be able to recognise and attribute these
very threats. The Federal Government considers
the establishment of space situational awareness
to be a joint civilian-military task and will set
up a network of sensors spanning the globe in
cooperation with international partners.

»The Federal Government will expand the
Space Situational Awareness Centre. To enable
appropriate response to incidents in space, we
will also strengthen and further develop our
interministerial assessment and decision-mak­
ing mechanisms.

»For this purpose, the Federal Government will
draw up a space security strategy setting down


At the German Space Situational Awareness Centre in Uedem,
the Bundeswehr and the German Aerospace Center (DLR) jointly
protect civilian and military systems in space.

future strands of action for protection and
defence in space as well as on measures to boost
national resilience and describing ways to use
space to strengthen military capability.

»The Federal Government will involve research
institutions and private stakeholders more
closely in our space security architecture.


-----

###### Sustainable: Safeguarding
 our natural resources

_Limiting, adapting and protecting: the climate_
_crisis, biodiversity and ecosystems_

Global climate, environmental, food and resource
policy is security policy. Germany’s efforts will
therefore be guided by the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and its Sustainable De­
velopment Goals, as well as by the international
agreements on the climate, the environment and
food. These include the United Nations Frame­
work Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC),
the Paris Agreement, the UN Convention on
Biological Diversity and the UN Convention to
Combat Desertification, the voluntary commit­
ments and recommendations agreed at the UN
Food Systems Summit, the guidelines and rec­
ommendations of the UN Committee on World
Food Security and the European Green Deal, as
well as our European and national climate and
environmental goals. For action by the Federal
Government, prevention is of overriding impor­
tance, since early action saves lives.

The climate process of the United Nations (UN­
FCCC) remains absolutely essential for progress on
global climate protection. It must be accompanied
by more flexible forums and instruments. The Fed­
eral Government believes that climate and trans­
formation partnerships are key to finding equitable
solutions that are tailored to specific countries.

Limiting global warming to 1.5°C, as enshrined
in the Paris Agreement, is a national and interna­
tional goal of the Federal Government. Breaching


Fighting the climate crisis and dealing
with its consequences is humanity’s
central task in this century. Our foremost
aim must be to drastically reduce global
emissions, which are currently still on the
rise: we must achieve results, and do so
urgently. At the same time, we must pursue
adaptation strategies that limit the impacts
of the climate crisis, so as to protect both
people and natural spaces. We require
equally great dynamism to overcome the
biodiversity and ecosystem crisis.

this limit would jeopardise our ability to live in
security and prosperity, both in Germany and
around the world, in the medium and long term.

Investment on a massive scale is required glob­
ally to fund efforts to accomplish an ecological
transformation and to make the necessary adap­
tations to the climate crisis. International climate
funding is therefore essential if this is to succeed.
The Federal Government is prepared to keep
making substantial contributions in this regard,
beyond its current commitments and especially
for the period after 2025. At international level,
we remain proponents of increased support for
the affected countries and continue to press
for also raising more private capital for climate
finance. When it comes to dealing with loss and
damage and to protecting particularly vulnerable
developing countries, we are actively striving
to rapidly operationalise the respective funding
mechanisms. To this end, we are working on
ambitious implementation of the Global Shield
against Climate Risks, a joint initiative of the G7
and the Vulnerable Twenty (V20) Group.


-----

The Federal Government is successfully advocating for funding mechanisms that are designed to help those people
who are most severely affected by climate-related damage.


Women, children and vulnerable population
groups are often strongly affected by the impacts
of the climate crisis. This is why special attention
must be given to them when working to limit
the impacts of the climate crisis. The need to
cooperate at regional and international level
to protect our natural resources also creates
opportunities for engaging in intergovernmental
confidence-building and conflict prevention.
We also need to seize the opportunities that are
inherent in the global hydrogen economy that
must now be built up.

Facing down the crisis of biodiversity and eco­
systems requires, at the very least, an equally
strong movement at international level as that
formed to tackle the climate crisis. As nego­
tiations continue in connection with the UN


Convention on Biological Diversity, the Federal
Government will therefore press for transpar­
ent, effective and swift implementation of the
respective necessary measures. In this regard,
balancing interests and resolving financial issues
will be especially important. Germany will help
drive forward efforts to this end.

The Federal Government is seeking at both na­
tional and international level to implement the
Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Frame­
work. The targets it contains – ensuring effective
protection of at least 30 % of the world’s land and
sea and restoring at least 30 % of damaged natural
spaces – provide a central basis for the long-term
preservation of our planet’s natural resources.


-----

Pupils in Pristina learn how
solar technology can be used
to address the climate crisis.

continent and expanding the EU’s climate-di­
plomacy activities.

»The Federal Government is seeking to ensure
that the EU implements and further develops
the European Green Deal with commitment,
resolutely tackling together the climate crisis,
species loss, pollution and the loss of natural
resources as a security risk.

»The Federal Government will draw up its first
strategy on climate diplomacy to define its
fields of action, aims and priorities in this policy
sphere and to renew and expand its cooperative
partnerships for tackling the climate crisis.

»By establishing and systematically developing
an open and cooperative international Climate
Club, the Federal Government will create
additional incentives for decarbonisation and


Our global resources crisis requires a response on
the part of all countries. The Federal Government
therefore aims to find global and ambitious solu­
tions. This includes a dialogue with all relevant
actors. An openness to all technological possibili­
ties makes it possible to ensure freedom of action,
for us and for coming generations.

»The Federal Government will step up its
national, European and international engage­
ment with a view to limiting the impact of
the climate crisis. To help achieve this, we will
meet our reduction targets for greenhouse gas
emissions, contribute to suitable international
climate finance mechanisms, and take action
to fight and mitigate the consequences of the
climate crisis.

»The Federal Government will play its part with a
view to making Europe the first climate-neutral


-----

raise the level of ambition, which in turn will
enhance competitiveness in the participating
economies by accelerating transformation with
regard to technologies of the future.

»The Federal Government will make the climate
crisis a fixed item on the agenda of the security
agencies at federal level, as well as of regional
and global security agencies, and enhance their
capabilities to systematically respond to cli­
mate-security risks.

»To improve our ability to assess the impact of
the climate crisis on our national security and
then arrive at informed choices of action, the
Federal Government will commission a study
from leading academic institutions in coopera­
tion with the Federal Intelligence Service.

»In keeping with its feminist foreign and devel­
opment policy, the Federal Government is com­
mitted to increasing the impact of women in
climate policymaking. In the sphere of climate
action and when dealing with the climate crisis,
we are committed to finding solutions that
strongly take into account the needs and rights
of women and marginalised groups.

»At national level, the Federal Government is
seeking to adopt climate change adaptation
legislation and will develop a new climate adap­
tation strategy with measurable targets.

»The Federal Government will ensure that the
appropriate action we are taking in the short
term to secure our energy supplies is in har­
mony with our medium and long-term climate
protection targets.


The impact of the climate crisis on people and the planet has
become especially clear in recent years all around the globe –
including in Germany.

»The Federal Government will use its pro­
gramme of action for nature-based solutions to
climate change in a targeted fashion to develop
synergies between climate action and ecosys­
tem protection. This includes measures that
directly protect, strengthen and restore natural
ecosystems. Forests and sustainable forest
management play an important role with a
view to achieving climate protection targets and
preserving biodiversity.

»Building on the National Water Strategy, the Fed­
eral Government will secure and protect water
resources. In addition to pursuing adaptation to
deal with long dry spells, the strategy enhances
the protection of our drinking water. Together


-----

with the Länder, the Federal Government is
working to implement the water strategy.

»We will advance the circular economy and
resource efficiency by promoting these goals
in all of the relevant sectors. In this way, we
will reduce the climate impacts caused by the
use of materials, protect biodiversity, fight
environmental pollution and improve how we
handle chemicals.

»The Federal Government is committed to a bind­
ing and ambitious UN agreement to end plastic
pollution, as well as for safe and sustainable
international chemicals management through
new rules updating the Strategic Approach to
International Chemicals Management.

»To safeguard and improve biodiversity, the
Federal Government will update the National
Strategy on Biological Diversity and will swiftly
implement the EU’s Biodiversity Strategy, the
forthcoming EU regulation on nature restora­
tion and the G7’s 2030 Nature Compact.

»The Federal Government will soon ratify the
High Seas Treaty of the United Nations.

_Strengthening global food security_

In future, the climate crisis will pose a particular
threat to global food security. It imperils the
human right to food. The Federal Government
is therefore promoting the transition to sus­
tainable and resilient agricultural and food
systems. The aim must be to act in concert with
partners around the world to achieve Sustainable
Development Goal No. 2 – Zero Hunger – of the
Agenda for Sustainable Development by 2030.


The Global Alliance for Food Security that was
established during Germany’s G7 Presidency in
2022 is intended to serve as a platform for the
future coordination of support towards this goal.

Disadvantaged and vulnerable population
groups are the focus of our international engage­
ment for food security. The Federal Government
supports partner governments around the world
as they work to make the right to food a yard­
stick for their actions and to restructure their
agriculture in a sustainable way. In this context,
we will pay special attention to people in crisis
and conflict situations.

To make agricultural and food systems more sus­
tainable and more resilient, all actors must work
together through an integrated approach that
comprises various sectors, such as agriculture,
nutrition, the environment, energy and health.
What is also needed is improved global govern­
ance of agricultural and food systems, in particu­
lar of the UN Food and Agriculture Organization
and of the Committee on World Food Security.
In this way, several objectives can be met: an
agricultural sector that produces nutritious food
while generating lower levels of greenhouse

The implementation of the human right
to adequate food is a guiding principle
for the Federal Government’s activities.
Food insecurity and inadequate nutrition
impair people’s health. It also adversely
affects development policy, inflicts
economic damage and destabilises entire
societies – with the effects also being felt
in Germany.


-----

The Federal Government is promoting the transformation to sustainable and resilient agricultural and food systems.


gases and protecting biodiversity. At the same
time, climate action helps secure production and
realise the right to food, first and foremost for
particularly affected small-scale farmers. Another
aim of sustainable restructuring is to make local
and regional agricultural and food systems less
likely to be impacted by global crises and con­
flicts and – by adapting them in a better way to
the climate crisis – to ensure that they can make
a greater contribution to the local population’s
food security. In order that these efforts do not
give rise to protectionism, which in turn would
lead to food shortages, the Federal Government
is more strongly advocating for fair trade and the
removal of trade restrictions, including non-tar­
iff trade barriers in global agricultural markets.
This includes the realignment of supply chains,
expanding sustainable and regional food produc­
tion and reducing post-harvest losses.


» The implementation of a human right to food

is and will remain a guiding principle for the
Federal Government’s activities. To reach this
goal, the Federal Government will remain
committed to further improving the global food
security architecture and will assume a leading
role at international level in cooperation with
our partners.

» Through our national agricultural policy, the

Federal Government will take targeted action
that will not distort trade; at the same time, we
will work to move forward the reform process
of the common agricultural policy of the EU,
which must be in compliance with competition
rules. In the framework of the WTO negotia­
tions, we are also seeking to limit trade-distort­
ing subsidies.


-----

» The Federal Government has joined the Zero

Hunger Coalition and will keep its expenditure
in the sphere of global food security in line with
the priorities that have been defined in this con­
text. We will also work to ensure that all partic­
ipants in the Agricultural Market Information
System of the G20 co-finance the system, as
well as make available data on their agricultural
production and stockpiles.

» Moreover, the Federal Government is working

to have export restrictions that could negatively
impact global food prices either dropped or for
them to exempt purchases by the UN World Food
Programme. We also want to increase the culti­
vation of plant-based protein as well as the use of
regional nutrient cycles in the G7 and the EU.

» The Federal Government actively supports the

strengthening of international agricultural
research. We are therefore pursuing coopera­
tion with actors of the agricultural innovation
system and small-scale farmers in partner
countries, so as to promote new technologies
and management practices to create a sustaina­
ble, climate-friendly and biodiverse agricultural
sector that prioritises local communities. We
will also support the establishment of research
cooperation projects to improve the global food
supply that will involve agricultural and nutri­
tion research institutions in partner countries
and in Germany.

» The Federal Government will enhance the

framework conditions for plant breeding
research. We will, among other things, promote
the breeding of climate-proof, locally adapted,
hardy and high-yield strains. Germany can take
a leading role in Europe in this field of research.


We will also focus on opportunities and risks
presented by new breeding techniques, such as
CRISPR/Cas.

» Both our short-term emergency-aid measures

and medium-term assistance will be designed
to contribute to the long-term transition to
sustainable agricultural and food systems. These
should promote local and sustainable produc­
tion within integrated systems, and diversify
the range of crops that are planted, thereby
reducing dependence on imports.

» The Federal Government aims to further

expand its support for the World Food Pro­
gramme and other humanitarian actors.
The Federal Government is also seeking to
strengthen support for the Food and Agricul­
ture Organization and the Committee on World
Food Security, with the ultimate aim of trans­
forming food systems.


-----

The global prevention of, and swift reaction to, pandemics is also key to guaranteeing human security.

_Improving global pandemic prevention_


The COVID-19 pandemic clearly demonstrated
the vulnerability of all countries and of inter­
national exchange in general. To effectively
prevent pandemics, the Federal Government is
pursuing a holistic One Health approach that
harnesses the close ties and interrelationships
between the health of humans, animals and
the environment. To this end, the Federal
Government will support its partner countries
around the world in their efforts to prevent
pandemics, build inclusive, digital and resilient
national healthcare systems and provide
primary health care, as well as contribute ex­
pertise to the international organisations that
are pursuing the One Health approach.

At the same time, we will enhance our na­
tional resilience by ensuring we can provide


The global prevention of, and swift reaction
to, pandemics is key to guaranteeing human
security. Pandemic preparedness and
response are therefore also security-policy
tasks. A lack of healthcare considerably limits
effective measures to prevent pandemics
and exacerbates problems such as poverty,
hunger and a lack of development. In an
interconnected world, pandemic preparedness
must be conducted at global scale. The Federal
Government will therefore further strengthen
its international endeavours in this field. We
will intensify our efforts to prepare for and
respond to future pandemics, expand the
global health architecture and enhance early
warning systems.


-----

medical care throughout Germany and maintain
our supply chains in the long term. To achieve
this, we must avoid dependencies, in particular
by diversifying our imports, maintaining and
expanding national and European production
capacities for critical items such as medicinal and
precursor products, as well as products for the
healthcare sector.

Moreover, we want to improve our ability to
detect risks associated with pandemics and zo­
onotic diseases at an early stage, as well as invest
in security-related research and development.
We will also enhance our ability to respond to re­
quests for assistance by other countries, not least
our European neighbours, through improved co­
ordination structures in the Federal Government
and close exchange within the EU. We will also
promote the training of special experts in the
detection of, and response to, outbreaks.

At European level, the Federal Government will
also work for greater coordination of measures
to prepare for and respond to future pandemics,
in particular through the EU4Health programme,
the Health Emergency Preparedness and Re­
sponse Authority (HERA) and in the context of
the EU Global Health Strategy.

»The Federal Government will drive forward
implementation of the Pact for Pandemic
Readiness that was adopted during Germany’s
G7 Presidency in 2022.

»The Federal Government will work to
strengthen the WHO, including its budget,
within the framework of the UN System.


»The Federal Government supports the WHO
Hub for Pandemic and Epidemic Intelligence
that was recently established in Berlin for the
purpose of gathering information centrally so
that pandemic-related data can be analysed and
used more swiftly and effectively.

»In close coordination with the WHO, the
Federal Government is working to have key
elements of the ACT-A initiative for fighting the
COVID-19 pandemic integrated into a global
health architecture, so that the international
community can more swiftly and effectively
respond to future health risks and so that fair
worldwide access to vaccines, medicines and
medical products can be ensured.

»The Federal Government supports the new
Financial Intermediary Fund for Pandemic
Prevention of the World Bank. It will also
campaign for more binding regulations under
international law for dealing with pandemics,
especially in connection with negotiations on
the establishment of a new pandemic treaty
and in the reform of the International Health
Regulations.


-----

## Building
 Integrated
 Security
 together


To pursue a policy of Integrated Security, we will
need to adapt our policies to new challenges.

Going beyond this, this Security Strategy is also
intended to contribute to the further develop­
ment of strategic culture in Germany and to be
the starting point for societal debate. The Fed­
eral Government seeks to foster a solid under­
standing of Integrated Security throughout our
society. The key aim will be to jointly identify
what must be done to strengthen Germany’s
security and freedom, so that our country and
its policies can be wehrhaft (robust), resilient
and sustainable.


To this end, the Federal Government is in regular
contact with the German Bundestag and the
Länder on questions of national security and
regarding the implementation of the National
Security Strategy. It will also maintain an ongo­
ing dialogue on these issues with the people of
our country.

Because we all share responsibility for security
in our country, and we all have something to
contribute. Together we will actively shape our
future – to become wehrhaft (robust), resilient
and sustainable.


-----

_Picture credits_

Cover: gettyimages - NicoElNino; p. 5 Presse- und Informationsamt der Bundesregierung, Thomas Köhler; p. 6 Bündnis90 Die Grünen;
[p. 8 Florian Gaertner/photothek.de; p. 8 Bundeswehr/Julia Kelm; p. 8 picture alliance/dpa/Marcus Brandt; p. 8 picture alliance/Zoonar;](https://photothek.de)
p. 10 picture alliance/Zoonar; p. 12 picture alliance/AA/Metin Aktas; p. 14 picture alliance/photothek; p. 16 BBK; p. 18 Janine Schmitz/
[photothek.net; p. 21 Bundeswehr/Christian Vierfuß; p. 22 NATO; p. 25 picture alliance/Eibner-Pressefoto, Roger Buerke; p. 26 picture](https://photothek.net)
alliance/Flashpic, Jens Krick; p. 28 Bundeswehr/Anne Weinrich; p.31 2022 Bundeswehr/Mario Bähr; p. 32, 33 Bundeswehr/Tanja Wendt;
p. 34 Bundeswehr/Tom Twardy; p. 37 picture alliance/SZ Photo, Natalie Neomi Isser; p. 41 A. Spangenberg/EUCAP Sahel Niger/ZIF;
[p. 43 GIZ/Hamish John Appleby; p. 46/47 picture alliance/imageBROKER, Schoening; p. 49 Thomas Trutschel/photothek.net; p. 51 GIZ/](https://photothek.net)
Florian Kopp; p. 53 picture alliance/dpa, Marcus Brandt; p. 58 DLR (CC-BY 3.0); p. 60 DLR (CC BY-NC-ND 3.0); p. 63 Bundeswehr/Francis
Hildemann; p. 65 picture alliance/dpa; p. 66 GIZ; p. 67 picture alliance/Jochen Tack; p. 69 picture alliance/Rupert Oberhäuser;
p. 71 gettyimages - Kobus Louw; p. 73 gettyimages - NicoElNino

_Publication details_

_Published by the_
Federal Foreign Office, Werderscher Markt 1, 10117 Berlin
[www.auswaertiges-amt.de, poststelle@auswaertiges-amt.de](https://www.auswaertiges-amt.de)

_Date of publication_
June 2023

_Designed by_
ressourcenmangel GmbH, 10997 Berlin

_Printed by_
Bonifatius GmbH Druck | Buch | Verlag, 33100 Paderborn

_Copies available for order from_
Publikationsversand der Bundesregierung
Postfach 48 10 09, 18132 Rostock, Germany
Telephone information service: +49 (0)30 18 272 2721
Fax information service: +49 (0)30 1810 272 2721
[publikationen@bundesregierung.de](mailto:publikationen@bundesregierung.de)

_Orders using the hotline for the deaf:_
[gebaerdentelefon@sip.bundesregierung.de](mailto:gebaerdentelefon@sip.bundesregierung.de)

Order online:
**[www.bundesregierung.de/publikationen](https://www.bundesregierung.de/publikationen)**

_Federal Government publications can also be ordered and downloaded from:_
**[www.bundesregierung.de/publikationen](https://www.bundesregierung.de/publikationen)**

The Federal Government has produced this publication as part of its public relations work. The publication is
distributed free of charge and is not intended for sale. It must not be used by political parties, election canvassers or
campaigners during an election campaign to secure votes. This applies to Bundestag, Landtag and local elections, as
well as to European Parliament elections.


-----

-----

**www bundesregierung de**


-----

