# White Paper 2006

### on German Security Policy and the Future of the Bundeswehr


-----

#### Contents

**Part one:**
**German Security Policy**

**Part two:**

**The Bundeswehr -**
**An Instrument of German**
**Security Policy**


**Executive Summary 4**

**1** **Fundamentals of German Security Policy 14**
1.1 Germany’s Security 14
1.2 The Strategic Context – Global Challenges,
Opportunities, Risks and Dangers 17
1.3 Values, Interests and Goals of
German Security Policy 21
1.4 Networked Security 22

**2** **German Security Policy**
**in the International Environment 24**
2.1 North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) 24
2.2 European Union (EU) 33
2.3 North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) – European
Union (EU) 40
2.4 Organisation for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) 42
2.5 United Nations (UN) 43
2.6 Arms Control and Disarmament 45
2.7 Strengthening Relations with Partners 47

**3** **Requirements and Parameters 53**

3.1 Mission 53
3.2 Tasks 54
3.3 Constitutional Requirements 56
3.4 “Innere Führung” – Leadership Development and Civic
Education 59
3.5 Universal Conscription 61
3.6 Financial Basis 62
3.7 Armaments Policy 63
3.8 Determining Factors for Bundeswehr Planning 65
3.9 Structures and Strength 69


**4** **The Bundeswehr on Operations 70**

**5** **Transformation 74**
5.1 Concept Development and Experimentation 76
5.2 Network-enabled Operations 77
5.3 Force Categories 78
5.4 Capabilities 81
5.5 Parameters and Conceptual Orientation 85

**6** **Organisation 86**
6.1 Federal Ministry of Defence 86
6.2 Armed Forces Command and
Control Organisation 88
6.3 Army 90
6.4 Air Force 92
6.5 Navy 95
6.6 Joint Support Service 98
6.7 Bundeswehr Joint Medical Service 101
6.8 Federal Defence Administration 105

6.9 Military Legal System  1 10
6.10 Chaplain Service  1 11

**7** **Personnel 112**
7.1 Regulars and Temporary-Career Volunteers 115
7.2 Basic-Service and Extended-Service Conscripts 116
7.3 Reservists 116
7.4 Civilian Personnel 117
7.5 Training and Education 118

**8** **The Way Ahead 122**

**List of Abbreviations 124**
**List of Illustrations and Diagrams 126**


**2** **3**


-----

#### Executive Summary


##### I. German Security Policy

 Twelve years have passed since the publication of the last White Paper on the Security of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Situation of the Bundeswehr. During that time, the international environment has changed dramatically. Globalisation has opened up new opportunities for Germany, too. At the same time, the radical changes in the security environment have created new risks and threats that are not only having a destabilising effect on Germany’s immediate surroundings but also impact on the security of the international community as a whole. A successful response to these new challenges requires the application of a wide range of foreign, security, defence, and development policy instruments in order to identify, prevent, and resolve conflicts at an early stage. With its broad spectrum of capabilities, the Bundeswehr has been making significant contributions towards the achieve- ment of this goal.

 International terrorism represents a fundamental challenge and threat to freedom and security. Increasingly, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and of the means of their delivery has become a potential threat to Germany as well as other nations. In addition, Germany has been confronted with the aftermath of intrastate and regional conflicts, the destabilisation, and the internal disintegration of states as well as its frequent by-product – the privatisation of force. Strategies that were previously effective in warding off external dangers are no longer adequate against the current, asymmetric threats. Today’s security policy must address new and increasingly complex challenges. Effective security provisions require preventive, efficient, and coherent cooperation at both the national and international levels, to include an effective fight against the root causes. It is imperative that we take preven- tive action against any risks and threats to our security and that we address them in a timely manner and at their sources.

 Germany’s security is inseparably linked to the political development of Europe and the remainder of the world. The united Germany has an important part in


**4** **5**


-----

##### shaping the future of Europe and beyond. As a member of the European Union (EU) and the North Atlantic Alliance (NATO), Germany has proven itself to be a reliable partner. In these international ventures, as well as in the United Nations (UN), the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and other such forums, Germany has been working towards the preservation of peace, protection against global threats, promotion of democracy and human rights, sustainable development, and cooperative security.

 Since the mid-1990s, the organisations vital to the security of Germany – the North Atlantic Alliance, the European Union, the United Nations – have signifi- cantly evolved and adapted to the new risks and challenges. As a result, their member countries have taken on additional responsibilities. Bundeswehr personnel have been serving as peacekeepers in the Balkans, in the Caucasus region, at the Horn of Africa, in the Middle East, on the African continent, and in Asia. For several years, the Bundeswehr has consistently followed the path of transitioning to an expeditionary force, and it has been radically transformed along the way.

 The process of global change will continue. In concert with its partners and allies, Germany has accepted the challenges created by this change, shaping it in accordance with its responsibilities and interests. German security policy is driven by the values set forth in its Basic Law and by the goal of safeguarding the interests of our country, in particular:

 to preserve justice, freedom, and democracy for the citizens of our country, as well as their security and welfare, and to protect them from threats; to assure the sovereignty and integrity of German territory; to prevent, whenever possible, regional crises and conflicts that may affect Germany’s security and to help manage such crises; to confront global challenges, above all the threat posed by international terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction; to help uphold human rights and strengthen the international order on the basis of international law; to promote free and open world trade as the basis for our prosperity and, by doing so help close the gap between the poor and wealthy regions of the world.

 German security policy is based on a comprehensive concept of security; it is forward-looking and multilateral. Security cannot be guaranteed by the efforts of any one nation or by armed forces alone. Instead, it requires an all-encom- passing approach that can only be developed in networked security structures


##### and within the context of a comprehensive national and global security philos- ophy. One of its components is the Federal Government’s overall concept of “Civilian Crisis Prevention, Conflict Resolution, and Post-Conflict Peace Building”.

 The transatlantic partnership remains the foundation of Germany’s and Europe’s common security. The North Atlantic Alliance will continue to be the cornerstone of Germany’s future security and defence policy. Forming the link between two continents, it provides unique political and military instruments for the maintenance and restoration of peace. In the long run, the global challenges confronting German security cannot be met without an effective transatlantic alliance that is based on mutual trust among its member states. The fundamental issues of European security can be addressed only in a joint effort with the United States of America, and this will continue to hold true in the future. However, the bonds between Germany and the United States must be continually cultivated and deepened through mutual consultation and co- ordinated action.

 The European Union stands for political stability, security, and prosperity in Germany as well as its other member states. It has evolved into a recognised actor in international crisis management, with an increasing capacity for taking action on foreign and security policy matters. As an integral part of the Euro- pean Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy, the European Security and Defence Policy has defined military and civilian headline goals, established politico-military structures for operations, created a European Defence Agency, and formulated its European Security Strategy. Thus, Europe now has the prereq- uisites to more effectively fulfil its share of responsibility for global security in the future and to contribute to making the world a safer place. One of the primary goals of German security policy is the strengthening of the European area of stability through the consolidation and development of European integration and the European Union’s active neighbourhood policy with the states of East- ern Europe, the southern Caucasus, Central Asia, and the Mediterranean region. Equally important are the development and reinforcement of a durable and resilient security partnership with Russia.

 The strategic partnership between NATO and the EU is one of the pillars of the European and transatlantic security architecture. The EU and NATO are not com- petitors; both make vital contributions to our security. Germany will continue to work towards improving the relationship between the two organisations in a manner that will lead to closer cooperation and greater efficiency, avoid duplication, and fortify European and transatlantic security in general.


**6** **7**


-----

##### Germany supports the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe as an important instrument of our foreign and security policy and seeks to strengthen its position.

 The United Nations is the only international organisation that is universal in nature. Its Charter provides the fundamental framework of international law that governs international relations. As the expectations of the UN’s ability to maintain global peace have increased, so has the number of UN requests for assistance from NATO and the EU. The UN is of critical importance to the resolu- tion of the multitude of issues that arise from an expanded concept of security. Germany fully accepts its share of responsibility to safeguard world peace and international security within the framework of the UN and is committed to strengthening the UN through fundamental and comprehensive reforms.

 Arms control, disarmament, non-proliferation, and a restrictive armaments export policy will remain important elements of the German security policy that focuses on conflict prevention. In light of the threat posed by weapons of mass destruction, special importance must be placed on strengthening the treaties regarding the prohibition and non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the continuation of nuclear disarmament.


##### II. The Bundeswehr – An Instrument of German Security Policy

 The Bundeswehr is an instrument of a comprehensive and proactive security and defence policy. Its mission is:

 to guarantee the capacity for action in the field of foreign policy, to contribute towards European and global stability, to maintain national security and defence, to provide assistance in the defence of our allies, to foster multinational cooperation and integration.

 An effective Bundeswehr is vital to a German security and defence policy that seeks to actively shape its environment. Politically and constitutionally, the Bundeswehr’s “raison d'être” and core function continue to be the defence of Germany against external threats. Additional responsibilities include the defence of allies in the event of attack and assistance in crises and conflicts that might escalate into actual threats. Thus, the central task of the Bundeswehr continues to be national and collective defence in the classical sense. However, the need for protection of the population and of the infrastructure has increased in importance as a result of the growing threat that terrorist attacks pose to German territory.

 The Bundeswehr’s functions are derived from its constitutional mission and from the values, goals, and interests of German security and defence policy. They are:

 international conflict prevention and crisis management, to include the fight against international terrorism; support of allies; protection of German territory and its citizens; rescue and evacuation operations; partnership and cooperation; subsidiary assistance (legal and administrative support, help in the wake of natural disasters and particularly grave accidents).

 For the foreseeable future, the most likely tasks will be the prevention of inter- national conflicts and crisis management, to include the fight against interna- tional terrorism. They will determine the structure of and exert significant influence on the capabilities, command and control systems, availability, and equipment of the Bundeswehr.


**8** **9**


-----

##### Internal and external security are increasingly intertwined. The defence against terrorist and other asymmetric threats within Germany falls primarily into the purview of the Federal and Land authorities responsible for internal security. It is, however, permissible under current law to deploy the Bundeswehr and its available assets whenever a particular situation cannot be managed without its assistance. To date, the use of military munitions in such cases has been prohibited. The Federal Government deems it necessary to expand the consti- tutional framework in this regard.

 The structure of the Bundeswehr is consistently oriented towards its opera- tional needs. Consequently, the German Armed Forces are organised into the categories of response, stabilisation, and support forces. They are trained, equipped, and deployed according to their respective functions. The Bun- deswehr will continue to be a conscript force in the future; universal conscrip- tion has proven to be an unqualified success in varying security environments. The tenets of “Innere Führung” – leadership development and civic education – will remain the Bundeswehr’s guiding principles.

 However, the effectiveness of the Bundeswehr depends not only on its personnel but also on the availability of financial resources. The ever-present dichotomy between the requirements of defence policy and the financial needs of other national tasks will continue into the future.

 Today’s Bundeswehr has been shaped by international missions. Already, more than 200,000 military personnel have served on operations abroad. The cost to the Bundeswehr for humanitarian relief operations has also been steadily increasing over the past years, tying up its resources.

 Successful missions require armed forces that can be deployed across the entire task spectrum. To realise this goal, the Bundeswehr is continuously work- ing to improve its capability profile. This is achieved via targeted measures in the capability categories of command and control, intelligence collection and reconnaissance, mobility, effective engagement, support and sustainability, and survivability and protection.

 Modern and effective armed forces are an element of national security provi- sions. The Bundeswehr has been adapting to the dynamic security environment through a continual process of transformation. This process is aimed at improv- ing operational readiness across the entire mission spectrum and requires unconditional joint force thinking and action throughout the Bundeswehr as


##### well as a stronger interministerial approach. At the same time, any develop- ment of existing capabilities must take into account the Bundeswehr's multi- national engagement. The ability to conduct network-enabled operations will be a fundamental prerequisite for the Bundeswehr’s successful participation in multinational conflict prevention and crisis management.

 In the future, national preventive security measures will be premised on even closer integration of political, military, development policy, economic, human- itarian, policing, and intelligence instruments for conflict prevention and crisis management. Operations at the international level will require a compre- hensive, networked approach that effectively combines civilian and military instruments. The Federal Government is prepared to confront the ensuing challenge of continuously assessing and, wherever necessary, refining its instruments of security policy. This approach will best serve the security of Germany and, at the same time, contribute towards global peace.


**10** **11**


-----

### Part one German Security Policy

**12** **13**


-----

#### 1 Fundamentals of German Security Policy


**1.1 Germany’s Security**

Twelve years have elapsed since the last White Paper
on the Security of the Federal Republic of Germany
and the Situation of the Bundeswehr was published.
During this time, there have been far-reaching
changes in the international situation. Globalisation
is opening up new opportunities for Germany, too.
At the same time, the radically changed security
environment is producing new risks and threats that
not only have a destabilising effect on Germany’s

immediate surroundings, but also impact on the
security of the international community as a whole.
To overcome these challenges a broad range of foreign, security, defence and development policy instruments are needed to identify, prevent and resolve conflicts in their early stages. The Bundeswehr
is able to make an important contribution here
thanks to its comprehensive spectrum of capabilities.

The Euro-Atlantic security structures have created a
singular area of stability - a development from which
Germany benefits directly. Germany is a member of
the European Union and of the North Atlantic Alliance, and as such a partner and ally to be counted
on. In these and other organisations, including the
United Nations and the Organisation for Security


and Cooperation in Europe, Germany contributes to
preserving peace, combating global threats, promoting democracy and human rights, sustained development, and cooperative security.

International terrorism is a threat to freedom and
security and a central challenge. The attacks of
11 September 2001 and the acts of terror perpetrated
in Europe, Asia and North Africa since then have
highlighted this.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) and of their means of delivery is steadily
emerging as a potential threat also for Germany.
State and non-state actors are endeavouring to acquire high-tech goods for criminal purposes. What is
more, a number of countries are eager to acquire
WMD as well as long-range delivery systems. Credible deterrence, backed up by defence, policing and
intelligence measures to prevent proliferation, plus
effective control of exports remain important elements for containing this risk; the same applies to
arms control, disarmament, and contractual agreements on the non-proliferation of WMD.

Furthermore, Germany is being confronted to an
increasing extent with the after-effects of intrastate


and regional conflicts, destabilisation, and the internal disintegration of states, as well as the privatisation
of force that frequently ensues.

The strategies previously effective in warding off
external dangers, such as deterrence and containment, are inadequate to deal with the new asymmetric threats also often emanating from non-state actors. Effective security planning thus calls for preventive, efficient and coherent cooperation at national
and international level, successfully tackling the root

causes.

Germany’s security is inseparably linked to the political development of Europe, indeed of the whole
world. Today Germany is part of an ever closer-knit
Europe that has overcome its artificial postwar division. An important role in the future shaping of Europe, and beyond, falls to united Germany because of
its size, population figures, economic power and
geographical location at the heart of the continent.

Germany stands by its international responsibility
for freedom and peace and, in doing so, strives for
the long-term protection and welfare of its citizens. It
is determined to exploit the greater freedom and
room for shaping progress in a world of globalisation


and, together with its allies and partners, to address
crisis developments that affect its security.

Since the mid nineties, the organisations vital to the
security of Germany have evolved significantly and
adapted to the new risks and challenges.

The North Atlantic Alliance, in its Strategic Concept of 1999, defined conflict prevention and crisis
management as a core task of the Alliance, in order to strengthen the security and stability of the

Euro-Atlantic area. New capability requirements
reflecting the changed spectrum of tasks of NATO
have been laid down for the armed forces of the
NATO countries in the years since then. The Alliance has, at the same time, developed an active
partnership policy, opened itself to the new
democracies in Eastern and South-Eastern Europe
and, as a result, decisively consolidated Europe as
an area of stability.

The European Union has grown steadily closer
together since the early nineties. It has continued
to develop a greater capability for action on foreign and security policy matters. It has defined
military and civilian headline goals, established
politico-military structures for operations, set up


**14** **15**


-----

the European Defence Agency (EDA) and, in 2003,
adopted a European Security Strategy. Europe has
hence put the necessary measures in place to meet
its share of responsibility for global security more
effectively in future and to help bring about a safe
world.

The end of the East-West conflict has given the
United Nations greater scope to fulfil the task of
preserving world peace and international security,
as defined in its Charter. Ever greater hopes are
being pinned on the UN to ensure global peace.
As a result, the UN is turning to NATO and the EU
more frequently for assistance.

As NATO, the EU and the UN have adapted to the
changed world, the tasks facing the member countries have also increased. Germany, in its Defence
Policy Guidelines (2003) and Bundeswehr Concept
(2004), has drawn far-reaching consequences from
the changed situation for the Bundeswehr. For years
now the Bundeswehr has consistently pursued the
course of transition towards an expeditionary force,
involving radical transformation. Since the mid
nineties Bundeswehr personnel have seen service in

the cause of peace in regions such as the Balkans, the
Caucasus, the Horn of Africa, the African continent,
the Middle East, and Asia. The number of these missions, their durations and personnel strengths, the
areas of deployment and the mandates involved
underscore how security policy has changed over the
past twelve years.

Global change is an ongoing process and will, also in
future, involve constant adaptation to new situations
and circumstances. Germany, together with its partners and allies, is taking up the challenges this poses
and is helping to shape the process commensurate
with our responsibility and interests.


**1.2 The Strategic Context – Global Challenges,**
**Opportunities, Risks and Dangers**

Today, our security policy faces new and ever more
complex challenges. Transborder risks as well as conflicts within and between states are putting Germany
to the test in a completely new way. We therefore
need to take precautions against risks and threats to
our security and to counter them in good time at
source.

Given such threats posed by WMD and international
terrorism, internal and external security are overlapping more and more. The Armed Forces must be
prepared to make their capabilities available in the
homeland, too, in support of the security and protection of our citizens.

Globalisation
The process of globalisation is affecting every state
and society around the world. The evolution and
progressive networking of international flows of
trade, investments, travel, communication and
knowledge are primarily opening up new opportunities. Germany, whose economic prosperity depends

on access to raw materials, goods and ideas, has an
elementary interest in peaceful competition of
thoughts and views, an open world trade system and
unrestricted transportation routes. The hugely accelerated and facilitated exchange of ideas and technology is a further characteristic of globalisation. Societies
are becoming more mutually dependent. Major
financial transactions move aroundthe world within
seconds, and the Internet and satellite communication
network people at the remotest locations. The global
village is becoming reality.

These developments also involve new risks that, to
a differing degree, can have direct or indirect implications for the external and internal security of
Germany and its citizens. The downside of the free


exchange of information and ideas is the risk of
states, non-state actors, international terrorists or
organised crime illegally appropriating and misusing sensitive knowledge, technologies and new
capabilities. Germany’s political and economic
structures as well as its critical infrastructure have
become more vulnerable as a result, not least where
criminal activities, terrorist acts, or military attacks
from or on cyberspace are concerned. These new
types of risks cannot, however, be countered by solely
or predominantly using military means.

In some places, globalisation is perceived as a threat
to cultural identity and as cementing inequality, and
is rejected or even actively opposed. Many of the new
risks and security challenges accompanying globalisation are transnational in character, being brought
about by non-state actors and affecting our security
even over major distances. Poverty, underdevelopment, poor education, shortage of resources, natural
disasters, environmental destruction, diseases, inequality and human rights violations are just some of
the factors that provide a breeding ground for illegal
migration and secular as well as religious extremism.
They can thus become causes of instability and, in

their most radical form, pave the way for international
terrorism. In an increasingly interdependent world,
these risks not only have an influence on their immediate environment but also affect the security of the
international community as a whole in various ways.


**16** **17**


-----

Terrorism
The terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001 in New
York and Washington, and the subsequent series
of terror acts stretching from Bali to Madrid and
London, have illustrated the vulnerability of modern
states and societies worldwide. They underline that
the most immediate danger to our security currently
emanates from international terrorism perpetrated
methodically in transnational networks. With their
attacks, terrorists aim to achieve the greatest possible
media impact, to intimidate people, and to shake the
polity, not least of all by attacking civilian targets of
symbolic character, fully aware that there will be a
high number of casualties. To these ends, terrorists
are making ever greater use of new technologies and
modern means of communication. Germany cannot
escape this danger, there having been repeated
instances where also German citizens have lost their
lives in such attacks.

Proliferation and Military Build-up
The signs of military build-up observed in many parts
of the world and the excessive accumulation of military materiel can have negative implications for
regional stability and, indirectly, for Germany. The

proliferation of WMD and their means of delivery
potentially represents the greatest threat to global
security and, consequently, one of the largest political challenges to the international community of
states. This applies particularly to the contingency
of terrorist groups and non-state actors obtaining
access to radiological, chemical and biological
agents. Sources of proliferation often stem from inadequate national export controls or state actors
deliberately trading in proliferation-relevant goods.


Regional Conflicts
Unresolved political conflicts on the periphery of the
European area of stability and in remoter regions
are, to a growing extent, also impinging on the security of Germany and its European partners. The erosion of state structures, the disintegration of entire
nations, frequently resulting in civil wars, and the
creation of regions that place themselves outside the
international order all open up areas where armed
groups and terrorist organisations can operate and
take refuge. They encourage organised crime, corruption, trafficking in human beings, and the cultivation of drug economies. In consequence, they not
only have a destabilising effect on their immediate
environment but also diversely affect the security of
the international community in the globalised
world. The Taliban regime in Afghanistan was an
example of this, until the international community
of states succeeded in putting the country on track
towards stabilisation under the leadership of a democratically legitimised government.

Even on the European continent and at its periphery,
there is still potential for intra- and inter-state conflicts along ethnic and religious dividing lines. The

collapse of the former Yugoslavia in the Balkans in
the nineteen-nineties, for instance, led to grave violations of human rights, feuding and civil war, including thousands of dead and hundreds of thousands of refugees, and could only be ended through
resolute and concerted intervention by the international community of states. By 1998 it was possible, in
the course of the NATO-led stabilisation operations
IFOR (Implementation Force) and SFOR (Stabilisation
Force), to create a secure environment in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, making reconstruction as well as
the return of over 400,000 refugees from Germany
possible.


Illegal Arms Trade
Uncontrolled exports of conventional arms and
illegal international arms trading have continued to
increase in recent years. Easy availability and the
misuse especially of small arms and light weapons
prolong and aggravate conflicts, and contribute
towards the destabilisation of societies and states.

Obstacles to Development and Fragile Statehood
In parts of Africa and Asia, supply and distribution
problems, besides the factors inherent in globalisation, repeatedly affect political and social stability.
The consequences of climate changes may compound
these effects even further. Economic and ecological
factors, frequently amplified by inefficiency and
corruption up to government level, give rise to political tensions. State failure and uncontrolled migration
can play a role in the destabilisation of entire regions
and have a lasting, negative effect on international
security. In this connection the responsibility for the
security of our country stands alongside the moral
obligation to provide assistance.

Transportation Routes – Resources – Communication
Germany has a particular interest in international

stability and an unhindered exchange of goods
because of its ever closer integration into the world
economy. Like many other nations it is highly
dependent on a secure supply of raw materials and
safe transportation routes around the world, as well
as reliant on functioning information and communication systems. Distortions in international relations,
disruptions in the flows of raw materials and goods
due to increasing piracy, for example, and interruptions in worldwide communications cannot fail in an
interdependent world to have repercussions on the
national economy, prosperity and social peace.


**18** **19**


-----

German security policy takes account of general
long-term conditions as well as changing interests.
The constants include Germany’s geographical location at the heart of Europe and the experience gained
from German and European history, our worldwide
integration as a trading and industrialised nation,
and international obligations arising particularly
from our membership of the United Nations, the
European Union and NATO. German security policy
also has to take account of developments in geographically remote regions, insofar as they affect our
interests. These are not static, but contingent on
international constellations and developments. In
the age of globalisation, interests can no longer be
defined solely in geographical terms.

The central goal of German foreign and security policy continues to be to shape the transatlantic partnership in the Alliance with the future in mind, and to
cultivate the close and trusting relationship with the
USA. Now and in the future, the fundamental issues
of European security can be only addressed together
with the USA.

A further, overriding goal of German security policy

is to strengthen the European area of stability through
consolidation and expansion of European integration and through a proactive neighbourhood policy
of the European Union with the states of Eastern
Europe, southern Caucasus, Central Asia and the
Mediterranean region. At the same time, we are
striving to develop and deepen a lasting and durable
security partnership with Russia.

The Federal Government additionally attaches great
importance to the development and further deepening of security partnerships with countries in far-away
regions.

German security policy is multilateral in character.
Together with the member states of the European


Energy Security
A secure, sustained and competitive supply of energy
is of strategic importance for the future of Germany
and Europe. Global challenges result, such as the
growing need for energy worldwide, the increasing
regional and inter-regional trade in energy, proliferation risks, rising climatic protection requirements,
and the necessity in developing countries to improve
access to energy thereby opening up opportunities
for economic development. Energy issues will play
an ever more important role for global security in
future. Germany’s and Europe’s growing dependence on imported fossil energy resources calls for an
intensification of the dialogue and cooperation
between producer, transit and consumer countries,
including trade and industry. To ensure energy
supplies in the long term, it will be vital to have differentiated sources of energy, to develop indigenous
forms of renewable energy and a balanced energy
mix, and to reduce the demand for energy by using it
economically and efficiently. It is also imperative to
ensure the security of the energy infrastructure.

Migration
Europe and Germany continue to hold a high attrac
tion for people who have left their homelands because
of wars and civil wars, displacement, persecution,
environmental destruction, poverty, hunger and
other distress situations in order to seek a better life.
The effects of uncontrolled migration on domestic
policy as a consequence of refugee movements are a
growing problem for European societies, whose
capacity for integration can be overtaxed by flows of
civil war and environmental refugees and economic
migrants. To deal with the causes of migration effectively, it is necessary to have in place a range of instruments across the political spectrum that can, in
particular, address the reasons for migration and
strengthen the affected states and societies so that
they themselves can assure security, the respect
of fundamental human rights, and development
opportunities for their people.


Epidemics and Pandemics
Rising levels of migration, international mobility
and global world trade are conducive to the spread
of epidemics and pandemics. The advance of HIV /
AIDS (Human Immunodeficiency Virus / Acquired
Immunodeficiency Syndrome), especially in Africa,
serves to illustrate how such a threat to world health
at the same time brings poverty and social instability
to the regions most heavily affected. Epidemics and
pandemics can develop into a serious threat to stability and peace.


**1.3 Values, Interests and Goals of German**
**Security Policy**

The Basic Law, which lays down Germany’s commitment to the preservation of peace, the unification of
Europe, the observance and strengthening of international law, the peaceful settlement of disputes,
and integration into a system of mutual collective
security, continues to provide valid points of reference.

German security policy is guided by the values
enshrined in the Basic Law and by the goal of safeguarding the interests of our country, in particular:

preserving justice and freedom, democracy,
security and prosperity for the citizens of our
country and protecting them from dangers;

ensuring the sovereignty and integrity of German
territory;

preventing regional crises and conflicts that may
affect Germany’s security, wherever possible, and
helping to control crises;

confronting global challenges, above all the
threat posed by international terrorism and the
proliferation of WMD;

helping to uphold human rights and strengthen
the international order on the basis of international law;

promoting free and unhindered world trade as a
basis for our prosperity thereby helping to overcome the divide between poor and rich regions of
the world.


**20** **21**


-----

Union, Germany is committed to active multilateralism. No state in the world nowadays is able to ensure
its security on its own. Germany therefore safeguards
its security interests primarily in international and
supranational institutions and plays an active role in
shaping their policies.

German security policy is forward-looking. The new
risks and threats to Germany and Europe have their
origin in regional and global developments, often
far beyond the European area of stability. They are
multifarious and dynamic, and will spread if not
addressed promptly. Preventive security can hence
be guaranteed most effectively through early warning and pre-emptive action, and must incorporate
the entire range of security policy instruments.

German security policy is based on a comprehensive
concept of security. Risks and threats have to be addressed with a suitably matched range of instruments.
These include diplomatic, economic, development
policy and policing measures as well as military
means and, where called for, also armed operations.
The latter entail dangers to life and limb and can
have far-reaching political consequences. The Feder
al Government will therefore continue in future to
examine in each individual case what German values
and interests require the operational involvement of
the Bundeswehr.


**1.4 Networked Security**

The chief determinants of future security policy
development are not military, but social, economic,
ecological and cultural conditions, which can be
influenced only through multinational cooperation.
It is therefore not possible to guarantee security by
going it alone, or with armed forces only. What is
called for, rather, is an all-embracing approach that
can only be developed in networked security structures based on a comprehensive national and global
security rationale.

Germany uses its influence in the relevant international and supranational organisations, from the
United Nations, European Union, North Atlantic
Alliance, Organisation for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, International Monetary Fund and World
Bank, through to the G8 framework, to improve the
coherence of the community of states and its capability to take action.

An all-round picture of the situation and, building
upon that, a shared situational understanding of all
the actors form the basis for security policy decisions,

at national and international level. In developing a
picture of the national situation, an interministerial
approach is needed that considers and brings together all aspects. Cooperation between the Federal
Intelligence Service and the military intelligence
organisation of the Bundeswehr has already been
intensified as a step in this direction. In future the
Federal Intelligence Service will, as part of its statutory
responsibilities, take over the task of central situation analysis and updating for the Federal Ministry of
Defence (FMoD) and the Bundeswehr, contingent on
their requirements. This is also to meet the increased
demand for information of forces on operations as a
consequence of the broadened task spectrum of the
Bundeswehr. On the basis of the most accurate infor

mation possible, military instruments can be purposefully deployed as part of a political strategy.

Important steps have been taken to establish an interministerial network structure by setting up the
“Crisis Response Centre of the Federal Foreign Office”,
where the crisis unit of the Federal Government
meets in the event of civil crises and disasters abroad,
the “National Air Security Centre”, the “Joint CounterTerrorism Centre”, and various facilities at Federal
and Land level for the protection of the population.
This structure remains open to adjustments to cope
with changed tasks. An intensified exchange of
personnel between the supreme federal authorities,
and suitable continuation training measures, for
instance at the Federal College for Security Studies,
will additionally help to expand interministerial
cooperation.

The Federal Government’s overall concept of “Civilian Crisis Prevention, Conflict Resolution and PostConflict Peace Building” is an element of this national security rationale. It comprises the areas of economic, environmental, financial, educational and
social policy, among others, besides the classic fields

of foreign, security, defence and development policy. The necessity of networking security structures
and their main actors derives from this, with the
elimination of structural crisis causes being seen as a
cross-cutting, inter-agency task. The concept is being
implemented under the responsibility of an interministerial steering group to which all federal ministries belong.


**The ‘Civilian Crisis Prevention’ Action Plan**
**as an Example of Interministerial and**
**Networked Security Provision**

With the ‘Civilian Crisis Prevention, Conflict Resolution
and Post-Conflict Peace Building’ Action Plan, the Federal
Government has reaffirmed its resolve to gradually give
German contributions to peace, security and development a more preventive orientation, thus making them
more effective and sustainable. By taking more and broader-based preventive measures, the risk of evolving crises
and hence the necessity of military crisis response operations in particular is to be reduced. Lessons learned in the
past few years have shown that the chances of sustainable
peace solutions increase when actors from different fields
of politics bring their instruments to bear by using an
integrated approach. The concept of ‘Civilian Crisis Prevention, Conflict Resolution and Post-Conflict Peace
Building’, which follows the logic of the 2003 European
Security Strategy, integrates all available crisis prevention
instruments in a concerted political approach oriented
towards attaining civilian objectives. The term ‘Civilian
Crisis Prevention’ is not to be understood as a delimitation
towards military crisis prevention, but rather includes it.
It includes the handling of conflicts before the outbreak
of violence, crisis management, and also post-conflict
rehabilitation (nation building). It is only through sustainable consolidation of peace and stability and the establishment of ownership on the part of those concerned
that the renewed outbreak of conflicts can be prevented.

**The cornerstones of the Action Plan and the most**
**important measures for its implementation are the**
**following:**

I [Orientation on the broader notion of security,]
and comprehensive interpretation of crisis prevention measures as political instruments to be
used prior to, during and after a conflict;

I [The principle of cross-cutting, coherent action]
through intermeshing of all available instruments;

I [The realisation that cooperation and transparen-]
cy at national level must be supported by appropriate crisis prevention structures, and that effective crisis prevention in a multilateral integrated
network requires the availability, capability and
networking of respective structures at European
and global level;

I [The complementary role of civilian society and]
non-state actors, giving special consideration to
the peace potential of women.


**22** **23**


-----

point of view, the Strategic Partnership between
NATO and the European Union plays a prominent
role in this regard.

Germany has supported NATO’s open-door policy
from an early stage. This policy led to the accession
of three former Warsaw Pact members in 1999 and
of another seven countries in 2004. Article 10 of the
1949 Washington Treaty will continue to apply, with
the door still open to states seeking membership
provided that they recognise NATO’s goals and are
able to contribute to common security.

Instabilities, crises and conflicts are impacting on
the Alliance ever more frequently and directly as a
consequence of globalisation. Over the past decade
its operational spectrum has changed profoundly.
Peacekeeping, stabilisation and peace enforcement
operations, to an increasing extent in cooperation
with the European Union, are NATO’s central fields
of activity today. Together with the forces of allied
and friendly nations, the Bundeswehr is making a
considerable contribution to the NATO missions in
Afghanistan, in Kosovo and to the maritime operation ACTIVE ENDEAVOUR in the Mediterranean.

Following the terror attacks of 11 September 2001,
NATO declared for the first time in its history that this
was an Article 5 contingency as defined in the North
Atlantic Treaty. All operations serve the purpose of
active preventive security through timely measures
geared to preventing or containing violent conflicts
and, following an armed conflict, to supporting sustainable stabilisation and the reconstruction of state
and societal structures.

The further development of NATO’s partnership policy continues to be an integral element of its cooperative external relations. In view of NATO’s growing
commitment beyond the borders of the Alliance it is
increasingly important to maintain well-functioning
relations with other international organisations and


#### 2 German Security Policy in the International Environment


No state is able to ensure peace, freedom, security and
prosperity for itself and its citizens on its own. National security planning calls for networked structures in
Germany and close multinational coordination. German security policy is committed to effective multilateralism, based on the conviction that the challenges to

international security can only be mastered together
with partners. The observance and strengthening of
international law as well as the multilateral orientation of German foreign and security policy are values
that are explicitly anchored in the Basic Law.


**2.1 North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO)**

Lines of Development
The transatlantic partnership remains the bedrock
of common security for Germany and Europe. It is the
backbone of the North Atlantic Alliance, which in

turn is the cornerstone of German security and defence policy. NATO is committed to safeguarding the
principles of democracy, freedom and the rule of law
and lays the foundation for collective defence. Forming the link between two continents, it provides a
unique range of political and military instruments
for peacekeeping and peace restoration. In this
regard, it is the most successful alliance in history.

The global challenges confronting German security
would be insurmountable in the long run without an
efficient transatlantic alliance based on mutual trust
of the member states. The friendly relations between
Germany and the United States of America have developed historically; they are based on common cultural roots, and are an expression of a community of


shared values and interests that has proved its worth
time and again. The reconstruction of Germany and
its democratic and peaceful reunification would not
have been possible without the support of the United
States of America. The fundamental issues of European security can be addressed only in a joint effort
with the United States of America, and this will continue to hold true in future. The bonds between Germany and the United States must be continually fostered and deepened, though, by means of mutual
consultation and coordinated action. Maintaining a
close and trusting relationship with the USA is paramount for Germany’s security in the 21st century.

Due to its political ambition, its economic weight, its
military capabilities and resulting influence, the USA
has always played a prominent part in the Alliance.
Germany continues to seek compatibility and interoperability of its Armed Forces with those of both
the United States and its other allies. This is crucial if
Germany is to maintain its military capability to honour alliance commitments and take action so that it
can continue to fulfil its role as a relevant partner.

Even against the backdrop of the changing interna
tional political environment, NATO offers a reliable
security framework to Europeans and Americans
alike. Over the past 15 years the Alliance has repeatedly drawn political and conceptual conclusions
from the changed security situation. It has changed
its military capability profile, conducted military
crisis management operations in Europe and beyond,
admitted transition states of Central-Eastern and
South-Eastern Europe, and established a close network of partnerships beyond the borders of the
Alliance. The changed tasks in Europe and elsewhere,
and NATO’s operational spectrum resulting from
them, call for a broad process of consultation in the
North Atlantic Council, extended political dialogue
with partners, and closer cooperation with international and regional organisations. From the German


**24** **25**


-----

states. Intensive political dialogue in a spirit of trust
and multi-faceted practical cooperation help to establish a basis for political and operational support
of NATO missions by numerous partner nations.

With the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC),
which Germany has been instrumental in advancing,
NATO has rendered a considerable contribution to
the stabilisation of Eastern Europe and Central Asia.
In future, the important thing will be to exploit the
partnerships and the range of instruments created
under the Partnership for Peace (PfP) project more
intensively and to improve the political dialogue
“at 46”, as well as to extend the participation of EAPC
members in NATO-led operations.

Since the NATO-Russia Founding Act was adopted
in 1997, relations with Russia have been of special
importance. The NATO-Russia Council, which was
established in its present form in 2002, is a forum
where the Alliance members and Russia cooperate
“at 27” on an equal footing. This holds true for both
political dialogue and practical cooperation. Russia’s
participation in the NATO-led peace mission in Kosovo from 1999 to 2003 is a prominent example of such

successful cooperation. The joint fight against international terrorism is another field where Russia and
NATO work together.

NATO has maintained a special partnership with
Ukraine since the conclusion of the NATO-Ukraine
Charter in 1997. This partnership is an important
contribution to supporting the country’s defence
sector reforms and its political transformation. The
main fields of cooperation are laid down in the 2002
NATO-Ukraine Action Plan. Since 2005, the Alliance
members and Ukraine have been conducting an
intensified dialogue on accession issues. Ukraine,
too, contributes to NATO-led operations.

NATO’s Mediterranean Dialogue has been ongoing
since 1994. NATO offers the Mediterranean Dialogue


countries (participants: NATO states plus Egypt, Algeria, Israel, Jordan, Morocco, Mauretania and Tunesia)
consultations on political issues combined with support in building up efficient forces that are integrated into democratic structures. All this serves to promote mutual transparency, build confidence and
increase interoperability, thus enabling the Mediterranean Dialogue countries to take part in crisis
response operations of the Alliance. The Initiative
established at the 2004 NATO summit in Istanbul on
cooperation with countries of the broader Middle
East region (Istanbul Cooperation Initiative, ICI),
which addresses in the first instance the member
states of the Gulf Cooperation Council (United Arab
Emirates, Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar und Saudi
Arabia), is an offer extended by the Alliance to engage in dialogue and practical cooperation to promote security and stability.

The Alliance is particularly interested in developing
relations with additional partner states that are able
to provide efficient forces as a substantial contribution towards NATO-led operations and are, at the
same time, democracies embracing the same political values and goals as NATO.

The new security environment has led to changes in
the tasks to be mastered by the Alliance. Today they
range from the continuing central commitment to
collective defence, to humanitarian operations in
disaster areas, through to robust stability operations
in Europe and at its periphery as well as far beyond
the boundaries of NATO territory. The capabilities
needed for this must also be retained in the future.

A debate on the role of deterrence in the security
environment of the 21st century has been initiated in
the Alliance, the results of which will be incorporated
in a new NATO Strategic Concept at the appropriate
point in time. Besides conventional means, the
Alliance will continue to need nuclear assets in the
foreseeable future as a credible deterrence capability.


The Alliance members’ nuclear forces have a fundamentally political purpose, this being to preserve
peace, prevent coercion and war of any kind. The
allies’ common commitment to preventing war and
the credible demonstration of Alliance solidarity, as
well as the fair sharing of burdens, require Germany
to make a contribution towards nuclear participation commensurate with its role in the Alliance and
the principles laid down in the Strategic Concept of
1999.

At the same time, the Federal Government continues
to pursue the goal of worldwide abolition of all
weapons of mass destruction. Germany itself has
entered into a binding obligation under international law to renounce possession of such weapons.
Since the early nineties, NATO member states have
reduced the number of sub-strategic nuclear
weapons in Europe by more than 85 percent. They
are being kept to the minimum level needed to safeguard peace and stability.

Within the wider set of tasks, the Alliance must be
prepared to conduct a number of concurrent operations of varying type and intensity over increasing

distances and to sustain them for prolonged periods.
This necessitates a fundamentally different force
posture than in the past. In view of continuing pressures on the defence budgets of most allies, it is
therefore important to change and streamline obsolete structures and concentrate the resources available on the capabilities needed in future.


**26** **27**


-----

Transformation
Threats, conflicts and crises in the global environment
are affecting the security needs of the NATO member
states. NATO is meeting the new challenges through
a comprehensive transformation process encompassing its structures and procedures as well as military capabilities and the enhancement of partnership relations. This can only be successful if the member states reach agreement on central issues.

Besides collective defence, NATO’s Strategic Concept
defines the Alliance’s core tasks as being conflict
prevention, crisis management, partnership and
cooperation.

In December 2005 the member states adopted the
Comprehensive Political Guidance (CPG) to take
account of the ever-changing security environment.
It complements the Strategic Concept, refines it in
compliance with Germany’s comprehensive concept
of security, and thus points the discussion on transformation within the Alliance in the right direction.
The CPG covers all NATO planning disciplines and
promotes their harmonisation, thus contributing to
greater efficiency. The central objective is to derive

the future capabilities needed by the armed forces
of the member states and the Alliance in an understandable way. In future, NATO’s efforts will to an
increasing extent focus on stabilisation operations
and military support for the rebuilding of state structures. What is increasingly important in this regard
is the coordinated use of all political and military
instruments and capacities available to NATO. It is
additionally necessary to organise cooperation even
more closely with other international organisations,
in particular with the United Nations and the European Union.

At the same time it will be crucial to retain the capability for collective defence and for conducting intensive military operations. In June 2006, NATO’s


strategic objectives (Level of Ambition, LoA) were
hence realigned accordingly. They describe the
nature, intensity, scale and number of NATO-led
operations that allies want to be able to contribute
to. It is from these that the Alliance’s requirements
for national forces are derived. The capabilities,
strength, readiness level and availability of such
forces are coordinated and harmonised under NATO
force planning.

For conflict prevention and crisis management, the
armed forces of the NATO member states need to be
better geared to jointness and to be able to perform
a wide range of tasks in a combined environment.
The requirements that armed forces have to meet for
crisis response operations are just as complex as
those entailed in high-intensity combat operations
in the context of collective defence. It is therefore
vital for NATO to be able to draw on forces of sufficient
quantity and quality, enabling it to respond appropriately across the entire task spectrum.

The Prague Summit of November 2002 brought
international terrorism, asymmetric threats and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction into the

focus of threat analysis. NATO has made it its business
to counter the risks and dangers to its security at
source and, as a result, has expanded its geographical
sphere of action beyond the Euro-Atlantic area. The
adoption of a comprehensive catalogue of measures
to combat international terrorism, an extensive
package aimed at transforming military capabilities,
and the resolution to improve the Alliance’s capabilities to counter nuclear, biological, radiological and
chemical threats underscore NATO’s reorientation
(Prague Capabilities Commitment, PCC).

The Alliance’s military transformation also manifests
itself in a modified command structure, a new force
structure and the development of new capabilities.
The hallmark of the NATO command structure reform


**The Alliance’s Strategic Concept of 1999 –**
**NATO’s fundamental security tasks**

As an Alliance of nations committed to the Washington
Treaty and the United Nations Charter, the Alliance performs the following fundamental security tasks:

I **[Security: ][To provide an indispensable foundation]**
for a stable Euro-Atlantic security environment,
based on the growth of democratic institutions and
commitment to the peaceful resolution of disputes,
in which no country would be able to intimidate any
other through the threat of force

I **[Consultation: ][To serve as an essential transatlantic]**
forum for Allied consultations on any issues that
affect their vital interests and for appropriate coordination of their efforts in fields of common concern

I **[Deterrence and Defence: ][To deter and defend]**
against any threat of aggression against any NATO
member state as provided for in Articles 5 and 6 of
the Washington Treaty

I **[In order to enhance the security and stability of]**
**the Euro-Atlantic area:**

I Crisis Management: To stand ready, case-by-case
and by consensus, in conformity with Article 7 of
the Washington Treaty, to contribute to effective
conflict prevention and to engage actively in crisis
management, including crisis response operations

I Partnership: To promote wide-ranging partnership, cooperation, and dialogue with other countries in the Euro-Atlantic area, with the aim of
increasing transparency, mutual confidence and the
capacity for joint action with the Alliance


process over the past few years has been the synchronised division of responsibilities into operations on
the one hand and transformation on the other. The
two Strategic Commands work in close consultation
and have a decisive share in shaping the military
aspect of the Alliance, with the Military Committee
exercising executive and coordinating authority.
The Supreme Allied Commander Europe (SACEUR) is
in charge of the planning and conduct of all Alliance
operations, whilst the Supreme Allied Commander
Transformation (SACT) is responsible for NATO’s continuing adjustment to operations and further development of concepts, capabilities, forces and means
in the light of lessons learned from current operations
and exercises. This is not least intended to speed up
political and military decision-making cycles within
the scope of effects-based, network-enabled operations in order to be able to adapt to changing situations more promptly and more flexibly.

The changed force structure also reflects NATO’s
reorientation on security and strategic issues. The
improvement of its command and control capability,
deployability, sustainability and operational readiness across the entire task spectrum serves to strength
enNATO’s capacity for action and adapt it to the new
challenges. The establishment of the NATO Response
Force (NRF), in particular, underscores this development. The NRF has to fulfil an important dual role:
on the one hand, it is a well-trained and suitably
equipped, operationally ready force and, on the
other hand, it serves as a transformation catalyst for
constant improvement of the military capabilities of
all contributing nations. This multinational response
force consisting of land, air and maritime components
is deployable within days across the entire broadened spectrum of tasks. It is planned that the NRF will
achieve full operational capability by the end of 2006.
It will comprise a land component up to brigade size,
a maritime component up to naval task force size
and an air component capable of 200 combat sorties


**28** **29**


-----

**NATO COMMAND STRUCTURE**

**Allied Command Operations (ACO)**

**Allied** **Supreme Allied Commander Europe**
**Submarine** **(SACEUR)**
**Command** **Headquarters Allied Command**

**Operations Mons, BEL**

**Joint Force** **Joint** **Joint Force**
**Command** **Command** **Command**
**Brunssum, NLD** **Lisbon, PRT** **Naples, ITA**

**Air** **Maritime** **Land** **Air** **Maritime** **Land**
**Component** **Component** **Component** **Component** **Component** **Component**
**Command** **Command** **Command** **Command** **Command** **Command**
**Ramstein, DEU** **Northwood, GBR** **Heidelberg, DEU** **Izmir, TUR** **Naples, ITA** **Madrid, ESP**

**Combined Air** **Combined Air**
**Operations** **Operations**
**Centre 1** **Centre 3**
**Uedem, DEU** **P. Renatico, ITA**

**Deployable Com-** **Deployable Com-**
**bined Air Opera-** **bined Air Opera-**
**tions Centre** **tions Centre**
**Uedem, DEU** **P. Renatico, ITA**

**Combined Air** **Combined Air**
**Operations** **Operations**
**Centre 2** **Centre 4**
**Finderup, DNK** **Larissa, GRC**

_The Supreme Allied Commander Europe (SACEUR) is responsible to the political leadership for the planning, conduct and preparation of_
_operations as well as follow-up activities. Command authority over the forces made available by the member nations is transferred to him._


**NATO COMMAND STRUCTURE**

**Allied Command Transformation (ACT)**

|Headquarters SACT Norfolk, USA dual-hatted|United States Joint Forces Command|
|---|---|


_The Supreme Allied Commander Transformation (SACT), dual-hatted as Commander, US Joint Forces Command is, at the level of Strategic_
_Commanders, responsible for the continuous transformation of NATO, his chief task being to ensure that the Alliance is fit for the future by_
_further developing capabilities, in particular, and enhancing interoperability._


**Supreme Allied Commander Transformation (SACT)**


**Strategic**
**Concepts,**
**Policy, Inter-**
**operability**


**Joint Analysis,**
**Concept**
**Development &**
**Experimentation**


**Future**
**Capabilities,**
**Research &**
**Technology**


**<**


**30** **31**


-----

responsibility for the development of the European
Union because of their size, their economic resources
and their historic role. The institutional basis for the
close cooperation between the two countries is the
Elysée Treaty of 1963. The Franco-German Defence
and Security Council was founded in 1988. It facilitates coordination and agreement and serves to
establish common positions. Important initiatives
for strengthening the European Security and Defence
Policy (ESDP) result from this cooperation.

The United Kingdom, given its capabilities, expertise
and experience, also has a crucial role to play in
furthering Europe’s capacity for action on security
matters. Time and again in the past, fresh impetus
to strengthen transatlantic and, consequently, European security has come from the United Kingdom.
Germany needs the United Kingdom as an eminent
partner in the European Union and NATO.

Moreover, great importance is attached to cooperation with our other direct neighbours.

European Security and Defence Policy
In future, the European Union itself must contribute

to its security to a greater extent than in the past.
Only a strong, united Europe capable of action on
security matters can help to shoulder responsibility
in overcoming the challenges to collective security.
The development of the European Security and Defence Policy as an integral part of the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) is an expression of this
awareness, as is the European Security Strategy (ESS)
adopted by the European Council in December 2003.

The European Security and Defence Policy was “born”
in Cologne, Germany, in June 1999 during the German
Council Presidency. The logic of this Policy is summarised in the conclusions of the European Council
adopted in Helsinki in December 1999:

**33**


a day, totalling some 25,000 military personnel who
can be assembled to form the necessary force packages tailored to the mission in hand and deployable
at very short notice. Fully trained forces committed
by the armed forces of the NATO member states on a
six-month rotation schedule make up the NRF, which
thus impacts on the overall capabilities of the Alliance.
Each NRF contingent is to cover the entire spectrum
of tasks up to and including high-intensity combat
operations for a limited period of time autonomously.

As regards new capabilities, the Alliance is concerned
with filling gaps that have been identified primarily
in the areas of strategic reconnaissance, command
and control and airlift capabilities. Strategic airlift,
notably of outsize cargo, is just one example of the
most serious capability gaps in NATO, as well as in
the EU member states. For this reason, Germany has
realised the Strategic Airlift Interim Solution (SALIS )
project together with other nations. This project
guarantees access to the strategic airlift capacity
required to deploy rapid response forces.

Political and military transformation of the Alliance
are inextricably linked. The Alliance can only fulfil its

tasks if its members show the same political will to
analyse the relevant security problems in a collective
approach, to decide by consensus and then to take
joint action. It is therefore crucial that the Alliance’s
political and military transformation is continued
successfully. Germany will play an active part in this
process by swiftly and fully implementing the conceptual decisions taken.

**32**


**NATO Response Force**

I Land component: brigade-size

I Sea component: naval task force level

I Air component: 200 sorties a day

The NRF dates back to a decision taken by the North
Atlantic Council at the Prague Summit in November
2002 to create a multilateral response force.

To be able to meet the full spectrum of possible future
missions, the NRF must be ready to move quickly to
wherever military forces are needed. As a core element
of NATO’s transformation process, the NRF consists of
technologically advanced, flexible, deployable, interoperable and sustainable forces. The NRF is hence to be a
catalyst for focusing and promoting improvements in
the Alliance’s military capabilities.

The NRF will achieve full operational readiness at 30
days’ notice and can operate as a stand-alone force in
crisis areas for approximately 30 days.


**2.2 European Union (EU)**

The European Union stands for political stability,
security and prosperity in Germany and its other
member states. Yet also outside Europe the EU is seen
as a model for a successful economic and political
integrative community that can be used to export
prosperity and stability. It remains the pre-eminent
political goal of Germany, therefore, to strengthen
the European Union as the core of the European area
of stability and to push ahead with the process of
European integration. The prospect of accession,
and also the global network of cooperation agreements and programmes of the EU have spurred
democratisation and economic development as well
as the peaceful settlement of conflicts, transformations to a market economy, and democratic control
of security forces. Examples include the Gothenburg
Programme for the Prevention of Violent Conflicts,
or the Cotonou Agreement regulating cooperation
with African, Caribbean and Pacific states. Germany’s
national interests can best be asserted in a capable
European Union.

Europe can exert its influence most effectively if it

speaks with one voice. This requires a constant
conciliation of interests between all member states
as well as a culture of dialogue that permits open
exchange, is characterised by mutual understanding
and consideration, at the same time making effective
leadership possible. Trusting bilateral relations
between the EU partners form the foundation for
constructive decisions in Brussels.

Close Franco-German relations have helped significantly over the past decades to make European integration a success. Owing to their history, intensity
and special institutionalisation they occupy a prominent position in the close cooperation between the
25 EU member states. Both countries have a special


-----

‘The European Council underlines its determination
to develop an autonomous capacity to take decisions
and, where NATO as a whole is not engaged, to launch
and conduct EU-led military operations in response
to international crises. This process will avoid unnecessary duplication and does not imply the creation of
a European army.’

At the same time the heads of state and government
decided to ‘improve and make more effective use of
resources in civilian crisis management in which the
Union and the Member States already have considerable experience.’

The ESDP aims to strengthen Europe’s capacity to act
in the field of civilian and military crisis management.
It is characterised by the parallel build-up of civilian
and military capabilities, which is also its particular
strength. A good seven years since its establishment,
the European Union has increasingly gained recognition and become a valuable actor in international
crisis management: in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
in Macedonia, in Georgia, in the Congo, in Aceh
(Indonesia), in Darfur (Sudan), in the Palestinian territories and on the border between the Republic of

Moldova and Ukraine. The replacement of the NATOled SFOR operation by the EU Operation ALTHEA
(European Union Force, EUFOR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina shows what strides in quality the ESDP has
achieved.

The European Security Strategy is the strategic frameworkfor employing the range of instruments available to the European Union. The ESS is in accord with
the goals and interests of German security policy. It
serves to define, in strategic terms, the role and tasks
of the EU in a drastically changed security environment, and in the conditions of a globalised world.


The ESS reflects the increased clout of the enlarged
Union, which has assumed responsibility as a global
actor. At the same time, it identifies ways in which
the EU can bring to bear its political, economic and
military weight - and that of its member states - more
effectively and coherently, and with improved capabilities. It provides the EU’s overarching range of
instruments for conflict prevention, crisis management and post-crisis activities to confront the global
challenges.

The Strategy focuses on three objectives. To address
new threats, the European Union must first commit
itself early on with its entire available range of instruments. Whenever possible, action should be taken
even before a crisis develops. Secondly, the ESS places
emphasis on establishing peace and stability in the
Union’s immediate neighbourhood. It draws upon
the EU’s longstanding experience with stabilisation
processes in its vicinity. Thirdly, it places the EU
under the obligation to uphold and further develop
international law and calls for the strengthening of
the community of states, smoothly functioning international institutions, and a well-regulated world
order.

The European Security Strategy furthermore emphasises the importance of the role of the Charter of the
United Nations as the fundamental framework for
international relations, as well as the irreplaceability
of the transatlantic relationship and the aim of an
effective and balanced partnership with the United
States of America.


**EUROPEAN SECURITY STRATEGY –**
**“A secure Europe in a better world”**


**Security environment**


**Globale**

**Global challengesHerausforderungen**

**Globalisation**
**Poverty/diseases**
**Competition for natural resources**
**Energy dependence**


**Key threatsHauptbedrohungen**


**Terrorism**
**Proliferation of WMD**
**Regional conflicts**
**Failing states**
**Organised crime**


_The European Security Strategy of December 2003 identifies the main threats and challenges to European security, strategic goals, and_
_implications for European politics._


**34** **35**


-----

**STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS OF THE EU COMMON FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY,**
**INCLUDING THE EUROPEAN SECURITY AND DEFENCE POLICY**


decision as needed, and subsequently augmented.
The Operation Centre is to be able to plan and conduct EU operations involving up to 2,000 personnel
over the entire task spectrum if no national headquarters is designated for the task. This capability
can be utilised particularly in cases where a joint
civil-military mission is called for.

Capabilities
With the European Headline Goal (EHG) adopted in
Helsinki in December 1999 the European Council
formulated a common European objective to establish military rapid reaction forces. This was to enable
the European Union to cope with the entire spectrum of crisis management tasks provided for in the
EU Treaty.

As a result, the member states are today capable of
deploying as many as 60,000 land forces and, depending on the situation, naval and air forces in a
theatre of operations within 60 days. Germany contributes a contingent of up to 18,000 military personnel for this purpose. These troops are able to carry
out the full military range of so-called Petersberg tasks,
as well as operations for a period of at least a year.

The bulk of the EU reaction forces are not kept constantly at the ready and in fixed structures, but are
assembled in response to the situations and missions
as they arise. They are drawn from existing national
and multinational staffs and units.

In June 2004, the European Council reformulated the
military objective of the European Headline Goal.
According to the new Headline Goal 2010, the forces
will be geared to operations that are more likely to
arise. This calls for the capability to carry out various
conflict prevention and crisis management operations on different scales concurrently. This approach
corresponds with the European Security Strategy.


**European Council**
Heads of State and Government


_The EU has adapted its organisation and procedures for CFSP and ESDP in order to meet the complex requirements of crisis management_
_operations. The most important structural decisions were taken at the European Council Meeting in Nice in December 2000._


Structures
The European Union has adapted its European Security and Defence Policy procedures and structures
and created new institutional structures in order to
meet the complex requirements of crisis management operations. The most important decisions in
this regard were taken by the European Council in
Nice in December 2000.

Political decisions relating to European Security and
Defence Policy are, as a rule, made by the General
Affairs and External Relations Council (GAERC), within the framework of which the defence ministers also
meet and take decisions. This takes into account the
EU’s increasing military capabilities and the growing
responsibility of the defence ministers.

In regard to crisis management, the Political and
Security Committee (PSC) assumes political control
and strategic direction of operations on behalf of the
Council. The EU Military Committee (EUMC) as the
decision-making and discussion forum of the chiefs
of defence of the member states or their deputies,
and the Committee for Civilian Aspects of Crisis
Management (CIVCOM), composed of diplomats

and civilian experts, advise the PSC on all issues of
military or civilian crisis management and on the
development of suitable capabilities.

Also fundamentally inherent in the European Union’s
institutional structure is the need for intensive networking of the range of civilian and military instruments. In December 2004, the European Council
approved detailed proposals for improving the EU’s
capabilities for the planning and conduct of operations. The establishment of a Civil-Military Cell enables the EU to make preparatory and coherent plans
for civil-military crisis management operations. This
Cell is also responsible for forming the nucleus of an
Operation Centre that can be activated by a Council


**36** **37**


-----

**Petersberg Tasks**
Treaty of Nice
(Art. 17 (2) Treaty on European Union)

I Humanitarian and rescue tasks

I Peacekeeping tasks

I Tasks of combat forces in crisis man**agement, including peacemaking**

The Headline Goal 2010 is being implemented by
means of, among other things, the EU Battlegroups
Concept agreed on in 2004. The Battlegroups Concept is based on a Franco-British-German initiative
launched in 2003 with the aim of furthering the rapid reaction capabilities of the European Union in the
event of crises. Each battlegroup has a strength of
1,500 multinational personnel and is designed for
rapid and resolute action across the entire EU task
spectrum. If called for by a crisis situation, the battle
groups should be able to begin their mission in the
area of deployment within fifteen days after a Council decision has been taken on the crisis management
concept. A distance of 6,000 kilometres from Brussels
was agreed as the planning basis for operations.

The European Union has set itself the goal of being
able to conduct two concurrent crisis management
operations with one battlegroup, respectively. This
means keeping two battlegroups in the highest state
of readiness at all times. The European Union has had
the first battlegroups of limited operational capability at its disposal since early 2005.


The force elements necessary to assemble a battlegroup either come from a single EU member state or
are contributed multinationally. The Bundeswehr
has participated substantially from the outset in the
implementation of the concept. Once full operational
capability has been established in the first half of
2007, Germany and the Netherlands will form a battlegroup, in which Finland will also participate.

The Federal Government has additionally been successful in inducing the European Union to decisively
upgrade its civilian crisis management capabilities.
In December 2004, the European Council launched
the Civilian Headline Goal 2008, which contains
planning objectives for civilian crisis management.
The implementation of this Headline Goal involves
the strengthening or build-up of those civilian crisis
management capabilities that the EU needs to cope
with future tasks and challenges in the civilian area.
The following priority areas have been identified:
police and the rule of law, civilian administration
and disaster control, monitoring, and providing
support to EU special representatives.

Within the context of implementing the Civilian

Headline Goal 2008, the EU also aims to set up and
deploy integrated Civilian Response Teams (CRTs)
for civilian crisis management. Experts are to be
identified and trained by the end of 2006 for deployment at very short notice in integrated Civilian Response Teams.


**EU Battlegroups**

I [The Battlegroups Concept is based on a Franco-]
British-German initiative from 2003 aimed at furthering the rapid response capabilities of the EU
in the event of crises.

I [Battlegroups are deployable task forces (at 10 to 15]
days’ notice), each with a multinational strength of
some 1,500 military personnel, designed for rapid,
robust action across the full range of tasks of the EU.
They are considered to be best suited for deployment as combat forces in a crisis management context. There are basically no geographical restrictions
as to their deployment. Brussels has agreed on a distance of 6,000 km as the planning basis for operations.

I [The EU has set itself the goal of being able to conduct]
two crisis management operations simultaneously,
using one battlegroup respectively, from 2007
onwards. This involves keeping at least two battlegroups in the highest state of availability at all
times. The European Union has had the first battlegroups of limited operational capability available
since early 2005.


European Defence Agency
The determination to improve the capabilities required in the field of European crisis management
was underscored by the foundation of the European
Defence Agency (EDA) by the European Council in
June 2004. It has the tasks of harmonising the military requirements of the member states, promoting
European armaments cooperation, improving the
effectiveness of European defence research and technology development, strengthening the defence
industrial and technology base, and creating a competitive European market for defence materiel. The
Agency is managed by a steering committee on
which the defence ministers of the participating
states sit under the chairmanship of the Secretary
General / High Representative of the EU. The Agency
is run under the authority of the Council. The General
Affairs and External Relations Council meeting
at defence minister level decides on fundamental
issues regarding the Agency’s activities. The EDA
works together with the European Commission, the
Political and Security Committee and EU Military
Committee as well as international organisations
and groups to fulfil its tasks.

Efficient cooperation on armaments in Europe is
conducive to European security policy goals, furthers
the development of force capabilities, and strengthens the position of the European Union both in competition with the United States of America and as its
cooperation partner. Germany will strive to maintain
a capable and competitive industrial base in core
technological and armaments areas as a prerequisite
for future cooperability.


**38** **39**


-----

**Strategic Partnership between the EU and NATO / Organisations for Europe**


**Berlin Plus Agreement**

**1. Assured access to NATO planning capabilities for**
**the EU**

**2. Availability of previously identified NATO**
**military capabilities and joint assets for EU-led**
**operations**

**3. Options for using elements of the European**
**NATO command structure for EU-led operations,**
**including the European role of the Deputy**
**Supreme Allied Commander Europe (DSACEUR)**

**4. Adaptation of the NATO defence planning**
**system to take the availability of troops for**
**EU-led operations more comprehensively**
**into account**

**5. Conclusion of a security agreement between**
**NATO and the EU on the exchange of informa-**
**tion and data**

more timely use should be made of this possibility in
the case of newly emerging conflicts and crises.

The partnership between the EU and NATO should
be further developed by intensifying the strategic
dialogue on all aspects of security policy. The topics
dealt with at the formal meetings of the NATO Council and the Political and Security Committee of the
EU at ambassador level are currently restricted to
operations involving the Berlin Plus arrangements;
Cyprus and Malta do not participate in these meetings as they are not Partnership for Peace members
and have no security agreements with NATO.
Although there have been positive developments in
the informal dialogue also at minister level, including Cyprus and Malta, a comprehensive partnership
of both organisations with all their members participating is the continued aim of German politics.


**OSCE’s 56 member states**


**NATO’s 26 member states**

Canada
USA

Bulgaria
Iceland
Norway
Romania
Turkey

Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Bosnia and Herzegovina


**EU’s 25 member states**

Belgium
Denmark
Germany
Estonia
France
Greece
United Kingdom
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg

Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Croatia
Liechtenstein
Macedonia


Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Czech Republic
Hungary

Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Russia
San Marino
Switzerland


Finland
Ireland
Malta
Austria
Sweden
Cyprus

Serbia
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
Uzbekistan
Holy See


**2.3 North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) –**
**European Union (EU)**

The Strategic Partnership between NATO and the EU
is a vital pillar of the European and transatlantic security architecture. The EU and NATO are not in competition with one another, but make complementary
contributions to our security. Only together can the
democracies of Europe and North America that belong to both organisations guarantee their security.
Germany will therefore strive for fundamental improvements in the relationship between both organisations so as to achieve closer cooperation and
greater efficiency, avoid duplications, and strengthen


European and transatlantic security as a whole. The
dialogue between the EU and NATO needs improving
at all levels.

Germany is campaigning for a more efficient coordination of NATO and EU activities. This will benefit
the efficiency of both organisations and conserve
resources, which are scarce in all the member states
of both organisations. At present, 19 states are already
members of both organisations. The number of dual
memberships is set to increase over the next few
years. This is one reason why very close coordination
and pragmatic cooperation will be necessary in the
interest of both sides. The Strategic Partnership be

tween the EU and NATO must be further developed
with this in mind.

NATO is, and remains, the foundation for the collective defence of its member states. No other organisation is able to take on this task in the foreseeable
future. It is the transatlantic forum for consultation
and the natural choice for all military operations
involving European and American allies. It has comparative advantages when it comes to complex military crisis management operations requiring robust
and proven military structures, procedures, forces
and capabilities for combat and stabilisation tasks.
Primarily because of the strategic capabilities and
force contributions made available by the USA, it
boasts a unique military potential. The EU, on the
other hand, has a much broader spectrum of capabilities at its disposal, making it well suited for operations and missions that call for the joint employment
of civilian and military assets. It is hence important
to develop the different profiles, areas of expertise
and strengths of the EU and NATO with the aim of
complementarity and to use them as efficiently as
possible.

The permanent arrangements between NATO and
the EU, known as Berlin Plus, provide the framework
for the Strategic Partnership between both organisations for crisis management purposes and improve
the EU’s operational capability. They assure the EU
access to Alliance assets and capabilities for the planning and conduct of EU crisis management operations. Operation CONCORDIA in Macedonia from
March to September 2003 and the hitherto largest
military operation within the scope of ESDP,
Operation ALTHEA in Bosnia and Herzegovina since
December 2004, are examples of successful missions
under these permanent arrangements. The Berlin
Plus arrangements also provide for early political
consultations between both organisations in the
field of crisis management. In future, greater and


**40** **41**


-----

There is additionally the objective, however, of enabling the European Union to plan and lead ESDP
operations autonomously. To do this, it should be
able to draw on force structures of its own, at least to
a limited extent.

The cooperation of both organisations should be
intensified, in particular in the fields of fighting
international terrorism, coordinating civil defence
measures and preventing proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. The expansion and optimisation
of civil-military cooperation also makes good sense.
It is crucial, considering the striven-for complementarity, to broaden cooperation in terms of quality to
include capability development and forces planning.
Furthermore, there are many fields offering potential
for military cooperation, such as training, exercises,
and certification of NRF assets and EU battlegroups.
As NATO and the EU use a single set of forces, the
same military standards should apply as far as possible in both organisations.


**2.4 Organisation for Security and Cooperation**
**in Europe (OSCE)**

The Organisation for Security and Cooperation in
Europe remains the largest pan-European security
organisation, in which the 56 member states, including the USA, Canada, the member states of the European Union, Russia and other successor states to the
former Soviet Union participate on an equal footing.
It stands for a comprehensive concept of security and
plays an important role as a forum for consultation,
cooperation and negotiation. It performs central
tasks, among others in the establishment and improvement of constitutional and democratic structures, in protecting human and minority rights,
in the promotion of civil society development, in
election monitoring, conventional arms control and
military transparency, in economic and environmental cooperation, as well as in the field of early
warning, conflict prevention, crisis management
and post-crisis rehabilitation.

The OSCE is founded on comprehensive common
principles and obligations in the human, economicecological and security dimensions (known as the

OSCE Acquis). All OSCE participating states are committed to these politically binding rules and obligations, which are the legitimate basis of reference for
dialogue and cooperation between the OSCE participating states.

To implement these obligations, the OSCE has created a unique and differentiated range of instruments.
These include, in particular, its Warsaw-based Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
(ODIHR) and election monitoring and field missions.
In the OSCE election monitoring missions, professional observers determine whether OSCE standards
for free and fair elections are being observed so that
the fundamental requirements for the expression of


democratic will are met. Field missions on the ground
in 19 of the OSCE participating states are making
significant contributions towards promoting the
rule of law and establishing democratic institutions.
A total of 3,200 experts accompany, advise and support participating states from Sarajevo to Astana in
their reform projects and thus assist in overcoming
dividing lines in Europe. Their activities comprise
the entire spectrum of the OSCE Acquis and include
conflict prevention and mediation (e.g. Transnistria /
Republic of Moldova, South Ossetia / Georgia and
Nagorno-Karabakh).

Because the OSCE is an important instrument of foreign and security policy, Germany supports it by
making substantial political, financial and personnel
contributions. In 2005 alone, 80 German experts
were assigned to the Secretariat, to institutions and
OSCE missions, and about 350 election monitors
were deployed on OSCE election monitoring missions.
Within the scope of the reform discussion in the
OSCE, Germany lends its support to a comprehensive
strengthening of the OSCE as a consultation forum
for security policy, as well as to the preservation and
further development of the Acquis and OSCE instru
ments.


**2.5 United Nations (UN)**

The United Nations is the only universal international
organisation. Its Charter provides the fundamental
international law framework for international relations. The United Nations Security Council has prime
responsibility for safeguarding world peace and
international security. The United Nations plays an
outstanding role in dealing with a multitude of issues
relating to a wider concept of security: peacekeeping
and peacemaking operations, the fight against
hunger and poverty, the concerns about sustainable
development, overcoming the North-South divide,
combating global pandemics and diseases as well
as drug trafficking, and the protection of natural
resources. Germany is committed to strengthening
the United Nations and furnishing it with the requisite means for accomplishing its tasks.

There has been a fundamental change in the number
and type of UN missions since the East-West conflict
ended. Currently amounting to approximately
75,000, the numbers of military and police personnel
deployed on these missions have increased considerably.

After the setbacks suffered in the mid nineties (Somalia, Rwanda, Srebrenica), the UN peace missions
underwent an intensive reform process. Since the
Brahimi Report was submitted in 2000, there has
been agreement that blue helmet missions must be
adequately furnished in terms of equipment and
personnel, and in most cases with a robust mandate,
permitting them to use force not only in self-defence
but also in fulfilling their mission and in protecting
the civilian population at risk.

Over the past few years, a sort of division of labour
has evolved in the framework of which the classic
troop-contributing countries of the Third World


**42** **43**


-----

have provided entire units, while the industrial
countries have contributed so-called enabling
elements, i.e. limited capabilities such as strategic
and tactical airlift, logistics, military observers, and
field medical services. Germany is also under special
obligation to make respective contributions.

Another approach to dealing with the strain on the
United Nations' capacities is to make increased use
of regional organisations in their own regions and
elsewhere. For example, the United Nations interacts
with NATO in Afghanistan, with the African Union,
NATO and the EU in Sudan, and with NATO, the EU
and OSCE in Kosovo, although not necessarily all of
these organisations provide troops. In the Balkans
the tasks of the United Nations are increasingly being
taken over by the EU.

Over the past few years, greater awareness of the
importance of a more just world order has emerged
where human rights must be protected and international humanitarian law strengthened. Not least due
to the lessons learned in Kosovo, the notion is also
becoming increasingly accepted in international
law that the use of force can be necessary to avert

humanitarian disasters, combat terrorist threats and
protect human rights. The international law doctrine of the Responsibility to Protect has developed
as a result of the lessons learned from the intervention in Kosovo in 1999. Even if the states that have
adopted this doctrine are probably still not in the
majority, the debate about the Responsibility to Protect is increasingly impacting on the ways of thinking in western countries. In the long term, this will
affect the mandating of international peace missions
by the United Nations Security Council as legitimation
under international law is crucial especially when
military force is used.

Germany accepts its share of the responsibility to
strive for world peace and international security


within the framework of the United Nations. As the
third-largest contributor in monetary terms after
the USA and Japan, Germany currently shoulders just
under nine percent of the UN budget and of the
budgets for international peace missions and additionally makes obligatory and voluntary payments
to sub-organisations and special organisations. Furthermore, it participates in humanitarian assistance
measures by providing extensive assets. The Bundeswehr is currently represented by 50 soldiers in other
UN-led missions besides its participation in the
UNIFIL mission in Lebanon. German participation in
this respect focuses mainly on sending specially qualified individuals (military observers, medical personnel) and on the provision of special capabilities, for
example in the fields of planning and logistics. Military planners in the United Nations are also turning
their attention more and more to military capabilities such as the EU Battlegroups and the NATO Response Force.

International peace missions call for common doctrine and training guidelines. Joint training and exercises promote mutual understanding, trust, and
professionalism. The Bundeswehr conducts appro
priate training at its UN Training Centre in Hammelburg and also trains officers in international courses
at the Bundeswehr Command and Staff College in
Hamburg for assignments to UN missions. Furthermore, the Bundeswehr participates in peacekeeping
exercises and in the exchange of teaching staff and
students with UN training centres. By contributing
Bundeswehr forces to UN missions and detaching
national experts to the UN Secretariat or UN special
organisations, Germany is able to actively participate in strengthening the United Nations as a world
organisation.

Germany is actively engaged in promoting a sweeping and comprehensive reform of the United Nations,
which must also include the reform of the Security


Council. Germany remains prepared to accept greater
responsibility, also by assuming a permanent seat on
the Security Council.

Implementing the resolutions of the September 2005
summit, and based on the recommendations of the
UN Secretary General, the Peace Consolidation Commission was established in December 2005 to close
a gap in the UN system. It is designed to bring all the
relevant actors together at one table with the aim of
providing and coordinating resources and developing integrated strategies for post-conflict peace
building and reconstruction. Germany is a founding
member of the Peace Consolidation Commission. In
March 2006, the member states agreed to establish
a Human Rights Council as a successor organisation
to replace the disbanded Human Rights Commission.
Germany, a founding member, was elected to the
Council for a three-year term.


**2.6 Arms Control and Disarmament**

Arms control, disarmament, non-proliferation and a
restrictive armaments export policy remain important elements of a German security policy oriented
towards conflict prevention.

Germany pursues a multilateral approach in this
respect, striving for cooperative solutions in the conviction that an active arms control policy based on
cooperation and equality can make an important
contribution to regional and global stability. To promote its arms control and non-proliferation objectives, the Federal Government is strongly engaged in
the pertinent international institutions and forums,
in particular in the United Nations, the Disarmament
Conference, the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the G8.

Given the threat emanating from weapons of mass
destruction, special importance has to be attached to
the universalisation and reinforcement of the treaties
on the prohibition and non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, in this regard particularly the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

(NPT), and to the continuation of nuclear disarmament. Of equal importance is the complete and timely destruction, verified by the OPCW, of all chemical
weapons in accordance with the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC).

In the EU, Germany supports arms control policy
efforts within the scope of the EU strategy against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Germany’s arms control policy also addresses the prevention of unauthorised states and non-state actors from
procuring weapons of mass destruction. This includes
the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) proposed by
the USA in 2003, which aims to prevent the sea, air
and land transport of weapons of mass destruction
and delivery systems.


**44** **45**


-----

Among the treaties on the prohibition of weapons of
mass destruction, the CWC is of exemplary importance. This is the first and so far the only multilateral
disarmament treaty to obligate the parties to the
treaty to destroy an entire category of weapons of
mass destruction within set time limits and under
international monitoring. The Federal Government
therefore advocates the full and timely implementation of the destruction regulations in particular, as
well as the universal application of this Convention.

Germany is furthermore committed to securing the
success of the verification conference to be held in
late 2006 regarding the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling
of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons
and on their Destruction (BWC). The Federal Government particularly advocates the establishment of
another four-year work programme for the annual
meetings of experts and states (follow-up process) in
addition to the usual review of the Convention. This
is intended to reinforce the BWC as long as there is
no prospect of success for negotiations on a BWC
verification protocol. In the medium term, the aim is
to establish a binding declaration and verification

regime.

As regards conventional arms control, it is still the
aim of the Federal Government to achieve the ratification and implementation of the Agreement on
Adaptation of the Treaty on Conventional Armed
Forces in Europe, which was signed as early as in 1999
by the heads of state and government of the 30 member states in Istanbul. Germany, in addition, supports
the further development of the confidence- and security-building measures in the context of the Vienna
Document, an extension of the scope of application
of the Open Skies Treaty, and the promotion of
regional arms control and confidence building in
South-Eastern Europe through implementation of
the Dayton Accord and the Stability Pact.


Germany actively supports the worldwide application of the Ottawa Convention on the global ban of
anti-personnel mines and its consistent implementation. In the course of the negotiations on the UN
Weapons Convention, Germany as a party to this
Convention is striving for further development of
humanitarian arms control, particularly with regard
to anti-vehicle mines and cluster munitions. Germany
also attributes considerable significance to the control of small arms and light weapons, which have
claimed the overwhelming majority of casualties
during the conflicts of the past few decades. For example, Germany particularly advocates within the
UN the introduction of uniform international guidelines for the approval of small arms transfers and has
taken the initiative in putting the issue of conventional ammunition on the arms control agenda of
the UN. African states especially are receiving support in small arms control within the scope of bilateral cooperation.

As the effectiveness and reliability of arms control
agreements largely depend on their verification,
Germany maintains a Bundeswehr Verification Centre with a staff of approximately 250 personnel to

take care of this task. This Centre is tasked with ensuring compliance of the rights and responsibilities
that ensue from the arms control agreements with
respect to security and military policy. The Bundeswehr Verification Centre cooperates closely with the
verification organisations of Germany’s allies and a
large number of OSCE states.


**2.7 Strengthening Relations with Partners**

In this age of globalisation and new challenges, security policy cannot be limited to regions in our immediate neighbourhood. Promoting regional security
cooperation and consolidating and developing good
relations with the most important regional powers is
a significant element of German security and stability policy.

Russia takes a special place in this bilateral cooperation, this being due to the formative experiences in
the course of our common history and that country’s
special role as a prominent partner of NATO and the
European Union, its size and potential. Russia is one
of the G8 nations, a nuclear power, and a permanent
member of the United Nations Security Council.
Being a member of the European Council and of the
Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
Russia bears a special responsibility in Europe, not
least in view of the situation in the regions of South
Caucasus and Central Asia. For many European
nations, Russia is an important energy supplier and
economic partner. Without Russia, security, stability,
integration and prosperity in Europe cannot there
fore be guaranteed. It is in Germany’s special interest
that Russia’s modernisation is supported by intensified political, economic and societal cooperation.
Germany therefore promotes the improvement of
Russia’s political, economic and cultural cooperation
with the European Union and supports an even closer cooperation with the North Atlantic Alliance.

Following the political turnaround in the wake of the
2004 Orange Revolution, Ukraine is undergoing
sweeping modernisation on the way towards more
democracy, constitutionality and a market economy.
Germany will continue to support the political and
economic reform process in Ukraine.


Peace and stability in the Western Balkans are important prerequisites for Europe’s security. This is in
Germany’s special interest due to its proximity to
the region. Stability in the region is jeopardised by
poverty, high levels of unemployment, corruption
and organised crime, including human and drug
trafficking, so that it is of paramount importance to
establish democratic and constitutional structures,
prosecute war crimes, successfully implement economic reforms and effectively protect minorities. To
contain future conflicts it is also necessary to resolve
the dichotomy between the national state principle
and ethnic diversity. This can only be achieved, with
any modicum of success, through reconciliation and
integration into the Euro-Atlantic structures.

The South Caucasus and Central Asia are located at
the interface between Europe, the broader Middle
East and Asia. The Central Asian region also plays an
important role in the field of security policy, not
least in the supply operations for the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan. The
main goal there is to create sustainable stability by
promoting democracy, the rule of law, economic
development and regional cooperation, as well as to

expand cooperation in the fight against international terrorism, organised crime and international drug
trafficking.

The broader Middle East has become a hotspot of
international politics due to its historical development, political-religious and cultural differences, its
societal and social problems associated with modernisation, the political and military unpredictability of individual states, and its rich energy sources.
The potential for conflict already present in the region is increased by the involvement of parts of the
region in international terrorism, the striving for the
possession of weapons of mass destruction and the
development of long-range means of delivery. It is


**46** **47**


-----

crucial for the international community to support
the parties concerned in seeking ways to resolve the
key conflict between Israel and the Palestinians, to
stabilise Iraq and to convince Iran to work towards
a constructive solution to the nuclear conflict. A preventive and comprehensive political approach is
needed to support the modernisation of the Islamic
societies and thus also cut the ground from under
the feet of fundamentalist terrorism.

German-Israeli relations take on a special quality
against the background of our history. Germany has
maintained diplomatic relations with Israel for 40
years and during this time has developed a dense
network of political, societal, economic, cultural and
even politico-military contacts. The cultivation of
these contacts is an unshakeable component of German politics, and Germany will continue to stand up
for Israel’s right to existence.

In the past few years, the rapid economic development of states in the Asian-Pacific area has led to an
intensification of the political and economic relations
of that area with Germany and Europe. In the field
of security policy, too, the Asian-Pacific area has be
come increasingly important for Germany. A political-strategic dialogue with key states in the region is
therefore called for. The traditionally close and firm
relations with Japan must be supplemented by a
long-term strategy of partnership with China and
India, and the security and economic dialogue with
Australia must be further developed.

Germany maintains intensive economic, cultural
and political relations with Japan, the world’s secondlargest economic power. For decades, Japan has been
making significant contributions towards international security and stability through its substantial
financial commitment in the United Nations, as well
as in the field of development aid. The importance


this partnership bears for global security is underlined by Japan’s political, economic, and recently
also military, commitment to stability in the broader
Middle East and Afghanistan.

China has undergone a breathtaking development
process in the past decade. Due to its economic, political and military potential, the further development
of this country will have a significant impact on the
future of the Asian-Pacific area and international
politics. China thus bears a growing responsibility
for safeguarding peace and stability worldwide. To
strengthen the cooperation between Germany and
China, and in recognition of their global responsibility, the two governments have agreed to enter into a
strategic dialogue before the end of the year.

India, next to China, is one of the most dynamic actors of the global economy and is the world’s largest
democracy. Due to the growing prosperity of large
parts of the population, and its expertise in many
forward-looking technologies, the country is becoming an ever more important economic and political
partner. India and Germany have a host of common
interests ranging from the promotion of democracy

to the protection of human rights to combating
international terrorism. Germany has therefore systematically expanded its strategic partnership with
India, which was agreed on in 2000, and will in years
to come further deepen this partnership by closer
cooperation in key areas such as energy security, and
science and research.

Although there has been progress in the democratisation and political, social and economic development of a number of African states, and there is a
growing awareness that they have a responsibility of
their own for peace and security, major efforts are
still necessary in Subsaharan Africa to stabilise state
structures and further improve governance. The


African continent in particular is becoming a focus of
attention due to the fact that there is growing willingness among the international community to support crisis prevention and conflict management
efforts. In 2003, the Bundeswehr participated in the
EU-led Operation ARTEMIS in the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is currently making a
substantial contribution towards another EU-led
operation in the Congo, the aim of which is to create
a secure environment during the 2006 presidential
and parliamentary elections. In Sudan, the Bundeswehr is participating in the UN-led peace mission
UNMIS. It will be increasingly important in future to
strengthen the capabilities of African countries to
help themselves when it comes to dealing with crises
and conflicts. Germany, through its partnerships in
the field of security policy helps to support Africa in
coping with the challenges it faces in the spirit of
the G8 Action Plan for Africa of June 2002 and the EUAfrica Strategy of December 2005. It is in this context
that Germany’s substantial commitment to supporting the Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre in Accra, Ghana, is to be seen.

Since 1999, there has been a strategic partnership

between the European Union and Latin America / the
Caribbean. Many countries of Latin America and the
Caribbean are taking an active part in multilateral
peace missions. Within the scope of this strategic
partnership the European Union supports efforts to
strengthen the region’s stability by means of regional integration, greater social justice and the combating of drugs and organised crime.

Germany is represented by full- and part-time military
attachés in 117 states. The Bundeswehr contributes
towards the expansion of bilateral relations through
a differentiated and flexible range of instruments,
reciprocal visits at political and military leadership
level, staff and expert talks, personnel exchanges


between training institutions, and detachment of
military advisers in support of reform and restructuring processes in the partner nations.

The Federal Foreign Office and the Federal Ministry
of Defence, as well as other ministries where necessary, cooperate in providing equipment assistance
for foreign armed forces.

Within the scope of military training assistance, the
Bundeswehr offers extensive training and advanced
training programmes at training facilities or in units,
thus strengthening relations in the long term and
serving to imbue democratic values in the minds of
personnel from the armed forces of our cooperation
partners. The interministerial steering group commissioned by the Federal Government to coordinate
the implementation of the “Civilian Crisis Prevention,
Conflict Resolution and Post-Conflict Peace Building” action plan is developing an interministerial
concept designed to assist developing nations and
countries in the process of transformation with the
reform of their security sector, with the aim of addressing the entire spectrum of their societies’ security needs and, at the same time, meeting the demo
cratic standards and principles of rule of law.

Although interministerial cooperation on security
sector reform is still in its infant stages, there are
already numerous activities that directly address
established areas of foreign, security, defence and
development policy, or their fringe areas. These are,
in particular, issues of judicial and police reform,
politico-military relations with the armed forces of
partner countries, interministerial activities in postconflict operations, the demobilisation and reintegration of ex-combatants, measures to control small
arms as well as increasingly broader approaches
aimed at establishing long-term structures and
capacities in partner countries.


**48** **49**


-----

**Instruments of Military Cooperation**


**50**


-----

### Part two


**51**


-----

#### 3 Requirements and Parameters


### The Bundeswehr – An Instrument of German Security Policy


**3.1 Mission**

The mission of the Bundeswehr is an integral part of
national security provision.

As an instrument of a comprehensive and proactive
security and defence policy, the Bundeswehr:
guarantees the capacity for action in the field of
foreign policy;
contributes towards European and global stability;
maintains national security and defence;
provides assistance in the defence of our allies,

fosters multinational cooperation and integration.

An efficient Bundeswehr is indispensable for a German security and defence policy that plays an active
and shaping role. It must be able to fulfil the enlarged
spectrum of tasks and missions together with armed
forces of other countries. Within the scope of its security interests, Germany commensurately provides
forces that are rapidly and effectively deployable in
combination with other nations’ forces. This includes
supporting allies at the boundaries of Alliance territories, or in an even wider geographical context.

The Bundeswehr promotes European and global
stability through its contributions towards multinational preventive security and the strengthening of


international security organisations. It is a key
instrument of a comprehensive, multilateral conflict
prevention and crisis management policy.

The political and constitutional raison d’être of the
Bundeswehr is, and always has been, to defend Germany against external threats. The growing threat
that terrorist attacks pose to German territory accentuates the importance of protecting the population
and infrastructure. This places additional demands
on the Bundeswehr in relation to performing tasks
in Germany and, therefore, its cooperation with the

agencies responsible at Federal and Land level for
internal security.

The Bundeswehr affords an important contribution
towards the development of trusting relations in the
spirit of partnership by working extensively together
with armed forces all over the world. At the same time,
the Bundeswehr plays a major role in the process of
integration and confidence building in Europe
through multinational cooperation at EU and NATO
level. It promotes, as a result, also the political goal of
an independently capable Europe.


**52** **53**


-----

**Bundeswehr Mission**

I Guarantee the capacity for action in
**the field of foreign policy**

I Contribute towards European and
**global stability**

I Maintain national security and
**defence and provide assistance in the**
**defence of our allies**

I Foster multinational cooperation and
**integration**


**3.2 Tasks**

The Bundeswehr’s tasks derive from the constitutional requirements, from its mission, and from the
German security and defence policy objectives.

International conflict prevention and crisis management, including the fight against international
terrorism, are the tasks more likely to arise in the
foreseeable future. They will dictate the structure
and have a decisive influence on the capabilities,
command and control systems, availability and
equipment of the Bundeswehr. Conflict prevention
and crisis management operations are similar in
terms of intensity and complexity to operations
mounted in defence of Alliance partners.

In the event of attacks on Alliance partners, NATO’s
mutual defence clause applies. It may also be
invoked for defence against asymmetric and terrorist attacks.

The contribution made by the Bundeswehr in protecting Germany and its population is significant.
National defence within the framework of the Al
liance continues to be a central responsibility of the
Bundeswehr as an expression of national sovereignty
and joint security provision to deter possible yet,
for the foreseeable future, unlikely threats. Efficient
national defence calls for reliable regional structures
as well as civil-military cooperation in utilising available capacities. The concept of civil defence is being
refined with this in mind and that of civil-military
cooperation evolved further. A differentiation is made
in this regard between civil-military cooperation at
home and cooperation with civilian actors on operations abroad.

Internal and external security is becoming increasingly interwoven. The task of providing defence
against terrorist and other asymmetric threats with

**Bundeswehr Tasks**

I International conflict prevention and
**crisis management including the fight**
**against international terrorism**

I Support of allies

I Protection of Germany and its
**population**

I Rescue and evacuation

I Partnership and cooperation

I Subsidiary assistance

in Germany falls primarily to the interior security
authorities at Federal and Land level. To support
them, it is however possible under current law to
deploy the Bundeswehr and the assets it keeps avail
able if a given situation is manageable only with its
assistance, in particular if it alone has the necessary
capabilities available, or if the authorities responsible
are able to ensure the protection of the population
and at-risk infrastructure only in concert with forces
of the Bundeswehr. The Bundeswehr provides special
services in the surveillance of German air and maritime space and supports other agencies in looking
after air and maritime sovereignty responsibilities.
The rescue and evacuation of German citizens is
fundamentally a national responsibility. It must be
possible to meet this responsibility anywhere in the
world independently, but also together with allies
and partners, and calls for special and specialised
Bundeswehr forces at a particularly high level of
readiness and deployability.


Partnership and cooperation, as ongoing military
tasks, serve to support political measures taken for
the purpose of crisis and conflict prevention and
post-crisis and post-conflict rehabilitation, and promote stability through confidence building. They
create the precondition for transparent common
action and also encompass participation in multinational activities and exercises as equal partners.
This includes arms control measures.

The Bundeswehr, in drawing upon available assets
and capabilities, can subsidiarily provide relief aid in
the event of natural disasters and particularly grave
accidents at home, and as part of humanitarian relief
actions and disaster responses abroad, subject to
compliance with constitutional requirements. The
Armed Forces can also help in connection with stabilisation operations to restore social order and infrastructure in crisis areas where this is necessary to
fulfil their mission and is unrealisable by means of
civilian contributions. The procedures for conducting such operations are being developed steadily
further in close collaboration with other governmental and non-governmental institutions and organisations.


**54** **55**


-----

**3.3 Constitutional Requirements**

The Bundeswehr is firmly integrated into the constitutional structure of Germany’s Basic Law and is
subject to the primacy of democratically legitimised
politics.

The Basic Law and international law form the foundation for all German Armed Forces operations.
Their observance and enforcement are indispensable
components of international peace policy. International humanitarian law and the Rules of Engagement
(ROE) laid down for operations are integral to the
command and control process in the German Armed
Forces.

Defending Germany against external military threats
is and remains the Bundeswehr’s core function, as
provided for by the constitution. The defence of
Alliance partners in the event of attacks and the rendering of assistance in crises and conflicts that may
escalate into an actual threat are additional aspects.
Classic national and collective defence continues to
be the central task of the Bundeswehr, even if such
menacing developments are unlikely in the foresee
able future.

Germany’s Basic Law affords a wide margin of freedom that makes it possible to also respond to changes
in the security environment. The German Federal
Constitutional Court clarified through its judgement
of 12 July 1994 that the German Armed Forces may,
in addition to national and Alliance defence, be
deployed on international operations in the context
of, and according to the rules of mutual collective
security systems (Article 24 (2) of the Basic Law).
On this basis the Bundeswehr participates in international conflict prevention and crisis management
missions, including the fight against international
terrorism.


The decision as to whether the Bundeswehr takes
part in operations in an international context is primarily a responsibility of the Federal Government.
Armed operations undertaken by German Armed
Forces always require the constitutional stamp of
approval from the German Bundestag beforehand,
however. The requirement of approval serves as a
means of parliamentary control over the deployment of armed forces. Support by a broad parliamentary majority is also in the interest of the servicemen
and women as they go about their dangerous missions.

It is up to the Federal Government to take the initiative on deployments of the Armed Forces and define
their precise terms and arrangements. The Parliamentary Participation Act that came into effect in
March 2005 gave the formal and procedural aspects
of the approval process for missions of the Armed
Forces abroad a statutory basis for the first time. In
individual cases, the conditions for political action at
international level and the need to be able to respond
flexibly to developments in military situations place
considerable demands on those involved in the
constitutional decision-making process relating to
the deployment of armed forces. The Federal Govern
ment will continue to play its part in this regard in
future by informing Parliament comprehensively
and promptly.

Other than for defence, the Armed Forces may be
employed in Germany only to the extent expressly
permitted by the Basic Law (Article 87a (2)). For
example, during a state of defence or tension, the
Armed Forces can be deployed to protect key civilian
facilities and for traffic control functions (Article
87a (3) of the Basic Law). Their employment is also
permissible under certain conditions to support the
police forces in the event of imminent danger to the
existence or free democratic basic order of the Federation or of a Land (Article 87a (4) of the Basic Law) and


**Article 24 (2)**
**Basic Law**

**(2)** **With a view to maintaining peace, the Federation**
**may enter into a system of mutual collective**
**security; in doing so it shall consent to such**
**limitations upon its sovereign powers as will**
**bring about and secure a lasting peace in**
**Europe and among the nations of the world.**

to support the Laender in responding to natural
disasters and grave accidents (Article 35 (2) and (3) of
the Basic Law). It is possible for the Armed Forces to

render legal and administrative assistance (Article
35 (1) of the Basic Law) at any time to the civilian
authorities of the Federation, the Laender or local
governments without having any additional sovereign powers.

The importance of protecting the population and
critical national infrastructure is increasing in view
of the growing threat that terrorist attacks pose to
German territory. This is a task, first and foremost, for
the Federal and Land authorities responsible for internal security. The German Federal Constitutional
Court, through its judgement of 15 February 2006
relating to the Act on Aviation Security, has identified the limits in this area and, at the same time, con

cretised the framework for supporting operations by
the Armed Forces under Article 35 (2) and (3) of the
Basic Law.

Terrorist attacks can, accordingly, constitute grave
accidents within the meaning of Article 35 of the
Basic Law. The Armed Forces may then be deployed
to prevent them if an occurrence of damage is imminent with certain probability, due to a terrorist
attack. As Article 35 of the Basic Law provides only
a basis for assisting the responsible authorities,
however, the use of military munitions has not been
allowed specifically in such cases to date. The Armed
Forces are restricted to using the weapons that the
police are permitted to use under applicable law.

The Federal Government therefore considers it necessary to expand the constitutional framework for
the deployment of the Armed Forces. Due to the new
quality of international terrorism and the increased
violence potential of non-state actors operating
largely unrestricted by territorial boundaries,attacks
are now also imaginable in Germany that, because of
their type, objective and impacts, exceed actual and
legal parameters applied in classic hazard prevention.

A forward-looking and responsible government
security policy must include such extreme situations
in its considerations.


**56** **57**


-----

called upon, like everybody else, to be a formative
part of society. When off duty, they are active in
political parties, churches, interest groups representing the socially disadvantaged, clubs and other
organisations, and thus play a proactive part in the
shaping of communities. Even on duty they are
expected to grapple with the constraints of military
service by themselves and to evolve their own positions, enabling them to contribute co-responsibly to
the fulfilment of military missions.

With the formation of the Bundeswehr in the 1950s
came an assimilation of the Prussian army reform
principles dating back to the beginning of the 19th
century. The concept of leadership development and
civic education construes the establishment of the
Bundeswehr as a conscious continuation of this tradition. The integration of “military and nation”, the
comprehensive training and education of military
leaders, and the encouragement to act on one’s own
initiative have become central maxims.The formation
of the Bundeswehr took place on 12 November 1955,
the 200th birthday of Prussian army reformer Gerhard von Scharnhorst, as a visible expression of this
tradition.

Military tradition helps soldiers to develop the image
they have of themselves and of their profession.
It serves to give them self-assurance, to put their
actions in the greater context of history and to give
them orientation for military leadership and conduct. The cultivation of traditions therefore plays a
vital role for the Bundeswehr on operations.

Tradition means passing on values and standards.
The cultivation of traditions in the Bundeswehr
focuses on the Prussian army reforms, the military
resistance to the National Socialist regime, and the
history of the Bundeswehr itself. The 50 successful
years of the Bundeswehr have created a tradition that
deserves greater attention than in the past, and the
military personnel duly need to be made aware of it.


**Article 87a (2), (3), (4)**
**Basic Law**

**(2)** **Apart from defence, the Armed Forces may be**
**employed only to the extent expressly permit-**
**ted by this Basic Law.**

**(3)** **During a state of defence or a state of tension**
**the Armed Forces shall have the power to pro-**
**tect civilian property and to perform traffic**
**control functions to the extent necessary to**
**accomplish their defence mission. Moreover,**
**during a state of defence or a state of tension,**
**the Armed Forces may also be authorised to**
**support police measures for the protection of**
**civilian property; in this event the Armed**
**Forces shall cooperate with the competent**
**authorities.**

**(4)** **In order to avert an imminent danger to the**
**existence or free democratic basic order**
**of the Federation or of a Land, the Federal**
**Government, if the conditions referred to**
**in paragraph (2) of Article 91 obtain and the**
**police forces and the Federal Police Force**
**prove inadequate, may employ the Armed**
**Forces to support the police and the Federal**
**Border Police in protecting civilian property**
**and in combating organised armed insurgents.**
**Any such employment of the Armed Forces**
**shall be discontinued if the Bundestag or the**
**Bundesrat so demands.**


**Article 35 (2), (3)**
**Basic Law**

**(2)** **(…). In order to respond to a grave accident**
**or a natural disaster, a Land may call for the**
**assistance of police forces of other Laender or**
**of personnel and facilities of other administra-**
**tive authorities, of the Armed Forces, or of the**
**Federal Border Police.**

**(3)** **If the natural disaster or accident endangers**
**the territory of more than one Land, the**
**Federal Government, insofar as is necessary to**
**combat the danger, may instruct the Land**
**governments to place police forces at the dis-**
**posal of other Laender, and may deploy units**
**of the Federal Border Police or the Armed**
**Forces to support the police. Measures taken**
**by the Federal Government pursuant to the**
**first sentence of this paragraph shall be**
**rescinded at any time at the demand of the**
**Bundesrat, and in any event as soon as the**
**danger is removed.**


**3.4 “Innere Führung” – Leadership Development**
**and Civic Education**

It is the duty of every serviceman and woman of the
Bundeswehr to serve the Federal Republic of Germany faithfully and to bravely defend the rights and
the freedom of the German people. Military service
characteristically involves integration in a hierarchical organisation with a clear-cut chain of command,
the militarily indispensable principle of command
and obedience, and a very wide-ranging duty of allegiance that also includes risking one’s own life. Moreover, military personnel have control over weapons
and instruments of power with a considerable
destructive potential, including the authority and
the obligation to use them under certain conditions.

_Innere Führung – leadership development and civic_
education – as the guiding principle of the Bundeswehr implies that the conditions under which mission-capable military forces operate have to be
brought into harmony with the principles of a free
and democratic state in which the rule of law prevails. Particularly considering the special nature of
military service, it is important for servicemen and

women to identify closely and consciously with the
values and standards anchored in the constitution.
Only those who actively recognise the free, democratic basic order are able to defend it with conviction. And only those who experience constitutional
principles and values themselves as a day-to-day
routine develop the necessary willingness to stand
up for them. For these reasons the military personnel
of the Bundeswehr have the same basic rights as
every other citizen. Restrictions apply only in as
much as the dictates of military service make them
absolutely necessary, and they then require a statutory basis.

A central element of the leadership development
and civic education concept is the model of the citizen in uniform. The servicemen and women are


**58** **59**


-----

The cultivation of tradition is a responsibility of company-level and higher commanders. These ensure
that military personnel also concentrate on German
history as part of their political and historical education and sharpen their awareness for attitudes and
deeds that can serve as a model for the Bundeswehr.
This instils inspiration to continue cultivating traditions in the Bundeswehr.

_Innere Führung stands for the realisation that the_
capability to act on security matters requires a successful interchange between politics, society and the
military. The mission and tasks of the Bundeswehr
must therefore be integrated in a comprehensive
political concept. The strength of the Bundeswehr is
rooted especially in its close and time-tested incorporation into German society.

The concept of Innere Führung, developed during
the years when Germany’s new Armed Forces were
being built up, has also proved its worth on operations. The Armed Forces today are characterised by a
generation of soldiers who, themselves, have experienced special operational demands as far-reaching
as risking life and limb, primarily on operations

abroad. Having to confront injury and death is a particular challenge that also affects the soldiers’ relatives and friends at home. The entire spectrum of
operations abroad now defines the way the military
personnel see themselves.

Besides being combatants, the servicemen and
women in the new Bundeswehr are at the same time
helpers, protectors and mediators. This job profile
calls for analytical and action-taking capabilities
that go far beyond purely military needs. Civic education helps them to grasp the complexity of crisis
scenarios and to take account of political parameters. Intensive ethics and moral education not only
helps to develop a well-considered occupational selfperception, but also promotes the capability of the


individual to act on his or her own responsibility in
morally difficult situations. An all-round intercultural education sharpens the awareness for specific
religious and cultural aspects in the particular areas
of deployment. This comprehensive educational
approach boosts the motivation of the individual
serviceman and woman, links their actions to the
protection of peace and freedom, and strengthens
assuredness, especially on operations. Innere
_Führung thus fosters the servicemen and women’s_
operational readiness and helps to enhance the
standing of the Bundeswehr in mission areas.

The concept of Innere Führung is the starting point
for any dialogue with our partners concerning leadership principles in their respective armed forces.
The development of common concepts of leadership
and militaryidentitynecessarily precedes any further
intensification of cooperation on defence policy. This
applies particularly to the further development of
already existing bi- or multinational units and staffs.

_Innere Führung is also proving helpful in the trans-_
formation of the Armed Forces. Especially in a world
that has become more complex, it proves an indis
pensable aid to military personnel in finding their
orientation. Responsibility, motivation, care and
welfare, mission command, and leadership by example continue, also 50 years on, to be the central ideas
of the command and control philosophy in the Bundeswehr of the future.


**3.5 Universal Conscription**

Universal conscription has shown itself to be an unqualified success for Germany, despite the changes
in the security environment. Since it was introduced
more than five decades ago, a defence and force
structure has evolved that, through intelligent combination of regulars and temporary-career volunteers,
basic-service and extended-service conscripts and
reservists, ensures a high degree of professionalism
and integration in society. Basic- and extended-service
conscripts contribute a broad range of knowledgeand
skills to the Armed Forces. Through them a continual
exchange takes place between the Bundeswehr and
society, particularly the young generation. The
enlisted conscripts fulfil a varied spectrum of tasks in
the Armed Forces, building on a broad base of educational and vocational qualifications. This reduces the
training effortand helps to sustain the high personnel
quality of the Armed Forces. The conscripts perform
vital tasks in all military services.

Universal conscription additionally guarantees an
extensive potential of rapidly available forces to
protect Germany and its citizens and creates a solid

foundation for recruiting suitable conscripts who
volunteer for extended enlistment.

Conscripts willing to go on operations abroad can
volunteer to do up to 14 months of extra military
service after their nine months of basic military service. The conscripts can already opt for such an extension before induction, as well as during their basic
military service. On average, 20 percent of the military personnel on deployment abroad are extendedservice conscripts. This highlights the particular
importance of these soldiers for the Bundeswehr.

Universal conscription serves to anchor the Bundeswehr in society. The Federal Government and the
Coalition Agreement dated 11 November 2005 stand


by universal conscription and by civilian service as
an alternative for conscientious objectors to military
service. The commitment of the young men performing their compulsory military service by way of civilian service, civil defence and disaster control as well
as other forms of alternative service is also widely
acknowledged in society.

Compulsory military service is a civic duty and signifies a key event in the planning of young men’s personal lives and careers. For the Bundeswehr it is important to organise military service in a meaningful
way and to keep the associated stresses and strains to
a minimum. The Federal Government, additionally,
has the responsibility to ensure that basic- and extended-service conscripts receive the recognition
they are due from society. According to the provisions of the Basic Law, all male citizens must in principle make a contribution towards the security and
defence of our country. In order to make better use of
the potential that the conscripts due for induction
offer,as well as for the purposes of conscription equity,
the Federal Minister of Defence has instructed that
the numbers of inductees be increased by more than
6,500 conscripts annually for 2006 and 2007.


**60** **61**


-----

**3.6 Financial Basis**

The appropriation of suitable funding for the Bundeswehr is crucial for Germany to remain able to act
on security and defence policy matters and maintain
its influence with regard to international developments.

Defence spending in Germany has been subject to
cutbacks since 1991 due to the changes in the security
environment in Europe and German reunification.
The budget of the Federal Ministry of Defence for the
year 2006, without taking the pensions and benefits
expenditure into account, is some 3 billion euros
below the ceiling of 1991. This cutback in defence
spending has helped to consolidate federal expenditure in a period of major burdens ensuing from
reunification. An additional factor has been the costintensive build-up of the Bundeswehr in the new
Laender, which has been accomplished only through
changes to the force structure and consistent utilisation of every savings potential.

The transformation of the Bundeswehr into an expeditionary force involves considerable adaptation and

modernisation effort. There will continue to be a
dichotomy between defence policy requirements
and financial needs for other national tasks. Security
and defence policy cannot be formulated independently of the general budgetary development. In consequence the central fiscal objective of the Federal
Government, to continue to consolidate the Federal
Budget, also places binding constraints on Bundeswehr planning.

Despite huge personnel cutbacks, there is no margin
for any further reductions in spending for reasons of
the Bundeswehr mission and ensuing structures, and
of maintaining operational and combat readiness, as
well as social responsibility for its military and civil

ian members. Appropriate budgetary adjustments
are essential in order to maintain the ceiling in real
terms.

The current medium-term financial planning provides for annual growth of the defence budget. Only
such a budget line will guarantee the transformation
of the Bundeswehr and enable Germany to meet
its international commitments to establish joint capabilities both at a European level and in the transatlantic alliance, and to carry out its international
operations.

The reorientation of the defence budget, in particular the reallocation of funds from running costs to
investments, will provide an adequate financial basis
for the transformation. A multitude of measures
are helping to reduce operating expenditure. They
essentially include further personnel cutbacks, the
new stationing concept, materiel and equipment
planning, and continued stripping-out of bureaucracy. The reduction of operating expenditure will serve
to increase the defence investment expenditure
share of the defence budget. The 30 percent investment ratio set partly as a target in the past is rendered

out of date by the estimate of the proportionate
pensions and benefits expenditure in the defence
budget. It is necessary in this regard to develop a new
measure of effectiveness that more suitably represents
the striven-for goal of optimising and modernising
the equipment of the Armed Forces.

The Bundeswehr will consistently concentrate on its
core tasks. Cooperation with trade and industry on
service tasks, extending as far as the outsourcing of
complete task packages that the private sector can
provide more economically, is being pursued further.
This will ease the work burden of the Armed Forces,
boost cost efficiency, and reduce operating costs
and tied-up capital. Private investor capital will be


mobilised, new sources of revenue opened up and
opportunities to strengthen investments for the Bundeswehr thereby created. What is crucial, besides
any materiel and equipment planning capable of
meeting future challenges, is that the running of the
Armed Forces and the provisions for the ongoing
missions remain assured.

Alternative financing options, also for procurements,
are to be examined in future in view of the limited
financial resources.


**3.7 Armaments Policy**

A modern Bundeswehr requires an efficient and sustainable defence industry base. This will need to be
defined increasingly in a European context, given
the limited national resources and restrained national
demand. Political, military and economic aspects
make in-depth cooperation highly important for the
EU member states to meet the materiel requirements
of their armed forces. For this reason, the development of a European armaments policy is a central
goal in establishing and expanding the European
Security and Defence Policy.

It means having indigenous defence technology
capabilities in order to co-shape the European integration process in the armaments sector. These will
guarantee cooperability and assure an influence in
the development, procurement and operation of
critical military systems. Only nations with a strong
defence industry have the appropriate clout in
Alliance decisions.

The political leadership and industry must jointly
define the strategic positioning of German defence

technology in Europe. The Federal Government will
do its utmost in this regard to preserve a balanced
mix of defence technology, including its high-technology areas, in Germany. National consolidation,
such as is taking place in the shipbuilding industry,
is preparing Germany’s defence technology enterprises to suitably position themselves for the restructuring process in Europe.

By developing interministerial strategies and continuing our dialogue with industry, we are looking to
preserve competitive industrial capabilities in key
technology areas of the German defence industry as
part of a balanced European partnership. We must,
equally, ensure that there is a future in Europe for the


**62** **63**


-----

innovative potential of our small- and medium-sized
companies in the defence sector. Using what control
instruments are available, the Federal Government
supports the export efforts of German defence industry companies in order to promote adequate utilisation of capacities. It is prepared to enter into strategic
partnerships with states also outside NATO and the
EU that help to reduce conflicts, pursue common
security interests and adhere to democratic norms of
behaviour as well as commit themselves to arms
controls, export control regimes on armaments and
non-proliferation.

It will continue to uphold future viability and competitiveness by investing in defence-related research
and technology at national and international level.
The exploitation of developments in other areas of
technology and of innovative dual-use products will
complement these measures. Where appropriate,
innovative cooperation and financing concepts may
open up possibilities for more efficient development
and procurement processes.

An opening-up of the defence market at European
level is also expected to have positive implications

for the defence industry. The voluntary code relating
to the application of Article 296 of the EC Treaty
(Code of Conduct on Defence Procurement) entered
into force on 1 July 2006 under the aegis of the European Defence Agency. It already represents an important step towards more competition and transparency in the defence industry and will, in the end,
also benefit the German defence industry.

The European Commission is also working on an
interpretative communication relating to the
application of essential security interests within the
meaning of Article 296 of the EC Treaty. The aim of
the communication is greater legal certainty in the
application of this Article. These two instruments,
the voluntary code and the interpretative communi

cation, already provide or respectively, will prove to
be, important means for promoting competition for
defence procurements.

In its Green Paper on Defence Procurement, the
European Commission has also presented broader
plans for procurement guidelines specifically for the
defence sector, but beyond the scope of Article 296
of the EC Treaty. From the viewpoint of the Federal
Government, however, the unfair competition and
barriers still existing in the European defence market
should be removed prior to the creation of legally
binding instruments. This includes, in particular, the
harmonisation of export conditions and the reduction
of subsidies and government-held shares in defence
companies.

The European Defence Agency, whose responsibilities
include military capability development, research,
procurement and the defence market, is an important instrument for organising a European defence
technological and industrial base. The Federal Government also regards the European Defence Agency
as coordinator of a network for bringing together
and correlating existing initiatives and institutions,

with the aim of improving European military capabilities. Armaments and standardisation activities
are being initiated and coordinated in the transatlantic context within NATO in order to meet the
NATO capability requirements. Germany would like
to see close coordination between NATO and the EU
in this connection so as to avoid any duplication of
effort and maintain interoperability.

Stronger European integration in the defence sector
will strengthen Europe as a partner in the transatlantic alliance. Germany supports the harmonisation
of military requirements and the further removal of
barriers that continue to hinder transatlantic cooperation in the spirit of partnership, especially with
regard to technology transfer and market access.


**3.8 Determining Factors for Bundeswehr**
**Planning**

The Bundeswehr’s mission, tasks and international
obligations determine its capabilities, structures and
personnel requirements. These are being consistently geared towards the tasks that are more likely to
arise.

The new Bundeswehr is duly adopting a strictly
deployment-oriented posture. This must be developed further in a way which will enable the Armed
Forces to operate unrestrictedly in a multinational
environment.

The force goals of NATO and the European Union are
important factors that have a determining influence
on the military capabilities in the respective member
countries. NATO has, firstly as part of its Defence
Capabilities Initiative (DCI) and subsequently in the
Prague Capabilities Commitment (PCC), defined
capability gaps that urgently need closing, in the
same way as the European Union has in the European
Capability Action Plan (ECAP). These tally essentially
with the national capability deficits.

The planning of the materiel and equipment must
help to establish and maintain a balanced relationship between the mission, tasks and assets of the
Bundeswehr and the funds that are available. The
absolute standard for the quality and quantity of the
projects undergoing planning and realisation is
their specific contribution towards establishing the
new joint capability profile. The adaptation of
materiel and equipment planning, and concurrent
structural realignments, are part of the Bundeswehr’s transformation. The determining factor here
is the conceptual requirement for procurement,
within budgetary constraints, for the force categories
to be differentiated and prioritised according to
capabilities in the following areas: force protection,


**64** **65**


-----

worldwide reconnaissance, command and control of
forces deployed in a multinational environment,
improvement of the basic missile defence capability,
precision and stand-off capability of the response
forces, and strategic deployability. In regard to the
joint and multinational tasks, the immediate priority
is to realise those projects and services that help
within the system to establish or expand the capabilities receiving no or insufficient consideration in
terms of materiel. The principle that applies in this
respect is: the establishment of new capabilities has
precedence over expansion of basic capabilities. In
the field of maintenance, it is necessary to accurately
identify cost-increasing factors, in order to initiate
measures to also ensure deployments and routine
duty of the Armed Forces at home in future.


Operational Requirements
The national level of ambition defines the scope and
quality of German contributions to operations spanning the entire task spectrum.

This takes into consideration the following politicomilitary commitments that Germany has made to
NATO, the European Union and the United Nations
regarding the contribution of troops to multinational
operations and response forces:

Continued participation in the NATO Response
Force calls for a joint force pool to be kept available
at all times. This ties down a total of approximately
15,000 military personnel during the standby
phase, including preparation and follow-up
activities.

In the framework of the European Headline Goal,
Germany has undertaken to provide an initial
joint contingent of up to 18,000 servicemen and
women, depending on the situation. This includes
the German contribution towards the implementation of the EU Battlegroups Concept adopted to
improve the EU’s Rapid Response Capability.

Within the scope of the United Nations Standby
Arrangements System (UNSAS), Germany has
pledged to the United Nations to provide, on a
case by case basis, force packages with state-ofthe-art equipment, including transport, medical,
military police and engineer forces, as well as maritime patrol aircraft and mine countermeasures
units. Bundeswehr planning needs to provide for
up to 1,000 military personnel for this.

Forces up to about 1,000 strong must additionally be
kept available for evacuation operations generally
conducted as a national responsibility.


Germany, furthermore, is making very large force
contributions to ongoing peace stabilisation operations. This applies to the current NATO-led operations,
primarily in Afghanistan and in Kosovo, to the EU
operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and also to missions of the United Nations.

Given this background, Germany must have a force
pool for peace enforcement missions that is adequate
at international level. The military capabilities that
such missions necessitate are significantly different
from those needed for nation and society building.
They involve the use of weapons in joint networkenabled, high-intensity combat operations. This can
be achieved only by close interaction of land, air and
maritime forces, operating together with armed
forces of allied and partner nations, and may also
involve utilising the capabilities of special forces.

The majority of current Bundeswehr operations are
peace stabilisation missions. Their aim is to create
the preconditions for establishing governmental
and societal structures within the scope of international cooperation. They range from the task of sepa
rating parties in conflict, to the enforcement of
embargo measures, through to monitoring air and
maritime spaces and protecting populations. The
national level of ambition is to deploy up to 14,000
servicemen and women at any one time, distributed
over as many as five different areas of operations.

There are provisions to keep an adequate capability
potential available for the protection of Germany
and its citizens, as well as for relief operations performed in Germany as a subsidiary task. Particularly
armed forces designed to meet operational needs
abroad have capabilities that could be employed for
rendering assistance at home as well. All the force


categories of the Bundeswehr have commensurate
capabilities and assets. These include, first and
foremost, NBC defence forces (to deal with nuclear,
biological and chemical agent threats), engineers,
military police, the reconnaissance capabilities of its
Air Force, Army and Navy, assets for assuring air and
maritime security, medical capacities, air rescue
capabilities over land/sea, maritime assistance
resources, logistics and transportation support,
PSYOPS capabilities, and capacities to provide
psychological support for civilian emergency response personnel and the population.

In principle, it is possible to employ any of the forces
available in Germany, and hence the vast majority
of Bundeswehr personnel, for these tasks. When any
decision is made regarding the provision of forces
for operations abroad, the resources required for the
protection of Germany and for subsidiary disaster
relief at home are always assessed with particular care.

Where operations allow little or no forewarning, as
in natural disasters for instance, available Bundeswehr forces are called in immediately. These may
be augmented or also replaced by reservists if the

duration of deployment becomes protracted. If there
is ample forewarning, reservists are deployed at an
earlier juncture.

Protective tasks within Germany are viable only if the
services act jointly and in conjunction with civilian
agencies and organisations. The Bundeswehr is a
major contributor in this regard. Civil-military cooperation is being expanded and improved. The cooperation between military territorial commands,
government district and region liaison elements and
civilian regional planning and support agencies is
setting the trend for the future. Over the coming
years there is to be a considerable intensification


**66** **67**


-----

**Operational Requirements**

**NATO Response Force**

**5,000 are on standby and**

**follow-up activities**

**European Headline Goal** **up to 18,000 troops**

**UN Standby Arrangement System** **up to 1,000 troops**

**Rescue and evacuation operations** **up to 1,000 troops**

especially of civil-military cooperation with the
medium- and lower-tier disaster management
authorities. It is there that reservists in small organi
sational elements will bear major responsibility, to a
large extent on their own, in planningand advisory
functions as early as the preliminary stages of crisis
situations. They will thus be able to contribute their
civilian occupational qualifications and also their
military skills to optimum effect.


**3.9 Structures and Strength**

The establishment of new elements capable of
meeting future challenges and the dismantling of no
longer needed structures will serve to make the Bundeswehr consistently deployment-oriented. Traditional national defence against conventional attack
is no longer a determinant of Bundeswehr structures
as it no longer reflects current security requirements.
This will mean that, by 2010, the great number of still
existing non-active units will be significantly reduced.

The Armed Forces will be divided into three force
categories: response, stabilisation and support
forces. Each of these will be trained, equipped and
employed according to their respective functions.
These force categories will form the conceptual basis
for shaping the fundamental structures in the military
services.


**Target Strength of the Bundeswehr 2010**

**Total** **327,500**
Servicemen
and women* 252,500

Civilian posts/
funded posts 75,000

*Including 2,500 posts for reservists (maximum
number of reservists undergoing daily training,
taking the annual average)


The numbers of servicemen and women planned for
the response, stabilisation and support forces are
35,000, 70,000 and 147,500, respectively. The future
basic strength of the Bundeswehr, according to current planning, will consequently be 252,500 active
military personnel. This figure includes a total of
2,500 posts for reservists. They complement the
personnel in the active units. A figure of 75,000 posts
is planned for civilian personnel from 2010 onward.


**68** **69**


-----

Germany is one of the largest troop contributors to
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in
Afghanistan. ISAF was established by the UN Security
Council on 20 December 2001 after the Taliban had
been ousted from power and an interim government
formed.

In 2003, after successful stabilisation of the situation
in Kabul, NATO assumed the lead role for the gradual
extension of ISAF into the country’s provinces. The
Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRT) have been
playing a central role in this context. They provide
the foundations for the rebuilding of state structures
in a safe and secure environment.

NATO duly decided at its Istanbul summit in June
2004 to extend the PRT concept to the entire territory
of Afghanistan. For this purpose, the country was
subdivided into five regional areas of responsibility,
in each of which a troop contributing nation assumed
coordinating responsibility.Since July 2006, Germany
has been responsible for the northern region and
has been pursuing an interministerial approach
involving civilian and military elements. Together
with members of the Federal Foreign Office, the Fed
eral Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development, the Federal Ministry of the Interior as well
as international partners and non-governmental
organisations, German soldiers have been accomplishing their mission through military presence
and participation in reconstruction assistance and
training support for the new Afghan Army and the
Afghan police force.

Germany is participating in the operation EUFOR RD
Congo, conducted by the European Union following
a request by the United Nations. This operation is to
provide, for a limited time, military assets to ensure
the security of the first democratic elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.


#### 4 The Bundeswehr on Operations


Over the past fifteen years, Germany has become one
of the largest troop contributors to international
peace missions. This is due to the changes in the security situation, Germany’s grown responsibility, its
international commitments in the United Nations,
the North Atlantic Alliance, and the European Union.
Today, the Bundeswehr operates worldwide.

After the end of the civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina in December 1995, Germany provided armed
forces to monitor and secure the peace process in the

context of an international peace mission. For this
purpose, NATO initially conducted the multinational
operation IFOR and, from December 1996 onwards,
the operation SFOR. From the outset, the Bundeswehr made substantial contributions to both operations and thus provided sustained support in the
political efforts to achieve lasting peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

In December 2004, the European Union took over
the responsibility for safeguarding the peace process
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The EU operation
ALTHEA became the successor operation to SFOR.
ALTHEA is to date the largest military operation in
the context of European Security and Defence Policy
and complements the European Union’s extensive


civilian commitments. With a Sarajevo-based headquarters of its own, NATO continues to support defence reform efforts of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
government. Germany is maintaining its military
commitment in Bosnia and Herzegovina and is contributing significantly to ALTHEA. Support for the
reconstruction of the devastated country was of
prime importance in the early stages of the operation, besides the purely military efforts to safeguard
the peace process. As a result of the successful
stabilisation and reconstruction efforts, numerous

refugees have been able to return from Germany to
their home country.

To put an end to the Kosovo crisis and prevent a
humanitarian disaster, German armed forces participated, from 24 March 1999, in an armed military
conflict for the first time in the Bundeswehr’s history.
During the Operation ALLIED FORCE, NATO conducted an air campaign against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Upon the successful completion of this
operation, the UN Security Council paved the way for
the deployment of military and civilian forces to
implement peace in Kosovo. This task has since been
performed by the NATO-led multinational Kosovo
Force (KFOR) and the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).


Creating and ensuring a safe and secure environment
is an essential part of KFOR’s military mission. This
includes, in particular, the protection of minorities
and of returning refugees and displaced persons, the
guaranteeing of freedom of movement for the civilian population, the confiscation of illegal weapons,
and the prevention of cross-border crime. The Bundeswehr has consistently provided one of the largest
force contingents for this operation.

The crisis that developed in the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia in 2001 was successfully managed through the preventive employment of military
forces as part of an international operation. The Bundeswehr participated mainly in the NATO-led operation AMBER FOX and the EU operation CONCORDIA.
Operation AMBER FOX, conducted in support of the
OSCE and EU observer missions, was the first international peace mission for which Germany assumed
the lead role from the outset and for a long time provided the largest troop contingent.

The Bundeswehr operations in the Balkans are important and necessary for our security, but they have
also shown that sustainable peacekeeping calls for

patience and appreciable stamina.

The UN Security Council condemned the terror attacks of 11 September 2001 as a threat to international
peace and security. As a result, for the first time in
its history, NATO declared that this was an Article 5
contingency. The Bundeswehr’s participation in
the NATO Operation ACTIVE ENDEAVOUR (OAE),
conducted to protect allied merchant vessels in the
Mediterranean Sea against terror attacks, is also
based on this Article 5 contingency.

Since November 2001, Germany has been contributing naval and special forces, among other assets, to
Operation ENDURING FREEDOM (OEF) to combat
international terrorism.


**70** **71**


-----

In response to requests by the United Nations and by
the Lebanese government for assistance, Germany is
also committing substantial forces to the Maritime
Task Force, as part of the UN-led peace mission UNIFIL.
The Israeli government had also expressly asked for
a German contribution to UNIFIL. Germany will thus
afford a major contribution towards the implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 1701. In
close cooperation with the Lebanese government,
the Maritime Task Force will ensure effective monitoring of Lebanese coastal waters with the aim of
preventing the smuggling of weapons. It will, in
doing so, help to preserve the conditions for a lasting
cease-fire. The hitherto largest German force contingent for a UN-led mission will be deployed in Lebanon
by assigning up to 2,400 servicemen and women.

Besides the peace missions mentioned above, Germany has for many years been participating in international observer missions to monitor security zones
and cease-fire agreements, particularly in Georgia,
Ethiopia and Eritrea, and the Sudan.

International humanitarian assistance operations
have placed a steadily growing burden on the Bun
deswehr and are increasingly tying up resources.
In the recent past, for example, comprehensive aid
in terms of personnel and materiel has been provided in the wake of earthquakes in Pakistan, flooding
in Mozambique and the tsunami disaster in Southeast Asia.

The Bundeswehr has changed profoundly since its
first operations abroad in Cambodia and Somalia
and so has the job profile of the soldier. Besides the
purely military characteristics, political, humanitarian, economic and cultural aspects must increasingly
be considered in today’s operational environment.
This entails the need, during operations, for the Bundeswehr to cooperate in networks with military and
civilian actors, nationally and internationally. The


lessons learned from the operations have led to the
Bundeswehr personnel gaining a broader understanding of military thinking and action. Bundeswehr servicemen and women today are confronted
with an operational reality that cannot fail to have an
impact on their professional self-image.

The Bundeswehr also renders reliable and comprehensive assistance at home in Germany, however,
and thus contributes towards protecting the population and vital infrastructure, and helps to prevent
the consequences of major catastrophic incidents,
including terrorist attacks. Since its activation, the
Bundeswehr has repeatedly provided comprehensive assistance in the wake of major disasters and
incidents such as snowstorms, forest fires and area
conflagrations, major accidents or flood disasters. Its
structures and special capabilities in the context of
civil-military cooperation have always enabled the
Bundeswehr to take on such subsidiary tasks.

Combating the flood waters of the Elbe, Mulde and
Danube rivers in August 2002 has been the largest
domestic operation of its kind so far. At the time,
45,000 Bundeswehr personnel fought against the

floods around the clock, shoulder to shoulder with
members of civilian relief organisations and volunteers. They saved lives and protected the land and the
people from even greater damage.

The Armed Forces kept personnel and materiel at the
ready to support the Federation and the Laender in
the organisation of major events involving millions
of visitors from all over the world, such as the World
Youth Day of the Catholic Church in 2005 and the
Football World Championship in 2006. In addition,
the Bundeswehr has supported allied forces in Germany within the framework of Host Nation Support.
This was last done on a major scale when the Bundeswehr protected facilities of the US forces over
several years.


**Bundeswehr Participation in International Peace Missions As of: October 2006**

**NATO Missions:**
**KFOR: Kosovo Force, Kosovo**
**ISAF: International Security**
Assistance Force, Afghanistan

**EUFOR**

**EU Missions:** **KFOR**
**EUFOR: European Union Force,**
Bosnia and Herzegovina
**EUFOR RD Congo: European Union**

**ACTIVE ENDEAVOUR**

Force, Democratic Republic of the

**UNIFIL**

Congo

**UN Missions:**
**UNMIS: United Nations Mission**
in Sudan
**UNMEE: United Nations Mission**
in Ethiopia and Eritrea
**UNOMIG: United Nations Observer**
Mission in Georgia

**UNMEE**

**UNAMA: United Nations Assistance**

**AMIS**

Mission in Afghanistan
**UNIFIL:** **UNMIS**
United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon

**Fight against International**
**Terrorism:**
**ACTIVE ENDEAVOUR: :** **EUFOR RD CONGO**
Mediterranean region (NATO operation under Article 5 of the North
Atlantic Treaty)
**ENDURING FREEDOM:**
Base: Djibouti, Horn of Africa

**AU Missions:**
**AMIS: African Union-Mission**
in Sudan

Regardless of the reprioritisation of its task spectrum,
the majority of the Bundeswehr’s active military
personnel will continue to be present in Germany
in future and thus be available to support civilian
disaster protection efforts. More active military personnel will continue to be available for disaster relief
at short notice than have ever been employed in any
given disaster situation in Germany in the past.


**72** **73**


-----

#### 5 Transformation

The constantly changing challenges to security in a
globalised world can be countered effectively only
through security structures that are adaptable and
flexible. Political, societal, economic and, not least,
technological parameters are changing at an ever
greater pace. The Bundeswehr is facing up to these
developments by embarking on a process of permanent adaptation. Transformation is the means for
shaping this adaptation process.

The overriding goal of transformation is to improve

and sustain the operational capability of the Bundeswehr in a changing environment. Transformation
has a security-related, societal, technological, and,
most notably, innovative and mental dimension.

Transformation responds to changes in the security
environment and provides solutions to ever new
challenges.

Transformation takes the dynamic developments
in society and in trade and industry into consideration and enables the Bundeswehr to benefit from
them.

Transformation promotes the integration of technological developments into the Bundeswehr.


Transformation shapes the adaptation process by
utilising new procedures and techniques.

Transformation requires readiness and willingness for change.The Bundeswehr’s transformation
process cannot succeed unless there is a lasting
willingness for change.

The transformation of the Bundeswehr covers all
aspectsof the Armed Forces and their administration:
capabilities, strengths, structures, stationing,

personnel, materiel, equipment and training. It
puts an end to static force planning and establishes
a continuous process of adaptation.

A coherently joint realignment of the Armed Forces,
as an essential element of transformation, is under
way and well on track. To make the Bundeswehr more
efficient, innovative solutions such as its reorganisation into response, stabilisation and support forces
are being utilised.

The stationing decision, based on military, functional
and economic criteria, supports the overriding goal
of transformation through operational savings and a
closer deployment of units, thereby improving their
coordination and interaction on operations.


New tasks require new qualifications. On stabilisation

operations, in particular, personnel have to be resolute, confident and self-assertive, and must additionally show a sense of ethnic responsibility combined
with social, intercultural and foreign language skills.

The generally proven personnel management methods have to constantly measure up to the requirements
of transformation. This applies just as much to the
procedures of recruitment, selection, training, development and promotion as it does to the optimal utilisation of capabilities and skills the personnel already
have. Materiel and equipment must be adapted to
the current and future operational requirements. A
consistently capability-oriented, Bundeswehr-unified holistic approach is being taken to carry out the
required modernisation of materiel and equipment.


**Transformation of the Bundeswehr**

**Organisation**

**Mentality** **Security**

**Technology**

**Society**

_Transformation is the proactive shaping of a continuous process of adaptation to the ever-changing framework conditions with the aim_
_of enhancing the Bundeswehr’s operational effectiveness._


By rigorously concentrating on key capabilities, and

by introducing modern forms of cooperation and
financing, the Bundeswehr has succeeded in implementing more efficient development, procurement
and operational procedures.


**74** **75**


-----

**Concept Development & Experimentation (CD&E)**


**Principle of Network-enabled Operations**


More efficient and
effective mission
accomplishment

Better quality of planning and decisions

**Fundamental** **Gain in effectiveness**
**prerequisites**


**Command &**
**control**
**superiority**


**Effects superiority**


Common situational
understanding

Common situational
awareness

Technological networking

IT-based interaction


**Information**
**superiority**


**5.1 Concept Development and Experimentation**

The modern-day Bundeswehr is characterised by new
capabilities and a new way of thinking. Only the
ongoing transformation process will ensure that the

Bundeswehr retains its ability to fulfil its tasks in
cooperation with the armed forces of partners and
allies and successfully counter those threats to Germany’s security that are difficult to predict.

Making the Bundeswehr fit for the future is a matter
of recognising potential for innovation early on and
utilising it appropriately. Concept Development and
Experimentation (CD&E) is one of the fundamental
methods for supporting the transformation process.
It serves to examine new conceptual considerations,
organisational ideas, management procedures and
technological innovations for use in the Bundeswehr. This is done by applying operations research
methods and procedures, and by utilising modelling
and simulation. The results obtained will help deci

sively to adapt the capability profile to the future
operational demands that confront the Armed
Forces.

Where concept development is concerned, the focus

is in particular on the development of an overarching
Bundeswehr-unified operations concept and of the
conceptual foundations for a common operational
picture, to serve as a basis for a common situational
understanding. Both are essential preconditions for
network-enabled operations.

Germany is participating in the CD&E process within
NATO and in a multinational context and has been
introducing its own concepts and findings into this
process. Concept Development and Experimentation
are among the fundamental tasks of the newly established Bundeswehr Transformation Centre.


**5.2 Network-enabled Operations**

A network-enabled capability facilitates the command and control as well as operations of armed
forces on the basis of an all-embracing and interop
erable information and communications network.
This network interlinks all relevant personnel, units,
facilities, intelligence and reconnaissance and
weapon systems. In future, it will no longer be the
classic one-on-one situation on the battlefield that is
important, but rather the goal to achieve information
and command and control superiority, based on a
common situational understanding, and to translate
it into effective engagement. The objective in this
regard, besides being successful on the battlefield, is
to influence the enemy’s development of objectives.
This makes military action across the entire task spectrum faster, more efficient and more effective.

Force planning in NATO and the European Union is
already being geared towards the principles of net

work-enabled operations to a considerable extent.
For the Bundeswehr, network-enabled operations
have likewise become a key elementof transformation.
This concept is being pushed ahead with priority and
is having impacts on all capability categories. The

effectiveness of weapon systems already in use can
be substantially enhanced by integrating them technologically into networked systems.

Network-enabled operations will be reflected in all
capability categories of the Bundeswehr. Depending
on operational demands, there will be different
levels of capability in the response, stabilisation and
support forces. All force categories, however, will be
networkable to the extent that they can support each
other effectively.

Besides their challenging technological aspects,
network-enabled operations place high demands on
decision-makers at all levels and at the same time call
for military thinking at the strategic, operational and


**76** **77**


-----

ation operations, which are normally a national responsibility. The Bundeswehr is thereby able to meet
Germany’s international commitments adequately
and to participate in complex, high-intensity combat
operations.

Due to the high demands regarding training and
operations, the response forces are, as a general rule,
composed solely of regulars, temporary-career volunteers and extended-service conscripts. Reservists
may also be included at their own request.

In conflict prevention and crisis management operations, response forces and stabilisation forces may
operate simultaneously or be employed in close succession. Both force categories must therefore have
the capability to interact in operations. It must additionally be possible to reinforce and support stabilisation forces with response forces.

Stabilisation Forces
Stabilisation forces are intended for multinational,
jointmilitary operations of low and medium intensity
lasting for an extended period of time and spanning
the broad spectrum of peace stabilisation missions.

These requirements largely derive from the operational reality currently confronting Bundeswehr
forces.

The stabilisation forces comprise 70,000 military
personnel, up to 14,000 of whom can be employed
more or less concurrently and distributed over as
many as five different operational areas.

They must be able to assert themselves against adversaries with a military structure and against
forces using asymmetric warfare techniques, while
minimising their own losses. To attain this, they
need robust capabilities which, in the land forces,
are provided essentially by armoured forces.


tactical levels. The ability of deployed soldiers to act
in accordance with their higher commander’s intent
– mission command, in other words – will be even
more indispensable than ever before. Networkenabled operations, moreover, impact on the further
development of the command and control systems,
and on operational concepts and training, especially
leadership training.

Network-enabled operations play a decisive role in
the support of effects-based operations. Effects-based
operations comprise the uniform planning and
interaction of military capabilities in concert with
other instruments of states, alliances and organisations. They embrace all the factors necessary for
achieving political and military-strategic objectives.

All transformation projectsmust be geared to improvingoperational capability. The scarcity of resources
and budgetary funds calls for innovative approaches
regarding investments, operation, cooperation with
the defence industry, research, development and
experimentation, and international cooperation.

In the years to come, practical implementation of the

transformation process will be pushed ahead in all
fields of activity. The principle of centralised control
and decentralised implementation will apply in this
respect. Even more so than has previously been the
case, all relevant topics will in future be interlinked
through precise contents, responsibilities and timelines. This will give shape and method to the transformation process as a holistic approach. Progress needs
to become visible and tangible. The Bundeswehr
today is already more modern and efficient compared
with just a few years ago and will continue to improve.

**78**


**5.3 Force Categories**

Through transformation, the Bundeswehr is being
oriented towards its more likely tasks. However, it
must also be capable of accomplishing all the other
tasks it has been assigned. The three new force categories, i.e. response, stabilisation and support forces
are an essential element for achieving this. The individual force categories each consist of land, air and
naval forces and of the required joint command and
control, and support assets. These will realise their
full capability by acting in a joint and unified manner.

The Bundeswehr is thus gearing itself, including its
training and equipment, to potential operational tasks.

Response Forces
The response forces are earmarked mainly for combined and joint, high-intensity network-enabled
operations. They are intended to conduct peace
enforcement missions against adversaries with a
predominantly military structure, while keeping
their losses to a minimum, and thus create the prerequisites for peace stabilisation operations.

The response forces are capable of a quick response
and have the best possible equipment, as well as the
required joint command and control, and support
assets. They also include special forces capable of
conducting particularly rapid response operations.
The response forces comprise a total of 35,000 servicemen and women.

This force pool is used to generate the German contributions to the NATO Response Force, to operations
in the context of the European Union’s Military Response Concept, to other NATO, or EU and multinational operations at the upper end of the intensity
spectrum, to the United Nations Standby Arrangement System, and to the forces for rescue and evacu

The robustness of stabilisation forces rests mainly on
three pillars: a resolute approach, marked cultural
and social competence in the deployment area, and
the capability of comprehensive intelligence collection and reconnaissance in order to counter unfavourable situational developments at an early stage.

When on operations, stabilisation forces must be
capable of escalation dominance across the entire
spectrum. As stabilisation operations conducted on
land frequently involve such tasks as carrying out
patrols or setting up and manning checkpoints in
close proximity to the local population, a high priority is given to the personal protection of the deployed
soldiers and to their situational awareness training.

Because of the special skills and qualification needed
to participate in specific deployments abroad, only
regulars,temporary-career volunteers and conscripts
who have volunteered for extended enlistment are
normally employed in the stabilisation forces. The
principle of voluntariness also applies to the inclusion
of reservists.

Support Forces

The main task of the support forces is to provide comprehensive and efficient support for response and
stabilisation forces during the preparation and conduct of operations, both in Germany and in mission
areas abroad. The support forces are therefore intendedto provide comprehensive, joint and sustainable
support for operations across the entire intensity
spectrum and for routine Bundeswehr duties in
Germany.

They are chiefly tasked with command and control
support, intelligence collection and reconnaissance,
logistics and medical support, geoinformation,
explosive ordnance disposal, and fire fighting and
protection.

**79**


-----

**Survivability** **Effective engagement**
**and protection**


**Capability Categories**


**Force Categories**

**Support Forces** **147,500**

##### •

Comprehensive, Bundeswehrunified and sustainable support
of Bundeswehr operations and
routine duty

The support forces comprise a total of 147,500 servicemen and women. This figure includes 39,000

posts for providing career or functional training, and
for providing civilian occupational qualifications for
regulars and temporary-career volunteers.

|Command and control|Col2|Effective engagement|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|||||
|Intelligence collection and reconnaissance|||Support and sustainability|
|Mobility||Survivability and protection||


**5.4 Capabilities**

Germany needs Armed Forces that can be employed
across the entire continuum of tasks. They must be
readily available for the more likely types of operations
and prepared for high-intensity combat operations.

The capability profile required to accomplish these
tasks comprises six capability categories, i.e. command and control, intelligence collection and reconnaissance, mobility, effective engagement, support
and sustainability, and survivability and protection,
and is to be developed in such a way that the Armed
Forces gradually attain the capability to conduct
network-enabled operations.

The capability categories are interdependent and of
equal importance. Sub-capabilities can be dispensed


**Capability Categories**


**Mobility**


**Survivability and protection**


with only if this is justifiable and if it can be ensured
that the forces of allied or partner nations keep such

sub-capabilities available. This conversely requires
the Bundeswehr to be able to place its specific capabilities at the disposal of allies and partners.

Such interlocking of capability categories also means
however that in addition to improving hitherto inadequate sub-capabilities, there must be enough leeway for modernisation in all capability categories so
as to give priority to achieving a broad spectrum of
basic capabilities.

Special emphasis must be placed on improving force
protection as a fundamental requirement for mission
accomplishment, as well as on improvement of the
stand-off and precision capabilities of the response
forces.


**80** **81**


-----

Acomprehensive capability-based approach requires
that the modernisation of materiel and equipment
receives the same consideration as personnel, training, and research and technology. This will serve to
ensure the attractiveness and fitness of the Bundeswehr in the long term to meet future challenges.

Command and Control Capability
Command and control capability is an essential
prerequisite for establishing information superiority, command and control superiority and best
possible effective engagement capability. Efficient
command and control capability calls for reliable
and speedy information management at and between all Bundeswehr command levels and units.
This requires a tight command and control organisation, clear and uniform command and control
procedures, secure and efficient command and
control support, and the capability to conduct network-enabled operations.

Using a joint approach, efficient command, control,
and information systems of the Armed Forces will
ensure the capability to exercise command and control worldwide. Joint, networkable radio equipment

and the SATCOMBw satellite-based communications
system are important prerequisites for networkenabled operations.

Improvements in the command and control of land,
air and naval forces are indispensable with regard to
the interoperability required for NATO and EU operations. Adequate provisions are being made for this in
materiel and equipment planning.

The task spectrum of the Bundeswehr calls for a radical modernisation of the IT equipment and
networks, and concerted support of the administrative and logistics processes to complement the above
measures.


Intelligence Collection and Reconnaissance
Knowledge and accurate estimates of the situation,
particularly in potential crisis areas, help the political and military leadership considerably to arrive at
the appropriate decisions. They are essential for the
early recognition of crises, for crisis management
and for the planning, preparation and conduct of
operations by the Armed Forces.

Intelligence and reconnaissance collection assets
gather and record situational information in areas of
interest, crises and operations on a worldwide basis.
They analyse such information and feed it, tailored
to the situation, mission and requirements, into the
joint intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
(ISR) network. The information thus processed forms
an important basis for issuing early warnings of imminent threats to deployed troops, for duly providing data and findings for targeting, and for making
network-enabled operations possible.

Information and intelligence collected as a national
responsibility by the Bundeswehr’s Military Intelligence Organisation afford an indispensable contribution in terms of the capability to independently

make judgements and decisions and take action.
They are vital for safeguarding German interests in
multinational organisations and for being on an
equal footing when exchanging information with
partner nations.

In the capability category of intelligence collection
and reconnaissance, the procurement of the SAR
LUPE space-based reconnaissance system will, for the
first time, provide the Bundeswehr with a worldwide
imagery reconnaissance capability. There are plans
to integrate this system into a European network.

Germany is, furthermore, participating in NATO’s
Alliance Ground Surveillance (AGS) project. This sys

tem is to attain an Alliance-wide initial core capability
of airborne, wide-area imagery surveillance and
reconnaissance for the support of ground operations
across the entire task spectrum. There is the intention
to close the capability gap caused by the phasing-out
of the SIGINT aircraft Breguet Atlantic by fielding the
EUROHAWK unmanned airborne reconnaissance
system.

Mobility
Given the new operational environment, the mobility of the Bundeswehr’s forces and assets is crucial to
its operational capability.

Strategic deployability is a prerequisite for fielding,
augmenting and supplying forces in distant operational areas. Priority is therefore being given to
attaining this capability, which includes adequate
air, sea and land transport capacities as well as their
timely and secure availability. This includes suitable
load handling systems, provided by military and
civilian agencies. It is indispensable in this respect
to have a minimum of own military capacities.
Strategic deployment is carried out utilising all
modes of transport and, as a general rule, in the con
text of multinational deployment planning.

Operational deployability means having the capability to carry out rapid changes in location and in points
of main effort in a land, air and maritime operation
over long distances. This also includes, if necessary,
movements in a threat environment and in areas
with a poorly developed infrastructure.

Tactical mobility with own means and assets is essential for the effective employment of forces and is hence
crucial to the conduct of operations.It must also be
realisable in difficult geographical and climatic conditions and areas with inadequate infrastructure, while
ensuring the necessaryprotection of own forces.


Contracts taken out for civilian air and sealift capacities will serve to close existing capability gaps as regards mobility. The AIRBUS A400M transport aircraft
will provide the Bundeswehr for the first time with
long-range airlift capacity for fast deployment to
operational areas also outside of Europe. Furthermore, tactical airlift capacities are being enhanced
and the air-to-air refuelling capability improved. The
fielding of the NH-90 transport helicopter will greatly improve tactical mobility.

Effective Engagement Capability
The robustness of forces is determined by their effective engagement capability, which is the ability to
directly or indirectly engage ground, air, surface and
subsurface targets, and to effectively operate in the
information space.

Credibly demonstrating military capabilities may
sometimes suffice, alone, to achieve a desired political, military or psychological effect. The optimal
interaction of all forces and means in a joint and
multinational network, in accordance with the principles of network-enabled operations, is a prerequisite for attaining effective engagement capability.

Besides the classic military factors of forces, space,
and time, the information factor is increasing in importance. The secure availability of and unfettered
access to information form the basis for the military
decision-making process and for the issuance of
orders in the planning and conduct of operations. In
future, the German Armed Forces will have an even
better capability to conduct information operations.

The Army’s embarkation on air mechanisation is
being continued with the introduction of the TIGER,
a multi-role, near-all-weather-capable combat support helicopter and the PUMA, an air-transportable
infantry fighting vehicle. Where the Air Force is con

**82** **83**


-----

cerned, the development of a new, ground-based
air defence system (MEADS) has begun, which is to
enhance its missile defence capability. The Navy’s
response and stabilisation forces will be further
modernised through the acquisition of the Type K130 corvettes.

Support and Sustainability
Support capabilities are aimed at ensuring the Bundeswehr’s operational readiness across the entire
spectrum of operational tasks and in routine duty at
home. They largely comprise personnel management, training, morale, welfare and recreation, medical care, and logistic support.

Personnel sustainability is achieved mainly by providing forces that have undergone mission-oriented
training, as well as through their timely deployment,
supply, accommodation, augmentation and relief.

Materiel sustainability is determined by the scope of
materiel and equipment available and by respective
maintenance and supply capabilities, in which
respect civilian services may be drawn upon to
augment military capacities.

In the category of support and sustainability, the
focus is on improving protected transport capability.
The procurement of vehicles to ensure safer personnel and materiel transport, medical evacuation and
protected medical treatment is ongoing. The Modular Deployable Medical Facilities project will improve
the basic operational capability of the field hospitals.


Survivability and Protection
Servicemen and women deployed on operations are
entitled to the best possible protection. The survivability and protection of personnel and infrastructure are vital to mission accomplishment and indicative of the state’s obligation to care for members of
the Bundeswehr.

The Armed Forces must protect themselves against
all types of threats originating from regular and
irregular forces, including the impact of information
warfare. Information superiority is decisive for providing active protection. Training, threat-appropriate
protective equipment including protected command
and multi-function transport vehicles, tactical
mobility, and a robust infrastructure ensure passive
protection.

The development and fielding of the Infantryman of
the Future system and of a friend or foe combat identification system will enhance the survivability of
combat troops. The equipment package termed
Soldier on Operations optimises the specific equipment needs of military personnel employed in noninfantry roles.


**5.5 Parameters and Conceptual Orientation**

The modernisation of materiel and equipment is
consistent with the Bundeswehr’s capability-oriented
holistic approach. Priority is being given to those
areas in which the life and limb of all Bundeswehr
personnel must be protected, where there are justified
requirements arising from ongoing operations, or
where legal obligations have to be met.

Given the limited resources, the planning of the materiel and equipment is tailored to the needs of each
individual force category.

The response forces are given priority when fielding
state-of-the-art technology, in order to markedly
improve their capability to conduct joint and multinational, high-intensity, network-enabled operations. The stabilisation forces will in future also have
modern equipment geared to their capabilities and
tasks, with their survivability and command and
control capability initially being improved by means
of air- and ground-based reconnaissance systems
and protected vehicles. The networkability of the
stabilisation forces is such that they are able to inter
act with the response forces.

The equipment standard of the support forces is sufficient to enable them to support both response and
stabilisation forces efficiently in the deployment
areas. This requires them to also have networkability
in some areas.

Capability gaps are being closed in accordance with
political guidelines, overall planning parameters,
conceptual requirements and operational demands,
taking into account aspects of economic efficiency
and applying modern methods to identify and meet


requirements. To the greatest possible extent, modernisation measures will be implemented or concretised on a multinational basis, primarily within the
scope of NATO and the European Union. The European
Defence Agency will play a central role in future
planning.


**84** **85**


-----

**Organisation of the Federal Ministry of Defence**

**Federal Ministry of Defence**


**Federal Minister**
**of Defence**


**Parliamentary**
**State Secretary**


**Press and**
**Information**
**Office**


**Parliamentary**
**State Secretary**


**Policy**
**Planning**
**Staff**


#### 6 Organisation

**6.1 Federal Ministry of Defence**

The Federal Ministry of Defence has the legal status
of a supreme federal authority. Within the Federal
Government it is the ministry that specialises in mili
tary defence and all Bundeswehr matters. The Federal Minister of Defence is Commander-in-Chief of
the Armed Forces, the highest superior of all Bundeswehr soldiers, and chief of the defence administration.
The integration of the service staffs into the Ministry
of Defence means that it also has the function of the
highest military command authority.

In the course of the reduction and reform of the Bundeswehr, the size of the Federal Ministry of Defence
and its working practices have been streamlined,
and devolvements have also taken place, whilst at
the same time new task areas such as information
technology and controlling have been integrated
more fully into the Ministry’s organisation.


Below itspolitical Executive Group,consisting of the
Minister as well as the Parliamentaryand Permanent
State Secretaries, the Federal Ministry of Defence is
structured into five militaryservice staffs and six ministerial directorates, including the recently established

Modernisation Directorate. There are, in addition, the
special staffs to support the Executive Group.

The first official seat of the Federal Ministry of Defence is in Bonn. Of the 3,200 military and civilian
posts, roughly ten percent are currently allocated to
the Ministry’s second official seat in Berlin.

In the course of the transformation, both the Federal
Ministry of Defence and its subordinate units
and agencies have been constantly undergoing adjustments. Such measures are primarily aimed at
exploiting possible potentials for optimisation, in
order to further strip out bureaucracy in the Federal
Ministry of Defence and, in particular, to strengthen
the cross-cutting leadership capability of the political executives.


**State Secretary** **Organisation** **Executive** **State Secretary**

**Staff** **Group**

**Controlling**
**Staff**


**Subordinate**
**areas**


Military
Legal
System

Chaplain
Service


Territorial
Defence
Administration


Army Air Force Joint Support Service Navy Bundeswehr
Joint
Medical
Service


Armaments
Organisation


**86** **87**


-----

**6.2 Armed Forces Command and Control**
**Organisation**

With the Berlin Directive issued on 21 January 2005,
the command and control organisation of the Bundeswehr was evolved further in order to improve the
Armed Forces’ operational capability. This directive
revises the principles for the assignment of tasks,
organisation and procedures within the top-level
structure of the Federal Ministry of Defence. The
Chief of Staff, Bundeswehr, is responsible to the Executive Group of the Federal Ministry of Defence for the
development and implementation of the overarching
concept of military defence. This covers, most importantly, Bundeswehr planning, the transformation
of the Bundeswehr, the planning, preparation and
conduct of operations, post-operational activities, as
well as the establishment of joint doctrine. The Chief
of Staff, Bundeswehr, is additionally the principal
military adviser to the Federal Government. In performing his tasks, he consults with the Chiefs of Staff
Council, the Operations Council and the Armaments
Council. He is supported by the Armed Forces Staff
and the Chiefs of Staff including their single service
staffs. Key to the effective performance of Bundes
wehr tasks is the interplay of operational capability
and operational readiness. This calls for a realignment
ofthe Bundeswehr so that the Armed Forces are better
positioned than in the past particularly to carry out
their operational tasks.

The Bundeswehr Operations Command is responsible
for the national tasks of planning and conducting
operations at operational level. It also forms the
nucleus of a multinational Operation Headquarters
(OHQ) for EU operations. As a general rule, the
deployed contingents of the Armed Forces are under
the control of the Commander, Bundeswehr Operations Command, for administrative purposes and
for those operational tasks that remain a national
responsibility.


The Special Forces Operations Command is an independent staff tasked with planning and conducting
special forces operations at operational level. Where
necessary, it also serves as the nucleus for a correspondingly composed multinational command post.

The Response Forces Operations Command provides
the nucleus for a multinational deployable Force
Headquarters (FHQ) for EU operations or, if necessary,
augments the German nucleus of the Operation
Headquarters. The Response Forces Operations
Command exercises command and control over the
response forces for joint exercises. Within the transformation process it is involved in the further development of the response forces as well as, for the time
being, that of the stabilisation forces.

Small-scale operations may remain under the control
of the service commands, as decided on a case-bycase basis.

During peacetime, operations in response to natural
disasters and particularly grave accidents in Germany
are controlled by the Joint Support Command. The
Fleet Command provides assistance in the event of

disasters or particularly serious accidents at sea.

Search and Rescue (SAR) operations involving aircraft are controlled by the SAR Coordination Centre
of the Air Force, whilst SAR operations at sea are
under the control of the Fleet Command.


**Army Command Structure**


**Chief of Staff, Army**

**Army Staff**

|Army Forces Com|Col2|
|---|---|


German
elements of
the FrancoGerman
Brigade


**88** **89**


-----

**6.3 Army**

The Army is the core of the land forces and the mainstay of land operations as well as operations conducted by airmobile and air mechanised forces. The Army
is geared to meeting future operational challenges,
thinks and acts jointly, and, within combined structures with allied nations, is a linchpin in the multinational cooperation of the Armed Forces.

More than before, the Army’s capabilities are being
tailored to conflict prevention and crisis management, including the fight against international terrorism, as part of multinational operations. For this
the Army provides response forces capable of rapid,
robust reaction and network-enabled operations for
missions involving high-intensity conflicts, as well
as for operations of special and specialised forces. A
modular and highly flexible system of stabilisation
forces is available at the same time for deployments
on medium- and low-intensity operations. Such operations determine the Army’s capabilities and structures, and they likewise determine equipment
planning, leadership, education and training. Their
warfighting capability is still the common basis for

all the force categories.

The Army’s future command and control information system will lay the technological basis for a comprehensive integration of command and control,
communications and information in the context of
network-enabled operations.

The elements of ground-based and airborne reconnaissance, as well as intelligence collection by field
intelligence forces, are to be organically combined
in the mixed reconnaissance units of the army reconnaissance branch and will be deployed with the
latest scout cars, high-performance radar equipment
and unmanned aerial vehicles.


The CH-53 medium transport helicopter and the
future NH-90 light transport helicopter will ensure
the Army’s tactical and operational air deployability
and air manoeuvre capability.

With the introduction of the TIGER combat support
helicopter into service, the Army will greatly improve
its capability to conduct air assault operations. The
PUMA infantry fighting vehicle will meet the fundamental requirements for robustness, mobility and
protection.

Modular equipment of the Army, based on the concept of families of vehicles, will decisively improve
the sustainability and tactical mobility of deployed
forces whilst affording them a greatly enhanced
level of protection. Priority will be given to procuring
protected command, multi-function and transport
vehicles. The range of protected vehicles is being
augmented consistently.

Altogether, this will give the Army increased flexibility, responsiveness, mobility and robustness.

This realignment of the Army is resulting in new

structures:

The Response Forces Division, the Specialised
Operations Division and the Airmobile Division
can perform command and control tasks on
operations, including on a multinational scale.

The brigades of the stabilisation forces are under
the administrative control of two division
headquarters that can also provide command
personnel for multinational headquarters during
stabilisation operations.

The tasks of command and control support and
logistic support are being reorganised between
the Army and the Joint Support Service.


The Reserve structures are being aligned to meet
the new tasks.

Below ministerial level, the Army has a two-pillar
command structure.

The Army Forces Command is responsible for the
operational readiness of the army corps, divisions,
and brigades. It exercises command and control
over all Army divisions, as well as over the German
elements in multinational corps headquarters and
in the Franco-German Brigade.

The Response Forces Division, consisting of two
armoured brigades plus operating forces and command and control and support forces, will have the
capability to conduct mainly network-enabled, joint
and high-intensity multinational composite land
force operations.

The Specialised Operations Division exercises command and control over the Army’s special and specialised forces, which have been organised into the
Special Forces Command and two airborne brigades.
The operational spectrum of the special forces

ranges from obtaining key information, providing
wide-area proactive protection of own forces, countering terrorist threats and rescuing hostages held
by terrorists, through to carrying out combat missions on enemy territory. Specialised forces play a
role in the fight against international terrorism and
can be employed for armed evacuation and recovery, for initial entry operations, and for rescue and
evacuation missions.

Through its Airmobile Division, the Army has the
capability to deploy forces rapidly and over long
distances, deliver effects, shift points of main effort
quickly, and contribute to joint operations conducted in the depth. Its forces can be employed during
operations of both the response forces and stabilisa

tion forces. The Airmobile Division is comprised of
the Air Manoeuvre Brigade, three Army Aviation
Regiments and the Army Troops Command. On operations the Air Manoeuvre Brigade is reinforced with
forces from the three Army Aviation Regiments.

The brigades of the stabilisation forces, which are
under the administrative control of the two division
headquarters, can be deployed independently as
part of low- and medium-intensity, multinational
joint military operations.

The Army Office elaborates the basis for the organisation, further development, equipping and training
of the Army. It is responsible for the Army’s schools
and central training facilities.


**90** **91**


-----

**6.4 Air Force**

With its extensive special capabilities to deliver
effects in and from the air, including space, the Air
Force contributes to German security. These include
its operational flexibility, its considerable responsiveness plus its capability to deliver effects over
great distances.

The fighter wings and the Air Force’s corresponding
command and control facilities are permanently
tasked with safeguarding air sovereignty in order to
ensure the protection of our citizens and own territory
against air attacks at all times.

The Air Force plays a significant part in maintaining
political and military freedom of action in the context
of international crisis management and conflict prevention beyond our own borders. It directly supports
land and maritime forces and establishes the prerequisites for protecting own and allied forces against
attacks from the air.

On account of their specific characteristics and capabilities, air forces also have an important political

role. By demonstrating timely presence and/or delivering graduated effects, it is possible to react to situational developments in an escalatory or de-escalatory
manner. Their capability to carry out the strategic
lift of personnel and equipment enables rapid
deployment of force contingents and their reliable
sustainability in crisis areas. They additionally support national rescue, disaster relief and evacuation
operations all over the world.

Ever since the Air Force was set up, internationality
and multinational cooperation have been its hallmarks. Consequently, the Air Force has already
assigned substantial forces to NATO.


The structure and organisation of the Air Force are
dictated by its operational mission. Below ministerial
level, the Air Force Command is responsible for ‘Operations’, and the Air Force Office for ‘Mission Support’.

The German Air Force Command exercises command
and control over all the Air Force’s operational units.
As the force provider it is responsible for operational
training, exercises and preparation of operations
and makes Air Force units available for Bundeswehr
operations. The German Air Force Command has
three divisions under its control as well as the Air
Transport Command, whose tasks in the medium
term will be transferred to a European Air Transport
Command. The target structure of the Air Force will
include a total of seven combat air wings.

Three surface-to-air missile (SAM) wings form the
core of the ground-based air defence and ensure the
basic capability for missile defence.

The number of tactical air command and control
units is being adapted to operational needs and condensed to three. The Air Force’s specific capabilities
for key point and installation defence are being

pooled and consolidated in one battalion-size unit.

The Air Force Office looks after those aspects of
mission support that remain the responsibility of the
Air Force. In case of operations, the Air Force Office is
subordinate to the Air Force Command. It also performs joint tasks through its flight safety and flight
operations departments as well as through subordinate agencies for air traffic control and aviation
medicine. The Air Force Office exercises direct command and control over the Air Force Training Command, including its training units and schools, and
over the Air Force Weapon Systems Command and
its logistics units.


The transformation of the Bundeswehr makes it similarly imperative for the Air Force to fine-tune its
materiel and equipment consistently, in line with its
tasks, to meet the fresh challenges. The procurement
of mobile operations centres and the replacement of
both the airborne and ground-based weapon systems
will mean an altogether greatly improved operational
capability.

The EUROFIGHTER weapon system will in future
afford the Air Force a highly agile and extremely
efficient combat aircraft for ensuring the integrity of
German airspace, as well as for conducting operations
in the context of international crisis management.
Superior-performance air-to-air missiles optimised
for different ranges will be integrated into the
EUROFIGHTER to provide this capability. For the airto-ground role, the multi-role EUROFIGHTER will be
equipped step by step with laser- and GPS-guided
precision weapons for various ranges, as well as with
a modular stand-off weapon.

Procurement of the highly mobile tactical Medium
Extended Air Defence System (MEADS), a transatlantic
development, will enhance the ballistic missile

defence capability, in particular. Together with an
upgraded PATRIOT weapon system, this will constitute a significant contribution to national risk prevention.

Capabilities for airborne, stand-off and all-weather
surveillance and reconnaissance are to be ensured in
future mainly by means of unmanned aerial vehicles
operating at medium and high altitudes.

The AIRBUS A400M transport aircraft with its air
refuelling capability will add considerably to existing airlift capacities.


Aircraft range and endurance in the mission area
can be increased substantially thanks to air refuelling.
AIRBUS A310s are being converted into tanker aircraft to provide an initial national air refuelling
capability.

The Air Force provides air ambulances, such as the
A310 AirMedEvac, for strategic aeromedical evacuation.

The new NH-90 transport helicopter will considerably
enhance short-range airlift capabilities and greatly
improve the quality of search and rescue performance in Germany. The capability that will then be
available for Combat Search and Rescue will be immensely important for own forces on operations.

The Air Force and its assets make a key contribution
to the capability profile of the Bundeswehr, given the
wider set of tasks. It thus makes valuable political
options available in the context of conflict prevention
and crisis management, as well as the capability for
national and alliance defence, and, with its special
capabilities, guarantees the safety of the population
at home and of forces abroad during joint operations.


**92** **93**


-----

countering sea mines, submarines and terrorist
threats to the maritime space, including support of
Federal and Land police forces.

One of the German Navy’s main attributes is its ability
to integrate rapidly into multinational task forces.
Almost all of its forces are assigned to NATO. The
Navy will continue to contribute on a regular basis
to all four NATO Standing Maritime Groups, thus
ensuring that Germany is generally represented in
the NATO Response Force at all times. The German
Navy has pledged naval forces of task force strength
to the European Union, plus the Glücksburg Maritime
Headquarters as the Maritime Component Command
for given joint operations. This also includes setting
up a maritime contribution to the EU battlegroups.

The Fleet Command, in its function as a higher command authority, is a force provider as well as a headquarters and lead command. As a force provider it is
responsible for ensuring that operational forces are
available. As a competent headquarters it has an
important function in the further evolution of naval
and naval air forces, this also in cooperation with
external partners.

The fleet is divided into two flotillas and two naval
air wings. The forces of the boat flotillas have been
combined as Flotilla 1 in Kiel. This step has been
taken not just to streamline command structures but
first and foremost to bring expertise in conducting
operations in coastal waters together under one roof.

A Centre of Excellence for Operations in Confined
and Shallow Waters (COE CSW) has, moreover, been
established with Flotilla 1. Here, new concepts and
procedures are to be developed and tested together
with the other services and international participants.
NATO allies will also be invited to contribute to the
Centre of Excellence, thus strengthening Germany’s


**Air Force Command Structure Target structures for 2010**


**6.5 Navy**

Germany faces the challenge of being able to counter
both conventional and asymmetric threats to our
security from the sea. The maritime capabilities of
the Bundeswehr necessary to meet this challenge are
provided by the Navy. In the course of transformation
of the Bundeswehr, the Navy is also evolving into an
expeditionary force.

The Navy is thus becoming well-positioned to conduct
sustained operations also on a multinational scale
and under threat off foreign shores. This is the Navy’s
contribution to the containment of crises and conflicts
where they arise and, if called for politically, their
management. The special legal status of the high
seas stands the Navy in good stead in that the sea
can be used as a base for operations, with all forces
interacting to deliver a desired effect in countries of
deployment.

German maritime forces can pre-station unhindered
in distant regions at an early stage, thus flanking
diplomatic efforts. Besides their ability to conduct
military operations at sea, they can make an effective

contribution to operations ashore. They can also
enforce embargo measures from the sea and support
humanitarian relief and evacuation operations.
Their considerable endurance in the mission area,
their robustness and their operational versatility
make the German Navy a vital component of multinational operations. Joint operations ashore can
also be commanded from the sea.

Given Germany’s maritime dependency, it is additionally vital to make adequate provisions for Germany’s security. A special responsibility falls to the
Navy to protect the coastal waters and sea lines of
communication of Germany and its allies. This means
having capabilities for sea surveillance as well as for


**94** **95**


-----

role in the Alliance. With the reduction of the number
of frigate squadrons from four to two in January
2006 and the establishment of a permanently
available operational headquarters, the Destroyer
Flotilla has been reorganised to form Flotilla 2.

The German Navy has set up a battalion of naval
protection forces to protect own units in confined
waters and in port. It is streamlining its structures
and improving its operational and command and
control capabilities by establishing rapidly available,
embarkable operational headquarters.

The Naval Office is responsible for course-based
training, armaments, equipment and naval logistics.
Subordinate to the Naval Office are the Navy schools,
the five base commands, the Naval Command and
Control Systems Command, and the Naval Service
Test Command.

The Navy will improve its future robustness and
sustainability with the Type K-130 corvettes. The
corvettes will be capable of precision target engagement ashore, thus supporting joint operations from
the sea.

The Type F125 frigates now at the planning stage will
be a completely new type of vessel, designed especially for prolonged stabilisation operations. Thanks
to innovative concepts for operational deployment,
the ship will be able to remain on station in the area
of operations for up to two years.

Type 212A submarines will maintain our capability
for submarine operations in the long term. Their
capabilities include antisurface operations, insertion
of special forces, plus intelligence collection and
reconnaissance. These submarines, together with
the P-3C Orion maritime patrol aircraft, frigates, and
shipborne helicopters needed for effective engagement of submarines, make up a three-dimensional
antisubmarine warfare net.


With its Type 702 combat support ships the German
Navy ensures logistic and medical support for prolonged operations. Combat support ships can also be
used to support joint operations, as well as humanitarian assistance and evacuation operations. What is
more, they can serve as a command platform during
joint operations. Depending on the type of operation
necessary, they can be equipped with an operations
centre, or alternatively, with a mobile naval surgical
hospital.

The procurement of the MH-90 naval helicopter
will mean the future availability of powerful and
efficient shipboard helicopters for the German Navy.

The Type F124 frigates have improved the Navy’s air
defence capabilities against aircraft and missiles
and contribute to maritime theatre ballistic missile
defence. They thus help to protect own forces, the
civilian population, economic centres and conurbations on land.


**Navy Command Structure**


Naval
Specialised
Deployment
Forces


1st
Submarine
Squadron


Submarine
Training
Centre

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|rine on|1st Corvet Squadr|
|rine g|7th Fast Pa Boat Squadr|
|lised ment|3rd Mines Squadr|
|||


Naval
Protection
Forces


**96** **97**


-----

**6.6 Joint Support Service**

The Joint Support Service (JSS) is the key military
organisational area that provides support for the
Bundeswehr, both on operations and during routine
duty. It performs cross-cutting and joint support
tasks for the entire Bundeswehr. Concentrating these
tasks reduces the strain on the single services,
exploits synergetic effects and enhances the performance of the Armed Forces as a whole.

The tasks of the Joint Support Service include:

provision of the command and control organisation for operations abroad and for Bundeswehr
assistance efforts in support of civilian disaster
relief in Germany;

command and control support in Germany, in the
areas of operation and from Germany to the areas
of operation;

logistic support, explosive ordnance disposal as
well as NBC defence and protection tasks;

the military intelligence organisation, including
strategic reconnaissance, geoinformation and
psychological operations;

Bundeswehr military police operations and civilmilitary cooperation at home and abroad;

joint training plus academic research and studies.

Tasks involving officer and non-commissioned officer (NCO) personnel management as well as bi- and
multinational cooperation are equally a part of the
Joint Support Service’s area of responsibility as are
family support, voluntary reservist work, the military
music service and the promotion of top-level sport.


This multifaceted task spectrum determines the organisation and structure of the Joint Support Service.

The Bundeswehr Operations Command and the
newly formed Special Forces Operations Command
are under the administrative control of the Chief of
Staff, Joint Support Service, who is also Vice Chief of
Staff, Bundeswehr. During operations both commands are directly subordinate to the Chief of Staff,
Bundeswehr.

The Armed Forces Office is responsible for the further
development of the Joint Support Service and, in addition, performs key specialist tasks for the Bundeswehr.
The Armed Forces Office is hence responsible for policy
matters concerning the training of the Armed Forces.
It exercises administrative control over the following:

the newly established Bundeswehr Transformation Centre;

central training institutes such as the Bundeswehr
Command and Staff College, the Leadership
Development and Civic Education Centre, the
Bundeswehr Logistics School, the Bundeswehr

Command Support School, the Bundeswehr
Military Police and Headquarters Service School,
and other training establishments;

military attaché offices, German elements of the
NATO command structure, and other elements
and agencies representing our interests in the
international field;

establishments and agencies responsible for research in the fields of social sciences and military
history, as well as museums;

other institutions and agencies for the joint
conduct of tasks, such as verification.


Because of their special functions, the Bundeswehr
Counterintelligence Office, the Office for Military
Studies, the Bundeswehr Personnel Office plus the
yet-to-be-established Bundeswehr Enlisted Personnel Office, and the German Military Representative
to NATO and the European Union also report directly
to the Chief of Staff, Joint Support Service, and Vice
Chief of Staff, Bundeswehr.

The Federal College for Security Studies, as an interministerial institute of the Federal Government, is
assigned to the Federal Ministry of Defence in terms
of organisation and, within this area, to the Joint
Support Service. The Joint Support Service is also
responsible for the Bundeswehr universities.

The Joint Support Command is the Joint Support
Service’s command headquarters. It exercises command and control over the bulk of the Joint Support
Service’s forces and is responsible for predeployment
training, exercises and preparations for deployment.
It is also the specialist agency for the task areas of
logistics, command and control support, NBC
defence and protection, as well as military police
matters and civil-military cooperation of the Bun
deswehr.

The Strategic Reconnaissance Command has command over the fixed and mobile signal intelligence,
electronic warfare and satellite intelligence forces
and institutions. The Bundeswehr Geoinformation
Office meets the needs of the Bundeswehr for geoinformation in close cooperation with civilian agencies
and allied and friendly nations. The Psychological
Operations Centre uses communication means and
methods to reach specific target audiences in the
areas of operations in support of own operations. The
Logistics Office organises logistics procedures for the
Joint Support Service and is responsible for the inservice support management of its equipment. The


Logistics Centre controls central logistic support for
the Armed Forces worldwide.

Four military district/Land commands are subordinate to the Joint Support Command. They exercise
command over all the Joint Support Service’s logistics, command and control support and military
police personnel, the training area headquarters,
military driver training centres, family support centres, military bands and sports promotion sections,
plus the Explosive Ordnance Disposal Centre and the
Bundeswehr’s Civil-Military Cooperation (CIMIC)
Centre.

The Military District Commands, their eleven subordinate Land commands and the Berlin garrison command are central elements of the territorial realignment to be completed by 2007. Approximately 470
government district and regional liaison elements
are to be set up, manned preferably by reservists, so
that nationwide civil-military cooperation can be
intensified at the lower and medium levels so crucial
for operations. Additional support for the civilian
disaster management authorities can be provided by
civil-military cooperation support points stationed

throughout Germany. At present, these include engineers and medical service and NBC assets. Besides
the organisational measures being taken, the military principles of employment are being adapted to
better meet the needs of the civilian agencies responsible for countering threats and providing disaster
relief, as well as to the requirements for effective
protection of Germany.


**98** **99**


-----

**Joint Support Service Command Structure**


**Vice Chief of Staff, Bundeswehr,**
**and Chief of Staff, Joint Support Service**


**6.7 Bundeswehr Joint Medical Service**

The purpose of medical support is to protect, maintain or restore the health of soldiers. Trust in the
reliability and quality of the Medical Service is an
important factor in the motivation of servicemen
and women.

The organisation and structure of the Medical Service are being further adapted to the new task spectrum, thus enabling the Medical Service to provide
appropriate medical support both at home and
abroad. This support includes the operation of suitable preclinical and clinical treatment facilities on
deployments, medically qualified and suitably
protected casualty evacuation, and a deploymentrelated reorientation of Bundeswehr hospitals as
treatment facilities integrated into Germany’s civilian health care system.

The guiding principle of the Bundeswehr Medical
Service on deployments abroad is to guarantee a
treatment outcome that, in terms of quality, corresponds to medical standards in Germany. This
applies to preventive health care, general medical

and dental care, the treatment of deployment-related
stress, and medical evacuation.

Operational medical support begins with emergency
on-site medical treatment of a wound, injury or
illness and includes appropriate emergency surgery.
If support consistent with German peacetime
medical standards cannot be obtained from suitable
treatment facilities of partner nations, then clinical
care facilities including the required medical specialist assets are also provided in the country of deployment. En-route medical treatment is ensured during
medical evacuation. Treatment is concluded with
continued full-spectrum care and rehabilitation
carried out in Bundeswehr hospitals or, if necessary,
civilian facilities.


**Bundeswehr**
**Operations**
**Command**


Strategic
Reconnaissance
Command


Psychological
Operations
Centre

|Armed Forces Staff|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|wehr Joint Su ons Comma nd||
|gic Bundeswehr nais- Military Intelligence and Centre*||
|logical Bundeswehr tions Logistics Office||


**100** **101**


-----

**Command Structure of the Joint Medical Service**


cine, and military pharmacy, and is responsible for
exercising supervision over the various medical
fields in the Bundeswehr, a task normally carried out
by public authorities. Its task spectrum additionally
includes further development, training, and equipment in the Medical Service as well as medical intelligence. The Medical Office exercises command over
educational and training facilities as well as over the
specialist and central institutes of the Bundeswehr
Joint Medical Service.

The only medical personnel serving outside the Medical Service are to be found in the following areas: the
Army special forces, the aeromedical service, the Air
Force Institute of Aviation Medicine, the shipboard
medical service, and the Naval Institute of Maritime
Medicine.


Rapid Medical
Response
Forces
Command

|al Region al Medic and I Comm|al Region al Medic and II Comm|al Region al Medic and III Comm|
|---|---|---|

|swehr Specia als medic centre|list Medic al field h s and regime|
|---|---|


In addition to supporting German force contingents,
the Medical Service provides medical care for civilians in the country of deployment, using local civil
ian health care structures. Such services are not only
of humanitarian significance, they are also an important contribution towards protecting our own troops
as they create confidence and trust.

Capabilities not required for current deployments
serve at home to maintain the routine provision of
medical care in the Bundeswehr and are available for
tasks related to the protection of Germany and its
citizens. Rapid reaction medical elements are available for accident and disaster relief. Special capabilities such as aeromedical evacuation are an additional, important aspect in the spectrum of the Medical
Service.


Below ministerial level, the Joint Medical Service
consists of two commands: the Joint Medical Forces
Command and the Bundeswehr Medical Office.

The Joint Medical Forces Command packages missiontailored medical contingents for the support of
deployed military personnel. It supports the units at
their home stations and during exercises and, upon
request, provides disaster relief assistance in Germany.
Four regional medical commands and the Rapid
Medical Response Forces Command have been
subordinated to the Joint Medical Forces Command
so that it can perform these tasks.

The regional medical commands are responsible for
the Bundeswehr hospitals, regional medical facilities,
and medical and hospital regiments, and thus have
at their disposal all the components necessary to


assemble medical task forces. Where regional medical support in Germany is concerned, the services
offered and the staffing levels have been adjusted to
local requirements. In addition, the regional medical
commands carry out health care tasks normally performed by public authorities.

Bundeswehr hospitals ensure free medical care for
soldiers according to an integrated treatment concept in which in-patient hospital treatment is dovetailed with out-patient care in medical centres. They
are modern hospitals whose range of treatments is
tailored primarily to the mission relevance of the
respective specialist field. In cooperation with civilian hospitals, they ensure that hospital personnel of
the Armed Forces receive medical training and
continually refresh their skills for deployments. Bundeswehr hospitals are an integral part of the civilian
rescue service, supplying it with rescue helicopters
and ambulances. In the event of a disaster, they can
support the civilian health care system by providing
it with specialist personnel.

The operational elementsof the JointMedical Service
are classified as response, stabilisation and support

forces. The Rapid Medical Response Forces Command
with its air-deployable medical facilities forms the
heart of the response forces. Its air-transportable aid
stations and surgical hospitals enable it to ensure
highly flexible emergency medical and surgical care
and deliver appropriate support to troops even in
high-intensity combat operations. Together with
elements of the organic medical services, the medical and hospital regiments provide the medical
services necessary to support the broad spectrum of
peace stabilising measures.

The Bundeswehr Medical Office performs central
tasks in the areas of preventive medical care, health
care, military medicine, dentistry, veterinary medi

**102** **103**


-----

**Tiers of Operational Medical Support**

**Medical evacuation and treatment facilities** **Type of support** **NATO Role**


Territorial Defence Administration
The Territorial Defence Administration’s core tasks
include the management and running of barracks
facilities, provision of messing, payment of salaries
and pensions, as well as responsibility for foreign
language support, housing support and social services.
It is additionally responsible for conducting preinduction examinations and calling up conscripts
pursuant to the Compulsory Military Service Act.
Dealing with general legal affairs such as settling
claims for damages as a result of exercises, air accidents or other kinds of major mishaps, also falls within its sphere of responsibility.

With its unified organisation, the Territorial Defence
Administration assures single-source support and
services throughout the Armed Forces. Service tasks
of similar type are being concentrated within the
Territorial Defence Administration in the course of
the further development of the Bundeswehr. Military
users will thus have competent points of contact at
all levels.

The Federal Office of Defence Administration has
been increasingly assigned tasks that need to be

centralised nationwide below ministerial level. This
applies especially to the planning, preparation,
control and performance of civilian operational
tasks incumbent on the Territorial Defence Administration during Bundeswehr operations abroad.

The number of military district administrative offices,
as central intermediate authorities of the Territorial
Defence Administration at regional level, has been
reduced from seven to four over the past few years
and their organisational structures significantly
streamlined.

The garrison administrative offices work as partners
with the Armed Forces in carrying out a wide range
of routine, day-to-day tasks in such areas as infrastruc

**Medical teams with rescue paramedics**
in the deployment area


**Initial life-saving** NATO Role 1
**measures**


**Mobile aid stations and mobile emergency** **Initial medical care** NATO Role 1
**physician teams**
in the deployment area


**Mobile surgical hospitals with trauma surgeons**
in the deployment area


**Initial emergency** NATO Role 2
**surgical care**


**Field hospitals with mission-essential specialists** **Acute clinical care** NATO Role 3
in the deployment area


**Bundeswehr hospitals and civilian hospitals**
in Germany


**Definitive treatment** NATO Role 4
**and rehabilitation**


**6.8. Federal Defence Administration**

Article 87 b of the Basic Law confers the administrative support of the Armed Forces on an independent
Defence Administration. It is basically separate and
independent from the military organisation but, like
the Armed Forces, it is under the direct control of the
Federal Ministry of Defence. The Federal Defence
Administration is responsible for personnel management and for satisfying the immediate materiel requirements of the Armed Forces. This includes, first
and foremost, personnel administration tasks, budgeting and accounting, pay, pensions and benefits,
messing, management of defence estate and accommodation facilities, as well as procurement issues.

The Federal Defence Administration is organised
into the Territorial Defence Administration and the
Armaments Organisation. Whilst the Armaments
Organisation has overall responsibility for developing, testing and procuring weapons and equipment,
the Territorial Defence Administration is tasked
with supporting the forces directly on the ground,
including at deployment bases abroad and within
the scope of international operations.

The structure and organisation of the Federal Defence
Administration are being optimised in parallel with
the realignment of the Armed Forces, while taking
operational tasks into account. All such measures are
aimed at ensuring that there will continue to be a
modern and service-oriented administration available in future which provides effective and unbureaucratic support, thus enabling the Armed Forces
to master the tasks in hand.


**104** **105**


-----

**Territorial Defence Administration**


tions needed to facilitate their return to civilian
working life at the end of their period of service.

The new tasks of the Bundeswehr also mean new
obligations for the Territorial Defence Administration.
Since 1995, it has been making a major contribution
in the areas of deployment outside Germany. Members of the Territorial Defence Administration take
part in operations abroad, for the duration of which
they may change their legal status from civilian to
military. During operations, support focuses on the
areas of personnel administration and remuneration
of local-hire personnel, language support, local procurement matters, as well as defence estate administration and management and infrastructure issues.

The reorientation of the Territorial Defence Administration towards operations also entails changes in its
structures and tasks in Germany. The Federal Office
of Defence Administration provides central expertise
ranging from messing, contractual matters and
environmental protection through to infrastructure,
taking the special aspects of operations abroad into
account. The Federal Office of Languages provides
all the linguistic support needed by German forces

deployed abroad, for which it has a “Support of Operations Abroad” cell. The Territorial Defence Administration Operations Support Coordination Centre,
which cooperates directly with the Bundeswehr
Operations Command, is tasked with coordinating
civilian operational activities.


**Federal Ministry of Defence**

**Defence Administration, Infrastructure**
**and Environmental Protection Directorate**


**Federal Office of Defence**
**Administration**


**Federal Office of Languages**


ture, personnel service and logistics. They are being
remodelled more intensively along business management lines and will in future assume important
civilian support tasks that are currently performed
by the Armed Forces. The garrison administrative
offices will be reduced in number, from 80 at present
to 53 by 2010, and will become modern Bundeswehr
service centres.

The selection and induction offices are the interface
between the Bundeswehr and young conscripts.
They are being reorganised so that they can carry on
functioning as modern, cost-effective and citizenfriendly agencies. They will be reduced to 52 in number by 2010. Seven pre-induction examination centres
will additionally be established, so that there will still
be a sufficient number of such offices throughout the
country.

The Federal Academy of Defence Administration and
Technology is the Federal Defence Administration’s
highest central educational establishment, with an
attendance of some 10,000 students per year. Every
year the Federal Office of Languages provides foreign
language training in more than 40 languages for

over 17,000 personnel of the Armed Forces and the
defence administration, and for personnel of Federal
and Land authorities as well as friendly nations, and
offers translation and interpretation services to all
areas for which the Federal Ministry of Defence is
responsible. The Federal College of Public Administration/Defence Administration Department trains
future civil servants of the higher intermediate nontechnical administrative service, whilst the Federal
Schools of Defence Administration train future civil
servants of the intermediate technical and non-technical service. Bundeswehr schools of general education give temporary-career volunteers, in particular,
the opportunity to acquire school-leaving qualifica

Federal Republic of Germany
Offices of Defence Administration
Abroad


**Federal Academy of Defence**
**Administration and Technology**


Bundeswehr Subsistence Office


**Federal College of Public**
**Administration – Defence**
**Administration Department**


Bundeswehr Schools of General
Education


Selection and
Induction
Offices


Garrison Administrative Offices/
Bundeswehr
Service Centres


**Federal Schools of Defence**
**Administration**

|Col1|Federal O District Military District Federal A trative Administrative Administr orth Office East District Military District Federal C trative Administrative Administr outh Office West Administr n and Garrison Adminis- Federal S n trative Offices/ Administr|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Defence|||
|||Federal A Administr|
||District trative orth||
|||Federal C Administr|
||District trative outh||
|||Administr Federal S Administr|
||n and Garrison n trative O||


**106** **107**


-----

**Structure of the Armaments Organisation**


Armaments and IT Organisations
The Armaments Organisation is responsible for satisfying the immediate materiel requirements of the
Armed Forces. It must ensure that the Bundeswehr is
supplied not only with classic military equipment
but also with standardised and cost-effective, stateof-the-art information technology.

The Armaments Organisation has a three-tier structure. At ministerial level, the Directorate General of
Armaments, the Modernisation Directorate and the
Director for Information Technology are tasked with
planning, directing and controlling all armamentsrelated activities and working with politicians and
parliament on defence and armaments issues. The
Director General of Armaments is directly responsible
to the Ministry’s Executive Group, whilst the Director
for Information Technology is assigned to the Modernisation Directorate. In his capacity as National
Armaments Director, the Director General of Armamentsrepresentsthe interests of the Federal Ministry
of Defence in the field of armaments at international
level. The Directorate General of Armaments has
responsibility for economic policy matters, international armaments cooperation, the planning and

direction of defence research and technology, and
for exercising ministerial oversight of the armaments
projects in its area of responsibility.

The two higher federal authorities, the Federal Office
of Defence Technology and Procurement and the
Federal Office for Bundeswehr Information Management and Information Technology (Bundeswehr IT
Office), are responsible for the armaments projects
below ministerial level. The core task of the Federal
Office of Defence Technology and Procurement is the
management of all armaments projects (with the
exception of information management and information technology projects). It is, furthermore, responsible for important cross-functional tasks, in particular disposal, contracting policy and industrial property rights.


Technical specialist tasks, technical and operational
systems testing, and the implementation of projects
in the field of defence research and technology are
the remit of the Bundeswehr technical centres and
research institutes. They are independent agencies
controlled by the Federal Office of Defence Technology and Procurement. The Naval Arsenal, responsible
for maintenance and logistic tasks for the Navy, is also
subordinate to the Federal Office of Defence Technology and Procurement.

Information management, command and control
support, and central and cross-cutting information
technology are the responsibility of the Federal Office for Bundeswehr Information Management and
Information Technology. This Office is under the
organisational, personnel and technical control of
the Director of Modernisation and is subordinate to
the IT Staff headed by the Director for Information
Technology. The IT tasks of the civilian and military
organisational areas are concentrated at the Federal
Office for Bundeswehr Information Management
and Information Technology and its subordinate
Bundeswehr Information Technology Centre. Over
and above satisfying the Armed Forces’ requirements

for modern information technology, the Federal
Office for Bundeswehr Information Management
and Information Technology is responsible for the
strategy, conceptual planning and architecture of
the Bundeswehr IT system.


**108** **109**


-----

**6.9** **Milit ary** **Legal Syst em** complaints and disciplinary matters. In so doing, **6.10** **Ch pa** **lain Service**

they are independent and bound only by law. Prose
Military decisions may only be taken in compliance Bundeswehr servicemen and women have a legal

cution of criminal offences, however, is the exclusive

with the established principles of national and inter- right to pastoral care and undisturbed practice of

jurisdiction of civilian criminal courts.

national law. It is therefore essential that all members religion. The religious communities have the opporof the Bundeswehr are familiar with the law and tunity to provide pastoral care for their members in

The operations-oriented posture of the Bundeswehr

know right from wrong. The servicemen and women the Armed Forces, taking into account the special

also poses fresh challenges to the Military Legal Sys
are entitled to seek protection of their rights before conditions of military service.

tem. Legal advisers take part in operations abroad

independent courts in case of such rights being

in the rank of field-grade officers. They advise the

violated. In the Armed Forces it is primarily the mem- There have so far been agreements only between

contingent commanders on the wide range of legal

bers of the Bundeswehr Military Legal System who the Protestant Church in Germany and the Catholic

issues pertinent to operations. Not only are they

have the task of imparting the necessary legal knowl- Church of the Federal Republic of Germany, and

tasked with the interpretation of United Nations reso
edge. They also advise military superiors, particularly agreements concerning an independent chaplain

lutions, Status of Forces Agreements and Rules of

on matters of military law and criminal law as well service for servicemen and women belonging to one

Engagement, for instance, but they must also con
as constitutional and international law. The Bundes- of these religions. Under these agreements, the state

duct a legal sufficiency review of operation plans to

wehr Military Legal System has a civilian structure takes care of the organisational structure of the

ensure that they comply with the rules of interna
Protestant and Catholic chaplain services, employs

and consists of the following:

tional humanitarian law. They are besides employed

chaplains as temporary or permanent civil servants,

in multinational headquarters together with legal

and bears the costs of these services’ organisation

Courtshaving jurisdiction over militarydisciplinary

advisers of other nations. Their tasks additionally

and personnel. This does not affect the independence

offences and complaints by military personnel

include supporting the deployed units during disci
of the Church’s mission. In fulfilling their pastoral

Disciplinary attorneys for the Armed Forces

plinary investigations in the country of deployment,

duties, military chaplains are exempt from govern
including the Disciplinary Attorney General for

rendering administrative assistance to German in
ment directives and only answerable to their Church,

the Armed Forces

vestigative and judicial authorities, and providing

irrespective of their status as federal civil servants.

Legal advisers

military personnel on operations with initial legal

Legal instructors

advice on private legal matters.

In addition to their church work, military chaplains
hold moral guidance classes, which the Bundeswehr

More than 100 civilian legal experts are currently

supports and encourages all servicemen and women

employed as legal advisers to commanders and

to attend, regardless of their religious beliefs. This

directors in units, agencies and offices of the Armed

provides a forum for discussing and reflecting on

Forces at division level and higher. These act, in a

fundamental moral and ethical issues of military

secondary function, as disciplinary attorneys for the

service and is well in keeping with the concept of

Armed Forces. Some 50 civilian legal instructors are

_Innere Führung (leadership development and civic_

employed at schools and academies of the Armed

education).

Forces. Military jurisdiction is exercised by the North
(Münster) and South (Munich) Disciplinary and Com
Roughly 40 percent of military personnel belong

plaints Courts of the Bundeswehr, with a total of

neither to the Protestant nor to the Catholic Church.

15 divisions and the two Military Affairs Divisions of

These include personnel who are completely non
the Federal Administrative Court in Leipzig. The

denominational and, to an increasing extent, mem
courts having jurisdiction over military disciplinary

bers of other denominations. Undisturbed practice

offences and complaints by members of the Armed

of religion is equally guaranteed for these servicemen

Forces are staffed by professional civilian judges and

and women in their units.

military lay judges. They take decisions on military


The Chaplain Service has had to focus its attention
on new tasks as a result of the Armed Forces missionoriented realignment. Protestant and Catholic military chaplains accompany units on international
peacekeeping and humanitarian relief operations.
They successfully help military personnel to cope
with personal and emotional strain in the areas of
deployment. Particularly on deployments abroad,
when soldiers often experience dire situations where
they are confronted with injury and death and the
misery of the local population, the fact that the
chaplains are there to help and talk to constitutes an
important element of care and welfare, with even
non-denominational soldiers using this opportunity
and finding it very helpful. In connection with such
deployments abroad, military chaplains devote special attention to the families of soldiers on operations
and take part in activities to help soldiers returning
from operations abroad to readjust to daily military
routine and resume their own private lives.


**110** **111**


-----

#### 7 Personnel

Well-trained, capable and motivated soldiers and
civilian employees are crucial for the operational
readiness of the Bundeswehr. The Bundeswehr is one
of the largest employers in Germany. Every year it
offers attractive jobs to more than 20,000 young men
and women in military and civilian vocations.

No other public institution has experienced such
drastic reductions in personnel numbers over the
past few years. The first year in which an all-German
budget was drawn up for an entire year was 1991,

when the National People’s Army was disbanded.
At that time, the manpower strength of the Bundeswehr was well over 650,000 military and civilian
personnel. Today, the Bundeswehr is some 370,000
strong; this includes around 250,000 military and
approximately 117,000 civilian personnel. Since Germany’s reunification, the civilian personnel cutbacks
in the Bundeswehr alone have accounted for well
over 80 percent of all personnel reductions throughout the public service at Federal level, helping significantly to bring down personnel costs over the long
term.

Operations abroad place considerable strain and
pressure on personnel. The Bundeswehr has therefore taken a number of well-coordinated measures to


respond to the demands facing Armed Forces personnel on operations.

The restructuring of careers and the qualification
campaign offering a wide range of initial civilian
occupational training as well as continuation training opportunities in the career path for non-commissioned officers (NCOs) has resulted in a sufficient
number and quality of recruits volunteering for service in the Armed Forces.There has been a significant
improvement in applicants’ general level of educa
tion and professional skills over the past few years. In
2005, some 70 percent of the applicants admitted to
the career paths of NCOs and enlisted personnel had
vocational qualifications. Ninety-three percent of
the applicants recruited for senior NCO careers had
an intermediate school-leaving certificate (Mittlere
_Reife), or a technical college (Fachhochschulreife) or_
university (Abitur) entrance qualification.

Some 40 percent of temporary-career volunteers
(TCVs) in the enlisted and NCO career categories in
2005 were recruited from the group of basic-service
conscripts (BSCs). This underlines not only the fact
that universal conscription is still the mainstay of
recruitment, but also that young people consider
serving in the Armed Forces to be attractive.


**Bundeswehr Personnel Strength As of 31 August 2006**


**112** **113**


-----

The special nature of military service is also being
taken into account in the striven-for reform of public
service law and pay regulations. It is being examined
whether it is possible or necessary to apply the same
type of pay system based on performance variables
to the military sector. In this context, the option of
introducing an independent and cost-neutral pay
system for military personnel will be looked at as
stipulated in the Coalition Agreement dated 11 November 2005. Military personnel will, on no account,
end up being financially worse off than civilians in
public service.

**115**


The attractiveness of military service is being consistently enhanced so that the Bundeswehr can hold its
own in the job market in the face of increasingly fierce
competition for qualified personnel.

The adjustment of East German pay levels to West
German standards is a central element of such efforts.
At present, civil servants, judges and military personnel who are given their first assignment in the new
Laender (including the eastern part of Berlin) receive
lower pay amounting to 92.5 percent of the amount
paid in the old Laender. This differentiation between
old and new Laender does not apply to conscripts.

As is already the case with public employees under
collective bargaining agreements, there is also the
intention to end the differentiation between East
and West German pay levels for civil servants and
military personnel in the lower income brackets (up
to pay grade A9) from the end of 2007, and for those
in the higher income brackets from the end of 2009.

Personnel sent on deployments abroad receive a
foreign deployment allowance to compensate for
the additional stresses and strains endured. The

amount of this allowance depends on the danger
to life and limb, the type and duration of the deployment and other personal restrictions during the
deployment abroad.

The Foreign Deployment-Related Benefits and Pensions Act, which entered into force on 1 December
2002, grants considerably increased benefits and
pensions to military personnel and civil servants who
are injured or suffer lasting health impairments
during deployments abroad. At present, the issue of
establishing a legal framework to enable those military personnel who are injured or sustained health
impairments on operations to stay in service is being

**114**


vigorously examined as a matter of priority. The objective is to apply, even more consistently, the principle that continued employment and rehabilitation
take precedence over mere payment of pensions and
benefits.

A key factor for the motivation of the servicemen
and women to fulfil their duties on deployments is
the support of their families. The Bundeswehr seeks
to take this aspect sufficiently into account. A family
support organisation including a central family support agency and 31 family support centres has been
established to this end. These provide assistance on
all social issues and care and welfare matters and
are being increasingly networked with comparable
institutions of civilian organisations. The Bundeswehr, moreover, attributes special importance to the
compatibility of family and employment in the
Armed Forces.


**7.1 Regulars and Temporary-Career Volunteers**

Some 60,000 regulars and about 130,000 temporarycareer volunteers (TCVs) are serving in the Bundeswehr.

The Armed Forces need a well-balanced mix of
personnel age groups to maintain their operational
readiness. Many tasks to be performed in the Services
can only be mastered up to a certain age by very
reason of the physical demands involved. This is why
only some 25 percent of all officers and NCOs who
serve in the forces as temporary-career volunteers
are currently kept on as regulars. All other personnel
have to take up a new civilian occupation when they
leave the Service. For this category of personnel there
are special provisions governing their right to vocational advancement, for instance, and the certainty
of being employed in the public service.

A Personnel Structure Model (PSM) provides the basis
for military personnel planning. It includes not only
personnel strengths but also detailed categorisation
of careers, terms of enlistment and pay grades.
Regulars for whom there are no vacancies under the

changed structures tie up funds no longer provided
for in the Personnel Structure Model.

The Personnel Early Retirement Act expiring in 2006
enables up to 3,000 regulars to opt for early retirement, provided that they meet specific conditions.
Also in future it must be ensured that the age structure in the forces is in line with the applicable personnel structure model. The Federal Government is
therefore examining the necessity to correct the
imbalance in the age structures of regulars in the
upper age brackets, tailored to the needs of the
Armed Forces in the course of the transformation
process.


-----

**7.2 Basic-Service and Extended-Service**
**Conscripts**

Some 55,000 basic-service conscripts (BSCs) and
extended-service conscripts (ESCs) serve at any one
time in the Bundeswehr and perform a wide variety
of tasks in support of operations abroad. They have a
broad range of educational and vocational qualifications, thus reducing the training effort of the Armed
Forces and increasing the spectrum of vocational
qualifications available.

Basic-service conscripts can volunteer for an extra
14 months of military service after their nine months
of basic military service. Such extended-service
conscripts account, on average, for 20 percent of the
personnel on deployments abroad. This underlines
their special importance for the operational readiness
of the Bundeswehr on operations abroad and during
routine duty at home.

Universal conscription and equity in conscription
are two sides of the same coin. For this reason, the
potential offered by the conscripts due for induction
will continue to be utilised to the best possible extent.

It is interesting to note in this connection that the
number of posts for basic-service conscripts for the
years 2006 and 2007 has been increased by 5,000.


**7.3 Reservists**

Reservists play their part in the successful fulfilment
of the Bundeswehr’s mission. Their voluntary participation in deployments abroad, in particular, is
indispensable. Through their commitment, they are
instrumental in ensuring that the Bundeswehr is
generally held in high esteem and can count on the
broad support of society.

Civil-military cooperation at government/urban
district and regional level is another area in which
mainly reservists are needed. They not only function
as advisers to the regions and districts, but also
render assistance in the event of natural disasters
and particularly grave accidents in Germany, and
initiate the necessary measures within the overall
national preventive security system.

The Bundeswehr can employ its reservists across the
entire task spectrum without resorting to mobilisation. The Armed Forces’ augmentation requirements
amount to 80,000 to 100,000 reservists.


**7.4 Civilian Personnel**

At present, some 117,00 civilian personnel are
employed in the Bundeswehr, about 26,000 of whom
are civil servants and around 85,000 public employees. More than 5,000 young people hold trainee
positions with the Armed Forces and the Defence
Administration.

In the course of the transformation of the Bundeswehr, the number of civilian personnel will be cut
back to some 75,000 posts by 2010.

The further reduction in civilian personnel is to be
achieved in a socially benign manner and without
any compulsory redundancies. It will be carried out
by strictly adhering to collective bargaining agreements and in close coordination with personnel
representatives, unions and professional associations. Safeguarding jobs continues to be a central
responsibility of civilian personnel management.

The Collective Agreement of 18 July 2001 on Socially
Benign Support Measures in Connection with the
Restructuring of the Bundeswehr offers public em
ployees a reliable basis for orientation. Every effort is
made, moreover, to ensure that employees whose
posts are cut can find another job in the Bundeswehr,
with other administrative authorities or agencies in
the public service, or even with partner enterprises
involved in cooperation projects.

Irrespective of the envisaged reduction in the number of personnel, the Bundeswehr will in future continue to offer interesting and responsible jobs with
good career prospects at home and abroad to civilian
employees holding all manner of qualifications. The
new tasks to be performed by the Armed Forces will
open up new opportunities for the civilian workforce.
So far, more than 2,000 civilian Bundeswehr person

nel have taken part in Bundeswehr deployments
abroad, which usually involves temporarily switching to military status.

The objective being pursued for higher intermediatelevel and higher-level civil servants under the
Personnel Development Concept is to identify, at an
early stage, civil servants who show well aboveaverage commitment and to prepare them for executive or managerial responsibilities. This includes,
first and foremost, ensuring that future executive
or managerial staff acquire qualifications in the
fields of personnel management as well as leadership and social competencies.


**116** **117**


-----

**7.5 Training and Education**

Training and education are crucial to the success of
the Bundeswehr’s transformation process. All servicemen and women receive the training they need
to fulfil their tasks successfully. New and innovative
approaches in advanced and continuation training
aswell as targeted investments in training technology
are vital for enhancing the capabilities of servicemen
and women to act independently in response to
changed situations. Efficient use is, at the same time,
being made of the opportunities opened up by global
networking and the resulting education resources,
thus making the Bundeswehr even more attractive
as an employer.

The modular concept of “Predeployment Training
for Conflict Prevention and Crisis Management”,
adopted in 2004, underscores the Bundeswehr’s
focus on operations. Right from basic military training, which is identical for all servicemen and women,
everyone is taught sufficient basic cross-functional
knowledge and skills for deployments abroad.
During their overall term of service, all soldiers must
master and demonstrate individual self-defence and

protection capabilities, irrespective of age, rank,
service or organisational area.

Exercises at national and multinational level also
remain indispensable for assessing and enhancing
the operational readiness of Bundeswehr units.
State-of-the-art training tools and computer-assisted
training facilities, such as the Army Combat Training
Centre, help to improve the quality of training and to
reduce costs.

It is primarily officers and non-commissioned officers
who receive a comprehensive education in politics
and history. Intensive ethical/moral and intercultural
education helps to foster the soldiers’ capability to
act in ethical conflict situations and in deployment


areas characterised by cultural differences. The Leadership Development and Civic Education Centre,
in particular, has been pioneering the conceptual
development and organisation of educational courses
on these subjects. It additionally offers “Leadership
coaching in military organisations” to leaders in
units and staffs.

Intensive foreign language training, especially English, is vital for deployments in a multinational environment. This training is provided by the Federal
Office of Languages at training establishments of the
Armed Forces and of the defence administration and
is mandatory for all senior NCOs and officers of the
Bundeswehr.

The Bundeswehr reserves a total of some 20,000
posts as part of a major long-term training and qualification campaign for personnel to gain recognised,
transferable civilian occupational qualifications,
such as apprenticeship trade qualifications,externally
accredited higher qualifications (e.g. as a master
craftsman) or technical college qualifications. This
provides primarily NCOs in the general specialist
service with the qualifications needed for their spe
cialist military tasks. A full range of qualification
opportunities is offered by the Vocational Advancement Service to facilitate the integration of soldiers
into civilian working life when they leave the Bundeswehr.

The vast majority of future officers take a degree
course based on independent research and teaching
at the universities of the Bundeswehr, which were
established in Hamburg and Munich in 1973. The
German Armed Forces hence have officers at their
disposal who, in addition to their military training,
obtain an academic qualification. This form of dual
professional qualification is unique in the world.
Both Bundeswehr universities are firmly integrated
into the German and international university land

**Modular Troop Training**

**1st to 3rd month** **from 4th month**


**Basic training**


**Targeted training**


Basic deployment
tasks training (predeployment training for conflict prevention and crisis
management)


**Operational**
**readiness**
**of individual /**
**team**

|tasks training (pre- deployment train- ing for conflict pre- vention and crisis management)|Force- Leadership category- training specific training General Standardised military modules training Special military training Advanced Specific deployment training tasks modules training Military organisational Deployment Supplemen- areas tasks refresher tary deploy- training ment tasks as required training mission- oriented|
|---|---|
|General military training||
|Centralised troop training||


**118** **119**


-----

scape. The constant development of the range of
courses, teaching in small groups, and the intensive
research activities make the Helmut Schmidt University in Hamburg and the Bundeswehr University in
Munich attractive seats of study and research.

Networked security policy and network-enabled
multinational operations place high demands on
the quality of continuing education and training of
top-level personnel. Such training is given at the
Bundeswehr Command and Staff College and at the
Federal College for Security Studies, established
within the remit of the Federal Ministry of Defence.

The Bundeswehr Command and Staff College is the
Bundeswehr’s highest military training institute. It
specialises in the joint initial and continuing education and training of all officers holding the status of
regulars and has an outstanding reputation in Germany and abroad. Some 80 Army, Air Force and Navy
officers from one year attend the two-year General
Staff/Admiral Staff Officers’ Course together with
more than 30 officers from allied member nations.
German field-grade officers and course participants
from all over the world receive joint instruction at

the College in a one-year International General Staff
Course, and receive the opportunity to gain experience far beyond the military sphere. The College
additionally teaches all Bundeswehr field-grade
officers the basic knowledge and skills needed for
troop assignments.

The Federal College for Security Studies runs continuing education courses on the full range of security
issues for officers, executive personnel of Federal and
Land ministries, participants from the fields of politics,
science, trade and industry, and journalism as well as
representatives of friendly nations and international
security organisations. A virtual learning platform
can be accessed not only for regular continuation
training but also to foster networking.


Besides the exchange on security policy topics at the
Federal College for Security Studies, efforts are being
made to establish interministerial approaches at
other education and training institutes. Security
policy topics are being taught interministerially,
both as part of training relating to deployments
abroad and as part of the training of future leadership personnel, and this is complemented by appropriate personnel exchange measures.

The process of transformation calls for a new didactic
approach. The Bundeswehr is making increasing use
of self-learning processes for initial and continuing
education and training. The emphasis here is on
accessing and assimilating knowledge independently
and transmitting it within a team. This promotes
individual responsibility, team spirit, creativity as
well as readiness for lifelong learning.

The modern education method of distance learning
is an example of this didactic approach. Based on the
principle of “New Teaching/New Learning”, students
have the opportunity to use the new media for
independent and team learning, supported by experienced instructors known as tele-tutors. Distance

learning also gives military personnel on deployments access to a wide choice of learning options.

Education in the Armed Forces has taken on a new
level of importance, as the success of transformation
and operations is largely determined by the ability
of the individual to assume responsibility. The independent pedagogical task of education calls for
military superiors to lead and train their subordinate
personnel in such a way that they can consistently
expand their capability to act on their own responsibility.


**120** **121**


-----

bines civilian and military instruments. Such an
approach is of paramount importance in the context
of comprehensive security provision, particularly for
conflict prevention and crisis management operations.
The same applies to the employment of military and
civilian capabilities in relief operations in the wake
of natural or man-made disasters. Experience at
national and international level has shown that,
where fewer resources are available, civilian and
military actors achieve greater effect if they pool
forces and coordinate their actions for the conceptual
planning and conduct of operations. The Federal
Government is taking up the ensuing challenge of
subjecting the instruments of security policy to constant appraisal and, where necessary, refining them.
This will serve the security of Germany best and, at
the same time, contribute to peace in the world.


#### 8 The Way Ahead


Modern and efficient Armed Forces are an element
of national security provision. Their tasks derive from
their constitutional mission and from the values,goals
and interests of German security and defence policy.
The transformation of the Armed Forces is aimed at
improving their operational readiness across the
entire task spectrum and requires unconditional
joint thinking and action throughout the Bundeswehr, as well as a stronger interministerial approach.
The further development of existing capabilities
must, at the same time, take account of the Bundeswehr's multinational involvement. The capability
of the Bundeswehr to conduct network-enabled operations will be an absolute prerequisite for it to play
a successful part in multinational conflict prevention
and crisis management.

In view of the changed international environment,
the future role of Armed Forces will be substantially
determined by the fact that effective protection of a
country and its people is possible only within the
framework of national security provision based on a
networked security policy. This will require not only
the Armed Forces, but also all other government
agencies concerned with threat and hazard preven
tion, preventive security and peacekeeping, to be
provided with the necessary funds within budgetary
constraints. Preventive security measures by the
state will in future necessitate even closer integration
of political, military, development policy, economic,
humanitarian, policing and intelligence instruments
for conflict prevention and crisis management. The
Bundeswehr is ready to meet the challenge of such
an interministerial approach, no matter what the
task, thus making allowance for the fact that security
parameters will also change as new risks and new
constellations in international politics arise.

The Bundeswehr undertakes operations at national
and international level. This similarly necessitates an
all-round, networked approach that effectively com

**122** **123**


-----

**SALIS** **Strategic Airlift Interim Solution**

**SAM** **Surface-to-air missile**

**SATCOMBw** **Satellite Communication for the**

**Bundeswehr**

**SAR** **Search and Rescue**

**SAR LUPE** **High Resolution Space-based**

**Synthetic Aperture Radar**

**SFOR** **Stabilisation Force**

**SIGINT** **Signal Intelligence**

**TACC** **Tactical Air Control Centre**

**TCV** **Temporary-Career Volunteer**

**UN** **United Nations**

**UNAMA** **United Nations Assistance Mission**

**in Afghanistan**

**UNIFIL** **United Nations Interim Force**

**in Lebanon**

**UNMIK** **United Nations Interim**

**Administration Mission in Kosovo**

**UNMIS** **United Nations Mission in Sudan**

**UNOMIG** **United Nations Oberserver Mission**

**in Georgia**

**UNSAS** **United Nations Standby**

**Arrangement System**

**WEU** **Western European Union**

**WMD** **Weapons of Mass Destruction**

**NATO Country Codes**

**DEU** **Germany**

**DNK** **Denmark**

**ESP** **Spain**

**GBR** **Great Britain**

**GRC** **Greece**

**ITA** **Italy**

**NLD** **Netherlands**

**NOR** **Norway**

**POL** **Poland**

**PRT** **Portugal**

**TUR** **Turkey**

**USA** **United States of America**


**GAERC** **General Affairs and External**

**Relations Council**

**GPS** **Global Positioning System**

**ISR** **Intelligence, Surveillance and**

**Reconnaissance**

**HIV** **Human Immunodeficiency Virus**

**IFOR** **Implementation Force**

**ICI** **Istanbul Cooperation Initiative**

**ISAF** **International Security Assistance**

**Force**

**IT** **Information Technology**

**JSS** **Joint Support Service**

**KFOR** **Kosovo Force**

**LoA** **Level of Ambition**

**MD** **Mediterranean Dialogue**

**MEADS** **Medium Extended Air Defence**

**System**

**NATO** **North Atlantic Treaty Organisation**

**NBC** **Nuclear, biological, chemical**

**NCO** **Non-commissioned officer**

**NPT** **Non-Proliferation Treaty**

**NRF** **NATO Response Force**

**OAE** **Operation ACTIVE ENDEAVOUR**

**ODIHR** **Office for Democratic Institutions**

**and Human Rights**

**OEF** **Operation ENDURING FREEDOM**

**OHQ** **Operation Headquarters**

**OSCE** **Organisation for Security and**

**Cooperation in Europe**

**OPCW** **Organisation for the Prohibition of**

**Chemical Weapons**

**PCC** **Prague Capabilities Commitment**

**PfP** **Partnership for Peace**

**PMG** **Politico-Military Group**

**PRT** **Provincial Reconstruction Team**

**PSI** **Proliferation Security Initiative**

**PSC** **Political and Security Committee**

**of the European Union**

**PSM** **Personnel Structure Model**

**RD Congo** **Democratic Republic of the Congo**

**SACEUR** **Supreme Allied Commander Europe**

**SACT** **Supreme Allied Commander**

**Transformation**


#### List of Abbreviations


**AF** **Air Force**

**AGS** **Alliance Ground Surveillance**

**AIDS** **Acquired Immunodeficiency**

**Syndrome**

**AirMedEvac** **Air Medical Evacuation**

**AMIS** **African Union Mission in Sudan**

**AU** **African Union**

**BSC** **Basic-Service Conscript**

**Bw** **Bundeswehr**

**BWC** **Biological Weapons Convention**

**CD&E** **Concept Development and**

**Experimentation**

**CFSP** **Common Foreign and Security Policy**

**COE CSW** **Centre of Excellence for Operations**

**in Confined and Shallow Waters**

**CIMIC** **Civil-Military Cooperation**

**CIVCOM** **Committee for Civilian Aspects of**

**Crisis Management**

**CPG** **Comprehensive Political Guidance**

**CPR** **Committee of Permanent**

**Representatives**

**CRT** **Civilian Response Team**

**CWC** **Chemical Weapons Convention**

**DCI** **Defence Capabilities Initiative**

**DSACEUR** **Deputy Supreme Allied Commander**

**Europe**

**EAPC** **Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council**

**EC** **European Community**

**ECAP** **European Capability Action Plan**

**EDA** **European Defence Agency**

**EHG** **European Headline Goal**

**ESC** **Extended-Service Conscript**

**ESDP** **European Security and Defence**

**Policy**

**ESS** **European Security Strategy**

**EU** **European Union**

**EUFOR** **European Union Force**

**EUMC** **European Union Military Committee**

**EUMS** **European Union Military Staff**

**FHQ** **Force Headquarters**

**FMoD** **Federal Ministry of Defence**

**G8** **Group of the seven leading**

**industrial nations and Russia**


**124** **125**


-----

#### List of Illustrations and Diagrams

The ‘Civilian Crisis Prevention’ Action Plan as an Example of

Interministerial and Networked Security Provision 23

The Alliance’s Strategic Concept of 1999 – NATO’s fundamen
tal security tasks 29

NATO Command Structure – Allied Command Operations

(ACO) 30

NATO Command Structure – Allied Command Transformation

(ACT) 31

NATO Response Force 32

European Security Strategy – “A secure Europe in a better

world” 35

Structural Elements of the EU Common Foreign and Security

Policy, including the European Security and Defence Policy 36

Petersberg Tasks 38

EU Battlegroups 39

Strategic Partnership between the EU and NATO / Organisa
tions for Europe 40

Berlin Plus Agreement 41

Instruments of Military Cooperation 50

Bundeswehr Mission 54

Bundeswehr Tasks 55

Article 24 (2) Basic Law 57

Article 87 a (2), (3), (4) Basic Law 58

Article 35 (2), (3) Basic Law 58

Operational Requirements 68

Target Strength of the Bundeswehr 2010 69

**126**


Bundeswehr Participation in International Peace Missions 73

Transformation of the Bundeswehr 75

Concept Development & Experimentation (CD&E ) 76

Principle of Network-enabled Operations 77

Force Categories 80

Capability Categories 81

Organisation of the Federal Ministry of Defence 87

Army Command Structure 89

Air Force Command Structure 94

Navy Command Structure 97

Joint Support Service Command Structure 100

Command Structure of the Joint Medical Service 102

Tiers of Operational Medical Support 104

Territorial Defence Administration 106

Structure of the Armaments Organisation 108

Bundeswehr Personnel Strength 113

Modular Troop Training 119


-----

