-  The Minister 
# Defence Policy Guidelines

 Safeguarding National Interests – Assuming International Responsibility –
 Shaping Security Together

I

The Defence Policy Guidelines set the strategic framework for the mission and the tasks

of the Bundeswehr as an element of the whole-of-government approach to security. They

describe the security objectives and security interests of the Federal Republic of

Germany. They are based on an assessment of the current situation and also include

current and likely future developments. The Guidelines will be reviewed at regular

intervals. They form the binding basis for the conceptual framework of the Bundeswehr

and all related subsequent work in the portfolio of the German Ministry of Defence.

II

The Strategic Security Environment

A direct territorial threat to Germany involving conventional military means remains an

unlikely event. Over the past few years the strategic security environment has continued

to change. Globalisation has led to power shifts between states and groups of states as

well as to the rise of new regional powers. Today, risks and threats are emerging above

all from failing and failed states, acts of international terrorism, terrorist regimes and

dictatorships, turmoil when these break up, criminal networks, climatic and natural

disasters, from migration developments, from the scarcity of or shortages in the supply of

natural resources and raw materials, from epidemics and pandemics, as well as from

possible threats to critical infrastructure such as information technology.

Security is not defined in geographical terms only. Developments in regions at the

periphery of Europe and outside the European zone of security and stability can have an

immediate impact on the security of Germany. Crises and conflicts can occur at any time,

at short notice and without prior warning and may require a rapid response even over

large distances.


-----

Based on the lessons we have learned on operations in recent years and our analysis of

security developments, we will adapt our national security tools and make new demands

on the armed forces as part of a whole-of-government approach in order to defend against

threats to our security both at home and in geographically distant regions.

Risks and Threats

The greatest challenges today lie less in the strength of other states than in their

weakness. Failing and failed states cause threats such as civil war, regional

destabilisation, humanitarian crises and related phenomena including radicalisation and

migration movements that help create safe havens and retreats for international terrorism

and organised crime. International terrorism remains a major threat to the freedom and

security of our country and our allies. International terrorist groups and networks – often

in combination with organised crime – pose an immediate threat that can have a wide

range of implications for state and society.

The growth of global interconnectedness encourages the rapid distribution and use of

advanced technologies, in particular information technology. For every great opportunity

there is an equally great risk. These technologies also help to mobilise pro-democracy

movements. The risk of political, economic and criminal abuse by state and non-state

actors is increasing. At the same time irreversible developments in the field of

telecommunications and information technology have led to the almost instant,

worldwide propagation of often unverified information. This gives extremists, too,

numerous opportunities for disinformation and facilitates radicalisation and

destabilisation.

Today, information infrastructure is considered to be critical infrastructure without which

public and private life would come to a halt. Due to its complexity, attacks on such

infrastructure can also destabilise our state with serious repercussions for our national

security. Given this threat from the information environment, governments will need to

adapt the way they see and resolve conflicts. The quick and unpredictable nature of these

attacks makes it almost impossible to consider the origin of enemies and their motives in

our own preparatory action. The possibility of denying cyber attacks after the fact has

already become a strategic element in a new type of computer-based conflict even

between states and is developing into an asymmetric threat with serious consequences.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and improvements in their means of

delivery are increasingly becoming a threat for Germany, too. We must prevent state and


-----

non-state actors from illegally acquiring weapons of mass destruction. To protect our

population we require credible deterrence, an effective non-proliferation regime, and

effective early warning and defence measures to limit the options of these actors.

The accelerated exchange of goods and services on global markets and worldwide

passenger traffic are increasing the risk of the dissemination of hazardous substances,

epidemics and pandemics. Transnational action is required in this area.

Climate change is already threatening the livelihood of many people in certain states.

Desertification, water and land shortages, uneven population densities, and enormous

prosperity gaps in connection with social disparity are leading to worldwide migration

flows to economically better developed regions and causing considerable conflict

potential for the regions in question. In the future this can have further consequences for

the stability of government and regional structures and thus for our security too.

Free trade routes and a secure supply of raw materials are crucial for the future of

Germany and Europe. Around the globe, changes are taking place in markets, channels of

distribution, and the ways in which natural resources are developed, secured and

accessed. The scarcity of energy sources and other commodities required for high
technology products will have implications for the international community. Restricted

access can trigger conflicts. Disruptions of transport routes and the flow of raw materials

and commodities, e.g. by piracy or the sabotage of air transport, pose a threat to security

and prosperity. This is why transport and energy security and related issues will play an

increasingly important role for our security.

III

Values, Objectives and Interests

Germany’s place in the world is characterised above all by our interests as a strong nation

in the centre of Europe and by our international responsibility for peace and freedom.

German security policy is committed to the values and principles of the free and

democratic order of the German constitution and international law. As an active member

of the international community, Germany pursues its interests and is actively striving for

a better and safer world. We are committed to serving world peace as a strong partner in a

united Europe.


-----

German security interests are a result of our history, our geographic location in the centre

of Europe, the international political and economic relations of our country, and our

resource dependency as a centre of high technology and an exporting nation with few

natural resources. These interests are not static, but can change in and along with

international constellations and associated developments.

Germany’s security objectives are:

-  the security and protection of German citizens;

-  the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Germany and its allies;

-  the fulfilment of international responsibilities.

German security interests include:

-  preventing, mitigating and managing crises and conflicts that endanger the

security of Germany and its allies;

-  advocating and implementing positions on foreign and security policy in an

assertive and credible way;

-  strengthening transatlantic and European security and partnership;

-  advocating the universality of human rights and principles of democracy,

promoting global respect for international law and reducing the gap between the

rich and the poor regions of the world;

-  facilitating free and unrestricted world trade as well as free access to the high seas

and to natural resources.

Ensuring security for our nation today means above all keeping the consequences of

crises and conflicts at bay and taking an active part in their prevention and containment.

To ensure its security, assert its sovereignty and demonstrate its willingness to defend

itself, Germany is prepared to use the complete spectrum of national policy instruments.

This includes the employment of armed forces. The involvement of the German

Bundestag with regard to the employment of the armed forces as stipulated in the

constitution will continue to be an indispensable basis of German security policy.

Military operations have far-reaching political consequences. In each individual case,

there must be a clear answer to the question of whether German interests and the related

fulfilment of international responsibility require and justify an operation and what the

consequences of non-action would be.


-----

Germany’s citizens can be certain that the available national forces, assets and

capabilities will be used to deliver fast and effective help – be it in natural disasters, after

large-scale emergencies or to protect vital infrastructure from threats of all kinds.

Responsibility for the protection of its citizens goes beyond the borders of Germany. In

case of imminent danger abroad, it must be possible to rescue and evacuate German

citizens in the best possible way by the employment of German forces alone.

The traditional distinction between external and internal security is becoming less and

less important in the light of current risks and threats. Today, safeguarding our interests is

only possible in a whole-of-government approach. We therefore need a national,

comprehensive and coordinated security policy that includes political and diplomatic

initiatives as well as economic, development policy, police, humanitarian, social and

military measures. A comprehensive, national approach to security can only be ensured if

all competent national institutions and forces in Germany take far-sighted, whole-of
government action while taking into account their responsibilities and capabilities laid

down in the constitution. To achieve this, the goal-oriented interaction of the foreign

service, development cooperation, police, armed forces, civil protection, disaster control,

and the intelligence service must be enhanced at all levels.

Improving information systems and better interlinking existing capabilities are tasks that

will have to be performed on a continuous basis. It remains to be examined if and to what

extent cooperation in alliances and the changing security and threat situation will

necessitate changes in legislation.

IV

Germany’s Responsibility in Europe and the World

Germany’s security is inextricably linked to political developments in Europe and

throughout the world. Increased international integration in all areas is resulting in

growing interdependence between states, which is increasingly affecting their respective

security policies. Germany’s security objectives and interests can only be pursued in

cooperation with its partners. The United Nations, the North Atlantic Alliance and the

European Union are the international framework of our security and defence policy.

Active participation in international and supranational organisations is of key importance


-----

for our national security and also for our prosperity. This participation can only be

achieved in close coordination with our partners.

United Nations (UN) and Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

Under international law, the United Nations bears primary responsibility for establishing

and maintaining world peace and international security. Objectives that will continue to

guide Germany’s security policy in the future are the prevention of crises, an effective

system of settling disputes and avoiding conflicts by, if possible, peaceful means as

outlined in the enhanced peacekeeping concept, the fight against poverty, the

enforcement of international law and the universal application of human rights. These

objectives include a consistent strengthening of the United Nations to improve its

effectiveness and task performance as well as active participation by Germany. This also

encompasses the provision of military capabilities for peacekeeping and peace

enforcement operations.

It is important from the perspective of German security policy to strengthen cooperation

with regional organisations within the system of the United Nations, such as the OSCE,

and to further improve cooperation between the United Nations, the European Union and

the North Atlantic Alliance.

North Atlantic Alliance and Transatlantic Partnership

The North Atlantic Alliance remains the centrepiece of our defence efforts. Alliance

solidarity and making a reliable and credible contribution to the Alliance are part of

Germany’s raison d’état. Germany stands by its international responsibility within the

Alliance and the commitments we have made in the interest of our security.

Developments within the Alliance are decisive in determining Germany’s defence policy.

The effectiveness of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation is based on military

integration and mutual political solidarity with our partners. The Alliance links Europe to

the United States of America and Canada, and vice versa. As a collective defence system,

it maintains and guarantees the security of Europe and thereby the protection and

territorial integrity of its member states. It provides a basis for confronting global security

challenges in an effective way by improving the protection of the population in its

member states against new risks and threats, by facilitating and strengthening cooperation

with partners and by providing crisis response capabilities in out-of-area missions.


-----

The commitment of the United States to the security of Europe, as it is most prominently

and effectively reflected in the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, remains a vital

interest of Germany and its European allies. It is therefore our duty and our mission to

preserve the unique quality of transatlantic relations, to strengthen our ties and our

exchanges and to continue to develop the partnership with the United States by

performing our tasks responsibly.

NATO’s New Strategic Concept, which was adopted by the Heads of State and

Government at the Lisbon Summit in autumn 2010, defines collective defence, crisis

management and cooperative security based on partnerships as the main tasks of the

Alliance. This approach takes account of changes in the security environment. One such

change is that national security facilities have become significantly more vulnerable to

cyber attacks. This requires an effective and coordinated response from the Alliance with

a view to enhancing its capability to repel such attacks, thus extending the Alliance’s task

spectrum. Collective self-defence as laid down in Article 5 of the Treaty remains the

main purpose of the Alliance.

At the same time, the Alliance emphasises its commitment to disarmament and arms

control. It maintains and develops a coordinated spectrum of conventional and nuclear

capabilities, including missile defence, that is tailored to the existing risks and threats. In

keeping with its Strategic Concept, NATO remains a nuclear alliance. The necessity of

nuclear deterrence will continue to exist, as long as nuclear weapons can be a threat in

military conflicts. A reduced and more efficient NATO command structure serves to

protect the established integrated structures while at the same time imposing higher

demands on the headquarters in NATO’s force structure. The continuation and

intensification of NATO’s partnership policy, as most prominently reflected in the ISAF

operation, provides the Alliance with a unique way of distributing tasks between and

maintaining a security cooperation with nations that share its objectives. Germany’s

defence diplomacy must therefore find new approaches that will open up opportunities

for intensified cooperation and dialogue.

European Union and Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP)

The commitment to a free and united Europe and the objective of participating in a

European integration process that encompasses all suitable political areas has

characterised German politics since the establishment of the European Communities. As

a politically effective community, Europe must improve its ability to take action in the


-----

area of security policy so that it can independently assume responsibility for meeting

collective security challenges within and beyond Europe’s borders. The European Union

is developing a broad spectrum of civilian and military instruments for preventing

conflicts, managing crises and supporting post-conflict rehabilitation which it will use to

contribute towards security measures agreed with, coordinated with and also – where

appropriate – performed in mutual reliance on the capabilities and structures of the North

Atlantic Alliance. The conceptual framework for this aim is provided by the guidelines

for Common Security Policy and Permanent Structured Cooperation as defined in the

Treaty of Lisbon. Closer cooperation between NATO and the EU and the mutual reliance

on capabilities and structures remain a principle of common security which will allow the

European Union to leverage its political power more effectively in the future. The

consistent development of Europe’s civilian and military capabilities as well as

cooperation in the field of technology and industrial policy within the European Union

will strengthen Europe politically while also serving our national security interests.

Germany coincides with its partners in this respect and will develop bilateral and

multilateral initiatives aimed at further progress. Franco-German relations play a pivotal

role owing to their special nature, underlined in the Élysée Treaty, and their unique

closeness. A strong technological base in core areas is a prerequisite for active

participation in the preservation and, wherever possible, expansion of a competitive

European armaments industry.

V

Mission and Tasks of the Bundeswehr and National Level of Ambition

Armed forces are an indispensable tool of our country’s foreign and security policy.

Armed forces are the centrepiece of the security and protection of Germany and its

citizens. Within the framework of applicable international law the use of military force

can be threatened and implemented only with armed forces.

Armed forces are the basis of a nation’s willingness and preparedness to defend itself.

They interact with other government tools of national security. In their identity, structure

and organisation, their scope, capabilities and equipment, armed forces follow the

changing objectives and interests of security policy. The Bundeswehr must be enabled to

meet current tasks and expected future developments. The Bundeswehr’s reorientation

must also and in particular be aligned with different and varied operations. By enabling


-----

the employment of armed forces across the entire intensity spectrum, Germany will be in

a position to make an adequate political and military contribution in accordance with its

size, thus ensuring its influence and, in particular, its say in planning and decisions. Only

those who offer capabilities for a common fulfilment of tasks can take part in shaping the

Alliance. Therefore, the strategic requirements set by the North Atlantic Alliance and the

European Union also have an impact on the form of military service, the task, scope,

structure, equipment and organisation of the armed forces. The task for the civilian

branches of the Bundeswehr, especially the defence administration, is to cover a broad

spectrum of support in close coordination with the armed forces which allows the forces

to focus on their core military mission. Service members and civilian staff are working

for one another and are committed to the same mission.

Defence expenditure must be in keeping with the mission of the Bundeswehr and with all

other government commitments. The Bundeswehr must be provided with appropriate

financial means for armed forces that are operationally ready and capable of meeting our

Alliance commitments and that reflect Germany’s position in the world. At the same time

the defence budget also contributes to the national task of consolidating the federal

budget, thus reducing the debt burden of future generations.

Bundeswehr Mission

As a tool of a comprehensive security and defence policy the Bundeswehr accomplishes

the following mission:

-  to protect Germany and its citizens;

-  to secure Germany’s capability to act in the field of foreign policy;

-  to contribute to the defence of allies;

-  to contribute to stability and partnership at an international level;

-  to support multinational cooperation and European integration.

Bundeswehr Tasks

Against this backdrop the Bundeswehr assumes the following interconnected tasks:

-  territorial defence as collective defence within the North Atlantic Alliance;

-  international conflict prevention and crisis management – including countering

international terrorism;


-----

-  participation in military tasks within the EU Common Security and Defence

Policy;

-  homeland security contributions, i.e. defence tasks on German territory as well as

administrative assistance in case of natural disasters and large-scale accidents, for

the protection of critical infrastructure and in cases of domestic emergency;

-  rescue and evacuation operations including hostage rescue operations abroad;

-  partnership and cooperation as a part of multinational integration and global

security cooperation in the context of modern defence diplomacy;

-  humanitarian relief abroad.

National Level of Ambition for the Bundeswehr

In accomplishing its mission the Bundeswehr makes an adequate contribution to

safeguarding our security interests in accordance with Germany’s role and economic

power in the international community. Therefore, the national level of ambition defines

the quality and scope of the capabilities to be provided. This includes security

requirements, operational demands and the availability of personnel, materiel and

financial resources. The national level of ambition is an essential guiding principle for the

Bundeswehr when it comes to defining its structure and capabilities.

The following must be ensured:

-  the option of assuming command responsibility as a framework nation and

-  providing the required capabilities for the entire task spectrum, into which

contributions of other nations can be integrated in a flexible and synergetic manner.

Bundeswehr forces not committed for employment ensure operational readiness across

the entire intensity spectrum. The ability to fight poses the greatest challenge to

personnel, materiel and training and is thus a benchmark for operational readiness.

By prioritising its tasks the Bundeswehr must achieve the following objectives:

-  Collective defence requires the provision of a joint set of forces that is able to respond

multinationally in a fast and effective manner for a limited period of time. Such an

operation may entail decisions to stop ongoing, parallel stability operations.

-  The German parts of the NATO Response Force and the EU Battlegroup included in

this set of forces still form the core of the German contribution to quick response

within the North Atlantic Alliance and the European Union.


-----

-  International conflict prevention and crisis management requires the provision of joint

forces with escalation and enforcement capabilities for operations in different

operational theatres at the same time. External support will be relied on if necessary.

To this end approximately 10,000 sustainable military personnel must be earmarked at

the same time.

-  UN peacekeeping within the UN Standby Arrangements System requires the provision

of joint forces based on capacities available. An adequate number of personnel are to

be earmarked for monitoring missions.

-  For rescue, evacuation and hostage rescue operations abroad joint capabilities must be

earmarked permanently in the framework of crisis management for German nationals

abroad.

-  Permanent capabilities are to be provided accordingly for the surveillance and policing

of German air space and maritime waters as well as for search and rescue.

-  In order to assume homeland security tasks all available forces including reservists

will be employed if required.

VI

Execution of Tasks by the Bundeswehr

Multinational Cooperation

As a general rule, Bundeswehr missions abroad are planned and conducted in cooperation

with allies and partners within the UN, NATO and the EU. Evacuation and rescue

operations are generally a matter of national responsibility. The cooperation,

standardisation and interoperability of armed forces within NATO and the EU are

prerequisites for the continuous improvement of military capabilities and performance.

The long-standing cooperation of the Bundeswehr with allies and partners has led to task

sharing, which is why the capability profiles of the allied nations already complement one

another. Combined headquarters, multinational command and control facilities and

capabilities, the development and procurement of systems with several partners, as well

as combined training and day-to-day service are living proof of this partnership. Where

the challenge of providing security has to be met with more limited resources, the

mechanisms of the alliances will increasingly, continuously and with maximum

efficiency be adapted to the changing requirements of the future.


-----

In this context, a particular focus will be on intra-European coordination. Before this

approach can be applied, a thorough, national analysis of the various options for military

cooperation must be conducted to identify:

-  capabilities that are of critical national importance and are therefore kept available on

a strictly national basis;

-  capabilities that allow closer cooperation with partners without compromising national

capability (pooling);

-  capabilities where a mutual, coordinated reliance on European partners is conceivable

(role and task sharing).

Mutual dependencies for and on operations can only be accepted to the degree required

for the execution of tasks. With this in mind, the priority must be to identify tasks that

can in future be performed together or be shared with allies.

Cooperation and Stability Transfer

Partnership and cooperation serve to build trust and promote stability, thereby preventing

armed conflicts. Developing the capabilities of regional security forces either as a

preventive or a post-conflict measure can contribute to security becoming a local

responsibility. Developing the capabilities of other nations can serve to support and

complement national forces on combined international crisis prevention and management

operations.

An enhancement of strategic and technical instruments of analysis, a continuous

observation and analysis of risks and threats as well as an evaluation of previous

Bundeswehr employments with regard to security and capabilities will ensure that the

Bundeswehr continues to contribute to the recognition of long-term changes of situation,

identifies new challenges in good time and is prepared to meet them.

Homeland Security and Long-Term Security Provisions

Since a direct, conventional attack on German territory has become unlikely, the previous

personnel strength that was exclusively reserved for such an event is no longer needed.

Nevertheless, in order to deliver an appropriate level of security, the buildup capabilities

of the armed forces will be retained and universal conscription will remain enshrined in


-----

the German constitution, although the obligation to perform basic military service has

been suspended.

Homeland security is a task involving all parts of government. The Bundeswehr’s

contribution to homeland security includes all capabilities for the protection of Germany

and of its citizens on German territory. In addition to the core tasks of the Bundeswehr

(surveillance and policing of German air space and maritime waters, national defence in

the traditional sense, protection of military home base facilities), this includes subsidiary

Bundeswehr tasks at home (administrative assistance in case of natural disasters and

large-scale accidents, protection of critical infrastructure and employment in a domestic

state of emergency) within the scope of applicable laws.

Reservists support the Bundeswehr in their routine duties and particularly in the buildup

of new capabilities, thus contributing to the protection of Germany. Territorial structures

and non-active units make an important contribution to the regional buildup of military

capabilities, to homeland security and to the operation – and possibly protection – of the

home base.

The prerequisites for successful domestic crisis management will be retained and

developed. They will enable the Bundeswehr to continue to provide capabilities urgently

required for disaster relief or administrative assistance.

VII

Bundeswehr Capabilities

In the light of ongoing strategic uncertainty, the Bundeswehr must continue to keep a

broad and flexible spectrum of military capabilities available. Current operations can only

serve as an orientation in this respect.

The Bundeswehr must retain capabilities for operations across the entire intensity

spectrum, including observer missions, advisory and training support as well as

preventive security measures. Assets must be specifically put together for each mission,

they must be quick to respond, flexible and modular and possess both escalation

capability and robustness. Cohesion – operating as part of a system – is an essential

prerequisite for success on operations and therefore a major determinant in the design of

interfaces between organisational areas. Sustainability must be ensured for forces that are

earmarked for enduring operations.


-----

The capabilities of the Bundeswehr are derived from its mission and tasks, with the

national level of ambition acting as a guideline. A prioritisation within the capability

spectrum is based on the likelihood of risks and threats that require a military

contribution, on the time needed to provide these capabilities, on an assessment of

national interests, and on the availability of funds. On this basis, a “prioritised capability

profile” for the Bundeswehr will be developed, which describes individual capabilities

according to type, quality and scale. It thus defines the number and sustainability of

capabilities subject to different requirements. In this profile, particular consideration is

given to the capabilities required for a framework nation, on which the contingents of

other troop-contributing nations can rely.

The more likely tasks of international conflict prevention and crisis management

determine the outline of the new Bundeswehr structure. Essentially, the forces available

for these tasks also fulfil the requirements of territorial and collective defence as well as

homeland security tasks of the Bundeswehr. Where core tasks of the Bundeswehr demand

it, these forces must be supplemented by additional structural elements.

In order for the Bundeswehr to fulfil its tasks in a constantly changing environment, its

internal structures must ensure that it can adapt to new levels of ambition and retain its

buildup capacity. This approach is part of the long-term national security approach and

encompasses capabilities, structures and processes across the Bundeswehr as a whole.

VIII

Personnel

Germany’s security fundamentally depends on the people who serve in the Bundeswehr.

Military and civilian personnel are faced with a multitude of challenges owing to the

special characteristics of service in the Bundeswehr. The conscription of young men into

basic military service has been rendered unnecessary by the current security situation.

This represents a watershed in the history of the Bundeswehr. For decades, conscription

guaranteed high force levels, augmentation capabilities, and high-quality recruitment and

helped to integrate the Bundeswehr into society. With the suspension of conscription, an

important element of recruitment has ceased to exist. Demographic developments make

recruitment difficult for the Bundeswehr. Modern personnel management supports

individuals, facilitates their passage between career paths, and helps retired military

personnel reintegrate into civilian life.


-----

The suspension of conscription is one of the reasons why changes must be made to the

Bundeswehr personnel model. Within the relevant career paths and status groups, and

taking into consideration rank and seniority, the personnel model must in the medium and

long term be adjusted to ensure future operational readiness. Appropriate instruments will

be applied to reduce recruitment requirement and make greater recruitment flexibility

possible.

Personnel restructuring in the armed forces will affect the structure and size of the

civilian personnel of the Bundeswehr. A further reduction is both possible and necessary.

Above all, this reduction must be based on the future tasks to be accomplished.

The image of the Bundeswehr as an attractive employer and the demands of its mission

require that military personnel have modern equipment at their disposal and be trained in

line with operational requirements. The proportion of women in the Bundeswehr is to be

increased.

As part of internal Bundeswehr training and to fulfil Bundeswehr tasks, cooperation is

sought with industry as well as with other government institutions and private bodies.

This promotes, among other things, continual training and a permanent exchange, which

facilitates the transition to civilian occupations for soldiers leaving the force.

Reservists are an indispensable element of the Bundeswehr and will become even more

important in future. Wherever possible, they will augment the active duty force and

increase sustainability even on operations. With a number of civilian and additional,

individual qualifications, reservists can be employed at short notice and based on the

crisis at hand. They can fulfil a broad spectrum of tasks and support the armed forces in

building up new capabilities, if necessary. As mediators between the Bundeswehr and

society and as citizens in uniform, they serve as an indispensable link that will benefit

both recruitment and the integration of the armed forces into society.

IX

Materiel

The capabilities for probable operations in the future require regular modifications and

upgrades of equipment in terms of quality and quantity. It is necessary to restructure the

procurement system against the backdrop of changed security challenges and with regard


-----

to increased efficiency. Furthermore, short-term responses to urgent operational

requirements must be guaranteed.

In view of rapidly changing framework conditions even in ongoing operations, more

importance is generally attached to the fast but partially limited capability buildup than to

a maximum improvement in quality, which can only be implemented in the long run.

Priority is to be given to commercial off-the-shelf solutions and to a consistent alignment

with prioritised capability requirements.

The German defence industry will continue to make a significant contribution to

providing modern and powerful equipment as well as to technological and logistic in
service support. We will procure what is required and affordable; we will not procure

what people would like to have or what is offered. Nevertheless, in the light of decreasing

quantities closer military cooperation among European countries must be reflected in the

cooperation of European defence industries, too. Agreeing on synergies when it comes to

developing, procuring and operating military systems will be crucial for securing

indispensable military capabilities in Europe. The same applies to defence cooperation

within the Alliance and with other international partners.

Industrial capabilities will be especially important where the Bundeswehr contributes

significant and recognised capabilities to national tasks and to tasks within alliances. The

Bundeswehr and the defence industry alike will have to react flexibly to changing levels

of ambition. Only in this way can the defence industry make a contribution to long-term

national security. The role of the defence industry is to serve the Bundeswehr.

X

The Identity of the Bundeswehr

Military and civilian personnel of the Bundeswehr together serve to defend the security of

Germany and to protect its citizens.

The civilian personnel of the Bundeswehr render their service in the knowledge that they

are supporting the armed forces at home and abroad. This includes performing their tasks

in operations outside Germany.

With the suspension of conscription, the Bundeswehr will become an all-volunteer force.

The principles of leadership development and civic education and the “citizen in

uniform” will remain unchanged. They have proven their worth since the establishment


-----

of the Bundeswehr and are a guarantee that the Bundeswehr will remain anchored in

society. An all-volunteer force will of course have to come to terms with the primacy of

politics and with the identity of military personnel, just as it will still require a knowledge

of ethics, history and politics and will still cultivate worthy traditions.

The Bundeswehr can best fulfil its mission when its personnel know that their service

enjoys broad public recognition. This is particularly applicable when it comes to the

reality of armed forces operations and their most extreme consequences, namely death

and injury. The Bundeswehr will cultivate an on-going exchange with society, promote a

broad understanding of security policy, and play a role in the public space.

One of the distinctive aspects of military service is that operations can entail dangers to

life and limb. Soldiers are required to carry out their assigned missions with bravery,

placing their lives on the line in combat. Soldiers must be able to protect, assist and

mediate. The crisis and conflict scenarios of the future will place high demands on social

and intercultural competence. The leadership, training and education of soldiers must be

adapted accordingly.

The more openly and appreciatively the German public recognises and honours the

unique aspects of military service and the contribution of the armed forces as a whole for

Germany, the better the soldiers of the Bundeswehr will be able to embrace and live up to

their professional identity on operations for our security and for the protection of our

citizens.


-----

