###### New Power New Responsibility

Elements of a German
foreign and security policy
for a changing world

A paper of the Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik (SWP)
and the German Marshall Fund of the United States (GMF)

### New


-----

SWP

Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik
Deutsches Institut für Internationale Politik und Sicherheit

G [|] M [|] F The German Marshall Fund
of the United States

**STRENGHTHENING TRANSATLANTIC COOPERATION**


-----

Table of Contents

I. Introduction 2

II. Germany and the International Order 12

III. Germany and Europe 20

IV. Germany and its Strategic Relationships 30

V. Germany and International Security 38

The Project and its Participants 47


-----

#### Policy


-----

I. Introduction

Germany has never been as prosperous, secure, and free as it is

today. But power and influence entail responsibility. This also means that it has to take on

new responsibilities.

Before 1990, (West) German foreign policy was derived from a con
ceptual framework with two fixed points of reference: a past to overcome, and a future to

be achieved. From Germany’s past followed an unconditional commitment to human dignity,

freedom, the rule of law, and democracy, as well as to an international order based on uni
versal norms. This commitment remains valid. Germany’s objective of national unity and the

threat from the East became the basis for its integration into Europe and the Atlantic Alliance.

This second point of reference vanished with the fall of the Berlin Wall and the dissolution

of the Warsaw Pact. The UN, EU, and NATO remain the defining framework for Germany’s

foreign policy – but at the same time, it is also looking for new orientation.

The caesura of 1990, of course, did not lead to the end of history,

not even of German history. On the contrary, Germany’s strategic environment has changed

dramatically since then. Globalization has opened up new spheres of freedom and develop
ment, but also creates new dependencies and vulnerabilities, and limits the ability of govern
ments to articulate and implement policy. The declared enemies of yesteryear have given way

to diverse and diffuse security risks. Emerging powers are demanding greater participation.

The international post-war order is faltering, but a new one is not in sight. The United Nations,

NATO, and the European Union are undergoing major changes; the European integration pro
cess in particular is in crisis.

Germany must respond to these changes. Mere pledges of support

for the existing international order are no longer enough. But the chaotic new situation and

the loosening of traditional ties does not mean a free pass for German unilateralism in the

world, because Germany has – and that is the paradox of Germany’s post-unification foreign

policy – regained its formal sovereignty under international law at a time when hardly a for
eign policy challenge can be solved anymore by one nation acting unilaterally.

Addressing this problem, then, is the key task task of German for
eign policy today. Above all, it must be based on the realization that Germany is more exposed

to globalization than many other countries. Its citizens are deeply integrated in Europe and

are networked globally; its companies operate on all continents. Germany benefits like few

other countries from globalization and the peaceful, open and free world order it makes pos
sible. At the same time, Germany is also especially dependent on this order working well. It is

therefore particularly vulnerable and susceptible to the effects of disturbances in the system.


Germany has never been

as prosperous, secure

and free as it is today.

But power and influence

entail responsibility


-----

Germany’s overriding strategic objective is the preservation and

continued adaptationof this free, open, and peaceful order. In future, Germany will have to

invest more than it does now to preserve this beneficial status quo. It will in fact have to

undertake greater efforts than ever ever to adapt regional and global governance structures

to the new challenges. But it can only do this together with others.

What is needed is more creative determination, ideas, and initia
tives. Germany will have to take the lead more decisively and more often. But as a country

that is deeply integrated in networks of mutual dependence – especially in the context of

multilateral commitments it has chosen itself (UN, EU, NATO) – this can only mean: leading

towards common goals, with others, and for others.

Germany’s new strategic environment

Expedited by major technical developments, globalization has cre
ated political, economic, and social networks that now span almost the entire globe. These

networks have created spheres of freedom and opened up new opportunities for growth and

development throughout the world, because they move people and goods through physical

space, as well as information and ideas through the cyber space. They have revolutionized

communications and commerce and connected previously insular societies to global mar
kets and debates. But this interdependence is double-edged: it also causes an unprecedented

degree of interdependence and vulnerability, with profound consequences for the autonomy

of nation states.

In Germany, located as it is in the middle of a more and more

deeply integrated European Union, this is especially evident. Europe benefits from globaliza
tion, and Germany benefits from the Union. The economic and political integration of the

EU’s member states gives them a clout in international affairs that even the major European

nations no longer can bring to bear on their own. Conversely, whatever threats and risks

Europe faces almost always affect all of Europe’s states; it makes less and less sense to concep
tualize and organize risk management and protection against threats within a purely national

framework.

This new interdependence and its consequences are also evident

in security policy. States are still the main actors in world politics; power, competition and

geography are still key determinants of international relations. Traditional threats – war, the


Germany profits like

few other countries from

globalization, and from

the peaceful, open, and

free global order that

enables it


-----

proliferation of weapons of mass destruction – continue to exist. However, globalization has

accelerated the privatization and individualization of violence in the form of terrorism and

organised crime. It has also added a wide range of cross-border risk factors, which tend to crop

up together and reinforce each other, and against which the sovereign power of the state can

do very little: climate change, demographics, uncontrolled migration, resource and food short
ages, pandemics, as well as weak and failing states. As a result, risk management has become

the new paradigm of security policy.

The global financial crisis has also shown that networks and inte
gration can also make national economies vulnerable in completely new ways – and societies

and governments, too. The euro crisis has shown that imbalances or dysfunctional national

economies can threaten the stability of the whole currency area; the closely integrated trans
atlantic financial market has likewise proven to be highly susceptible. The impact of the crisis

can be seen on both sides of the Atlantic in the form of political and institutional impasses, or

the success of populist movements. That said, authoritarian emerging powers are by no means

better equipped to cope with such shocks than Western democracies.

The new technologies – the key drivers of this recent deepening of

globalization – have an ambivalent impact on state power. On the one hand, they strengthen

state executives, because they provide completely new capabilities to monitor and control

citizens. The same technologies, however, have also empowered private actors – from freedom

fighters and public-spirited citizens, via consumers and businesses, all the way to criminal

organizations and terrorists.

The diffusion of power within states is accompanied by power

shifts in the international order. Overall, the post-war international order has proved to be

remarkably resilient. There has been no alternative universalist challenge to the West, with

its model of a legitimacy based on human rights, the rule of law, separation of powers, and

democracy. And the power that has guaranteed this order for decades, the United States, con
tinues to be, at least for the foreseeable future, the only superpower with global reach and

the will to impose order on the globe.


Authoritarian powers

are by no means better

equipped to cope with

shocks and crises than

democracies


-----

Yet the United States – conscious of its reduced resources – is

sending clear signals that their engagement in the world will be more selective in future, and

that its expectations of partners will be correspondingly higher. This means that Europe, and

Germany in particular, will have to take on a lot more tasks and responsibilities.

The three institutions that provided the orienting framework of

German foreign policy in the global post-war order for over half a century – the United

Nations, NATO, and the European Union – are themselves in transition. All three are undergo
ing fundamental disputes among their members about their purpose, remits, and architec
ture. At the same time, emerging powers are demanding a more equitable representation in

international institutions; some of these powers also question their normative foundations

or even their legitimacy altogether. But they only rarely offer an alternative. Often, they are

only spoilers, not balancers. And Western states themselves, faced with persistent dissent and

stalemates, increasingly bypass proven multilateral institutions, relying instead on “coalitions

of the willing” or informal formats in order to cope with crises, and to solve problems.

These shifts and disruptions in Germany’s strategic environment –

in the global order, in European affairs, in its relations with other states, and in international

security – require a redefinition of German national objectives.

Germany’s goals, values, and interests

Germany’s commitment to human dignity, freedom, democracy,

the rule of law, and to an international order that is based on universal norms remains valid,

as does its commitment to working within the frameworks of the United Nations, European

Union and Atlantic Alliance. In light of the changed strategic environment, however, new ele
ments must be added to this definition of German national objectives.

Germany, with its free and open civil society, benefits from glo
balisation like few other countries. Its current strength is largely owed to its ability to imple
ment reforms that have preserved its competitiveness and capacity for innovation – but it is

owed even more to its success as a trading and exporting nation. Its very existence depends on

exchange (of people, goods, resources, ideas, and information) with other societies. Germany

therefore depends on demand from other markets, as well as on access to international trade

routes and raw materials. But what it needs even more is the stable and vital global environ
ment that makes those freedoms possible in the first place: a strong Europe and a liberal,


Th United States’ en­

gagement in the world

will be more selective.

For Europe, and for Ger­

many, this means more

tasks and responsibilities


-----

rule-based international order with free and open states and societies. Germany’s overriding

strategic goal must therefore be to preserve, protect, and adapt this world order.

At the same time, however, Germany also maintains strategic rela
tionships with countries that, though promising high growth rates and returns, so far show

lit­tle inclination to accept the Western political and social model as an example to emulate. But

this tension does not imply that Germany, in keeping with a new Realpolitik, should have to

choose between its traditional normative and multilateral orientation and a geo-economically

oriented foreign policy; or that it might – to put it even more bluntly – be forced to decide

between between its values and its interests. What is true is that conflicts between German

values and interests, especially in dealing with authoritarian states, are often unavoidable in

the short term and that they must be balanced from case to case. In the long-term, however,

a commitment to values is an existential interest for any Western democracy.

For human dignity, civil liberties, rule of law, and participation do

not undermine the stability of individual countries and regions; they are its prerequisite. Nor

are authoritarian regimes necessarily stable just because they are authoritarian. (East) Ger
many’s recent history in particular has shown how fragile autocratic power can be. Supporting

these goals in other countries, therefore, is an expression of Germany’s values as much as of

its strategic interests. For Germany to be not only a successful but a credible player in foreign

policy, it must defend the values it upholds at home in its foreign policy as well. That said,

the centrifugal forces of globalization (reinforced by the economic crisis) undeniably affect

not only Western states, but also their citizens. Societies have become more fragile, social

contracts more brittle. So, conversely, Germany must make sure that it credibly defends the

values it advocates in its foreign policy at home, too. This is not something to be taken for

granted. The global economic crisis has done away with the illusion that modern democracies

are immune to populist temptations or to anxious attempts to pull up the drawbridges; this

is as true for Europe overall, as it is for Germany in particular. The legitimacy and appeal of

the Western model, however, depends on its also being resolutely defended against challenges

at home.


Germany’s overriding

strategic goal must be to

preserve, protect, and

adapt the liberal world

order


-----

The domestic dimension of German foreign policy

German foreign policy will continue to deploy the full range of foreign policy

instruments, from diplomacy, foreign aid and cultural policy to the use of military

force. However, the fact that it is globally networked and interdependent also

requires new approaches at the national level: closer coordination between

departments; closer cooperation between the executive and legislative, as well

as with research institutions; a more effective political control; and a greater

commitment to communication with the German public.

Foreign ministries have not had a monopoly on the definition and implementation

of foreign policy for some time now. They will have to evolve even further, and

become initiators and network managers who organize processes of assessment

and decision-making. More and more ministries claim a say in foreign policy

today; that makes it all the more necessary to aggregate and concentrate

governmental analysis, management, and leadership capabilities. Just by way of

example: crisis prevention, management, and follow-up in Germany continue

to be hampered by a lack of cooperation between civil, diplomatic, police, and

military forces.

A more complex environment with shortened response times also requires better

cognitive skills. Knowledge, perception, understanding, judgment and strategic

foresight: all these skills can be taught and trained. But that requires investments –

on the part of the state, but also on the part of universities, research institutions,

foundations, and foreign policy institutions. The goal must be to e­stablish an

intellectual environment that not only enables and nurtures political creativity,

but is also able to develop policy options quickly and in formats that can be

operationalized.

More is also required of Germany’s political supervisory bodies. Policymakers

and the public alike will have to get used to the idea that a more prominent

German role on the global stage will require more resources. Nor should the fact

be underestimated that a more forward-leaning German foreign policy does not

make political control any easier. This may exacerbate issues of legitimacy at

home. A more active German foreign policy also requires appropriate monitoring

and control by the legislature. If nothing else, this requires strengthening the

human and financial resources of Parliament.


The legitimacy and

appeal of the Western

model depends on its

being defended against

challenges at home


-----

Finally, policymakers as well as experts in Germany like to complain about the

public’s lack of understanding of foreign policy. But it is up to them to change

this, because there is no lack of interest. Today, civil society (at home and

elsewhere) not only observes and comments on German foreign policy as never

before, but even contributes to shaping it. Policymakers must therefore learn to

communicate their foreign policy goals and concerns more effectively to convince

Germany’s own citizens, as well as international public opinion.

Partners of German foreign policy

German foreign policy will continue to work with partners old

and new: with proven like-minded friends and allies, with challengers, and sometimes even

with rogue states. But today cooperation in all its formats – from multilateral institutions

via alliances to supra-national integration – is about more than sharing burdens, maximizing

resources and forces, or providing legitimacy. More and more often, a country that is as deeply

integrated in the global economy as Germany will simply have no other choice than to act

together with others, because close cooperation across national borders is the only practical

or even possible format to solve problems, manage risks, or ward off threats.

There are many examples in the recent past (Libya, Mali, Syria)

that show that disagreements among allies are likely and even legitimate despite this inter
dependence. That is why Germany must factor its globally networked condition and its inter
dependence into its foreign policy calculus in future. But the reverse is also true: Germany’s

partners are similarly dependent on Germany. Sovereignty in a networked world, therefore,

requires mutual consideration and taking responsibility for the impact of national decisions

on others.

The key reason why Germany has a strategic interest in being a

good neighbour, ally, and partner is also a consequence of the fact that it lives in global net
works. The greatest of all foreign policy challenges – the renewal, adaptation, and reorganiza
tion of the international order – cannot be shouldered by any country alone. But Germany

has been selective and hesitant even in offering ideas or spearheading initiatives, at least in

relation to its economic strength, geopolitical clout, and international standing. In this sense,

at any rate, Germany remains a global player in waiting.


German civil society

not only observes and

comments on foreign

policy – it contributes

to shaping it


-----

Sovereignty in a

networked world

requires consideration

and taking responsibility

for the impact

of nation­al decisions

on others


Germany will also have to lead more often in the future. This does

not mean always taking the initiative and expecting others to follow. Rather, it means invest
ing in long-term relationships and compromises; that calls for patience and empathy. This

kind of collaborative leadership entails sacrifices. They are worth making, because only a

leadership style that is seriously committed to consensus-building and balancing interests

can count on success in international relations. Germany must play a greater role in shaping

global affairs, but it either does so together with others, or stops altogether.

The following four chapters deal with four key areas of this new responsibility:

-  Germany and the international order

-  Germany and Europe

-  Germany’s strategic relationships

-  Germany and international security

## >>


-----

## > II


-----

# Worl


-----

II. Germany
and the International Order

The emergence of a polycentric world in the wake of globalization

entails many benefits, but also great new challenges for Germany. Germany benefits like few

other countries from globalization and from the open, peaceful, free, and cooperative inter
national order that makes it possible. At the same time, Germany is especially dependent on

this order working well, and is particularly vulnerable and susceptible to the effects of distur
bances in the system. The protection and adaptation of the international order must therefore

be Germany’s supreme strategic objective – if only out of self-interest.

The challenge: an international order in flux

The current international order was shaped primarily by the United

States and its allies in 1945, with new rules and institutions – above all the United Nations –

that were meant to ensure peaceful relations among states. A complex architecture of regional

and sectoral systems, each with their own norms and institutions, evolved under the auspices

of the world organization and its charter. They include almost all regions of the world (NATO,

ASEAN, ECOWAS, Mercosur, etc.) and almost all aspects of public life, from human rights via

issues of peace and security to the economy, trade, and development. Over time, global com
mons like the Arctic, the oceans, airspace, and space were included. There were wars and con
flicts nonetheless, but this post-war order enabled significant gains in peace, prosperity and

freedom for more than 60 years. For Germany, active participation in this order over decades

has been both an amplifier of influence and a source of legitimacy.

But there is no mistaking the fact that today the architecture of

the international order is under enormous pressure, exacerbated by the global financial and

debt crisis. Globalization, expedited by technical innovations, has integrated the world politi
cally, economically, and socially; this has created new spheres of freedom, and provided states

and societies with new opportunities for communication, growth, and development. But there

are also formidable counterforces at work: climate change, demographic shifts, uncontrolled

migration, poverty and social disparity, ethnic and religious tensions, and increasing competi
tion between an ever larger number of stakeholders over increasingly scarce resources, food,

and access to trade routes and technologies. Even the global commons are increasingly con
tested and subject to disputes over access, usage, and exploitation rights. These fragmenting

and centrifugal forces make countries vulnerable and government policy less controllable; this

is even more the case for international governance and its institutions. The implementation

and enforcement of binding rules remains difficult, whereas expectations regarding effective

governance and an international order guaranteed by the states have, if anything, grown. In

# ld


The architecture of

the international order

is under enormous

pressure today


-----

conjunction, these effects are potentially destabilizing. Globalization has reduced the power

of states, even the strongest. And it has made the world, for all the gains in freedom, smaller

and more contested.

Then there is the global power shift. The United States, conscious

of its reduced resources, is no longer willing to play the role of global hegemon and guarantor

of the international order on its own. The European Union, which is still struggling with the

financial crisis and its consequences, currently appears neither willing nor able to take on a

similar role. The international engagement of individual European countries has also declined

significantly during the crisis. Thus, the ability of the West to set agendas and build coalitions

has dwindled. The result is a leadership vacuum at the global level.

In this situation, new players are thronging onto the stage of

international politics, driven by the development of the global South. This trend is not uni
form by any means, as many states continue to stagnate politically and economically, while

others are menaced by failure. But it has lifted millions of people out of poverty and promoted

the emergence of an increasingly prosperous and politically assertive middle class worldwide.

Moreover, it has led to the rise of emerging powers that have established themselves as new

power centres besides the established powers of the “West.” Germany has advocated and

promoted this development for decades under the aspect of poverty reduction and global

burden-sharing. Germany has also benefited greatly from this development: it has opened up

the emerging nations as new export and investment markets, thereby generating high profits.

Germany’s new power and influence is based to no small degree on this development.

But the rise of these new powers also represents a fundamental

challenge - for the West, for Europe, and especially for Germany, which has labelled its rela
tionships with many of these countries as “strategic partnerships.” The new powers demand

a representation in the existing institutions of international order that is commensurate

with their new clout, and in doing so challenge the dominant role Germany and other West
ern states have played in these forums until now. Some of them share an interest in a free,

peaceful, and rule-based world order, and say they share values such as the rule of law and

good governance. Other rising powers, however, question the norms and architecture of the

international order itself; some do so because they see international politics as a zero-sum

game among major powers, and hope to be able to assert their interests more successfully in

an unregulated competition. Mostly, they do not articulate an alternative. But some have

established counterweight institutions (such as the Eurasian Union, or the proposal of a BRICS

Development Bank). Yet, for now, no alternative bloc has managed to establish itself firmly.


Globalisation has

reduced the power

of states, even

the strongest


-----

The states of the West have contributed to weakening the exist
ing architechture of global norms and institutions, whether by acting inconsistently or using

double standards, by employing trade discrimination, or even by not sufficiently legitimiz
ing the use of military force, by resorting to informal “coalitions of the willing” and ad-hoc

formats such as the G-20, or simply by their failure to appropriately adapt the international

order to the new challenges until now.

The task: shaping the international order together with others

A German role in the adaptation of the international order must be

based on the fundamental values of human dignity, freedom, rule of law and good governance,

democratic participation, a global social market economy, sustainable development, peace and

security. The starting point for any efforts at reform must be the current liberal and collabora
tive world order. The goal of reform should be to adapt and expand it, not to transform, let

alone reorganize it. Nor is this about Germany forging ahead with a comprehensive blueprint

of its own design. Rather, it should work with like-minded partners and in consultation with

those emerging powers with similar values and interests, to offer ideas and incentives for

change on a broad array of issues.

At the top echelons of international governance, Germany should

push for reform of the United Nations and the international financial institutions. But this

will require changes that ensure that room is made for participation by the emerging powers,

and that their interests are taken seriously. Those new shaping powers who are able and will
ing to assume responsibility for the international order ought to be represented in the Secu
rity Council. This includes Germany; yet a European seat on the Security Council is desirable

in the long term. Western nations – including Germany – will have to give up some of their

voting rights in the decision-making bodies of the World Bank and the International Mon
etary Fund so that emerging powers are adequately represented. Germany may still continue

to work within informal or weakly formalized structures, such as the G-20 group, if only to

preserve the ability to act and to solve problems in a crisis, an impasse, or simply when estab
lished institutions prove to be ineffective. Over time, though, such formats should be codified

or at least be broadly formalized in order to make them transparent, predictable and stable.

Germany also has an interest in functioning regional governance –

above all, in the renewal of the European Union itself. But as a globally networked economy,

it also has a vested interest in the stability and prosperity of other world regions. Even if


The goal of reform

should be to adapt and

expand the internatio­

nal order


-----

other countries show little inclination to hand over responsibilities to supranational authori
ties like their European counterparts, Europe and Germany have a lot of experience to offer,

from coming to terms with war crimes via arbitration procedures for border and territorial

disputes to fighting corruption. In all this, Germany should pay greater attention to issues of

security policy: it is precisely because Germany has a vital interest in trade with China and

its neighbors that it should not be indifferent to the tense relations between the countries in

southeastern and eastern Asia.

Germany should also push for the adaptation, consolidation and,

where possible, legal regulation of sectoral governance. One of the greatest achievements of

the liberal post-war order was to set out a framework for the creation of a series of ground
breaking multi-lateral conventions: on human rights and international criminal justice, on

trade and finance, on disarmament and arms control, as well as on maritime and space law.

But many of these instruments now need to be renewed, typically because new developments

(such as new techniques of extracting raw materials and deep sea drilling for oil and gas, the

melting of the polar ice caps or the privatisation of space) have opened up new unregulated

– and increasingly contested – spaces.

The global commons and their critical infrastructure enable the

mobility of people, goods, and information that is necessary in a globalized world; it is vital

to protect them. This includes airspace and space (satellites) and the world’s oceans (tele
communication cables). Cyber space, which has become part of almost all aspects of political

and social life, has generated a particular potential for conflict, from cyber war, terrorism,

and espionage to organised crime and shadow banking. Finding an international regulatory

approach here is a particularly complex challenge, but it is no less urgent.

Support of effective statehood – be it through poverty reduction,

development cooperation, crisis prevention and management, or through support for peace
building measures or transformation partnerships – remains an important component of any

rule-based international order. Free societies and functioning social contracts are also essen
tial aspects of effective statehood. German diplomacy and development aid must not only

address state elites, but must be based on the principle of human security.


Germany should not

be indifferent to

tensions in the Far East


-----

The path: influence in a networked world

In a polycentric, globalized world, the classic elements of state

power, such as gross national product, resources, and military power, have by no means

become meaningless, but they no longer suffice to confer real clout in international relations.

Today a state is a shaping power in international affairs if it is able to solve problems and

conflicts affecting parts or all of the international community; to articulate ideas, provide

incentives and offer compromises, rather than dictating terms unilaterally; and if it works

towards its goals in coalitions and networks of like-minded states, using negotiation platforms

that are both open and transparent; and if it includes both states and non-government actors

in the process. Above all, influence is wielded by states that demonstrate they are guided by

the principle of legitimacy in their efforts to shape the international order.

Since any peaceful adaptation of the international order is pos
sible only with, and not against, the new powers, Germany will have to engage with actors

that profess values and interests that clearly differ from its own or from those of other like
minded partners – for example in the fight against climate change, or in the shift to renewable

energies, or when negotiating sustainable production and consumption standards. Germany

will therefore be compelled to make compromises and concessions, because of its overwhelm
ing systemic interest in maintaining international rules and institutions: better compromises

than a crumbling international order. Yet at the same time, it will have to press for more

global responsibility from the emerging powers, because these new powers are too often only

consumers, but not producers of global common goods and security.

However, where spoiler states questions the international order,

where they violate basic international norms (such as the genocide prohibition or the prohibi
tion on the use of weapons of mass destruction), where they lay claims to – or even attack –

the commons or the critical infrastructure of globalization. In other words, where offers of

compromise or dispute resolution are made in vain, Germany must be willing and able to use

military power within the framework of collective measures sanctioned by international law

(or at least credibly threaten its use), in order to be able to protect these goods, norms, and

collective interests.


Shaping power means

the ability to help solve

problems


-----

Recommendations:

-  In the long term, Germany should see itself as a provider of ideas for organizing the adap
tation of the international order.

-  Germany should advocate reforming the institutions of the international order, in particu
lar for making the UN system more effective and legitimate. This also includes reforming

the Security Council with German participation.

-  Germany should work towards the adaptation, deepening, and legal regulation of sectoral

governance, and for the protection of the commons.

## >>


-----

## > III


-----

# Europ


-----

III. Germany and Europe

The serious crisis of the European Union has caused many inside

and outside the EU to lose faith and confidence in the project of European integration. This

has led some critics and doubters to conclude that the project itself has had its day: the Euro
pean unification process, they argue, has bestowed an unprecedented level of peace, prosper
ity and freedom on the continent for more than 60 years, and has now come to its natural

end. That would mean there can be only two ways out of the crisis: freezing the status quo,

or “downsizing” the EU to a healthier state.

But the story of European integration is by no means at an end; it

has only begun a new chapter. The challenge now is to ensure both Europe’s capacity to act

and its democratic legitimacy in an era of globalization and the rise of new powers. Economic

and political integration has given Europe’s states international clout – a clout that even the

major European nations can no longer bring to bear on their own. Without a deepening of the

European project, Europe will not withstand the challenges of globalization.

Why Europe?

As a country that is globally networked like few others, Germany

has a vital interest in the success of European integration, from which it has benefited more

than any other member state. At the same time, its history and location at the center of

Europe, but even more its present economic strength and new geopolitical weight, confer

a special responsibility on Germany for the preservation and development of the European

Union. Germany will have to take the lead in this field more often and more decisively; but

it must do so for common European objectives, and only for the benefit of and together with

other member states.

Overcoming the current crisis in the EU is also a prerequisite for

Germany achieving other strategic goals. Without economic recovery and stabilization of the

euro area, there can be no long-term prospect of strong growth for the Federal Republic; with
out overcoming the crisis, there will be no European leverage for Germany’s ideas on global

order.

Germany’s European policy must therefore be directed at deepen
ing the Union in order to enable it to cope with the internal and external challenges fac
ing the EU. The ultimate goal here is not the creation of a European superstate. What is at

stake, however, is restoring confidence in the Union’s ability to act and improving the demo

The story of European

integration has begun

a new chapter


-----

cratic legitimacy of EU decisions by taking further steps towards integration. In doing so, the

strengthening of the euro area has to be balanced against the goal of keeping all EU member

states in the Community.

The price of failure

Europe’s crisis means many things to many people: a banking and

sovereign debt crisis, an adjustment and growth crisis, a political and social crisis, a leader
ship and legitimacy crisis. And the potential way out of the crisis involves other dangers: the

deepening of European integration could itself split the Union. Since the crisis remains men
acing, the time has come to reform the architecture of Europe beyond crisis management and

the pragmatism of small steps, and in a way that makes it better prepared for future crises.

The crisis remains a menace because it might yet evolve from an

acute into a chronic stage and thereby derail the entire project of European integration. Nor

is Germany’s current strength unlimited. The rapid aging of the German population could put

an end to the economic miracle. It is the South that is implementing economic reforms, not

Germany; and other EU states will aim to limit Germany’s influence.

This is why deeper integration is not one alternative of many, but

the alternative to failure. A failure to act would lay the seed for the next phase of the crisis.

The crisis has starkly revealed the interdependencies and systemic risks operating in the euro

area, and demonstrated the vulnerability of member states. This fragility is rooted in the

incompleteness of monetary union, which makes the public finances of the member states

susceptible to market fluctuations, hampers economic recovery, exacerbates social disparities

and deepens the divide between the EU and its citizens. The political consequences of these

tensions can already be seen throughout Europe. It is not only the EU and the idea of further

European integration that are losing support among the population. National democracies are

also being destabilized, either by the growing influence of populists or even by reforms that

threaten democracy and the rule of law.

It cannot be ruled out that the centrifugal forces in the EU will

increase under these conditions, and that European policy makers will no longer be able to

keep the Union together. If the Euro fell apart, this would most likely also tear away part of

the internal market. From Germany’s perspective, the loss of these achievements would entail

immense political and economic costs.


Europe’s architecture

must be reformed

so as to make it

better prepared

against future crises


-----

The way forward: two integration options

Under the pressure of the crisis, some crucial institutional and

political reforms – such as the establishment of the European Stability Mechanism and the

European Semester – were set in motion, and the European Central Bank has taken on a cen
tral role as a crisis manager. This has temporarily calmed the situation. But these steps alone

are not enough; the greatest challenges still lie ahead.

The stabilization and development of the euro area with its 17

(soon to be 18) members remains the central task of German European policy. But the eco
nomic and budgetary policies of member states in the European monetary union also cannot

remain a purely national concern forever – another lesson taught by the crisis. The monetary

union must therefore be supplemented by an economic and fiscal union. The challenge here is

not simply the formulation of fiscal and economic policies in the member states designed to

achieve stability and competitiveness, as well as greater convergence in the euro area; and the

latter cannot be achieved exclusively by adjustments in the countries affected by the crisis.

A German contribution to convergence could, for example, take the form of a liberalization

of the service sector, or of investments in infrastructure, education, and innovation. Nor is

all this merely a question of technocratic optimization processes. What is at stake, rather, is

the promotion of a pan-European consensus on common economic and financial policies that

is supported by European publics. To this end, the European Parliament and national legisla
tures must be involved in the policy-making process more closely than before. Only this can

make the European Union plausible as a part of European democracy, instead of a threat to

it.

How to achieve these goals remains controversial. Should respon
sibility lie with national governments, or ought there to be greater solidarity between the

states? Should there be more rules or more political decision-making power at the European

level? Ought there to be more or less citizen participation? The challenge here is readjusting

two delicate balances: between national autonomy and the common European interest on

one hand, and between institutional capacity to act and democratic accountability on the

other – and all this under conditions of globalization and interdependence. Solutions to these

questions can only be found together with the European partners, and with the participation

of European publics. But German European policy must be able to offer its own answers and

ideas – if only to avoid being caught on the defensive.

German policy for Europe has two models to choose from. They

are not alternatives; they differ only in terms of the degree and depth of integration they


The stabilization of the

euro area remains the

central task of German

EU policy


-----

envisage, as well as in the specific balance they strike between intergovernmentalism and

integration. The second model is premised on the first, and builds on it. In both cases, deeper

integration must go together with a deepening of democracy. Both models will inevitably lead

to further political and institutional differentiation in the EU.

Model 1: a stronger European framework for national reforms

This option continues on the path of pragmatic integration, focus
ing on further fiscal consolidation, and strengthening the competitiveness of the member

states. Recent reform efforts should be consistently continued and expanded. At the same

time, Germany should work towards closer political cooperation in Europe. The member states

and their legislatures would continue to retain control over the reform process, but the EU

Commission would play an important role in the control of national budgetary and fiscal

policy. The potential of the existing European treaties concerning budgetary control could be

further exploited.

European countries suffering under the impact of the crisis need

support and incentives to continue to reform their economies and to get back on a growth

path. _First, the EU budget, which currently focuses heavily on agriculture and infrastruc-_

ture, should be used in a more targeted way to support economic reforms. Second, a special

fund should be set up and financed by the member states to promote structural reforms and

measures to increase competitiveness in member states that comply with European recom
mendations. Third, consultations on economic policy in the euro area should be intensified

at the executive and ministerial level. An ageing population will become a heavy burden on

public finances in some member states. In the long term, this will make it more difficult to

reconcile the consolidation of national budgets with incentives for growth and jobs. Which

is why – fourth – the European Stability Mechanism should in the medium term be developed

into a European Monetary Fund which, among other things, would provide for a procedure to

deal with sovereign defaults.

Convergence in the eurozone area is only possible if the euro coun
tries comply with the debt limits of the Stability Pact. This is why this model requires not

only incentives, but also sanctions. If the budget of a eurozone state repeatedly exceeds the

deficit limits set by the Pact, the EU should be allowed to declare it invalid. The European

Court of Justice should exercise this authority at the request of the Commission or individual

member states.


Deeper integration must

go together with a deep­

ening of democracy


-----

In the European Parliament, decisions about the eurozone area

should be the exclusive privilege of representatives of the eurozone countries. Furthermore,

national parliaments should be more engaged in decisions made in Brussels. Legislators from

the member states should, above all, be more involved in consultations on decisions concern
ing the euro group. This could include the creation of a second chamber in the European

Parliament, in which members of the national parliaments would be represented.

Model 2: more common capacity to act on the European level

The second model partly builds on the steps towards further inte
gration taken in the first model. But it represents a qualitative leap: it is based on the

insight that the integration of monetary and financial markets massively constrains national

capacities to act, and makes public finances vulnerable. It concludes that a policy of con
verging reforms at the level of member states is no longer enough to stabilise the euro area.

Consequently, this model proposes that to regain the ability to act and take control, greater

integration steps are needed. However, any further integration is only acceptable – and this

is especially true for Europe’s donor states – if the countries affected by the crisis resolutely

continue with the consolidation of their national budgets and with structural reforms to

improve their competitiveness.

A package of three measures would stabilize the monetary union

and make it less vulnerable in the long term. First, the completion of a banking union, includ
ing a common bank resolution regime and sufficient funds to restructure banks, in order to

break the link between public finances and the stability of banks. Second, the creation of a

euro area budget that can be used not only to support national reform efforts, but to mitigate

cyclical divergence through automatic stabilizers (e.g. a European unemployment insurance

scheme). In the long term, and combined with the structural reform efforts, this could reduce

cyclical divergences and to that extent enable the European Central Bank’s monetary policy

to better “fit” the euro area. Third, if control over fiscal policy is strengthened as described

in Model 1, common euro bonds could be introduced for a share of the national debt. This

would be done to help break the mutual dependence between public finances and the bank
ing system, which has led to a parallel banking and sovereign debt crisis. Above all, it would

make public finances less vulnerable to fluctuations on the financial markets – a key risk

since national central banks can no longer act as lenders of last resort after the power to set

monetary policy was transferred to the ECB.


Budget consolidation

and structural reforms

must continue


-----

The overarching goal of German European policy, were it to opt for

the second model of deeper integration, would be the creation of a transnational European

multilevel democracy. A central element of this second model would be the development of

the Commission into an economic government that reflects the political composition of the

European Parliament and is accountable to it. The Federal Constitutional Court’s admonition

that the German legislature should play a greater role in matters of European policy ought

to be taken seriously, but without setting the European Parliament and the Bundestag up

as competitors. In future, national parliaments should continue to stay out of the ordinary

legislative process of the EU; they should, however, play a key role in fundamental policy

decisions. Not least to ensure the democratic accountability of these reforms, Germany should

work towards convening a Convention on a parliamentary basis.

In both of the two models, European integration will proceed in

a differentiated manner; European integration should not overburden either the states or

their citizens. But at the same time, it must not drive a wedge between the members of the

eurozone and the other member states. Regardless of the depth of future integration, German

European policy should take great care to be inclusive and Community-friendly, but not at

any price. Inducing individual member states to stay in the Union ought not to be achieved at

the cost of turning back the clock of European integration. Conversely, a German leadership

in Europe that is based on partnership requires patience, empathy, and, above all, a willing
ness to compromise – and not just with regard to those partners with which it collaborates

most often.

European foreign policy

Europe can only be a shaping power if the European Union has a

more unified external representation. Germany’s foreign policy should seek to ensure that the

EU’s enlargement and neighborhood policies are adapted to current developments, that the

Common Foreign and Security Policy is revived, and that the EU becomes a strong player on

the world stage.

In 2003, the EU committed itself to admit the countries of the

Western Balkans. It is in Germany’s interest to ensure that this promise is kept, so as to per
manently pacify and stabilize this part of Europe. Yet for those countries still willing to accede,

the EU has undeniably lost some of its transformative power. Conditionality and financial as

well as technical assistance programs are often no longer enough to advance the necessary


European integration

should not overburden

either the states or

their citizens


-----

reforms for EU membership. But failed reforms in the candidate country stand to threaten the

political, economic, and social stability of the new member state. Once a country is a member,

though, the EU has even fewer incentives and sanctions. Germany will therefore need to do

more to make candidates ready for accession, and should actively encourage a constructive

debate about these changing circumstances. Regardless of the success of the accession nego
tiations with Turkey, Germany has an interest in a Turkey that looks toward and is anchored

in Europe – that is, in a close and stable EU-Turkey relationship which includes enhanced

economic cooperation, closer cooperation on security matters, and a more flexible visa policy.

As a regional stabilizing power, the EU must strive for stability and

good governance in Europe’s southern and eastern neighbourhood and direct its efforts not

only at governments, but also at civil societies. To this end, it should systematically deploy all

the economic, diplomatic, and security policy instruments at its disposal. The advancement of

democracy, pluralism, rule of law, and respect for human rights in transitional societies and

in countries under authoritarian rule remains a key objective of the EU and the goal in any

cooperation with the relevant states. Germany should help to ensure that the EU forges ahead

with opening the internal market for goods, labor and services to neighboring countries to

provide incentives for domestic reforms. The promotion of mobility between the EU and the

neighboring European countries is key here, especially for the younger generations.

The development of the Common Foreign and Security Policy

(CFSP) and the Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) remain key objectives of any

deeper integration. Indeed, the cooperation between member states on foreign policy issues

has been mostly issue-by-issue to date, for example on Iran. This puts the EU at risk of being

marginalized in international affairs. Preventing this should be a main objective of its policy

for Europe. This also includes strengthening the role of the High Representative and of the

European External Action Service. In the medium term, the content and speed of foreign

poli­cy decisions would benefit from the introduction of qualified majority voting.

Within the international institutions, the EU member states will

lose influence due to recent global power shifts. In the long term, therefore, the interests of

the member states can only be preserved by strengthening the role of the EU. Accordingly,

Germany should encourage a more coordinated approach among the EU members in the IMF

and World Bank and support existing plans for the consolidation of voting rights of the euro
area members, which should be exercised by a Euro Executive Director in future. In the United

Nations, its short-term goal should be to maintain the EU’s share of permanent and non
permanent seats. A comprehensive reform of the Security Council (which Germany supports),


Germany must

contribute to the EU

becoming a strong

global player


-----

could in the long term involve an EU seat in a slightly enlarged circle of permanent members,

and additional non-permanent seats that would be rotated within the EU.

Germany must be willing to be represented internationally by the

EU, even in policy areas involving shared authority between the EU and the member states,

e.g. the Common Foreign and Security Policy. Being able to influence the EU position, however,

requires a clear articulation of German interests and goals. For the purpose of an effective pur
suit of European interests, all EU policies should be coordinated as far as possible by a single

instance. To do so, transparent procedures should be established in Brussels that provide

information on the status and content of negotiations. A leverage effect that goes beyond the

boundaries of individual policies can only be achieved through better coordination. Effective

coordination requires strong coordinating bodies.

## >>


The EU’s role in

international institutions

should be reinforced


-----

Recommendations:

-  Germany must work to deepen European integration in order to enable the European Union

to master the internal and external challenges facing it, without compromising on democ
racy.

-  Germany should push for the enlargement of the EU through accession of the Western Bal
kans; strive for a close and stable relationship of the EU with Turkey; and ensure that the

EU, as a regional power, consistently uses all its instruments to promote stability and good

governance in its southern and eastern neighborhoods.

-  Germany should seek to ensure that the CFSP and CSDP are developed further; that the

EEAS and the High Representative are strengthened; and that qualified majority decisions

are made possible.

## > IV


-----

# Partn


-----

IV. Germany and
its Strategic Relationships

Globalization and the rise of new powers have made the interna
tional system more disordered and contested. For a country like Germany, which benefits from

globalization and plays an active part in it, this is a double challenge. The paramount strategic

goal of German foreign policy must be to ensure that the international order remains peaceful,

free, rule-based, and cooperative. That entails adapting it to the new situation – in particular,

to reflect the rise of new powers. However, the new players must also be encouraged to take

on greater responsibility for confronting global problems; and where they act as spoilers, they

must either be engaged or contained. In doing so, German foreign policy should not focus only

on cooperation between governments, but must engage civil societies as well. For all of this,

Germany will have to work together with like-minded allies.

Yet Germany, too, finds itself in a new situation, because it has

joined the league of global players itself. This was not always the case. Before unification,

German foreign policy was largely focused on the East-West axis, whereas its relations with

the global South focused on development policy, as well as recognition for and support of Ger
many in the United Nations and other international organizations. The Bonn Republic lacked

both the weight and freedom of movement for independent relations with partners beyond the

European and transatlantic frameworks. Today, Germany’s new strength gives it new oppor
tunities to use its influence. This, too, is cause for reassessing its international relationships.

Germany’s strategic relationships: a framework

Countries are strategically relevant for Germany if and to the

extent that their decisions and internal developments have a major effect on German interests

and the international order as a whole. The classical criteria for the calculus of relevance are:

military power, economic clout, population, resources, capital, and geographic location. But

what makes a country strategically relevant in the context of foreign policy is its capabilities

and shaping power – that is, the ability and the will to bring political, economic, cultural,

or religious influence to bear in bilateral relations with third states, in multilateral formats,

or on a strategic market. Even small countries can achieve strategic importance in this way.

Germany’s practice of officially designating certain countries as “strategic partners” already

points in this direction, but is still characterized by a lack of consistency (see chart).


Germany, too, has joined

the league of global

players


-----

relevance

primary


secondary


engagement

U.S.
.

EU
. China

Russia Iran

Japan .
.

Canada India
. .Israel Syria.

Turkey. Brazil

South Korea. Pakistan. North Korea.

Mexico Indonesia
. .

South Africa
.

UAE Saudi Arabia
.

Qatar

.Australia .Singapore .

Egypt
.

Vietnam

New Zealand
. Cuba

Nigeria .
.

Venezuela
.

allies challengers spoilers

bilateral strategic partnership

Germany’s strategic relations


divergence


Germany’s relations with these powers are primarily governed by

how closely their values and interests match its own. The greater the divergence between their

worldview and goals and those of the West, the more difficult it will be to engage them and

to bring them closer, and the more there will be conflicting objectives.


-----

Germany’s strategic relationships: a typology

_Proven partners and like-minded allies: The guiding principles of Ger-_

man post-war foreign policy – alignment with the West, reconciliation, European integration,

and effective multi-lateralism – remain a valid framework for the pursuit of Germany’s values

and interests. On most key issues – peace and security, a rule-based global order, rule of law

and human rights, functioning markets, secure supplies of energy and raw materials, the envi
ronment and climate change, or human development – a comparison of German positions with

those of its proven European and transatlantic partners will show broad agreement, despite

disparities on specific issues. The circle of these partners with influence and shaping power

extends beyond the “West” and includes (in concentric rings) not just the EU member states

(indispensable partners) and the NATO allies United States, Canada, and Turkey (key partners),

but countries like Japan, South Korea, Australia, New Zealand, Mexico, and Israel (important

partners). Nurturing these proven partnerships and deepening bilateral relations with other

like-minded allies should be a priority for German foreign policy, because these relationships

act as amplifiers: they expand the scope, reach and legitimacy of German shaping power. This

is especially true in relation to the world’s emerging powers.

_Challengers: This group includes countries of very different politi-_

cal clout and ambitions: the major powers China and Russia, as well as rising developing

countries such as India, Brazil, South Africa, Indonesia and others. Germany now maintains

relationships with most of these countries that extend considerably beyond mere economic

cooperation. Some of them share an interest in a free and peaceful world order, and not a few

expressly acknowledge that they share values such as the rule of law and good governance.

However, societies in many of these countries do not see the “West”

as a role model at all. Nor are all of their governments willing to grant their citizens political

and social rights and freedoms. Some governments even question the universality of human

rights. Much as the self-empowerment of civil societies and the rise of new wealthy and self
confident middle classes may be apparent throughout the world, there can still be no question

of an inevitable convergence towards free, democratic, and liberal systems.

Inevitably, this will lead to competition and conflicts in Germany’s

relations with the new economic and political power centers of the world: struggles about

influence, and access to resources, but also about the architecture of the international order

as well as the validity of the norms on which it is based. It is in Germany’s interest to ensure

that they are directed into peaceful channels. This will require an adaptation of the interna

Like-minded partners

act as amplifiers for

German foreign policy


-----

tional order, which currently still reflects the post-war distribution of power. The new powers

will have to be appropriately represented there – if only to prevent the formation of new

blocks which might challenge the liberal order (the beginnings of which can already be seen).

In this process, some challenger states could become real partners for Germany, but it is also

conceivable that some will opt for confrontation. Here, Germany will have to combine engage
ment and containment in concert with other like-minded states.

_Spoilers: Both strong and functioning as well as fragile or failing_

states can act as spoilers in the international order. Iran and North Korea (and, much less

importantly, Venezuela or Cuba) belong to the first category, the latter include states such

as Syria, Somalia, Afghanistan, and Mali. Their spoiler potential can result from the fact that

they possess or proliferate weapons of mass destruction or that they support or harbour ter
rorists; from their location (for example at a strategic transport route or a maritime choke

point); or from internal conflicts that have an impact on their neighbors and quite often

on the entire region. In today’s globalized world, a local problem can quickly develop into a

regional or international problem. The interests (and values) of a globally networked country

like Germany can therefore be severely compromised even by a small or distant spoiler state.

Strategic relationships: guiding principles

For all its new strength, Germany is well advised to continue rely
ing on multilateral cooperation with reliablen partners and other like-minded allies on the

major questions of reshaping the international order. For Germany, it remains a wise strategy

to continue to be a reliable and predictable partner and to nurture its long-term partnerships.

Conversely raising its own profile at the expense of others – such as the European Union – is

short-sighted, because even the global player Germany is no more than a middle power on the

international stage. Indeed, the recent discussions about the cooperation and competition

between Western intelligence services show that trust cannot be taken for granted, even in

the context of these proven partnerships, but must be continually renewed. Moreover, it is all

too easy for powers such as China and Russia to take advantage of competition among Western

nations, and to drive a wedge between the members of the EU or the transatlantic alliance.

By contrast, two key questions shape Germany’s strategic rela
tions with the challengers and rogue states: which instruments should German foreign policy

employ in its dealings with them to further its objective of a peaceful and rule-based inter

New powers should

be represented in

international institutions


-----

national order? And what price is German foreign policy prepared to pay for this overriding

objective in the event of conflicting interests?

Incentives and cooperation mechanisms have always served Ger
man (and European) foreign policy well. In the German “Ostpolitik” of the 1970s (“change

through rapprochement”) as well as the EU’s eastward enlargement, this form of influence

has been very successful. But many of Germany’s key bilateral relationships unmistakably

demonstrate the limits of a policy based explicitly on cooperation. Incentives have produced

few tangible results in the context of the EU’s neighborhood policy or of the “modernization

partnership” with Russia; China can choose which offers of cooperation to accept and which

to reject. And among the spoilers, Iran and North Korea have turned down Western offers for

years.

Meanwhile, Germany also regularly participates in the imposition

of sanctions within the framework of the EU or UN. In the case of Iran, it was only the severe

sanctions of the West that brought Tehran back to the negotiating table. Sanctions will con
tinue to be one of the instruments of German foreign policy.

The inherent tension between Germany’s governance interest in a

peaceful reshaping of the international order on one hand and its interest in bilateral trade

relations with high growth rates, returns on investment, and access to key resources on the

other becomes particularly sharp where it is dealing with countries that are economically and

politically strong enough to dictate the terms of bilateral relations themselves. If they are also

autocratically governed states, trade relations with them may touch on fundamental German

values – such as human dignity, civil liberties, rule of law, good governance and participation.

Over time, such trade relations may themselves boost civil societies in these countries; they

can also lead to improved integration of the country in international governance frameworks,

create incentives for constructive behavior, and perhaps even encourage social change in the

country itself. But it is equally conceivable that trade contributes primarily to stabilizing

a regime, or even gives it new leverage over its own civil society. Such tensions are neither

avoidable, nor do they lend themselves to simple resolution. Conversely, and contrary to what

is sometimes claimed, they by no means force German foreign policy to choose between its

traditional normative and multilateral orientation, and a more geo-economic orientation.


Some spoilers have

turned down Western

offers for years


-----

Nonetheless, it is possible to formulate guiding principles on how

to deal with such tensions, as well as red lines that German foreign policy may not cross

without being compromised. _First, Germany, with its new economic power, is a key player,_

especially (but not only) in the EU; the weight of its support will often be decisive for the suc
cess of incentives as well as sanctions. This implies a certain responsibility. Second, Germany’s

relations with partners are usually so diversified that the loss of a single transaction will not

jeopardise the economic basis of the entire relationship. Third, these partnerships are two-way

streets. The partners, too, have a greater interest in a vibrant, multi-dimensional relationship

with Germany: in goods, investments, technology transfers, and training cooperation, but also

in collaboration on other issues such as resolving regional conflicts. Fourth, Germany should

avoid dependency on any particular bilateral relationship, for example by diversifying its

energy imports. Fifth, when weighing between bilateral trade and governance interests, the

opportunity costs of a deal must also be taken into account. If there is reason to believe that

multilateral negotiations or institutions will be compromised by it, then German long-term

interests, too, will be compromised. Sixth, in its dealings with autocratic regimes, Germany

must meticulously scrutinize goals, means, costs and compatibility with its values. This is

especially true for arms exports or police training – all the more if there is reason to believe

that a government will use these supplies or capabilities against its own people. Seventh, Ger
many is naturally more strongly interested in the internal development of countries in the

immediate EU neighborhood, whether in the East or in the South, than in that of more distant

states. This must be reflected appropriately in Germany’s support for a sustainable transforma
tion of its neighbours towards stability and democracy, rule of law, and a market economy. The

fact that the Eastern European countries in particular have formally committed themselves

to these values should be helpful in this regard. But Germany must do more to make sure

that these commitments are kept, and at the same time promote closer ties of these Eastern

and Southern neighbourhoods with the EU. Eighth, Germany must not become vulnerable to

extortion. In terms of its security, the best guarantee to prevent this is active membership in

the North Atlantic Alliance. In economic terms, this requires further diversification of Ger
man export markets and sources of raw materials; in particular, it necessitates a sustainable

strengthening of Europe’s economic power and the expansion of transatlantic free trade.

A different kind of tension is at play where fragile and failing

states (Afghanistan, Mali, Somalia) are concerned. These countries are at the bottom of the

development scale, and as the losers of globalization they have often missed out on economic

and social development. It would be pointless to pressure or offer incentives to governments

that de facto have little or no control over their countries. Here, too, German foreign policy

must deploy the full range of its foreign policy instruments – from humanitarian aid, develop­
## >


Arms exports should

be closely scrutinized:

Could they be used

against civil society?


-----

ment cooperation and diplomacy to military stabilization missions. The immediate goal is to

end conflicts and promote stability, while the long-term goal is to create conditions that allow

legitimate and capable governments to fulfil their government functions themselves.

If Germany uses its new potential together with its allies and like- Pressure can achieve

minded partners, it can contribute to peace, freedom, security, and prosperity in the world, little against a failed or

and even take the lead on certain issues. Yet for this, it needs political, economic, and mili- failing state

tary partnerships that are reliable and resilient more than ever.

Recommendations:

-  Germany should maintain, strengthen, and expand its proven partnerships in the frame
works of the EU, NATO and the United Nations. These should take precedence over relation
ships with emerging powers.

-  Germany should enhance its partnerships with challengers whose interests largely coincide

with those of Germany and Europe. Specifically, it should promote regional leadership roles

for such countries, as well as their participation in international organizations.

-  German foreign policy must either integrate challengers by encouraging them to act con
structively, or contain them by limiting their scope of action (e.g. by diversifying its sup
plies of raw materials, or by supporting regional competitors).

## >> V


-----

# Secur


-----

V. Germany
and International Security

Germany’s citizens have been enjoying a phase of unprecedented

security. Their country is at peace with its neighbors in Europe and is a member of the most

powerful military alliance in the world. The enlargement of the EU and NATO has placed a pro
tective ring of stable democracies around Germany. But that does not mean that the protec
tion of individual, social, and national security in Germany is now merely an issue of internal

security. The world remains full of uncertainties and threats. For a globally networked state

like Germany, this means that the security of the world and German security are inextricably

linked.

Traditional threats like war, the proliferation of weapons of mass

destruction, and terrorism continue to exist. In recent times, we have seen a wide range of

new security risks, from climate change and shortages of resources and food to pandemics,

from open data networks, and the erosion of government power (up to the point of state fail
ures) to the empowerment of private actors. Germany’s Southern and Eastern neighborhoods

– from North Africa and the Sahel, the Western Balkans and the Middle East, to the Caucasus,

and Central Asia – remain the scene of tensions, crises, and violence.

Germany’s openness and integration in global trade, transport, and

communication networks affects its security in two ways. They make Germany susceptible

and vulnerable to anything that disturbs these networks. At the same time, pulling up the

drawbridges would not be a realistic option, because it would mean cutting off the country’s

lifeblood. If Germany, then, is existentially dependent on exchange with other societies, this

means that the vulnerability of its neighbors, allies, and partners also affects German security,

and their protection is in Germany’s interest. Moreover, Germany has a strategic interest in

the open and free world order that makes globalization possible in the first place, as well as in

protecting the domains (sea, air and space, cyberspace) that are global commons, but are also

increasingly contested due to new technological developments. If Germany wants to preserve

and protect its own way of life, it must work for a peaceful and rule-based world order, using

all legitimate means at its disposition, including military force where and when required.

The growth of Germany’s power and influence mean that it must

also exercise greater responsibility. For decades, Germany was a consumer of security, guar
anteed by NATO and especially by the United States. Today, its allies and partners expect

Germany to become a provider of security, and not only for itself.

For all these reasons, German security policy can no longer be con
ceived otherwise than globally. That said, Germany’s history, its location, and scarce resources

are reasons to be judicious about its specific strategic objectives. This also means that a

pragmatic German security policy, especially when costly longer-term military operations are


EU and NATO

enlargement has

placed a ring of stable

democracies around

Germany


-----

called for, will have to concentrate primarily on the increasingly unstable European vicin
ity, from Northern Africa and the Middle East to Central Asia, not least to relieve Germany’s

U.S. allies in NATO, as the United States increasingly focuses on Asia. On the other hand, an

exclusive emphasis on the management of acute crises at the expense of long-term strategic

action must be avoided. German security policy must be able to do both at the same time: fast

response and pursuit of long-term goals.

Security policy as risk management

Germany, as a globally networked country, must conceptualize

and organize its security in terms of a whole-of-government risk management approach that

includes defense, and domestic as well as external security. Security provision must begin

with cognitive capabilities like knowledge, perception, analysis, judgment, and strategic fore
sight. A security policy that is defined within a risk management paradigm covers the full

range of government instruments, from development cooperation and humanitarian aid via

classical diplomacy and intelligence services to disaster prevention and the use of military

force. Internal and external security connect seamlessly. A forward-looking, comprehensive

security policy must include all relevant ministries and institutions (and, where appropriate,

civil society).

Risk management places high demands on communication between

government and the public. Risk assessments, priorities, and consequences must be convinc
ingly explained and justified to the citizens. There can be no all-encompassing protection

in an open society. Not all risks can be avoided, not all dangers can be averted. In the new

strategic environment, the limited ability of states to control the implementation of security

policy with sovereign instruments has become clear. This is why a risk management approach

also requires that government, the business sector and society learn to understand their own

vulnerability and build up resilience, in systems that are as decentralised as possible.

Instruments of German security policy

The instruments of German security policy must be enhanced and

better networked with each other. Overall, despite a commitment to a “national” or “net
worked” approach, inter-agency coordination is mostly practised on an informal and ad hoc

basis in Germany, or not at all. Any further expansion of interagency coordination so far has


Security policy today

means risk management


-----

always run up against the departmental principle (Ressortprinzip). Like other states before it,

Germany will have to strengthen its ability to integrate systems. In particular, crisis preven
tion, management, and post-conflict follow-up are still characterized by a lack of coordination

between civilian, police, and military forces. Germany is ahead of many EU and NATO partners

in its ability to send civilian personnel, such as police officers, judges, or election observers,

to crisis areas. Nevertheless, its performance often lags behind its own ambitions in this area.

Germany’s armed forces (together with its allies and partners)

make a wide-ranging contribution to providing security. They provide situational awareness

and contribute to early warning; they remain necessary for national and alliance defence; they

help to prevent crises and to mitigate, contain, and end conflicts; they participate in securing

lines of supply and transportation; and they rescue German citizens abroad where necessary.

Their missions today range from humanitarian aid to military advice, support, reconnaissance,

and stabilization operations, all the way to combat operations.

National and alliance defence remains the primary focus of Ger
many’s security policy, because the risk of intra- and inter-state conflicts as well as the

proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems continues to grow

in Europe’s southern and eastern neighbourhoods. This gives new urgency, for example, to

Germany’s participation in the establishment of a common NATO missile defence shield in

Europe. At the same time, the German Armed Forces (Bundeswehr) must continue to be

prepared for missions of crisis prevention and crisis management beyond Europe, even after

their withdrawal from Afghanistan. Germany should also continue to contribute its armed

forces to the enforcement of international law within the frameworks of the United Nations,

NATO, and the EU.


The Bundeswehr must

continue to be prepared

for missions beyond

Europe


-----

Dissent: Use of military force without a mandate of the
UN Security Council?

How should Germany act when there appears to be an urgent need for military action

to prevent, for example, an imminent genocide, ethnic cleansing, or the use of inter
nationally prohibited weapons, and a consensus in the Security Council cannot be

reached in time – especially if such consensus is blocked by a veto?

_Positions on this question remained irreconcilable within the project._

_No military intervention without a Security Council mandate: According to the Charter of_

the United Nations, the use of military force is only permissible if authoriszed by the

UN Security Council to maintain or restore international peace, or in the case of indivi
sual or collective self-defence. The prohibition on the unilateral use of force expresses

the need for a reliable, rule-bound international order; it is intended to prevent abuse

and errors of judgment. This prohibition ought to be respected by every state that

wishes to retain the ability to invoke it in the future. While the UN General Assembly

established the principle of “Responsibility to Protect” in 2005, this does not oblige

the Security Council to make the protection of threatened civilian populations a pri
mary consideration in its decisions, let alone to authorize a military operation. Con
sequently, no military intervention is permitted without a Security Council mandate

– not even to prevent a genocide.

_Intervention without a Security Council mandate in exceptional cases: In very narrowly_

defined exceptional cases, such as an imminent threat of severe human rights viola
tions, and if the use of military force appears inevitable to avert an imminent danger,

so-called “humanitarian interventions” should be permissible without authorization

by the UN Security Council. In situations of this nature, there is a conflict between

ethical considerations of human security on one hand and international law on the

other; accepting a genocide is a greater breach of fundamental taboos and civiliza
tional norms than breaching the ban (indeed often broken in practice) on the use of

force. In such situations, therefore, Germany should be open to a collective military

action. Germany bears a special responsibility in this regard because of its overwhelm
ing interest in a world order that is bound by values and because of its commitment

to human rights.


Germany should use

its new influence

to strengthen the UN,

the EU, and NATO


-----

Partners of German security policy

Today, security cooperation with neighbors, partners, and allies –

from ad hoc coalitions via formal alliances to supranational integration – no longer merely

serves to leverage scarce resources, to multiply forces, or to establish legitimacy. Security

cooperation across national borders is now the necessary consequence of interdependence.

But all three institutions that for decades have provided the frame
work of German security policy – the United Nations, NATO, and the EU – are going through

fundamental debates about their purpose, remits, and architecture. Germany’s contributions

therefore should not be limited to specific policy issues or participation in individual opera
tions. It needs to offer ideas and initiatives to promote the renewal and adaptation of these

institutions.

The _United Nations is the only organization with universal mem-_

bership. For all its weaknesses, it offers a uniquely legitimate forum for the cooperative settle
ment of contested issues such as the protection of the global commons, security of supply

routes and access to raw materials; and its charter provides the framework for a rule-based

international order, in whose preservation Germany has a special interest. Where law and

rules are recognized, there is no need to enforce them. It is therefore worthwhile for Germany

to invest in the recognition – and where necessary, in the adaptation – of international law.

Strengthening the United Nations and its affiliate organisations therefore remains a goal of

German foreign policy. Nevertheless, NATO and the EU must continue to expect to be called on

by the UN to enforce international law, if necessary by military means.

As an alliance of Western democracies with standing political and

military structures, a broad range of instruments and capabilities for collective defence and

the preservation and and enforcement of peace, and a worldwide network of partners, NATO

is a unique amplifier of German security policy interests. However, the impending end of the

ISAF mission in Afghanistan, the new priorities of U.S. foreign policy, drastic cuts in European

defence budgets, and a public that is sceptical of military operations, all put a question mark

over the future direction of the alliance.

Germany must use its increased influence to contribute to shaping

the future of the alliance. It has an interest in the continued existence of a strong and effec
tive NATO, because the alliance is a proven framework for political consultation and military


Cooperation across

borders is a necessary

consequence of

interdependence


-----

operations, in particular with the United States. The need for consultation at the strategic

level will only grow, and here too the United States will expect far more input from Europe

and Germany. On the military-operational level, however, the Europeans will have to get used

to the idea that the United States will not only assume a leadership role less often, but will

also want to participate in fewer joint missions. Europe and Germany must therefore develop

formats for NATO operations that rely less on U.S. contributions. This requires greater invest
ment in military capabilities, and more political leadership. Europe in particular will have to

provide more security in its own neighborhood. This is Europe’s unique responsibility, and

Germany will have to make an investment that is commensurate with its strength.

With its Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP), the European

_Union has been able to distinguish itself in civilian, civil-military, and military operations_

of low and medium intensity. It cannot replace NATO, but it plays an indispensable role in

European security policy because (unlike NATO) it has a comprehensive range of policy instru
ments at its disposal. However, the financial crisis, the dispute among Member States about

the future direction of the Union, and uncoordinated cuts in defence budgets have weakened

the credibility of the Union and prevented a strengthening of CSDP.

But it is precisely their political integration – including CFSP and

CSDP – that gives the European countries their international clout. Consequently, Germany

must use its new responsibility to help the CSDP regain new vigor. This can only be successful

if such an initiative is coupled with the development of specific civil and military capabilities.

But the member states have been half-hearted in their efforts to counter budget cuts by pool
ing, sharing, and specialization of capabilities and equipment. There is already (within NATO)

an integrated air defence system with joint air surveillance. Even a common European border

police, coastguard, or a military procurement according to the rules of the single European

market – including uniform technical standards and certification procedures – is conceivable.

Modern defence technologies are becoming increasingly complex and costly. An internation
ally competitive European defence industry can only be maintained in the long term by a

broad consolidation of national industries within the European context. This is therefore in

Germany’s interest.

Just as important as the hardware of CSDP, however, is the Europe­

anization of its software: the development of common strategic foresight and planning capa
bilities, as well as of joint training, doctrines, and exercises.


Europe and Germany

must do more for the

security of their

neighborhoods


-----

All this should lead to the development of military and civilian

capabilities that can be used interchangeably within the framework of the UN, NATO, or EU

(or in joint operations). If nothing else, this should make the Europeans more effective as

partners. A stronger, more responsible role for Europe in NATO requires an EU that is capable

of providing security effectively on its own.

What does alliance solidarity mean under these circumstances?

The use of military force will always be a highly sensitive issue in Germany. Germany’s Basic

Law and international law provide the mandatory frame of reference for any decision to use

force; and the participation of the legislature (Bundestag) is constitutionally required. Yet

cases in which law or circumstances actually compel Germany to use military force will remain

rare exceptions. And if risk management, rather than just defense, is taken as the overarching

paradigm of security policy, legitimate disagreements on specific risk assessments or priorities

within NATO or the EU/CSDP will be all the more likely, perhaps even the norm. Like other

member states, Germany will therefore have to be clear(er) in articulating its own interests

and values. But it must also include the fact of its mutual dependence with others in its calcu
lations. Not only does the Federal Republic rely on its allies and partners, they are also reliant

on Germany. In sum, alliance solidarity in a networked world requires special consideration

of the needs and interests of allies, and taking responsibility for the impact that a sovereign

decision has on them.

Recommendations:

-  A risk management paradigm for Germany’s security policy requires a whole-of-government

approach and the reinforcement of capabilities in the areas of knowledge, analysis, and

strategic foresight – including an inter-departmental strategic risk analysis.

-  A crisis and military deployment committee should be established in the German Bundes­

tag. Parliamentary participation in deployment decisions should be made more flexible, for

example by making missions subject to recall, combined with an earlier involvement of the

legislature by the executive, and information exchanges with allied legislatures.

-  To better inform the German public about current security challenges, the Federal Govern
ment should regularly submit a report on Germany’s security to the Bundestag.


Germany and its partners

are mutually dependent.

That entails a special

consideration


-----

New Power
New Responsibility


-----

## >>


-----

**The Project and its Participants**

_The project_

This paper is the result of “Elements of a Foreign and Security Policy Strategy for Germany,”

a joint initiative of the German Marshall Fund of the United States and the Stiftung Wissen
schaft und Politik (German Institute for International and Security Affairs) and was funded by

the Policy Planning Staff of the Federal Foreign Office. The participants were foreign and secu
rity policy experts from the Bundestag, administration, science, industry, foundations, think

tanks, media and non-governmental organizations.

The paper reflects the consensus, but also the dissent in their discussions, which were held in

four working groups between November 2012 and September 2013. The analyses and recom
mendations contained therein are not necessarily shared by all members of the project.

_Project Management_

**Dr. habil. Markus Kaim, Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik**

**Dr. Constanze Stelzenmüller, The German Marshall Fund of the United States**

_Working Group Coordinators_

**Dr. Lars Brozus, Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik**

**Dr. Jörg Forbrig, The German Marshall Fund of the United States**

**Dr. Ronja Kempin, Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik**

**Dr. Claudia Major, Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik**

_Assistants_

**Birthe Tahmaz, Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik**

**Thomas Friebe, The German Marshall Fund of the United States**

_Participants_

**Niels Annen, Friedrich-Ebert Foundation**

**Dr. Thomas Bagger, Federal Foreign Office**

**Peter Beyer, Member of the German Bundestag**

**Dr. Jochen Bittner, DIE ZEIT**

**Prof. Dr. Tanja Börzel, Freie Universität Berlin**

**Knut Brünjes, Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology**

**Dr. Christian Buck, Federal Foreign Office**

**Dr. Nikolas Busse, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung**

**Michael Flügger, Federal Chancellery**


-----

**Dr. Arndt Freiherr Freytag von Loringhoven, Federal Foreign Office**

**Prof. Dr. Manuel Fröhlich, Friedrich-Schiller University Jena**

**Dr. Bastian Giegerich, Federal Ministry of Defence**

**Wolfgang Grenz, Amnesty International**

**Dr. Ulrike Guérot, European Council on Foreign Relations**

**Dr. Wibke Hansen, Center for International Peace Operations**

**Prof. Dr. Gunther Hellmann, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University Frankfurt/Main**

**Martin Jäger, Daimler AG (until August 15, 2013)**

**Alexandra Jonas, German Armed Forces Military History Research Office**

**Dr. Patrick Keller, Konrad-Adenauer Foundation**

**Roderich Kiesewetter, Member of the German Bundestag**

**Dr. Katrin Kinzelbach, Global Public Policy Institute**

**Thomas Kleine-Brockhoff, The German Marshall Fund of the United States (until August 15, 2013)**

**Stefan Liebich, Member of the German Bundestag**

**Dr. Barbara Lippert, Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik**

**Heike MacKerron, The German Marshall Fund of the United States**

**Dr. Stefan Mair, Federation of German Industries**

**Prof. Dr. Hanns Maull, University of Trier**

**Rainer Meyer zum Felde, Federal Academy for Security Policy**

**Dr. Stormy-Annika Mildner, Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik**

**Prof. Dr. Jürgen Neyer, European University Viadrina**

**Dietmar Nietan, Member of the German Bundestag**

**Prof. Dr. Georg Nolte, Humboldt University Berlin**

**Omid Nouripour, Member of the German Bundestag**

**Prof. Dr. Volker Perthes, Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik**

**Dr. Tobias Raffel, Roland Berger School of Strategy and Economics**

**Dr. Karsten Sach, Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety**

**Prof. Dr. Eberhard Sandschneider, German Council on Foreign Relations**

**Jürgen Schnappertz, Federal Foreign Office**

**Dr. Daniela Schwarzer, Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik**

**Svenja Sinjen, German Council on Foreign Relations**

**Joachim Spatz, Member of the German Bundestag**

**Gerd Tebbe, German Bundestag**

**Dr. Hinrich Thölken, Federal Foreign Office**

**Stefani Weiss, Bertelsmann Foundation**

**Dr. Jasper Wieck, Federal Foreign Office**


-----

SWP
Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik
Deutsches Institut für Internationale Politik und Sicherheit
Ludwigkirchplatz 3-4
10719 Berlin
Telefon +49 30 880 07-0
Fax +4930880 07-100
www.swp-berlin.org
swp@swp-berlin.org

GMF
The German Marshall Fund of the United States
1744 R Street, NW
Washington, DC 20009, USA
T +1 202 683 2650
F + 1 202 265 1662
www.gmfus.org
info@gmfus.org

Design
lindakowsky.de · Berlin

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any
form or by any means without prior permission in writing.
©Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik + German Marshall Fund of the United States, 2013

##### Power


-----

