# GGGRRREEEEEEKKK SSSEEECCCUUURRRIIITTTYYY PPPOOOLLLIIICCCYYY IIINNN

 [T]TTHHHEEE 222111[s][s][s][t][t][t] CCCEEENNNTTTUUURRRYYY

 [T]TT[h]hh[a]aa[n]nn[o]oo[s]ss DDDoookkkooosss (((eeeddd...)))


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

**Copyright © 2007**
HELLENIC FOUNDATION FOR EUROPEAN AND FOREIGN POLICY (ELIAMEP)
All rights reserved
ISBN 978-960-8356-20-7

**Greek Security Policy**
**In the 21[st] century**
**Thanos Dokos (ed.)**

**HELLENIC** **FOUNDATION** **FOR** **EUROPEAN** **&** **FOREIGN** **POLICY**
**(ELIAMEP)**
49 Vas. Sofias Av.
106 76 Athens, Greece
Τel: (+30) 210 7257110 Fax: (+30) 210 7257114
[e-mail: eliamep@eliamep.gr url: http://www.eliamep.gr](mailto:eliamep@eliamep.gr)

_______________________________________________________________
The Hellenic Foundation for European and Foreign Policy (ELIAMEP) was founded in 1988
and operates as an independent, non- profit, policy- oriented research and training institute. It
functions as a forum of debate on international issues, as an information centre, as well as a
point of contact for experts and policymakers. Over the years, ELIAMEP has developed into and
influential think-tank on foreign policy and international relations issues. ELIAMEP neither
expresses, nor represents, any specific political party view. It is only devoted to the right of free
and well- documented discourse.

**2**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9


**INTRODUCTION**


The study aims to provide a comprehensive overview of Greek security policy in
terms of description of the regional security environment, threat assessment,
defence planning, defence industry, current and future procurement decisions,
participation to the European security architecture, soft security threats and
challenges and policy options.

The analysis of trends, threat assessment, predictions and recommendations
were on a medium- to long-term basis, covering the next ten years (keeping, of
course, in mind that ten years in the extremely fluid current international system
is a rather long-time and many predictions and policy prescriptions may become
quickly outdated and obsolete).

The authors of the study were a group of extremely experienced and
knowledgeable (retired) military officers and analysts/experts. Overall
responsibility for the executive summary and the policy report lies, however, with
the Hellenic Foundation for European and Foreign Policy.

The study is based on the following assumptions:
a) Being located in the southeastern part of the EU, in a region still ridden
with conflict, instability and risks for European security, Greece wishes to
become an indispensable component of the European security system, in
both the military and soft-security dimensions;
b) There will be no significant increase of Greek defence expenditures. If
anything, Greek governments will attempt to further reduce military
spending. At the same time, Greece’s demographic problem will not
improve, resulting in a smaller and ageing population, and thus having a
negative impact on the Armed Forces. Migration has served as a
“demographic booster”, at least in the economic field, but can do little to
alleviate manpower problems in the military sector;
c) There will be only marginal improvements in the technological capabilities
and financial situation of the Greek defence industry. Therefore, Greece
will continue to cover the vast bulk of its defence procurement needs
through imports from its European partners and the United States, with
Russia and Israel as possible suppliers;
d) The regional and international environment will remain fluid and unstable.
There will be continuing concern about international terrorism,
transnational organized crime, illegal migration and failed/failing states.
For reasons of geography and economic affluence, Greece will be strongly
affected by those trends;
e) The European and transatlantic dimensions of Greek foreign policy are of
increasing importance. The process of Greece’s deeper integration into the

**3**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

European political, economic and security architectures will continue at a
steady pace, with the country aiming at being at the core of any future
project for deeper European integration (opinion polls over the past
several years show a steady and strong support for this strategic choice).
At the same time, it will be essential for Athens to maintain good working
relations with the United States, the preeminent strategic actor in the
Eastern Mediterranean. The country’s orientation will continue to be EuroAtlantic, with a perhaps rather slow, but continuous shift towards the
European pillar;
f) It is not expected that there will be spectacular changes in Greek-Turkish
relations, although the possibility of a breakdown in Ankara’s membership
negotiations with the EU, and the subsequent [negative] consequences for
bilateral relations with Greece, cannot be excluded. The full resolution of
Greek-Turkish problems through negotiations is not considered as a highly
probable development in the short- or medium-term. A return to a hightension relationship is slightly more probable, but still quite unlikely;
g) Greece’s armed forces will, for the foreseeable future, have one primary
and one secondary mission: the primary will be to deter external threats
and challenges to Greece’s territorial integrity and vital interests; the
secondary will be to participate to the European Rapid Reaction Force and
other EU and NATO’s multinational forces and in international stabilization
and peace-support operations, under the UN, EU or NATO auspices.
Another mission, connected to the secondary one, will be to provide
assistance, when necessary, to Greek security services in their effort to
deal with transnational “threats”.

The study is divided in the following parts:
(a) Greek security policy
(b) The Hellenic Armed Forces
(i) Army/Land Forces
(ii) Air Force
(iii) Navy
(c) Defence expenditures
(d) Defence Industry
(e) Greece in the European Security Architecture (ESDP & NATO)
(f) Transnational threats
(g) National Intelligence Agency
(h) Main conclusions and recommendations

**4**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9


**MAIN CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS**


**FOR GREEK SECURITY**


Despite being a member of the EU and NATO, Greece is geographically situated
in a conflict-prone region where the use of force in inter-state relations may still
be considered as an option. Therefore, in order to safeguard its security, the
challenge for a status quo country like Greece in the early twenty-first century
will be to broaden and deepen its ties with its EU and NATO partners, at a time
of internal and external adaptation of these organizations.

At the dawn of the 21[st] century relations with Turkey will continue to dominate the
Greek foreign and security policy agenda. Athens has no wish to border a ‘lone
wolf’ Turkey. It is in Greece’s interest that Turkey remains firmly anchored in the
Western harbor and engaged in a political, economic and social modernization
process. Whatever the short-term course of the rapprochement process, relations
with Turkey will continue to remain a top priority concern for Greek foreign and
security policy well into the 21[st] century. It should be mentioned, however, that
Greece’s self-confidence has been steadily increasing as a result of its membership
to the EU and the country is slowly moving away from the “Turkish obsession” of
previous decades and has been implementing a multi-dimensional foreign policy.

The changes introduced to the Balkan political scene since the end of the Cold
War, the collapse of communism, the break-up of the former Yugoslavia and the
emergence of a number of successor states (in the post-Dayton era) clearly
highlight the magnitude of the stakes that the new regional environment has
brought to the fore; they also render imperative the need for Greece to define an
appropriate strategy to meet the new threats and risks that the new century will
entail.

Greek foreign policy officials and decision makers, in an effort to formulate a
policy that would both promote Greek national interests and be compatible with
the policies of the EU and NATO, are assessing developments on a number of
issues of high importance, including the EU’s Common Foreign and Security
Policy (ESDP) and Greece’s contribution to the European Rapid Reaction Force;
EU and NATO enlargement; the transatlantic relationship; burden sharing in the
context of NATO and the gap in military capabilities between the two pillars of
the Alliance; relations with Russia; new asymmetric threats in NATO’s southern
flank; and general concern about the south as a zone of instability in a region of
vital interest for the West.

To deter threats to its security, Greece relies on internal (strong Armed Forces)
and external balancing (participation in all West European security and political
organizations [NATO, WEU, EU] and signature and adherence to practically all

**5**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

multilateral arms control agreements and international export control.[1] More
specifically, to deter the perceived Turkish threat, Greece, for many years, relied
mainly on international law and agreements, as well as the mediating role of the
U.S. NATO, and the UN. As this policy proved rather ineffective, Greece began to
place more emphasis on internal balancing (through the strengthening of its
Armed Forces) and less on membership in NATO and the bilateral relationship
with the United States (mainly as a result of Turkey’s membership to the former
and “privileged” relationship with the latter). In the last decade or so, Greece
placed increased importance on its “European card”. Today, Greece relies on a
mixture of diplomatic maneuvering, the strengthening of its Armed Forces and its
membership to the European Union in order to balance Turkish military
superiority, as well as other challenges to its security.

**The new security environment and the need for security sector reform**

For most countries, security today is primarily measured in **non-military terms**
and threats to security are non-military in nature. These threats include –
incompetent government, corruption, organized crime, insecure borders,
smuggling [weapons, drugs, contraband, people], illegal migration, ethnic and
religious conflict, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, shortage of
natural resources [e.g., water] and; of course, terrorism. As security is no longer
just a military concern, it is no longer just the preserve of MODs and MFAs which
have to date been the main ministries involved in security cooperation. It is no
longer possible to draw a clear distinction between external security and internal
security. Security henceforth requires the coordination of the ‘external’ ministries

[i.e., MOD and MFA] and their agencies [armed forces, intelligence services] with
those of the ‘interior’ ministries: internal affairs; finance; transport; environment;
health; etc., with their agencies [policing forces, security services, disaster relief
agencies, etc.]. An example of the large number of ministries and agencies
involved in dealing with terrorism is provided in the diagram below. Security
today takes in social development and it demands the involvement of all
elements of society in a way which security in the Cold War days did not.
Meeting these new security requirements demands fundamental reform of
national structures, patterns of investment, systems of government. Likewise it
demands the evolution of international institutions on a truly radical scale.

The security sector of a state may be defined broadly as encompassing those
elements that have been granted a legitimate and exclusive role in the exercise
of coercive power in society to deal with external and internal threats to the
security of the state and its citizens. As such, security sector reform (SSR)

1 Greece has signed practically all multilateral arms control agreements and is a member of all
international export control regimes. More specifically, Greece is a signatory of the 1925 Geneva
Protocol, the Antarctic Treaty, the Partial Test Ban Treaty, the Outer Space Treaty, the NonProliferation Treaty (NPT), the Seabed Treaty, the Biological Weapons Convention, the ENMOD
Convention, the "Inhumane Weapons" Convention, the CFE Treaty and the Chemical Weapons
Convention.

**6**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

encompasses all those organizations that have the authority to use, or order the
use of force, or the threat of force, as well as those civil structures that are
responsible for their management. The organizations concerned include: military
and paramilitary forces; intelligence services; police forces, both national and
local, together with border guards and customs services; judicial and penal
systems; and the civil authorities mandated to control and oversee these
agencies.

The overall aim of SSR is the transformation of security institutions so that they
play an effective, legitimate and democratically accountable role in providing
external and internal security for their citizens. Institutional reform focuses upon
building up their capacities in line with the standards assumed appropriate to the
democratic political context. Transformation of the security sector requires broad
consultation and includes goals such as strengthening civilian control and
oversight of the security sector; professionalisation of the security forces;
demilitarization and peace-building; and strengthening the rule of law. SSR is
therefore about much more than the internal structure of security forces. It
promotes the strengthening of norms in relation to the proper relationship
between the security sector and society at large.

To implement such changes in a civil-military partnership requires, among other,
a civilian body of experts knowledgeable enough to address defence and security
issues with credibility and confidence. Without such civilian expertise decisionmakers cannot take hard decisions which are opposed by the entrenched and
conservative military staff. Building such an expert civilian security community is
the sine qua non of defence and security sector reform.

In dealing with new threats to security and the war on terrorism, non-military
elements are becoming more important of late. There is also a strong feeling
that these different security agencies (MOD, General Staff, Intelligence Services,
Ministry of Interior, Police, Border Guards, Customs, Judiciary) do not
communicate between themselves – a fatal flow in today’s new security
environment. There is a great need to generate ideas, stimulate thinking and
debate on all aspects of security reform, to break down boundaries between
different elements of the security establishment and to expand the frontiers of
what is considered ‘security’. There is an equal need to increase the strength of
the ‘security community’ – the body of military and especially of civilian
personnel competent in the new security issues and capable [a] of filling posts in
national and international institutions; and [b] educating the population to
understand the new needs of security so as to ensure their support through the
democratic process.

**7**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

Greek Anti-terrorist mechanism

Ministry

Ministry Ministry of Ministry of Ministry Ministry

of Foreign

of Interior Defence Public Order of Justice of Finance

Affairs

National Task Force on

National

General Intelligence Money
Secretariat Police Agency Laundering

Intelligence Special

for Civil

Agency, Forces,

Protection

HNDGS HNDGS Coast

Guard

Anti-Terrorist Branch

Special Forces Special Forces

Areas of necessary coordination in dealing with new security threats include
the following:
(a) In view of the difficulties of coordination between ministries and agencies,
the lack of a coordinating mechanism on national security issues
(especially if a wider definition of the term ‘national security’ is adopted –
as suggested below) becomes even more pronounced. The creation of a
**National Security Council would be strongly recommended;**

(b) The most pressing need would be the upgrading of the Parliament, and
more specifically the Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, whose
role and authority should be expanded and its support mechanism
significantly strengthened. Finally, Greece is no exception to the rule that
in democratic societies there is a continuing competition between national
security and transparency. Although the former is of extreme importance,
a functioning system of checks and balances guarantees that there is a
relative balance between national security and transparency.

(c) The Greek security sector will be faced with a number of important
challenges: developing and maintaining a ‘critical mass’ of highly trained
and motivated officers; increasing professionalism throughout its ranks;
resolving problems of inter-agency cooperation and the slow pace of
security sector reform, due to the rather low level of awareness about the
new security threats among the general public, and the traditional
weaknesses of the Greek public administration system; and, last but not
least, developing a security culture. The latter should be achieved by
increasing the number of civilian experts, as suggested below, but also
through improving the professional education system and, importantly,
making the mental leap in order to adapt to a new security environment

**8**

|Ministry of Justice|Ministry of Finance|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||||
||Task Force on Money Laundering||

|Ministry of Interior|Ministry of Foreign Affairs|
|---|---|
|||
|General Secretariat for Civil Protection||

|Ministry of Defence|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||Special Forces, HNDGS||


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

where Greece is a full member of the developed and ‘privileged’ West
and, therefore, a possible target of non-state actors.

(d) Finally, like most countries in the world today, Greece still needs to
improve its domestic response, particularly in terms of training,
equipment, and information-sharing on issues such as money-laundering,
cyber-terrorism and cyber-crime, and prevention and consequence
management of NBC terrorist attacks. The considerable resources trained personnel, organisation, equipment, planning and experience that were used for the security of the 2004 Athens Olympic Games should
be fully exploited now that the Games are over. Indeed, the systems
developed for the Games will constitute an important post-Olympic
legacy, leaving Greece with a high quality infrastructure in terms of
equipment and trained personnel.

The Games’ ‘security legacy’ (personnel, equipment, expertise, know-how,
planning) will, if properly exploited, ‘introduce’ Greece into the 21[st] century
security environment of asymmetric threats, allowing the country to protect its
national security and contribute to international efforts to deal with such
problems.

**THE HELLENIC ARMED FORCES: POLICIES, TRENDS,**
**RECOMMENDATIONS**

**Some general observations**

**(a) Joint Capabilities**

Greece’s territorial configuration, in combination with the threat and the risks
that affect the area, provides the ideal place for applying the principles of
jointness. Recently, a joint rapid reaction force was formed (“Delta Force”),
which is expected to provide improved capabilities in a short notice. When it
comes to jointness, it is not surprising that the Greek Armed Forces are faced
with the same problems as almost any other Armed Forces in the world. The
cooperation between the three Branches is still not at a satisfactory level.

The problems range from lack of experience in joint cooperation and the low
willingness to cooperate jointly, the lack of sufficient systems of communication
and exchange of information, and deficiencies in the planning process and the
competence in the decision-making. The measures which could be taken to
promote much closer cooperation between the Branches and, therefore, the
strengthening of their collective capability, in conditions of peace, crisis or war,
would include the following:

    - Creation of a joint operational staff under the Hellenic National Defence
General Staff (GEETHA), following the British model (Permanent Joint

**9**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

Headquarters), for the conduct of various kinds of operations.
    - The Branches will be responsible only for matters of personnel, logistics
and training, and then CHOD will bear the responsibility for conducting the
operations.

   - Strengthening the role and improving the training for the Forces of
Rapid Reaction, under the CHOD. These forces should have complete manning,
high degree of readiness, proper equipment and effective plans.

   - Strengthening the capabilities of collection and analysis of military
information. The system will be strengthened with the full use of the recently
acquired UAVs, even if the existing system is rather small, compared with other
modern intelligence systems.

   - Creation of a unified joint system of Command-Control and
Communications. The advertised C[4]I system (Command-Control-CommunicationComputers-Intelligence) exists in rather embryonic form. The expansion of
military internet will satisfy the requirements of staffs at all levels from battalion
up to ship and combat aircraft. Afterwards, the creation of an effective ISTAR
system (Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance) will
be sought, to provide the capability to conduct Information Warfare.

    - The logistics (hospitals, food, clothes, fuels, service stations, common
supplies) of the three Branches should be placed under a single joint command
to achieve economies of scale.

   - The CHOD has to determine the priority of procurement programmes for
the main systems, in order to equip first the forces of rapid reaction and the
other spearhead forces.

   - Institutional strengthening of the recently established General
Secretariat in the Ministry, to handle the subjects related to Defence Policy. This
staff will be manned with permanent personnel (military officers, diplomats and
experts) that will not be affected by the change of the Minister or the
government. This way the CHOD will focus solely in the operational matters while
the civilian element of the MoD will be responsible for defence planning. This
distinct separation of responsibilities should not exclude, but rather should
encourage, the close cooperation.

**Military Training and Education**

At the moment, the military education and training system has not followed the
modernization of the main equipment. It can be argued that the conditions have
matured to promote changes, in the following direction:

    - The initial education of Officers in the military Cadet Academies has to
be focused primarily on the academic education, with particular emphasis in the
courses of leadership and management, modern technology, information
technology and foreign languages. The military education should take place in
the brigades, in such a way as to gradually familiarize the students with the
equipment and the tactics before going for first time to the units.

   - Combining the use of various weapon systems and allocated means
(e.g. main battle tanks with artillery, antitank, attack helicopters, aircraft, ships,

**10**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

and the reconnaissance means).

   - The system of training has to support the improvement of fighting
capabilities at various levels.
   - Improving the fighting and staff capability of professional military
personnel with education for life, adapted in the developments of modern
technology and the requirements of military science, according to the
international models and the national needs.

    - Closure of the basic training centres (a total of 31) and conduct of the
full training cycle in the brigades and other units (German model). This will
reduce the costs and increase the conscripts’ staying time in the units.

   - Promoting the significant reduction of bureaucracy and disengagement
of personnel from the staffs and offices (the objective should be a 30% reduction
in one year), so that they participate in the daily operational - training activities
of fighting units.

    - Especially in the armoured units, but in general as well, establishing a
new training methodology which will be based on simulation techniques and the
continuous evaluation of the individual and the crew, in combination with
modern and sophisticated training/firing areas where the companies and
battalions will be evaluated. After procurement of so many means, it is now the
proper time to combine their use and exploit their capabilities through the
improvement of combined training.

**11**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

**HELLENIC ARMY**

The mechanization for the majority of the Army’s brigades in the continental
region was one of the main changes that took place between 1996-2000. The
planned reorganization of 2000 was delayed and finally a new reorganization was
announced in 2005, which resulted to the elimination of only a few units with low
levels of personnel anyway. The procurement of major equipment between
1996-2004, gave the opportunity to integrate new technologies, but was not
combined with the appropriate changes in the structure, to make the Army more
effective with less cost and more flexibility.

The new procurement programme for the coming years was announced in 2005.
There are two separate plans, the “realistic” from 2006 to 2010 (1[st] phase) and
the following plan that covers until 2015 (2[nd] phase), with an extension to 2020
(3[rd] phase). The total budget is estimated to be 22 billion Euros, while the Army
will receive 37.17% of this amount. Even if the defence budget is reduced below
the level of 3% of the GDP, for the first time since 1974, the programme is
ambitious, and in a few areas focuses on the integration of the procured “big”
systems from the previous years. The priority in this case is given to transport
helicopters, infantry fighting vehicles, C[4]I systems, spare parts for the
maintenance of the existing systems and ammunitions.

**_The Military Transformation (Key decisions to be made in the short-_**
**_medium-and long term, toward a more effective and cost-benefit basis)_**

The Army is characterized by the tendency to enlarge in number, extend
geographically, and reduce training time. In order to become capable of facing
threats and regional risks, the army must:

- Train for threat and risk management and for international obligations.

- Close units that are not operational.

- Close small training centers.

- Close the headquarters that decrease flexibility.

- Close units of logistical support that do not enhance a modern military.

- Re-consider the necessity of maintaining obsolete means and munitions.

- Rely on operational armored and mechanized units for the defence of
continental regions and rely mainly on lighter units with special equipment for
the defence of islands.

- Merge military factory work in sectors where possible.

- Apply joint function to the Command and Control systems.

- Promote jointness, in the fields of intelligence, planning and operations.

**_Could one suggest different priorities for the Procurement Plan?_**

The ten-year Procurement Plan was unofficially published in various military
magazines in July 2006. At the same time the Plan was discussed in the

**12**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

Parliament (Foreign Affairs and Defence Committee), but only as a generic plan
without the government providing any details. The published priorities seem to
be balanced among the Branches; especially the top priorities for completing the
national and international missions are considered to be in the right direction.
However, there are significant shortfalls for recognized needs which were not
sufficiently well-coordinated among the Branches, apparently as a result of
mutual compromise. For example, the C[4]I satellite system had to be linked with
additional joint flexible, reliable and deployable communications. The additional
10 transport helicopters are considered to be the minimum number for the
requirement to transport troops to the geographically isolated continental or
islander areas. A number of naval priorities are considered as excessive (5 naval
reconnaissance aircraft, 2 naval training helicopters, modification of 2 frigates
into training ships). Some other programmes are not well-coordinated between
the Branches, such as the long range UAVs.

For having a comprehensive procurement plan that would enable the Armed
Forces to conduct the missions in a joint mode and not as separate missions for
the three Branches, one should formulate a different plan oriented to capabilities’
requirements for confronting the threat and the risks. For this purpose, the
procurement plan should start with the following priorities:

  - C[4]I with the related Communications, Intelligence and Target acquisition
systems (satellite, UAVs, SIGINT, etc).

  - Transport means, including helicopters and fast transport boats.

  - Smart weapons, such as laser guided bombs and munitions.

  - Special Operations equipment and means.

  - Long range (stand-off) weapons for the navy and air-force.

  - Search and Rescue systems.

  - Joint Logistics systems.

  - Spare parts for the existing systems.

The above should be considered as top priorities. The other needs including the
procurement of main systems (aircrafts, ships, fighting vehicles, tanks etc.),
could be considered in a following list. For the land forces the priority systems
should include the following:

  - Ground reconnaissance systems and UAVs

  - Transport and special operations helicopters

  - Attack helicopters

  - Infantry Fighting Vehicles

  - Fast transport boats

  - Special Forces and Marines equipment

  - Simulation means for realistic training

  - Spare parts and ammunition (combat and training) for the existing
equipment and weapons

  - Links with Air Force and Navy for combined-joint operations.

**13**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

**_Current Trends and future challenges_**

The Army’s current goals are reflected in the following priorities:
1. Support, modernize and upgrade existing systems as well as the supply of
essential munitions for battle loads and training. This will exploit systems’
operational capabilities. This will also extend the circle of life and the availability
of the procured equipment.
2. Fill personnel deficit with professionals and shift personnel from lower
readiness units.
3. Supply Command and Control systems and gradually integrate with
Information, Surveillance and Targeting systems.

During previous years, the priority was the acquisition of new equipment. Today,
the priority should be the Army’s re-structuring, integration of the existing
systems and finding cost-effective solutions through a more linear and flexible
Army with joint capabilities, in order to maximize the required effectiveness for
the national and international missions and obligations.

**HELLENIC AIR FORCE**

After studying the published programmes and cross-checking them with other
sources, which take into consideration the economic dimension, our estimate is
that the equipping programmes of the next five years, which either fall into the
HAF programme, or are common with the other Branches, are the following:

1. Development of the basic part-network for the Satellite Communication
System of the Armed Forces. It is a common programme for all
branches and the investment for a 5-years period is €161 million.
Information shows that the first demand will be for a “Ku” Band.
2. Acquisition of thirty (30) 4[th] generation fighters. According to a
statement by the Minister of National Defence in March 2006, this
programme has a budget that exceeds €3 billion.
3. Exercise the option right for three (3) additional transport C-27J
aircraft. The requirement has been approved at the HAF level and is
now in the MoD for final approval.
4. Participation in a joint venture BOC-HELLIOS. The programme is
common with the other Branches and will cover the need for the
reception of earth observation satellite images. There will also be
acquisition of the necessary ground station, with upgrading capabilities
so as to receive images from a radar satellite. The cost of the
programme has been estimated to be €120 million.
5. Acquisition of 15 SAR helicopters and 2 VIP. The cost has been
estimated to be €270 million. This programme to improve the country’s
capacities in SAR for the whole surrounding sea area is urgently
needed.
6. Installation of self-protection systems in 10 C-130H, 4 or 6 CSAR Super

**14**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

Puma helicopters and 12 or 15 C-27J. The total cost reaches €155
million. Preparations and preliminary actions to hold an international
bid have already begun.
7. Acquisition of 40-45 Advanced Jet Trainers, which in HAF’s opinion
should be operational around 2010-11. The estimated total cost is €1.1
billion.
8. Ways to improve security of air-to-air and air-to-ground-to-air
communications will be investigated. The estimated cost is €15 million
for the systems and €15 million for the necessary modifications to
aircraft.
9. Acquisition of the AACMI system for operational training in fighters (it
is not known yet if the same system can be applied both in the F-16
and the M-2000 aircrafts). The budget is €25 million.
10.Acquisition of the necessary air-to-air and air-to-ground weapons
through FMS for the thirty (30) new F-16 Block 52+s.
11.Aircraft modifications in order to install the LINK 16 have a budget of
€30 million. This programme may be delayed beyond the 5-year
period, as it is affected by other factors.
12.For the HAF operational needs, the acquisition of an AAR capacity has
been programmed with an estimated budget of €750 million. This plan
involves the acquisition of at least four aircraft after the 5-year period
of 2006-2010. Nonetheless, in October 2005, during the Meeting of the
EU Ministers of Defence, it was decided that the EU member states
would jointly examine the AAR issue. Greece will participate in the AAR
_ad hoc Group to examine the matter. The Ministers will re-examine the_
issue in their forthcoming meeting and will reach a decision.

**_Future Acquisition Programme (after the first 5-year period)_**

After the first five years, the HAF has a number of acquisition programmes which
cover all operational needs. The most important programmes are the following:

1. If the HAF decides to procure a first batch of only 30 fourth-generation
fighter aircraft, then there will be a need for an additional procurement
programme during this period;
2. There is a programme for the acquisition of BVR missiles in two
phases. The number is not precisely set;
3. Acquisition of LANTIRN systems;
4. There is a programme to obtain various weapons, such as antiradiation missiles and HTS, IIR missiles, various battle and training
ammunition, ammunition for anti-air attack weapons, STAND-OFF
missiles, air-to-ground weapons, missiles for SHORAD “VELOS,” etc;
5. The acquisition of the proper UAV in two phases is planned, whose
operational mission focuses on electronic warfare but also on SEAD
(Suppression Air Defence) with ECM;
6. Upgrading of the radar and of the mission computers of the F-16 Block

**15**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

30;
7. There is a programme to obtain in two phases various vehicles to
support all the operational work of the aircraft;
8. A programme exists to obtain UCAVs;
9. There is a programme to obtain two HSAM systems of wide range in
the framework of the study on a unified air defence;
10. With the withdrawal of the C-130B/H in mind, the HAF has planned to
replace them with another transport aircraft;
11. The programme includes a possible expansion of the terrestrial partnetwork of the Satellite Communication System of the Armed Forces
(maybe into the “X” band);
12. An upgrade of the M-2000 aircraft is planned;
13. There is a programme to obtain a number of SHORAD;
14. A possible exercise of the option for 3 additional M-2000-5MK2
aircrafts is planned;
15. The construction of a modern fire ball field as well as armament
release field for pilots’ training and for various armament systems
certification, has been planned;
16. Acquisition of the necessary SQOC and WOC for units from which
fighters will operate.

**NOTE: SQOC: Squadron Operation Center**
WOC: Wind Operation Center

Apart from the above mentioned programmes, there are also other needs
(operational, maintenance, improvement, etc), which have been programmed to
be covered gradually. At this point there is no reason to mention them more
analytically.

**_Key issues for the future_**

There has been a tendency in the last years, not only in the Greek Air Force but
also in many other Air Forces around the world, to put emphasis on a double role
for fighter aircraft. This is by no means a mistake; on the contrary, it has
operational and economic advantages. However, this is not a rule that should be
applied extensively in all cases. The advantages-flexibility that the multi-role
fighters and their operational applications display, have to be evaluated
objectively, taking into account the overall capabilities, requirements, threats,
priorities, as well as the doctrine of every operational user, separately.

Perhaps the most important factor, determining the priority and the balance
between fighters’ air-to-air and air-to-ground capabilities, is the type of
“deterrence” that better supports the Hellenic Defence Doctrine, in conjunction
with the existing threats and challenges. Taking into account all the involved
parameters, it is believed that “deterrence by denial” is of higher importance
compared with “deterrence by punishment”, which should be treated as an

**16**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

option of last resort. Deep-strike capabilities are not a top priority for Greece in
the context of its deterrence by denial strategy and on the basis of the current
capabilities. Stealth features should be considered as a very useful but not
absolutely necessary required capability for the 4[th] generation fighter aircraft.
Instead, the acquisition of counter-stealth capabilities should be seriously
considered by the HAF to deal with the perceived threat.

The HAF figures of today (approximately 215 3[rd] generation fighters by 2010,
plus possibly 30 4[th] generation fighters), the figures of the corresponding threat
for that year and foremost the operational needs for HAF’s successfully carrying
out its mission, namely deterrence and superiority if so required, lead us to reexamine the above rule for dual role aircraft.

Acquiring an aircraft whose main role will be air-superiority in regions of interest
will release a substantial number of 3[rd] generation fighters not only for air-toground targeting missions, but also for other special missions. This combination,
we believe, will provide maximum flexibility and will bring the best results,
compared to other choices. This option, of course, does not mean that the 4[th]
generation fighters which will be obtained should not be able to effectively
perform air-to-ground missions. However, their best performance and emphasis
should be placed on air-superiority missions, while at the same time being able
to run air-to-ground or swing role missions, when it is so required (carrying
mixed armament).

The other element, which has not been clarified so far, is the total number of
needed 4[th] generation fighters for the HAF. We do not believe that the
announced figure of 30 such fighters is the final number. If there is another
order of 4[th] generation fighters later, it will be another more serious mistake,
mainly in terms of economic and industrial development. Our opinion is that if
the HAF wishes to be in a position to execute its mission, then it should decide as
early as possible about the total number of 4[th] generation fighters that will be
needed by 2020. Greece will then be able to negotiate much more efficiently with
the supplier and achieve political, economic and technological benefits.
Additionally, by 2010 the HAF will have to decide what will be done with the
oldest F-16s.

**HELLENIC NAVY**

The Navy should maintain technological superiority. The acquisition of force
multipliers, in the form of C[4]I systems, advanced weapons and electronic warfare
systems should be a priority. The acquisition of over-the-horizon maritime-borne
strike capability will provide a significant operational capability and a strategic
advantage against potential aggressors. Sustainability in the conduct of maritime
operations in the Aegean cannot be neglected.

**17**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

It seems that the multi-role Frigate will continue to be the main unit of the
Hellenic Navy. A modern multi-role frigate has operational capabilities in line with
operational requirements, personnel limitations and logistical support capabilities.
Increased air defence capabilities in the field of area defence, which are absent
from current operational capabilities, should be given high priority. With the
decommissioning of Adams class DDGs, the Hellenic Navy does not possess an
area defence AAW capability. Current plans and programmes do not consider a
replacement for the Adams class DDGs; corrective action is necessary.

The major “malaise” is the lack of a timely planning and execution of
procurement and modernization programmes. There are many and varied
reasons for this problem. Firstly, there are postponed staff processes. The staff
process, in most cases, starts late with regard to the ship’s age. This is a result
of the Greek bureaucracy not thinking ahead of events unless compelled to do
so. When the process starts it must follow certain stages. These stages are rarely
completed on time. The reasons for this range from the lack of a clear picture of
what is needed, which causes changing specifications and operational
characteristics and ultimately delays the final decision, to the proper and timely
selection of who will conduct the work.

For decades following WWII, the Hellenic Navy was basically comprised of
second-hand ships, mainly ex-USS. Circumstances now allow the adoption of a
new procurement policy. An operational life limit of 30 to 35 years for warships,
which will foresee a mid-life modernization at 15 to 18 years, will certainly be
quite beneficial. It will allow for better planning and timely preparation of
necessary modernizations, smooth the transition to new units, and ultimately,
guarantee a better performance. Of course, such a policy cannot be implemented
overnight. Full implementation may require 10 to 15 years. A long time in a
human life, but rather short compared to a nation’s. Bold decisions, consistency,
and faith in the end result are required.

There are two persuasive points that will convince the political leadership to
commit the considerable funds necessary for the implementation of the above
policies. The Navy already pays for its own acquisitions and will continue to do
so. The Navy also has a strong ace at its hand, the Hellenic shipbuilding industry.
The abilities of the domestic shipbuilding industry have been exploited in the
past, by building a number of ships, even a batch of frigates (MEKO class), but
always on an individual basis, not in the context of a consistent policy. Modern
warship building technologies, like that of modular design –the ability to put on
the same platform different weapons system- allows ships, equipped with the
desired weapons systems, to be built in Greece. Such a policy will profoundly
benefit the Navy as well as the national economy. As a further step, in the
context of this policy, the Navy may proceed with the design of the ship(s)
according to its desired specifications, in cooperation with the domestic
shipbuilding industry. This will help to match ship specifications with the Navy’s
needs and operational requirements, rather than hoping that ships built for a
different operational environment will adapt to specific operational

**18**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

circumstances. The Navy has the required knowledge and the properly educated
people for such an endeavour. What is lacking is self confidence or, more
accurately, confidence in the Navy staff’s abilities.

In order to improve warfighting capabilities, special attention should be given to
effective information management, through the use of proper tactical and
communication systems. The war fighting problem is simple: look at the theatre
of operations, exchange information with other units and with headquarters, and
direct weapons to the target. However, the information is so abundant that it will
saturate the tactical picture if not properly handled. Therefore, information
management is necessary to achieve desired results. This, in turn requires
compatibility not only between Navy units, but with other services, primarily the
Air Force and secondarily, the Army. The nature of the Aegean operational
theatre and the proximity of the potential aggressor make necessary the
continuous improvement of the speed of command –the ability to rapidly collect
information, make an assessment, and execute a decision- which, in sequence,
improves war fighting capability. Therefore, Navy units should be equipped with
suitable tactical and communications systems, compatible not only between
themselves, but with other services and suitable weapons systems for the
potential operational theatres.

The implementation of such proposals would be a revolutionary change in the
way the Hellenic Navy functions and operates. Revolutionary change has no
chance of success unless it fully exploits the most valuable recourse it possesses,
the human factor. No weapon system can perform effectively without expert
human involvement. Navy personnel management has remained unchanged for
the past thirty years, despite significant innovations in naval technology.
Adjustments should be made to personnel management and training techniques
so that the human factor of the Hellenic Navy can be in a position to perform as
new circumstances demand. Changes in training are the first priority. Ignorance
of, or non-familiarity with the use of IT systems, at all levels, prevents the
maximum utilization of modern weapons systems. Proper training at War College
level will develop strategic thinking at the highest levels of command, and the
maintenance of seagoing skills and abilities cannot be overemphasized.

What has been said until now has been restricted to purely naval affairs.
However, there is another item in the defence agenda which extends beyond the
Navy’s sphere, that of cooperation between the Armed Forces (jointness). Today,
the significance of conducting joint operations is generally accepted; however,
very little progress has been achieved in this direction. The Navy’s role is joint by
nature. Fundamental tasks cannot be accomplished effectively unless they are
conducted jointly. There are many things to be done for the implementation of a
joint doctrine, in a broad spectrum of fields.

In the field of armaments, interoperability of tactical and communications
systems, owned or procured by the three services, is a necessity. In the
operational field, the existence of a joint command in the Aegean, to conduct

**19**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

activities at the operational level, is another necessity. Proper joint education at
staff college level will ensure proper joint operational functioning. Currently, the
most profound example of jointness, the amphibious force, is divided
operationally and administratively between two services and surveillance
operations in the Aegean are conducted again by separate services. Jointness
does not only provide certain operational advantages; it also saves taxpayer
money and promotes clever and efficient spending. But nothing can be changed
unless correct education is acquired and services’ narrow mindedness is set
aside.

The latest NATO Command Structure, approved in June 2004, foresees the
creation of a Maritime Interdiction Operations Training Center in Souda Bay, to
provide training for Allied Maritime units in the conduct of Maritime Interdiction
Operations. The Center will have a multinational staff and will be directed by a
Hellenic Navy flag officer. It is quite obvious that, in the contemporary strategic
environment, this Center will provide valuable services to the Alliance and will
strengthen Greece’s role within it. However, three years after the decision there
was rather limited progress towards the establishment of this facility. It is quite
important for the Hellenic Defence leadership and the Navy’s in particular, to
apprehend the significance of this training facility for the Greece’s benefit and
speed up necessary actions for its establishment and operation.

**20**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

**DEFENCE EXPENDITURES**

Greece is a member of both NATO and the European Union, having joined them
in 1952 and 1981, respectively. In the pursuit of national security, Greece has
over the years allocated substantial human and material resources to defence. In
comparative terms, it is the most militarized country in NATO and the E.U.
Expressed as a share of GDP Greek military spending has invariably been higher
than the E.U. and NATO averages. For example, in 2004 it stood at 4.2% of GDP
which is more than double of the corresponding NATO and EU averages. Indeed,
Greek defence spending expressed as a share of GDP is by far the highest in the
EU25 group of countries.

In many respects, when compared to other EU and NATO members, Greek
security concerns present a unique case that is reflected in the level of resources
– both human and material - the country yearly allocates to defence. The Greek
defence effort that the various indices reflect, cannot be explained only in terms
of the broader western security priorities as they have evolved during the bipolar
era as well as in the post-bipolar period. Greece has long regarded Turkey,
another NATO ally, as the main threat to its security interests. Thus, during the
Cold War the country’s external security concerns were not only the WTO
countries but also its neighbour and NATO ally, Turkey. In fact, Turkey is
perceived by Greek security and defence policy as the main and most imminent
source of external threat to its sovereignty and national interests.

In particular, Turkey is the prime security concern for Greece and as long as the
core of their differences remains unresolved (namely Cyprus and the Aegean),
Greece will continue to invest resources to its defence capability. Allowing for the
fiscal constraints and the fact that Greece has to fall in line with the provisions of
the Stability and Growth Pact for the Eurozone group of countries it is expected
that military expenditures expressed as a share of GDP will in the next years
exhibit a slight downward trend. A reasonable expectation is that they will
oscillate around 3% to 3.5% of GDP which, compared to the 4.5% of the 19882004 period would, if realised, represent an appreciable decrease. Yet, this
expectation is conditional upon Greek-Turkish bilateral relations. If they
deteriorate from their current state, defence spending may again reach its
“traditional” levels. A crucial factor that will influence the relations of the two
countries is the progress of Turkey’s EU candidacy and aspiration to full
membership. If this falters, then Greek-Turkish bilateral relations could again
regress to tension and friction.

**_Defence procurement and defence industry_**

Systematic efforts to develop a defense industry in Greece began in the mid1970s (although several industries existed long before that date). The objectives
were to satisfy national military needs, to increase the participation of domestic
manufacturers, and, at the same time, to reduce dependency on foreign military

**21**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

suppliers. From a technological point of view, the effort was successful. Greek
defense industries produce a wide variety of equipment for the needs of the
Hellenic Armed Forces, although success in exporting defense equipment to
other countries has been very limited.

There have been significant economic problems caused by a number of factors:
the small domestic market, which seriously affects the viability of production
lines; adoption of inefficient management methods, including delayed response
to technological developments and the changing needs of armed forces; the
rather inefficient use of offsets, agreements, and memoranda of understanding

[MoUs] with countries such as France, Italy and UK); and military assistance
programs (mostly from the United States and Germany) that have hurt the
industry to a certain degree.

As a result, some of the state-owned industries have been privatized (the
process is already under way) in order to survive and eventually become
competitive. Furthermore, it is generally agreed that the only way for the Greek
defense industry to survive is through the participation to multinational projects.

For the first time for this country, there is an effort for long – term planning and
a fifteen – year plan for procurement goals (FPfPG, covering the years 2005 –
2020) was brought to press recently (March 2006). This plan prescribes all needs
of the armed forces for the years to come, sorted by perceived importance, and
the total value of these needs is currently at €52bn. As expected, this list of
procurement programmes will be changed and reviewed according to the
development of the defence environment of the country. This long – term plan
will be implemented through five-year plans called JMAPs (Joint Medium Term
Armaments Program). At present, the government has approved to use €1.9bn
annually (that is, €19bn for the years 2006 – 15, not adjusted for potential
increase of GDP) for the country’s defence expenditures.

This would mean that for the 2006 – 2015 JMAPs the government has at present
allocated €22.1€bn, which include €5.1bn for existing liabilities. There are also
two alternative JMAP scenarios for the same period (one with a total value of
€36.7bn and the other of €51.9bn), that are considered highly unrealistic. The
existence of these scenarios should be attributed to the probability that some
programmes might be rolled – over to be materialized by 2020, or to the
probability that the financial situation will be better than expected.

**_Prospects of the Greek Defence Industry_**

Beginning this section with our view, we feel that firms of the Greek defence
industry are generally better prepared and ready to face the challenges of the
future, as compared to the average firm engaged in the relevant industrial
sectors. Below, we explain why we believe it is so. Before we turn to the viability
prospects of the Greek defence industry, let us divert to note that the Greek

**22**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

Manufacturers of Defence Material Association (SEKPY) is the association
representing the defence industry, but as yet the members have not been
successful in forming common strategies or in coordinating their activities.

As far as the state – side is concerned, it is characteristic that back in 2002
Kollias and Rafailidis wrote that “until recently there had been no attempt to
_prepare a registry of firms active in the defence industry sector”. This means that_
the state has no way of knowing who is capable of producing what. This
situation has at several occasions led to orders being placed to foreign firms
even in cases where there were local ones that could produce the same products
with high local value added, without worsening the balance of payments.

Moreover, the authors in the same paper noted that “the aforementioned
_registry should by now be almost ready”, as it was under preparation. To our_
knowledge, this has yet to be achieved. When it is eventually completed (and
regularly updated), it will give an idea of what can be produced. However, there
is no technological auditing process involved that would enable the state to
realize the true technological capabilities of defence firms. Probably, this is a
step to be taken in the future, but for the time being we are not fully aware of
the current technological capabilities of firms, we are not aware of the pace at
which these are enhanced, and we are not aware of the factors that have a
bearing upon the evolution of these capabilities. In short, we are not fully aware
of the technological accumulation processes within Greek defence firms.

Returning to the prospects of the industry, as noted earlier about 140 firms are
members of SEKPY. However, only about forty of these appear to be engaged in
defence related production on a more engaged basis, while the others represent
manufacturers that have the capacity to engage in defence – related production
but this does constitute a regular activity in their annual turnover. Even for the
more defence – oriented firms, turnover does not totally originate from MoD
purchases, as will be shown later on.

As in all countries, although one refers to the “defence industry” or “defence
sector” (firms selling to the defence sector), the firms comprising defence
industry are actually engaged in a highly differentiated set of industrial sectors
and activities. This is because defence applications require a vast spectrum of
technologies and technological capabilities, ranging from plain glass to composite
armor and from specialized electrical fuses and nails to complex electronic
warfare software.

The Greek defence industry is no exception and the firms are mainly distributed
(2002 data, 80 firms) among the metal products and construction (37%), electric
and electronic equipment (25.9%), transportation (18.5%), machinery (9.26%)
and plastics and rubber sectors (9.26%). Thus, sector – specific factors will only
affect the relevant sector and not the industry as a whole.

**23**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

The firms also export a significant part of their total production. A percentage of
74% of the 80 above – mentioned firms export part of production, while for 28%
of those exports constitute more of 25% of turnover. In fact, for 11.5% of firms
exports constitute more than 80% of turnover (Rafailidis, 2002). This naturally
means that many firms are not totally dependent on Greek defence
expenditures.

When compared to the average (non – defence) firm of their respective industrial
sector, defence industry firms are significantly larger in fundamental figures like
turnover (averaging €32m compared to €6m), number of employees (averaging
376 compared to 59) and net assets (averaging €38.6m compared to €6.6m)
(Rafailidis, 2002). That is, defence industry firms are more likely to be able to
cope with future challenges, as they are more likely to possess better
technological capabilities and more financial resources. Additionally, only part the
total defence industry turnover can be attributed to MoD purchases, as is evident
from Table 6 above. For the 20 firms with the largest sales to the MoD 41.7% of
turnover is related to the MoD and the rest comes from the commercial sector.
For the rest of the firms this percentage is significantly lower. These figures
generally also mean that defence industry firms are not totally dependent on the
MoD.

Finally, defence industry firms are generally relatively well integrated in the
modern industrial structures that most frequently require cooperation,
collaboration, joint ventures, joint research and development, cost sharing etc.
Rafailidis (2002) studied 19 defence industry firms to find that they were
engaged in a total of 141 cooperation agreement of various forms (that is, more
than 7 cooperation agreements each). Of these agreements 76 regarded the
purchase or sale of technology abroad and 45% of those actually concerned the
sale of technology from the Greek firm to a foreign client. These figures would
certainly indicate that the technological level of the Greek defence – industry
firms is relatively high.

Summarizing, the Greek defence industry concerns a set of highly differentiated
firms, selling to both the defence and commercial sectors, having a good part of
their turnover stemming from exports, having much better fundamental
economic indicators than their average non – defence – industry counterparts,
and heavily engaged in cooperation agreements. All this does not mean that
these firms can definitely survive in the future, especially with declining defence
budgets. It means, however, that these firms appear to be better able to cope
with the future.

Regarding the various forms of cooperation agreements, we argue that one of
the main driving forces for their formation is that there are new emerging core
technologies and technological change is rapid, which implies that products are
quickly obsolete, and firms need to recover their investment in a much shorter
period than was previously the case. This speed of technological obsolescence is
quite important and is a by – product of the new techno – economic paradigm

**24**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

that often leads to discontinuous technological change. Even huge firms cannot
go – it – alone and are frequently willing to collaborate, in order to:

   - manage to assimilate and endogenize the continuously emerging
technologies,

    - manage technological risk

    - manage the cost associated with the rapid technological change
The self – sufficient and vertically integrated firms of the recent past are
now becoming fast extinct. Only very few firms are now capable developing,
manufacturing and selling their products or services on their own, while firms
that can control state – of – the – art technologies are even fewer.

In contrast with the past then, collaboration, alliances, organizational knowledge
and learning, entrepreneurial empowerment and market exploration will be the
catalysts for success for the future. This brings us to the argument that for firms
in countries like _Hellas the need to participate in cooperation agreements is a_
requirement that has become relatively easier and is now a necessary
precondition for development. A second powerful trend that prevails defence
sales is the fact that offsets agreements with very high values (often higher than
100%) have become an almost indispensable part of any sales pitch, following
the decline of defence budgets after the end of the Cold War. Although defence
budgets (especially the U.S. one) are now again in the rise, the current
marketing practice calls for good “total package” proposals including industrial
cooperation of some sort.

Thus, the engagement of the Greek defence industry in cooperation agreements
is a sign of successful adaptation to current conditions, both from a purely
technological and from a defence – marketing perspective. To further support
this argument, below we present the “European spaghetti” of the aerospace
industry, indicating that even all main firms are related to each other. Thus,
cooperation agreements of all kinds are mainly a result of the current techno –
economic conditions and not of governmental choice. They are governed by
competitive, industrial, techno – economic and marketing criteria and are mainly
firm – to – firm, and not as much country – to – country, relations. Essentially
firms from all countries and from all industrial sectors are engaged in cooperation
agreements.

The Greek defence industry is already cooperating with European and U.S. firms
and there appear to be some origin – related differences in the behaviour of
partners. More specifically, U.S. firms for a variety of reasons are more reluctant
(or not even allowed in some cases) to engage in true cooperation and relations
are more one – way. European firms, on the other hand, appear more willing to
share and to engage foreign partners even in the pre – competitive phases of
defence programmes. This is mainly because inter – European relations are
institutionally easier, while the European defence firms are on average smaller
and also address a smaller market than U.S. firms, and so need to find ways to
gain a better market share. Given the fact that European firms produce quite a
large variety of remarkable systems able to cover most of Greek defence needs,

**25**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

cooperation with European firms seems to be better suited to the needs of the
Greek defence industry.

**_Participation of Hellenic firms to multinational programmes_**

For an EU country which annually spends a high percentage of its national
product on defence acquisition programmes, we believe it is to her advantage, as
well as to the EU’s (in practice to the member states that are industrially
advanced in the defence field) to participate in joint European economic and
industrial programmes.

The involvement of the Greek MoD in joint European programmes has began
(BOC-HELIOS, IRIS-T, UCAV, etc) and since the projects agreed to be examined
by EDA are of immediate interest for the Greek Armed Forces, it is our view that
a serious amount of the capital which Greece invests on defence equipment, is
more advantageous to be directed towards a joint European development with
participation – to a realistic degree – of the Greek industries.

Regarding the **_Greek defence industry, this mainly consists of about forty_**
firms. In fact, around 140 firms are members of the _Greek Manufacturers of_
_Defence Material Association (SEKPY). However, only about forty of them appear_
to be engaged in defence related production on a more permanent basis, while
the others represent manufacturers that have the capacity to engage in such
production but this does constitute a regular activity in their annual turnover.

Noticeable when examining the Greek defence industry is that it is characterised
by a major dualism between public firms, on the one hand, and private
manufacturers on the other. In terms of net fixed assets, turnover, and
personnel private firms are on average of substantially smaller size than the
three public ones i.e. EAB, EAS (Greek Defence Systems, merger of EBO and
PYRKAL) and ELVO. On the other hand however, private firms are profitable
enterprises while the state controlled defence industries suffer from chronic and
persistent losses. Public firms are now beginning to consider consolidating and
the start has been made with the merger of the EBO (Greek Arms Industry) with
PYRKAL, both firms mainly active in the production of ammunition and small
arms. This marriage has met serious difficulties, partly justified by the lack of
relative experience. Skaramagas shipyards (Greek Shipyards S.A.), until recently
a public firm, is now under the control of ThyssenKrupp Group after passing
through HDW. Elefsis Shipyards S.A. is the second major firm in the shipbuilding
sector, and this is also at private hands. Countries like France only have one
shipyard mainly dealing with naval programmes, so it seems that having two in a
small country like Greece is redundant. Indeed, there are discussions under way
for exploring the potential for a future merger of Skaramagas and Elefsis (located
right next to each other).

**26**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

There are mainly three important things to have in mind when contemplating
defence – related cooperation agreements with Hellenic firms.

The **_first is that the Hellenic is an open market. The country has consistently_**
been (and remains) a major worldwide buyer in the defence market, sometimes
making innovative and diversified purchases, giving many firms and countries the
opportunity to export and operationally prove their systems. The equipment
procured was divided (as by March 2002) by total value between the following
countries: USA 35.8%, Germany 25.4%, France 14.6%, Russia 8.3%, Sweden
4.2%, Greece 3.7% and the UK 2.7%. The remaining 5.3% we could not trace.
These deals prove that Greece has been, and remains, a comparatively European
– oriented country regarding defence. Whenever European systems were
operationally competitive and/or cost – effective, or gave the country a
differentiated source of supply, they were selected.

**_Second, the Hellenic offsets guidelines were put forward in 1996 and have not_**
been expressly replaced, despite the changes described in section 3. All defence
– related proposals have to be accompanied by an offsets proposal. Regarding
offsets policy, the main points worth noting are the following:

(a) The total volume of the Offset Benefits is at least equal to 60% of the foreign
currency part of the procurement contract and mandatorily includes
subcontracting work/purchase of defence materials and/or production of new
products at least 50% of Offset Benefits total credit value.

(b) Multipliers are still in use and can give certain offsets proposals very high, yet
practically artificial, credits. This can result in proposals that could on occasion be
quite advantageous to the potential supplier. For example, one of the types of
offsets concerns the award of subcontracting work to Hellenic firms. In this case
the credit formula is C = N*V, where C: total credits, V: value of order and N:
the credit coefficient. N can go up to 4 for products and services of high
technology. Regarding direct investment as an offset, the formula remains but
the N coefficient can go up to eight (8). The highest value is given exclusively in
cases of high interest industrial investments, mainly for export purposes, which
are not competitive to existing Hellenic firms. Direct investment close to the
Hellenic borders can have a coefficient of up to twelve (12).

**_Third, the only other constraint regards the Hellenic Value – Added (HVA), that_**
is defined at a minimum 35% of the work – share assigned to the local industry.
HVA is defined as the indirect production cost divided by final price (this
practically means percentage of labour cost on final price). The apparent
emphasis on labour induces labour – intensive cooperation agreements. Perhaps
this is advantageous when the client is a country with a strong emphasis on the
creation of work places, as well as when the potential supplier wishes to direct
some of the more labour – intensive tasks to a lower cost environment.

The situation, as far as cooperation prospects are concerned, is characterized

**27**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

by the fact that until recently there had been no attempt to prepare a registry of
firms active in the defence industry sector. This means that the Greek state and
potential suppliers have no way of knowing who was capable of producing what.
Moreover, although the aforementioned registry should by now be under
preparation, it will actually only give an idea of what can be produced. That is,
there is no technological auditing process involved that would enable potential
partners to realize the true technological capabilities of defence firms.

The authors believe that in order for a cooperation to be fruitful for all
participants, there is a critical issue to be studied: the technological distance
between potential partners. We believe there is a minimum technological level
that must be reached before any firm becomes capable of cooperating efficiently.
Perhaps sometimes Hellenic defence firms are not able to capitalize on
cooperation opportunities not because foreign partners are unwilling to transfer
technology or know – how, but because they cannot see how they can achieve
this transfer while working with partners of a considerably lower technological
level than their own.

Perhaps it is an intermediate technological distance between partners that can
improve the potential for successful cooperation. This “intermediate”
technological distance between partners means that, on the one hand, the local
partner has the technological capabilities required to comprehend the technology
of the foreign partner and, on the other, that there is ground for mutual
understanding and for a common culture and language between partners.

Too great a technological distance means that the technologically less advanced
firm could learn a great deal from the more advanced one, but lacks the
capability to sufficiently comprehend and accumulate the latter’s technological
capabilities. This observation means that in cases where this distance is
considered to be too great, foreign firms are practically forced to select simpler
forms of technological cooperation and technology transfer, such as licensing,
while the smaller this distance the more able are foreign firms to use more
complex forms of technology transfer.

Following these remarks, all Greek defence firms are willing to engage in
cooperation agreements, as they see this as perhaps the only way to participate
in significant defence contracts. However, not all firms would make equally good
partners. The firms described in the latter part of section 2 of the main study are
considered qualified potential partners, as far as their technological capabilities
are concerned. Of course, depending on the technological field of interest to the
potential foreign partner, there may well be other firms capable of cooperating
successfully.

**28**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

**GREECE’S DEEPER INTEGRATION INTO THE EUROPEAN**
**SECURITY ARCHITECTURE**

For the foreseeable future, the challenge to Greece will continue to be the
reconciliation of its international responsibility with deeply entrenched national
security interests and convictions. The contrasting tasks which Greece confronts
in the field of security and defence are numerous and burdensome.
Circumstances indicate that it will be an uphill struggle to carry a thoroughgoing
Defence Review. The following are some suggestions for adapting and improving
Greece’s reactions to the challenges of a complex world while attaining the
objectives of the Greek foreign, security and defence policies.

1. Enhance the capabilities (i.e. equipment and personnel) of the National
Centre of Operations in order to increase the amount of necessary
unbiased and reliable information on all kinds of elements that constitute
the warning factors of a crisis that is communicated at the appropriate
time to the Hellenic National Defence General Staff. Improvements in all
aspects of the decision cycle must be made so that the time between the
anticipation of a security challenge or threat and the definition and
execution of a corresponding course of action can be shortened.

2. Given the fact that the pool of potential personnel is still too limited due to
the generic problems associated with extracting civilian experts from their
domestic duties and providing sufficient incentives for them to leave on
foreign missions, examine ways of improving the quality and deployability
of civilian personnel qualified to deal with conflict prevention.

3. Appoint in some diplomatic and consular missions experts on
peacekeeping, conflict prevention etc in order to be able to discuss and
coordinate potential Greek assistance with the countries that are in crisis.

4. Encourage ample and fluid communication with outside actors, such as
academic institutions, think tanks, NGOs etc. All of these partners are
fundamental to conducting a comprehensive conflict analysis. This
approach provides an opportunity for a holistic analysis to inform early
warning and conflict prevention efforts.

5. Draw worst-case scenarios, which could evolve if no preventive measures
are taken to address the structural causes of conflicts. Thereafter, outline
scenarios of what would happen if the structural causes are addressed by
means of preventive measures. Once the analysis has been conducted and
the elements for a preventive action strategy outlined, it is helpful to
reflect on how these measures will be implemented, by whom, by which
means and under whose responsibility. In addition, it is important to
ensure that the means such as funding, human capacity, political will and
judgment exist to implement the strategy.

**29**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

6. Design a training project that would contribute to improving the specific
and fundamental skills needed for effective and coherent early warning
analysis and to consolidating a common vision and language within the
Hellenic National Defence General Staff with regard to conflict prevention.
This training project will need to go beyond Hellenic National Defence
General Staff personnel and extend its client base to systematically include
participants of government, state and non-state actors. It is important to
bring the value added from other players to the analysis and, especially to
the development of preventive strategies for selected regions in the world.

7. Incorporate best practices and lessons learned into functional changes in
training, planning, exercises and operational capabilities that support
improved performance.

8. Develop doctrine and procedures to operate in post-combat and postconflict situations.

9. Crisis management and stabilization and reconstruction operations cannot
be the responsibility of just one national agency. Greece should enhance
coordination among different organizations and institutions with varied
expertise and comparative advantages and consider establishing an
interagency mechanism (Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of National
Defence, Ministry of Public Order, Ministry of Justice etc) dedicated to
such operations. In this context, Greece should try to improve mutual
interagency understanding that is often hampered by the lack of a NATOEU Glossary of Contemporary Political and Military Terms. The
development of such a Glossary will allow all the various actors working
together on the ground, whether from governmental agencies or from the
non-governmental community, especially during prolonged and
demanding post-conflict reconstruction activities to plan, organize and
accomplish the desired multifaceted end-state.

10.A key enabler for supporting both national and institutional (NATO and
EU) military capabilities is the ability to rapidly deploy forces over distance
in line with NRF and battle group aspirations. The strategic deployment of
Rapid Reaction Forces (NRF and battle groups) endows with the capacity
to achieve rapid impact. It enables EU and NATO governments to affect a
situation from its earliest stage, possibly by containing a deteriorating
situation and preventing escalation through coercion or deterrence. If
demonstrations of political will fail, air and sea transportation permits
governments to deliver, sustain and reinforce their deployed military
capability. Speed of reaction also allows an expeditious response to
requests for assistance from other nations as it was perfectly
demonstrated by the NRF tailored force packages that were deployed in
support of relief operations following Hurricane Katrina and the Pakistan
earthquake. In addition, air and sealift can permit greater freedom of
movement when the ground situation encumbers land Lines of

**30**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

Communication (LOC). In order to ascertain its strategic lift requirements,
Greece first has to establish what is required to do. After conducting a
comprehensive Defence Strategic Review, defence planners should
determine a gamut of military requirements that might be required to
support Greece’s national and international commitments. Using the most
demanding of these tasks in terms of rapid deployment, Greece should
seek to determine if its current force roster could meet this challenge, and
if not to assess how its current capabilities could be reconfigured to do so.
This then should be used as a basis for fleshing out a “capability
package”, whose acquisition would be necessary for meeting the
challenges of the next ten to fifteen years and for determining how to
mitigate any remaining capability shortfalls. This “capability package”,
which should include long-term “qualitative” and short-term “quantitative”
options to enable Greece to improve on the dearth of available strategic
lift, could serve as the catalyst for the inclusion in national armaments
programmes of the priorities of NATO and the European Union.

11.There is a need to raise the public awareness of EU/NATO in Greece and
change the Alliance’s/EU’s image in the Greek mind which is often
“distorted” or “one-dimensional”. This would put the country’s foreign and
security policy helmsmen in a position to effectually explain to the Greek
public opinion why EU/NATO -Greece cooperation is mandatory in the field
of peace support and peacekeeping operations. Lectures, seminars,
conferences, discussions and tailor-made public diplomacy activities
sponsored jointly by EU/NATO representatives and Greek organizations
prove to be highly effective in involving citizens. These initiatives should
be pursued and intensified. Moreover, trends toward reducing funding of
public diplomacy programmes need to be reversed and the level of
coordination among the many relevant arms of government needs to be
stepped-up.

12.The intrastate operations in the developing world that the EU’s battle
groups and NATO’s NRF are intended to undertake cover the full spectrum
of conflict from peace support to high intensity combat, demanding a
range of military skills and experience beyond the capabilities of conscripts
who can only be used for national defence. The ability of Greek armed
forces to participate in an effective way in this kind of operations is likely
to be hindered by an unwillingness to divert funds allocated for domestic
use in order to adequately resource and prepare them for the more
exacting types of military operations. Greece, therefore, should consider
the possibility, without detracting from the nation’s ability to prevail in
major theater warfare, of modifying its force structure to create allvolunteer professional rapid reaction forces for peacekeeping operations
as standing units of Greek armed forces capable of intervention in
conflicts in which Greece has no interest other than humanitarian
considerations on behalf of the UN/EU/NATO in a wide variety of
environments. National peacekeeping forces personnel will be prepared

**31**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

both technically and psychologically for the kind of high intensity combat
that might be necessary during an expeditionary operation and trained to
handle humanitarian tasks, stabilization functions and combat operations
concurrently. These forces would require about a month of postmobilization training at the Hellenic Multinational Peace Support
Operations Training Centre in Kilkis before deploying to their area of
operations. They would conduct peacekeeping for six months or possibly a
year before returning to Greece. After deployment, they would require
another month to reconstitute and allow personnel to take authorized
leave. Although one of the main disadvantages of the establishment and
deployment of this sort of professional peacekeeping forces is the increase
in economic cost, stemming largely from the difference between normal
pay and active-duty pay (this cost should be added to the separate
contingency budget proposed above instead of being borne by the
defence budget) there are also several advantages such as increased
availability of active units for major contingencies as well as fewer
forfeited training opportunities for armed forces.

13.Military intelligence analysts or officers concerned with long-range force
planning ought to develop analytical tools with enough foresight to lay out
a representative spectrum of different scenarios of “future worlds” that
Greece will face in the next 10-15 years. These scenarios will be
generated by mixing geopolitical, economic, demographic, technological
and environmental key regional and global trends and will provide a
complement to the straight-line projections that posit a mainline scenario
typically presenting a one-dimensional view of how the future might
unfold. Clearly, the armed forces confront tough decisions on the speed,
size and scope of their transformation. This process will have to be
informed by scenarios that break through conventional thinking and basic
assumptions so that effective hedging strategies that take into account
underlying interactions that may have particular policy significance can be
devised that will at least partially insulate Greek armed forces against the
vagaries of the future during times of great uncertainty.

**32**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

**TRANSNATIONAL THREATS**

Greece was shocked and deeply saddened by the terrorist attack against the
United States on September 11, 2001, and the huge number of casualties that
resulted. There was widespread concern that humankind has entered a very
dangerous new phase of terrorist activities. The predominant feeling was that
this is not a clash of civilizations, West against Islam, but a war of the civilized
world, including many Muslim countries and the great majority of Muslim people,
against the fanatics and the zealots of the Osama bin-Laden type.

Since the New York and Washington terrorist attacks, Greek officials have been
re-assessing their security priorities. Although relations with Turkey remain the
highest priority for Greek security planners, and there is still concern about
fluidity and instability in the Balkans, a number of new issues of high concern
(the so-called new asymmetric threats of a transnational nature) have been
raised. These include the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction; theater
and national missile defense; terrorism (both conventional and new forms such
as NBC and cyber-terrorism) and the resulting need for increased bilateral and
multilateral intelligence and police cooperation; and transnational organized
crime, with special emphasis on drug trafficking, religious extremism, and illegal
migration.

More specifically on the issue of international terrorism, Greece was definitely not
alone among European countries in demonstrating over many years a certain
sensitivity regarding the definition of terrorism. This was due to a considerable
extent to its sympathy for the PKK, owing as much to Athens' sincere concern
about the plight of Kurdish people, as to the zero-sum game mentality that
dominated Greek-Turkish relations for many years, according to which the
“enemy of my enemy is my friend." While Greece considered the PKK to be a
guerrilla movement and not a terrorist organization, it recognized that PKK
frequently used “terrorist methods” to achieve its goals. In addition, Greece’s
Arab ties and pro-Arab stance on the Palestinian conflict (especially in the 1980s)
made Athens reluctant to agree to a definition of terrorism that would classify the
PLO as a terrorist group.

Since the late 1990s, as Greece has moved considerably closer to the core of
European political and economic integration, its views and positions on a number
of foreign policy and security issues have converged with those of its EU partners.
Greece has moved towards the center on a number of other issues, fully
normalizing relations with Israel, as well as markedly improving its relations with
Turkey.

Terrorism is one of the issues on which Greek positions have moved closer to
those of its EU and NATO partners. The September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks
shocked the Greek foreign policy and security elites (although not necessarily to
the same extent as the average Greek citizen, whose feelings of sadness over
the loss of innocent lives were much stronger than concern about terrorist

**33**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

attacks against Greece). Recognizing the possibility that Greece could be a
potential target either because of its membership in NATO and the EU, or during
the Athens 2004 Olympic Games (a very high-publicity event), Greek officials
quickly joined forces with their Western counterparts in an effort to respond to
the emerging terrorist threat. Greece’s contribution had political, military,
intelligence, police, and judicial dimensions.

Greece’s military contribution to the war against international terrorism currently
consists of two frigates (one in the Persian Gulf in the context of Operation
Enduring Freedom and one in the Mediterranean for STANAVFORMED), one
submarine, one fast missile craft, one general replenishment ship, and one Orion
P-3 aircraft for Operation Active Endeavour (to inspect and intercept if necessary
various “suspect” ships, in the context of the war against international terrorism),
and one minesweeper for MCMFORSOUTH. Before the war in Afghanistan, a
small group of four to five officers was sent to the U.S. Central Command
Headquarters in Tampa, Florida, to coordinate with their American counterparts.
The officers remain in Tampa to this date.

**34**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

**GREEK PARTICIPATION IN PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS**

In recent years, Greece has evolved from a firm but rather inactive supporter
into an active participant of United Nations peacekeeping efforts and operations.
Greek military personnel have participated in peacekeeping operations in Somalia
(UNSOM I), Bosnia-Herzegovina (IFOR & SFOR), Albania (Operation Alba),
Kosovo (KFOR, with a sizeable contingent), FYROM (Operation Essential
Harvest), and Afghanistan (ISAF) and as observers in other missions in Kuwait,
northern Iraq, Western Sahara, and Abkhazia. As already mentioned, Greece is
an active participant to the Southeast European Brigade, a multinational
peacekeeping unit. After the recent war in Lebanon and the decision for the
deployment of a reinforced UNIFIL, Greece expressed its readiness to contribute
to the naval leg of the mission with one frigate and one transport ship. Greek
officials believe that the future will bring more and more peacekeeping
operations by coalitions of the willing.

Greece has also been quite active, at least in comparison to its past performance,
in the United Nations context in the past one to two years. Specific examples
include its membership on the executive committees of UNICEF, UNESCO and
the Coordinating Council for HIV/AIDS, the joint Greek-Turkish proposal on
dealing with natural disasters (1999), and, in a different context, the proposal for
an Olympic truce (2000). It has also signed all relevant arms control treaties and
is participating in all non-proliferation regimes.

Greek participation in peace-support operations (numbers at peak strength)[2]

**PSO** **SIZE OF** **YEAR**
**CONTRIBUTION**

UNOSOM (Somalia) 106 1992-95

IFOR/SFOR (Bosnia- 100 1996Herzegovina)

ALBA (Albania) 803 1997-99

KFOR (Kosovo) 1,489 1999
Essential Harvest/Amber 330 2001Fox (FYROM)

ISAF (Afghanistan) 220 2002
2 It is interesting to note that in 2002, Greece was ranked first in the world in terms of per-capita
contribution to peacekeeping operations.

**35**

|PSO|SIZE OF CONTRIBUTION|YEAR|
|---|---|---|
|UNOSOM (Somalia)|106|1992-95|
|IFOR/SFOR (Bosnia- Herzegovina)|100|1996-|
|ALBA (Albania)|803|1997-99|
|KFOR (Kosovo)|1,489|1999-|
|Essential Harvest/Amber Fox (FYROM)|330|2001-|
|ISAF (Afghanistan)|220|2002-|


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

**NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY**

It is difficult for small states, like Greece, to have efficient Intelligence Services.
The combination of qualified personnel, sufficient means, government interest,
intelligence and political oversight is hard to achieve. Between internal and
external Services, the second are more demanding. Their separate existence is
justified only if small states face external threats. This is the reason why the
majority of small states in Europe have Security Services and leave external
intelligence to their Military Intelligence Services.

Greece has adopted (like Spain) the concept of a single Service, more in order to
avoid the creation of several Services with the corresponding expenditure and
less because a single Service was chosen as the model that best suited the
country’s needs. A single Service is not without advantages, as that of better
coordination of its external and internal branches (i.e. in facing international
terrorism). If the model of a single Service is preferred by the Government, it is
possible – if the political will exists – to introduce measures which will improve its
efficiency. A confidential discussion on the present and the desirable functioning
of EYP is a prerequisite for these measures. The discussion must also include the
basic principles of Greek foreign policy, to identify foreign policy priorities and
threats. Is Greece interested, for example, in recruiting or training Arab speaking
intelligence officers to serve in the Arab countries?

The examination of the internal competence of EYP should cover the priorities of
the government’s anti-crime policy and the division of tasks between EYP and
other Services or Departments with similar competences. The government’s
coordination on matters of national security is more important and is attainable,
at least conceptually, through the creation of a flexible political coordinating
body. At the official level, the daily coordination between EYP and the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs would be facilitated by the creation of Direction of Intelligence in
the latter, which would liaise with EYP (perhaps by extending the remit of the
Direction of Planning and Analysis). On counterterrorism, operational between
and the Antiterrorist Branch must be institutionalized. Meetings on external
terrorism should include the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (many Departments
dealing with terrorism geographically or functionally) and Military Intelligence.

Whatever measures are adopted, EYP will not deliver timely and accurate
intelligence unless it is protected from political pressures. Unfortunately, we have
moved from the militarization of KYP before 1974 to its politicization (together
will the Armed Forces and the Police) after the restoration of Democracy.

It is understandable that Governments wish to dispose of an Intelligence Service
that they can trust, but their intervention must limit itself to the appointments of
the Director and the Assistant Operational Director. This is the case with the US
and European Intelligence Services. Beyond these nominations, intervention
becomes patronage. The worst upheaval was caused in 1989 -90, when the
PASOK government appointed 400 officers and employees in EYP, only have

**36**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

them transferred out of the Service by the ensuing New Democracy Government.
Many among them returned to EYP when PASOK came back to power after the
elections of 1993!

Patronage is also routinely exercised in the detachment of Police and Armed
Forces officers to EYP. The patronage together with the brief length of these
detachments lead to the conclusion that they must be brought to an end, as they
have harmed EYP more than they have benefited it.

The personnel upheaval after elections if a new political party comes to power,
has in the past also caused the destruction or the disappearance of sensitive EYP
files. The files are the memory of an Intelligence Service. Without a memory, a
Service loses the ability to compare and assess intelligence.

**37**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

**FUTURE TRENDS AND STRATEGIC CHOICES**

Recent changes in Greek defense policy include the substantial reduction of
military service (from 15-18 months down to twelve months, although any
further reduction would be quite difficult) and the parallel increase of the number
of professional soldiers on five-year contract, the reduction of defense
expenditures to below 4% of GNP, with the objective of further reduction to 3%
and the achievement of a higher domestic value in major procurement
programmes.

The key issues that need to be dealt with include:

- Realistic threat assessment and force planning in order to maintain Greece’s
deterrent capability (by increasing the cost for any opponent), without
undermining the national economy and the country’s future;

- Streamlining of the command structure and greater emphasis on joint
training, planning, and operations; economies of scale through integration of
intelligence, logistics, and air-defense of the three branches; There has been
progress in the last decade in this direction. What appears to be missing is a
“strategic plan/vision”;

- Gradual, well-planned steps for the creation of a smaller, more efficient mixed
force of professionals and conscripts. Additional emphasis on the training and
education of officers;

- No more exclusive emphasis on platforms,[3] but rather on the procurement of
smart weapons and force multipliers. Gradual movement from platformcentric to network-centric armed forces with the final objective of creating a
mixed, multi-mission force; full exploitation of the possibilities offered by new
technologies (C[4]I, UAVs, simulators, long-range stand–off weapons, electronic
warfare, sensors, space capabilities) and doctrines (in the framework of the
Revolution in Military Affairs/RMA); more linear organizational and more
horizontal command system;

- The decision to acquire another 30 F-16 Block-52 will undoubtedly strengthen
the Hellenic Air Force, although it has been argued that the diverted funds
could have been invested more efficiently for a 4[th] generation fighter aircraft.
It is imperative that Greece makes a decision as early as possible about the
acquisition of 4[th] generation fighter aircraft. The main contender will be the
Eurofighter, manufactured by EADS, and, if the decision is considerably
delayed, the U.S.-made F-35. Other contenders with much more limited
chances are the French-made Rafale, the Russian-made Sukhoi-27 and the
Swedish-made Grippen. The main selection criteria will be the technical
characteristics and capabilities of the aircraft, the economic cost and
technological benefits, but also geopolitical criteria, such as Greece’s

3 In this context, decisions such as the procurement of new MBTs are simply beyond
comprehension. Not because of the price per unit or the quality of the MBT selected, which is an
excellent tank, well-suited to satisfy Greek armour requirements, but because there are other
much more pressing needs and shrinking economic resources and because the most likely conflict
scenario would involve other types of systems.

**38**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

European orientation. Also, in a situation where both sides possess the same
types of aircraft, but the opponent enjoys quantitative superiority, choosing
an aircraft which the opponent does not possess, and therefore has only a
second-hand knowledge of its operational characteristics and capabilities,
may be considered as an advantage.

- Greece has been spending a considerable percentage of its GNP for its
defence, but not necessarily in the most effective way. A different approach
to defense expenditures, procurement, and the organization of the armed
forces on the basis of the following principles is needed: more rational
structure and organizational procedures, cost-effective use of available funds,
trimming down of bureaucracies, and emphasis on the appointment of
experienced managers to key positions; Scrutiny of defense procurement
programs and rationalization of defense expenditures on the basis of real
needs, not the preferences of the three branches of the armed forces;

- There is shortage of personnel, especially in the Land Forces, because of the
country’s general demographic problem, but also consecutive reductions in
the length of conscript service, as a result of government decisions, without
any significant change in the force structure, the threat assessment or the
completion of the professionalization process of the armed forces. The
conscription system should be changed and conscripts should join the Armed
Forces at the age of 18, right after graduating from High School (the Cypriot
model)

- Non-essential units and military camps/facilities should be closed down to
reduce personnel and operating costs;

- Full participation to EU and NATO multinational units (see section on Greece’s
integration to the European Security Architecture);

- Improved coordination with the MFA on issues of crisis management and
national security policy and with other agencies, such as police and Coast
Guard, on matters related to asymmetric threats;

- Better coordination with and support for Greek state and private defense
companies; dramatically higher R & D expenditures, involving Greek
universities and research centers; Active participation in international defence
industry projects/consortia, with the objective of attaining political,
technological and economic benefits;

- Greater emphasis on intelligence collection and analysis capabilities.

**_The need for strategic choices_**

Greece continues to be faced with what it perceives as a serious threat to its
security (alternatively, some would describe it as an existential threat to its vital
national interests). There is a strong consensus both at the level of the political
leadership and the various elites, but also among the general population that
Greece needs to maintain a stable military balance with Turkey until the “dust
clears”, that is until Turkey is firmly anchored to the European Union.

**39**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

Greece would go at great lengths to avoid a new arms race with Turkey and has
periodically submitted various ideas for arms reduction and confidence-building
measures. However, as the other side is usually not responsive to such initiatives
and as there is a Turkish casus belli statement still hanging in the air, and if this
is the cost of maintaining a sufficient deterrent capability and peace and stability
in the Aegean in this critical transition period for Turkey, then Greece has no
choice but to invest in technological superiority and the full exploitation of its
human resources, as well as the strengthening of strategic alliances.

In the defence sector, Greece is faced with a number of constraints: it cannot
outspend its strategic opponent, at least not without very serious repercussions
for its own national economy, which would inevitably to a general national
decline, it cannot produce weapon systems of greater sophistication than its
rival, nor it can buy such systems because both sides have the same suppliers,
who in almost every case are not willing to heavily favour one of the sides.

The only viable option for a country like Greece is to make the most efficient use
of its defence expenditures by emphasizing the acquisition of force multipliers,
and organizing its armed forces in such a way as to transform the country into a
very “indigestible target”. In such a way, it could affect the cost/benefit analysis
of its opponent and convince him that any use of force against Greece would be
an extremely costly exercise clearly outweighing any expected benefits.

As it was explained in detail in the section on the Hellenic Navy, Greece has a
record of piecemeal acquisition of weapon systems. This is perhaps the least
efficient method of defence procurement in terms of political, economic and
technological benefits. More emphasis should be put on strategic planning and
an assessment of current and future needs. For example, in the case of the 4[th]
generation fighter plane, Greece should decide on the needs of its Air Force for
the next 15-20 years (probably in the range of 90+ aircraft, but this is only an
informed guess on our side) and then devise an acquisition strategy. Even
without placing an order for the total number, Greece would be able to
participate to the selected aircraft production programme, and offsets and other
military, political and economic benefits could be substantial.

The modernization and strengthening of all three services is vital and necessary
(due to the need for joint operations), and their role will be mutually supportive
and reinforcing. With a weak navy Greece would lose control of the Aegean and
with a weak army it would not be in a position to defend the islands. It could be
argued, however, that airpower, although by no means capable of winning a
conflict by itself, can both act as a strong deterrent and, if deterrence fails,
create a protective umbrella under which the other two services can fight and
win the war. Therefore, achieving air superiority should be a top priority.

When it comes to Greek defence industry, a number of fundamental problems
need to be resolved and some major decisions need to be taken as soon as
possible on issues such as the role of defence industry in covering part of the

**40**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

country’s defence needs and in contributing to the development of the high
technology sector of the economy (and here another very pertinent question is
who supervises and coordinates R & D in Greece and to what degree various
actors cooperate in order to produce synergies instead of acting independently
and without a minimum of coordination and cooperation), the need for a longterm strategy to achieve those goals and the creation of the necessary strategic
planning and decision-making mechanism.

In view of Greece’s first steps in space (with the launch of a telecommunications
satellite [Hellas Sat] and proclaimed increasing interest and future needs
(including participation in the Helios programme), another pressing question is
whether Greece envisages for itself a role –again, probably a minor one, but a
role nevertheless- in the international aerospace industry.

There is an obvious need for strategic choices in order to ensure survivability of
Greece’s defence industry for economic and national security reasons. A viable
and developed defence industry might also result in technological spin-offs for
the civilian sector. Such knowledge and technology diffusion could be potentially
important for a country with very limited funding for R & D, which has, however,
highly qualified scientific potential, both in-country, but also abroad. Improved
prospects in the R & D sector might attract some of them back to Greece,
boosting scientific and technological research.

If one accepts that the only viable option for the survival of the defence industry
of a medium country, with a small domestic market, and rather limited
technological edge, is to participate in multinational programmes, this makes
imperative to make timely decisions in terms of international partnerships.

The two main options are, of course, joining in American- or European-led
consortia. Although one could decide on a case-by-case basis, the American
policy is to not share critical technologies with their clients and partners (for
obvious and well-understood reasons that have to do with their national security
and the maintenance of their technological edge). European countries have
adopted a different approach and are willing to provide their partners, especially
other members of the EU, increased access to high technology, software codes,
etc. Although in most cases, a country like Greece would join multinational
programmes as a junior partner, it is possible, on the basis of its participation to
a specific programme, to have a more substantial role, especially if it joins at the
early stages. This might allow Greece to better support its weapon systems
(increased availability), to participate in the weapon system’s future upgrades
and follow-on support programmes and reduce its dependency (which is a critical
factor, especially in periods of tension).

In conclusion, for the foreseeable future, the challenge to Greece will continue to
be the reconciliation of its international responsibility with deeply entrenched
national security interests and convictions.

**41**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

To achieve those objectives, Greece should increase military research and
development (R&D) spending and start gradually shifting to a high technology
force. Athens needs to devise a strategy for enticing scientific talent of Greek
origin residing and working abroad to migrate back to its home country and also
seize the opportunity provided by the rapid diffusion of scientific knowledge in
the age of globalization to generate teams of scientists committed to developing
new technologies. These teams will consist of both public and private-sector
laboratories, area universities and research facilities and non-profit organizations
and will apply modern science and engineering – particularly in fields such as
physics, chemistry, information technology, biotechnology, nanotechnology and
robotics – to develop weapons for conventional use but also innovative
capabilities – including key military enablers (intelligence, surveillance, target
acquisition and reconnaissance, suppression of enemy air defences, precision
guided munitions, air-to-air refueling, electronic warfare, secure communications
networks, intelligence assets etc) – designed to upgrade Greece’s ability to
project both “soft” and “hard” power. Technology can act as a force multiplier,
and as such, can provide Greece with the ability to reconfigure forces and
equipment rapidly in order to adapt to changing circumstances.

As Greece’s strategic choice is to become as deeply integrated into the European
security architecture as possible, it should structure part of its armed forces in
such a way as to increase interoperability and participation to EU and NATO
multinational forces. The intrastate operations in the developing world that the
EU’s battle groups and NATO’s NRF are intended to undertake cover the full
spectrum of conflict from peace support to high intensity combat, demanding a
range of military skills and experience beyond the capabilities of conscripts who
can only be used for national defence. The ability of Greek armed forces to
participate in an effective way in this kind of operations is likely to be hindered
by an unwillingness to divert funds allocated for domestic use in order to
adequately resource and prepare them for the more exacting types of military
operations. Greece, therefore, should consider the possibility, without detracting
from the nation’s ability to prevail in major theatre warfare, of modifying its force
structure to create all-volunteer professional rapid reaction forces for
peacekeeping operations as standing units of Greek armed forces capable of
intervention in conflicts in which Greece has no interest other than humanitarian
considerations on behalf of the UN/EU/NATO in a wide variety of environments.
National peacekeeping forces personnel will be prepared both technically and
psychologically for the kind of high intensity combat that might be necessary
during an expeditionary operation and trained to handle humanitarian tasks,
stabilization functions and combat operations concurrently.

As senior Greek government officials acknowledge, there is considerable concern
about the nexus between transnational organized crime, in the Balkans, the
Middle East and adjacent regions –especially trafficking of narcotic substances
and women- and international terrorism. Because of its geographic location,
Greece is a transit point for such illegal activities, in the context of organized
crime/terrorist networks.

**42**


-----

ELIAMEP Policy Paper No. 9

Like most countries in the world today, Greece still needs to improve its domestic
response, particularly in terms of training, equipment, and information-sharing
on issues such as money-laundering, cyber-terrorism and cyber-crime, and
prevention and consequence management of NBC terrorist attacks. The
considerable resources - trained personnel, organisation, equipment, planning
and experience - that were used for the security of the 2004 Athens Olympic
Games should be fully exploited now that the Games are over. Indeed, the
systems developed for the Games and the expertise earned will constitute an
important post-Olympic legacy, leaving Greece with a high quality infrastructure
in terms of equipment and trained personnel.

The Greek security sector will be faced with a number of important challenges:
developing and maintaining a ‘critical mass’ of highly trained and motivated
officers; increasing professionalism throughout its ranks; resolving problems of
inter-agency cooperation and the slow pace of security sector reform, due to the
rather low level of awareness about the new security threats among the general
public, and the traditional weaknesses of the Greek public administration system;
and, last but not least, developing a security culture. The latter should be
achieved by increasing the number of civilian experts, as suggested below, but
also through improving the professional education system and, importantly,
making the mental leap in order to adapt to a new security environment where
Greece is a full member of the developed and ‘privileged’ West and, therefore, a
possible target of non-state actors.

Finally, in view of the difficulties of coordination between ministries and
agencies, the lack of a coordinating mechanism on national security issues
(especially if a wider definition of the term ‘national security’ is adopted)
becomes even more pronounced. The creation of a National Security Council
would be strongly recommended.

**43**


-----

