[hadisir.hu |](http://hadisir.hu/)


[honvedkorhaz.hu |](http://honvedkorhaz.hu/)


[hadkiegeszites.hu |](http://hadkiegeszites.hu/)


[kormany.hu](http://kormany.hu/)


+36 30 276 4840


szerkesztoseg@hmzrinyi.hu


# National Military Strategy of Hungary

21:27 October 13, 2021

**GOVERNMENT OF HUNGARY**

Published: the Hungarian Gazette

**THE GOVERNMENT**

**-------------------**

**Resolution 1393/2021 (VI. 24)**

**on the National Military Strategy of Hungary**

Having regard to clause 17 of Parliamentary Resolution

94/1998 (XII.29) on the Principles of the Security and Defence

Policy of the Republic of Hungary and clause 2 of Government
Resolution 1163/2020 (IV. 21.) on the National Security
Strategy of Hungary, hereby adopts the following Resolution:

1. The Government hereby establishes the National Military

Strategy of Hungary as set out in Annex 1.

2. This Resolution shall enter into force on the day following

its publication.

3. Government Resolution No. 1656/2012 (XII. 20.) on the

National Military Strategy of Hungary shall cease to be in
force.


-----

( Viktor Orbán )

Prime Minister

_Annex 1 to Government Resolution 1393/2021. (VI.24.)_

**The National Military Strategy of Hungary**

### INTRODUCTION

The defence of the homeland is a whole-of-nation cause. In
addition to the development of the capabilities of the armed

forces, it requires close cooperation between the

organisations involved in national defence, the development

of the national defence industry in line with the growth of the
economy, broad social cohesion and the commitment of

citizens to the defence of their homeland. The National

Military Strategy (hereinafter referred to as the Strategy)

provides guidance for achieving this.

As a result of the efforts of the Hungarian nation, the

Hungarian Government and the Hungarian military, the Zrínyi
Defence and Force Development Programme (hereinafter
referred to as the Zrínyi HHP) will create a military force
worthy of a millennial state, increasing the security of
Hungarian citizens, and the military-industrial capacities
necessary to maintain it. The renewing Hungarian Defence
Forces will develop and organise their capabilities in line with

the Government's defence policy considerations, ensuring the
defence of the country's sovereignty, territorial integrity and
citizens, and the enforcement of its interests. As a result of
the force development, Hungary's military self-reliance will

increase signi`cantly, which is crucial not only for its selfdefence and deterrence capabilities, but also to remain an

effective contributor to regional, European and transatlantic
security efforts.


-----

Hungary does not consider any state an enemy. Nonetheless,
a renewed national armed forces is more vital in the rapidly
changing security environment of the 21 century than at anyst
time following the Cold War. The cornerstone of our country's

security is the collective defence ensured within the North
Atlantic Treaty Organisation (hereinafter: NATO), but a
national armed forces is the primary prerequisite of this
cooperation in alliance.

In our volatile and unpredictable security environment, crises
can develop unpredictably directly on Hungary's borders, in
our intermediate region or at strategic distances. In a modern

globalised world, even distant crises can rapidly spill over into
the region and the territory of the country, undermining the
security of citizens and the homeland, as the illegal migration

crisis of 2015 demonstrated. In addition to non-military
means, the more frequent aggressive use of military force is

playing an increasing role in the arsenal of state actors. This
particularly justi`es the reinforcement of national resilience

and the strengthening of the capabilities and preparedness of

the armed forces, with a view to successfully accomplishing

armed defence and collective defence tasks as and when
required, and typically international crisis management

operations for common causes.

Hungary's strategic objective is to develop the Hungarian
Defence Forces by 2030 so as to become a key military force

in the region which, as a member of NATO, can ensure the
country's security, deter any eventual aggression, support the
joint defence by the Government against military and non
military threats and challenges, and ful`l its responsibilities as
a member of the Alliance and the European Union. Zrínyi HHP
provides the framework for achieving this. In parallel with the

implementation of the comprehensive programme, it is a
national strategic priority objective for Hungary to become the
key defence industrial centre of the region.

The country's military security is based on complementary
pillars. One pillar is a state-of-the-art national armed force,
complemented by higher level defence systems and forms of

collaboration of regional cooperation. The second pillar of the
military dimension of our security is the collective defence
provided by NATO, complemented by the Common Security
and Defence Policy (CSDP[1]) of the European Union


-----

(hereinafter: EU), including the mutual assistance clause, as
well as the fora for cooperation within the United Nations
(hereinafter: UN) and the Organisation for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (hereinafter: OSCE).

Building security is a long-term endeavour that requires longterm investment. Preparing for the threats of tomorrow must
start today. The defence of a country is built on complex and

interdependent security elements comprising economic,
political, social, environmental, cyber and information
dimensions alongside the military aspect. Today's state and
non-state threats and challenges may occur across the full

spectrum of these security dimensions in many combinations,
and therefore defence cannot be treated in isolation from
other aspects of security. Addressing security challenges

goes beyond the competence of individual sector ministries
and requires cross-governmental cooperation, while military

capabilities will continue to play a key role in the
implementation of home defence tasks. In view of the above,

the scope of the Strategy shall cover all defence sector

activities and organisations involved in the defence of the

country and in providing capabilities related to our allied
commitments, but shall principally provide guidance to the

Hungarian Defence Forces.

Based on the National Security Strategy's assessment of the
security environment, and taking into account relevant NATO

and European Union documents, the Strategy sets out the
deployment environment for the armed forces until the end of
the 2020s. It sets out the main principles, directions and

parameters for the deployment and sustainment of the armed
forces. It de`nes the objectives and means to transform the
Hungarian Defence Forces into a modern, sustainable, iexible

and effective force with a balanced structure, with high
combat effectiveness, capable of being deployed in a wide
range of crisis situations.

In line with the objectives of the other sectoral strategies of
the National Security Strategy concerning the implementation
of defence tasks, the Strategy provides guidance for the

development of the organisational, human, doctrinal,
educational, training and leadership areas of the overall
defence capabilities, the organisational culture of the
Hungarian Defence Forces, the strengthening of national


-----

defence cooperation processes and the conscious increase of
defence industrial capabilities, in addition to the tasks of force
development.

### 1.  THE OPERATIONAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE 21ST CENTURY

The global and European security environment is
characterised by instability and unpredictability. Crises in

distant regions may have a short-term impact on Hungary's
security, increasing the number and scope of threats and

challenges to our country. Overall, the global security situation
is deteriorating. The shifting balance of power is

accompanied by a renewed intensi`cation of superpower
rivalries and an increased risk of confrontation.

The rapid development of ITC capabilities, the gradual

proliferation of ground-breaking disruptive technologies[2] and
the increasing ease and speed of access to them are

signi`cantly increasing the number of actors with the

potential to have a signi`cant impact on global security, thus

increasing unpredictability.

In the 21st century, while the purpose of war remains

unchanged, the theatres, forms and means of war are

broadening with its characteristics changing and increasingly
extending to the non-military dimensions of security. Although
the use of military force remains a priority, states are seeking
to minimise military confrontation in time and space, and

incidents that do not rise to the level of armed coniict and are
dijcult to monitor are increasingly coming to the fore. In such
so-called hybrid warfare, state and non-state actors seek to

advance their interests to the detriment of the opposing side
through the coordinated use of military and non-military
means for a speci`c strategic objective, and may take steps
to exacerbate the challenges and crises threatening Hungary.

Other characteristics of the contemporary operational
environment include the active and targeted iniuencing of
domestic and international public opinion via public

diplomacy and strategic communications; the manipulation of
information channels and social media platforms within the


-----

framework of information operations; the fuelling of societal,
political and economic instability; the exploitation of crises,
along with the use of conditional military and economic`nancial assistance as a means to exert iniuence and

pressure. The use of substitute (proxy) forces, criminal and
terrorist groups with covert state support and control, and
government actors disguised as NGOs, has become more
prominent. The emergence of non-military operations

automatically implies a blurring of the line between war and
peace.

Recent years have seen decisive changes in the global

technological environment. Disruptive technologies are
overriding existing traditional procedures and application
principles, disrupting processes and changing them, even at

the risk of taking risks, in a radically new way, by means of a
radically new solution or tool, in a revolutionary new direction.

One of the characteristics of today's technological
developments is that the latest tools and technologies are

appearing in civilian trade at the same time as, or even before,

the defence sector, in order to gain economic advantage.

Arti`cial intelligence robots in all domains, revolutionary drone
swarm technology, human-robot collaborative military task

execution, automated decision-making technologies, military

applications of 3D printing, cyberspace operations and

directed-energy weapons, and military hardware with high

precision and autonomous strike measurement capabilities
are fundamentally changing the rules and procedures of

current warfare. Future theatres of war will see the emergence

of smaller adversaries with advanced technological support.

These changes put pressure on international security
systems, organisations and procedures tailored to former

conventional dimensions of warfare, which therefore need to
be modernised in light of new security threats. International
(political, legal, economic, security and defence policy-related,
arms control, etc.) regimes, together with NATO, the EU and

their respective Member States, including Hungary, must
continually and iexibly adapt their ends, ways and means to
an ever-changing environment.

In modern warfare, the line between the strategic and the
tactical level becomes blurred, and the concept of victory has
changed: the aggressor no longer needs to occupy the


-----

enemy s territory, destroy its armed forces and equipment, or
annihilate its entire economic potential in order to achieve its
political objectives. To secure victory, it may prove sujcient
to just attack the enemy’s state and public administration

command and control facilities and critical infrastructure
using strategic strike capabilities and high-precision weapons
systems, to disable its communications systems, to impede
the political leadership’s ability to act, or to strike the

command facilities of the opponent’s armed forces and
defence infrastructure– in sum, to gain total control over the
target state.

Space, as the domain of deployment of the latest
technologies, offers superpowers the opportunity to gain
military or security advantage in peacetime already through

the deployment of assets over land, sea and oceans, while in
times of war to be able to operate strategic weapon systems,

provide for an appropriate level of theatre reconnaissance,
take full control and carry out strikes if necessary.

In the case of global and regional wars, the opposing parties

are able to `ght with all means at their disposal and in all
theatres of war, without restrictions. In the event of a largescale and intensive global war, Hungary – as a member of

NATO – may be affected as part the European theatre, and

may even become a target of attacks. In such a situation,
Hungary’s communications and transport infrastructure, along

with other critical system components, could be involved or
targeted, and the entire territory, airspace and cyberspace of
the country could become the theatre of military operations.

In most cases, modern coniicts also have cyber security

aspects. Operations conducted in cyberspace may serve to
prepare, accompany or replace kinetic operations, but can
also be used for independent purposes. They may be directed
at disrupting government IT systems, e-government, utilities,

strategic enterprises, the transport sector and other critical
systems elements of sectors vital to the functioning of the
economy, digital networks of organisations essential to the
functioning of society, or at manipulating, acquiring or

rendering inaccessible the data and information stored on
them. The potential of cyber-attacks to cause material
damage and disrupt public order does not fall short of
conventional weapons. Given that cyberspace is relatively


-----

easily accessible, the desired effects may be triggered more
rapidly than in any other operational domain, while the identity
of perpetrators can remain well concealed.

### 2.  THREATS AND CHALLENGES REQUIRING THE INVOLVEMENT OF THE HUNGARIAN DEFENCE FORCES

The security threats, challenges and risks facing Hungary are
detailed in Hungary's National Security Strategy. In most
cases, addressing these requires cross-governmental

cooperation, with a number of them requiring the leading role
or supporting cooperation of the Hungarian Defence Forces.

The Hungarian Defence Forces may be deployed to counter

threats posed by state or non-state actors alike. The

probability of an unexpected armed attack against Hungary by

a state is low, but the consequences for the country as a
whole could be extremely serious if it were to occur. For this
reason, the Hungarian Defence Forces must always be

capable of deterring armed attacks (even on its own until the

arrival of Allied support) or, in case such an attack actually
occurs, of ensuring the military defence of the country's

independence, territorial integrity, borders, citizens and
material assets. The possibility of an unexpected armed

attack on one or more member states of NATO or the
European Union cannot be excluded, therefore Hungary and
the Hungarian Defence Forces – in the spirit of the pledged
solidarity– must be ready to perform allied or European Union
tasks related to the averting of such attacks, both abroad and
at home (in the framework of host nation support).

State actors may employ the tools of non-conventional
warfare, and the targeted use of non-military assets could
have repercussions similar to that of an armed attack.

Responding accordingly is oftentimes hindered by the

dijculties of identifying perpetrators (attribution), and / or its
potential political consequences. Opponent state actors may
seek to paralyse or disrupt the operation of the command and
control system of the Hungarian Defence Forces through the
use of information technology. Hungary considers cyber


-----

capabilities endangering physical security or capable of
causing substantial material damage to be weapons, and their
use to constitute even an act of armed attack, which may
eventually invoke a military response.

The likelihood of Hungary and/or its neighbouring countries
being a target of an attack using weapons of mass
destruction is low, but its implications would be

unforeseeable. In such a case, the employment of the
Hungarian Defence Forces’ defence capabilities is inevitable.
Defending Hungary against possible attacks by conventional,
nuclear or dual-use missile systems would be realised within

the framework of the Alliance, with the active contribution of
Hungary.

In the 21 century, challenges posed by non-state actors arest
becoming more and more persistent, and the Hungarian
Defence Forces contributes to their mitigation primarily at
their point of origin, by participating in crisis management
operations. The spread of radical ideologies and terrorism

within Europe and on its periphery poses a major threat. This

may lead to the launching of conventional and nonconventional attacks even against Hungary, or the targeting of
Hungarian citizens, interests, military operations and missions

abroad. This includes attacks and acts of terrorism caused by

disruptive technologies falling into unauthorised hands and
thereby endangering national security.

Currently and in the foreseeable future, the most probable

threat is a mass increase of illegal migration overburdening
government systems and law enforcement agencies, mainly

from the Western Balkans route, but also from other

directions affecting Hungary. This kind of “modern exodus”
has serious consequences for the security and stability of
Europe, including Hungary, while simultaneously posing
national security, public order, humanitarian and public health

risks. During a migration crisis, the Hungarian Defence Forces
acts in support of the law enforcement forces. The Hungarian
Defence Forces participates in the mitigation of the root
causes of illegal mass migration (weak/failed states, ethnic

and religious coniicts, extremist ideologies, climate change,
the uncontrolled proliferation of weapons, the unilateral


-----

intervention of external actors) as part of the states broader
security and defence policy toolkit, within an international
coalition.

The COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated that in our
globalised world an epidemic can spread rapidly and virtually
unstoppably, and that in addition to the health crisis its impact
on other elements of security is profound. it also showed that

this not only causes a health crisis, but fundamentally affects
other aspects of security too. The pandemic has highlighted
that the emergence and spread of a disease carrying the risk
of severe and mass morbidity among the population in

Hungary may trigger a serious crisis, in which the Hungarian
Defence Forces – thanks to their organisation, capabilities
and extensive logistical infrastructure – play an indispensable

role. In addition to the primary effects of the epidemic, we
must also be prepared for its secondary effects on the world

economy, which could set back the economic performance of
individual countries for years, cause severe social tensions

and increase existing instabilities, which could widen the

range of unstable regions, increase the likelihood of known

security risks (e.g. migration) and create new challenges.

We must be prepared to handle natural disasters, including

those linked to climate change, which are becoming ever

more likely, along with less probable industrial accidents and
disasters of regional signi`cance occurring in Hungary or its

neighbouring countries. The mitigation of such events will
require the active contribution of the Hungarian Defence
Forces in line with its core tasks.

### 3.  OUR DEFENCE CHARACTERISTICS

The current state of the Hungarian Defence Forces is

fundamentally shaped by the fact that less attention and
fewer resources were allocated to the cause of national
defence in the atmosphere and under the economic
conditions following the Cold War and the political changes in

Central and Eastern Europe. When the lifecycles of major –
primarily Soviet-made – weapons systems expired, they could
only be replaced in certain areas, whereas entire arms of
service and the related know-how disappeared almost


-----

completely. In parallel, former defence industry capacities
were also substantially cut back, and the defence mobilisation
capacity of the national economy basically ceased to exist.

The radical changes in the security environment of the 2010s
caused a signi`cant shift in opinion regarding national
defence in general, and the role of the Hungarian Defence
Forces in particular. The Zrínyi Programme launched by the

Government in 2016 aimed to create comprehensive national
defence capabilities encompassing the whole of society, the
economy and governmental organisations. Its most visible
outcome is the ongoing development of defence systems and

military infrastructure. n parallel, the acceleration of pangovernmental decision-making, the development of elements
of national resilience and the promotion of citizens' security

awareness, as reiected in their individual, small community
and societal engagement in defence, have begun.

The extensive modernisation of the Hungarian Defence
Forces contributes to the reinvigoration of the national

defence industry, the creation of jobs, the development of

small and medium-sized enterprises in Hungary through
supply chains, the increase of foreign investment, as well the
emergence and strengthening of cutting-edge technology and

training, education and technological systems in Hungary. The

establishment of domestic supply capacities (production,
research & development) will boost employment and ease our

dependence on external suppliers.

The successful operation of modern armed forces requires
the development of a committed and competent workforce

with high quality training, education and continuous training,

based on targeted knowledge elements, and with adequate
physical `tness and mental resilience. In Hungary, too, the
demographic challenges faced by developed societies ageing, emigration, changes in the working capacity and

physical endurance of the population - are factors that
determine the military `tness of the population. The growing
demand for human resources in the global and domestic
labour market also poses a further challenge to the Hungarian

armed forces.

Due to its geographical location, our country is directly
affected by the challenges emerging on the southern and
eastern periphery of Europe. In the regions that determine


-----

Hungarys security, the coniicts of the past decades have not
been resolved and could easily and unexpectedly spread to
other regions. Therefore, Hungary's security cannot be
separated from global and regional processes, the effects of

which our country is addressing in a multinational
cooperation. At the same time, the stability of the Western
Balkans, the Middle East and North Africa, as well as the
European Union's Eastern neighbourhood, has become a high

priority for Hungary.

Hungary lies at the crossroads of NATO’s “eastern” and
“southern” ianks, at the intersection between the northern,

eastern and southern European operational theatres. Its
central location means it can serve as a staging base,
deployment route, hosting, force-integration and build-up and

redeployment area and / or pre-deployment zone for Allied
military formations.

In addition to the European theatre of operations, Europe,
including Hungary, may also become involved in coalition

operations and peace operations in the North Atlantic, Middle

East and North African theatres of operations, as its territory
(or deployed forces) is accessible to potential attackers by
means of strike capabilities through assets deployed in these

areas.

Threats and challenges arising from this changing security

environment necessitate the maintaining of close

transatlantic ties, as well as the improvement of the defence

capabilities of European states, including those of Hungary.
Transatlantic cooperation, in accordance with Article 3 of the

Washington Treaty (developing national capabilities), is based

on the coordinated development of allied forces and ensures
the credibility of the collective defence enshrined in Article 5
of the Treaty through the continued interoperability, readiness
and combat readiness of national forces.

The need to develop European defence capabilities is further
underscored by the fact that Europe – apart from
guaranteeing its own security – must also act as a security
provider in neighbouring (crisis) regions in order to prevent or

mitigate threats. The strengthening of CSDP could facilitate
the management of crises erupting in the peripheries, as well
as increase the ejciency of European defence industry
synergies.


-----

Hungary s direct security is indivisible from other security
developments unfolding in our region. For this reason, there is
a need for close defence cooperation with other countries in
the region, primarily within the frameworks of the Visegrad

Cooperation (V4), the Central European Defence Cooperation
(CEDC), the Multinational Land Force (MLF), the Defence
Cooperation Initiative (DECI), or within the framework nations
concepts led by Germany and Italy (FNC DEU, FNC ITA). The

coordinated (and partly joint) development of military
capabilities and abilities for cooperation realised through
these multinational formations strengthens the security of
both Hungary and our regional allies.

Multinational military formations are key elements of 21st
century defence policy thinking, since they create strategic

convergence among cooperating Member States.
Furthermore, they increase military security through the

coordination of effective operations and the joint training of
forces. In order to promote regional stability, Hungary hosts

several multinational cooperation initiatives, such as the HQ

Multinational Division Centre (HQ MND-C) or the Regional

Special Operations Component Command (R-SOCC), which
provide an opportunity for the Hungarian Defence Forces to

play an active and decisive role in the command and control

of military operations in the Central European region.

### 4.  NATIONAL DEFENCE OF THE FUTURE

The Hungarian Defence Forces must become a sustainable
military force that meets the requirements of the times, that is

renewed in its approach, organisational culture and defence
technology, that is well organised, that respects and preserves

national traditions, that can be deployed effectively
independently and within the framework of the Alliance and

the European Union, and that strengthens its capabilities with
a reserve system. It must have state-of-the-art equipped and

trained troops, as well as iexible, adaptable, effectively
deployable and sustainable defence capabilities to carry out

its domestic and international tasks. The development and
maintenance of an adequate and continuously renewing

national defence industry is essential for a modern force.


-----

### 4.1 DETERRENCE AND DEFENCE

The toolbox of deterrence and defence to counter challenges
affecting Hungary is most ejcient when these threats
originate from state actors. As global competition for greater

geopolitical iniuence intensi`es, the boundary between tasks
related to defence and deterrence in peacetime and during
crises becomes ever more blurred.

The basis of the armed defence of the modern state and the
security of the nation rests on a well-trained national armed

forces, a supportive defence industry capable of sustaining
the former, the unity of the nation, along with public support

for the leadership. A strong national armed forces able to
independently act – one that makes an opponent of

comparable size and potential question the attainable
objectives and advantages of a possible attack – can itself

serve as a deterrent. Were such an attack to nevertheless
occur, a national force must be able to defend its territory and

the sovereignty of the country by military force. With regard to
strategic deterrence and defence, Hungary’s membership in

NATO and the European Union is a decisive factor, while the
development of independent national capabilities also shores

up the defences of NATO and the EU, thereby enhancing the
stability and security of the continent. That is why the

Hungarian Defence Forces must be able (i) to ful`l obligations

arising from Article 3 of the Washington Treaty concerning

individual and collective defence capability development; (ii)
to ensure participation in collective defence tasks derived

from Article 5 of the said Treaty; (iii) to undertake tasks

arising from the mutual assistance clause (Article 42.7) and
the solidarity clause (Article 222) of the Treaty of the
European Union and the Treaty on the Functioning of the
European Union; and `nally (iv) to contribute to crisis

response operations and partnership obligations within the
realm of national defence systems. For the sake of carrying
out tasks related to defending the country, host nation support
for incoming Allied forces must continuously be ensured.

The importance of proportional contributions to the highreadiness response forces of NATO and the EU has
signi`cantly increased due to the radically changed security
environment. High-readiness reaction forces actively


-----

contribute to improving the security of the Euro-Atlantic
region, and possess the necessary tools to prevent and
manage an armed coniict. That is why it remains in Hungary’s
interest to continue contributing to such formations.

As a result of capability developments, the Hungarian
Defences Forces must become a well-equipped, highly mobile
rapid-reaction force capable of immediate, swift and effective

intervention within both national setup and allied frameworks.
Furthermore, the Hungarian Defence Forces has to be able to
provide signi`cant contributions to high-intensity joint alliance
operations, which serve as the basis for iexible, tailored

participation in low-intensity (peace support, crisis
management, etc.) operations as well.

National and multinational military exercises demonstrating
our military capabilities, together with multinational
formations in different constellations, are effective tools of
deterrence and defence, so we must strive for such
participation.

### 4.2 NATIONAL COOPERATION ABILITY (DEFENCE ADMINISTRATION)

Defence is a national cause, so resources and coordination of

efforts must be developed at all levels and in all organisations
of government and public administration. Although the armed
defence of the country can only be achieved through the
activities of the Hungarian Defence Forces, the nature of the

challenges requires the preparation of the entire nation, the
development and strengthening of national resilience in the
complex system of defence. This also includes the

preparation and development of the state and public
administration, the economy, social organisations and
individuals in peacetime, as the security of the country can
only be ensured by the combined existence and cooperation

of all these. In order to organise the defence of the country in
accordance with these principles, an effective defence
management system must be put in place, in the spirit of a
pan-governmental approach.


-----

Defence administration, as part of the broader national
defence system, needs to prepare state and non-state
organisations, actors in the economy, along with citizens to
undertake national defence tasks, and ensure the joint,

coordinated use of military and non-military capabilities in
order to protect our country.

The Government's management of the system of defence in

the framework of the pan-governmental coordination is
carried out through the Minister responsible for defence, who
combines the tasks of preparing the country and society for
defence and of managing the Hungarian Defence Forces.

Accordingly, the command and control system of the
Hungarian Defence Forces is integrated into the system of
governmental command and control, thus ensuring the

coordinated application of the military and non-military
elements of defence.

Today’s rapidly and dynamically changing security challenges,
which frequently demand immediate reactions, require us to

make decisions on next steps in a timely manner (even within

a few hours’ time) to undertake defence tasks arising at either
the level of the Alliance or of the state. That is why the
defence administration system must be able to effectively

organise and coordinate the defence of the country during

peacetime, cases of extraordinary legal order, or even in crisis
situations. Procedures and conditions for accelerated

governmental decision-making need to be established to
ensure timely responses, and the corresponding information
communication systems must be improved.

The resources of the national economy are a key determinant

of defence capability. Responsibility for the preparation of the
national economy for defence purposes, along with economic
mobilisation, lie with the whole state apparatus. For the sake
of operating according to uniform requirements, a centralised

system of tasks and organisations must be established on the
basis of defence administration to prepare, make and
coordinate decisions. Furthermore, the system of defence
reserves needs to be improved to ensure that the demands of

economic mobilisation are met immediately and securely.

In order to involve citizens in duties related to national
defence, a sense of defence awareness must be cultivated at
both a societal and individual level, along with a willingness to


-----

make sacri`ces as necessary. Social responsibility for the
cause of national defence needs to be strengthened, as is an
active approach to the societal management of dangers,
crises and coniict situations. The population, enterprises of

all sizes, and institutions should be prepared to undertake
defence tasks and activities. Defence education and trainings
as well as defence exercise systems and preparation
frameworks must be improved. Cooperation with scienti`c

institutions should be deepened so that scienti`c results can
be channelled into military innovation as soon as possible.

### 4.3. NATIONAL RESILIENCE

In today’s complex, unpredictable security environment, we
must be prepared for kinetic and non-kinetic attacks, hybrid

threats, or other crisis situations endangering our homeland
and its citizens. To this end, national resilience must be

improved to withstand strikes, to fend off, mitigate and
alleviate their consequences, and to maintain the functioning

of critical capabilities. The enhancement of the Hungarian
national economy’s performance, and the capacities of the

national defence industry in parallel, signi`cantly contributes
to the strengthening of security and national resilience.

Establishing a high level of resilience decreases the risk of a

potential attack, thereby contributing to our deterrence

capabilities. In addition, it strengthens the ability to defend the

country, and can be used to improve society’s capacity to
avert dangers, threats and attacks, to manage their
consequences, and to rapidly restore functionality through the
synchronisation of military, law enforcement and civilian

activities. Consequently, the Hungarian Defence Forces must
be able (i) to take action against conventional and hybrid
threats; (ii) to increase national resilience through military
capabilities; (iii) to guard and defend critical infrastructure and

facilities crucial for national defence; as well as (iv) to support
the activities of civilian and law enforcement agencies and
cooperate with them.

There is an increased need for the ejcient functioning of
military intelligence and counter-intelligence agencies in order
to acquire information regarding military operations, to
forecast crises affecting the security of Hungary, to uncover


-----

covert efforts threatening Hungarian defence interests, or to
ensure the security of soldiers serving in crisis zones. When
carrying out tasks related to national security in support of
defence, a focus should also be devoted in the future to the

targeted development of strategic cooperation with domestic
partner services, as well as the intelligence and counterintelligence organisations of NATO and EU Member States,
with primary regard to contemporary challenges.

The success of activities undertaken by the Hungarian
Defence Forces and Allied forces operating in Hungarian
territory depends to a great degree on support by civilian (non
military) capabilities. In addition, military support for the
civilian sector may prove necessary in many crisis situations
as well. Both the Hungarian Defence Forces and the civilian

actors of society must be prepared to carry out such mutual
assistance tasks already during peacetime, predominantly

within the framework of civil preparedness, which in turn is a
vital tool for achieving a high level of national resilience.

The tasks of civil preparedness fall under the remit of the

country’s defence system. Its purpose is to guarantee the
continuity of services provided by the government (public
administration) and critical system elements, as well as to

ensure civilian resources to support the Hungarian Defence

Forces and NATO armed forces. Coordination of civilian
preparedness tasks between the civilian and military sectors

takes place within the system of defence administration, and
aims to strengthen and develop national resilience. Thus, it
must be improved in a direction and manner so as to facilitate

the successful execution of any tasks arising from these
requirements.

### 4.4 INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION CAPACITY

In view of Hungary's close integration into the European and
Euro-Atlantic security architecture, the development of the
capabilities of the Hungarian Defence Forces should pay

special attention to maintaining and enhancing the ability and
readiness to cooperate with allied and EU forces. This is an
important prerequisite for the defence of Hungary and Europe
within the alliance framework, as well as for the effectiveness


-----

of participation in operations, missions and other tasks
building up national defence capabilities and management for
the stability of the surrounding areas, and thus also for the
success of deterrence and defence and resilience.

The maintaining of capabilities offered to NATO and the
European Union, together with the long-term provision of
contributions to international military operations, is a priority

for the Hungarian Defence Forces. In planning international
contributions, the existing or planned capabilities and the
rearmament of military units must be taken into account,
along with the respective timeline for force development.

In light of the presumably long-term threats caused by illegal
mass migration to Europe and Hungary, we can expect the

prolongation and possible transformation of Hungarian
operational presence in regions identi`ed as the source of this
problem. In addition to the NATO and EU frameworks, the
possibility of operational participation in these regions under
the aegis of the UN, the OSCE and ad-hoc coalitions should be

examined. We must prepare for a more visible presence in

observer, mentoring and advisory military and civilian
missions, which play an increasingly prominent role in
international crisis management efforts. These tasks can only

be planned and carried out within the context of pan
governmental cooperation, with the active participation of
several Ministries.

The personnel, institutional, procedural and standardisation

conditions of multinational cooperation must be improved to
ensure the widest possible spectrum of defence capabilities,

to be able to respond to threats in an appropriate and timely

manner, and to enhance the ability to actively shape our
security environment. Such measures facilitate strategic
cooperation with our Allies, the joint development and
deployment of the armed forces in collective defence tasks, in

crisis management operations abroad, and in tasks
supporting the capability building of our partners.

The `rst level of establishing interoperability is the
coordinated development of military capabilities in bilateral

and multilateral formations with other NATO and EU Member
States. The second level is composed of joint trainings and
exercises with our Allies and EU partners, carried out in both
the physical and virtual space. Finally, the highest level of


-----

interoperability can be achieved through participation in
multinational regional formations and readiness forces, so we
must strive to regularly take part in such initiatives. In addition
to the above, the Hungarian Defence Forces should act not

only as a contributor to military cooperation, but rather
emerge in the coming decade as a driver of cooperation and a
decisive regional player.

In order to establish cooperation abilities, Hungary will
maintain the consistency between national and NATO defence
planning processes, prioritising the qualitative, quantitative
and timely ful`lment of capability targets. Hungary has a

vested interest in the strengthening of EU defence capabilities
in line with the Alliance. With regard to the development of the
CSDP military toolbox, we will primarily concentrate on

meeting our Permanent Structured Cooperation (PESCO)
obligations, and in participating in PESCO projects linked to

plans for national force development.

### 4.5 FOCUS ON THE PEOPLE

The most important assets of the Hungarian Defence Forces

are the soldiers and civilians serving the cause of national
defence. The future of the Hungarian armed forces rests on
the implementation of a progressive human strategy adapted

to contemporary challenges and societal changes. This

serves as the basis for a dedicated personnel policy

encompassing the entire course of military service, including
active military service, reserve service and the `nal phase of a
professional career. Another strategic objective is the
establishment and improvement of conditions for aftercare

and digni`ed care in old age.

Among the further aims is (i) to develop and increase the

ejciency of recruitment tailored to generational and
contemporary challenges; (ii) to increase institutional
retention by iexibly adapting to labour market effects; and (iii)
to innovate career models, promotion systems and salary and

bene`t schemes.

The Hungarian Defence Forces will continue to actively
support youth policy, family policy and equal opportunity

initiatives (through its commitment to implementing UN
Security Council Resolution 1325 on women, peace and


-----

security). It will participate in efforts to shape societal
awareness, to direct society’s attention to general well-being
and promote a healthy lifestyle.

Programmes to develop physical and mental health, for family
and social care, and to support the labour market
reintegration and reconversion efforts of military
professionals are vital to retaining personnel and upholding

their motivation levels.

The recruitment of personnel to the Hungarian Defence

Forces is a responsibility of the entire society, which also
depends on the outcome of patriotic and defence-related
education. Basic knowledge concerning citizens’ obligations
as enshrined in the Fundamental Law (encompassing public

education, vocational training and institutions of higher
education) is widely disseminated as part of patriotic and
defence-related education, in accordance with the human
resources objectives of the armed forces. To ensure
comprehensive societal embedment, the Hungarian Defence

Forces is continuously present at state, national, military or

other public events, thereby promoting the acceptance, and
increasing the prestige, of the military profession itself.

Reaching, recruiting, retaining and replacing quali`ed and

committed personnel necessary for effectively undertaking
the tasks of the renewed Hungarian Defence Forces and for

the operation of modern weapons systems is another priority.

One of the preconditions for the development of defence

capabilities adaptable to an ever-changing security and
economic environment, and to societal demands and

expectations, is the employment of an adequate number of

professionally trained soldiers and civilian employees.
However, demographic trends in Hungary, the transformation
of employment conditions, generational changes in societal
values and the increasing human resource demand of

economic actors pose serious challenges, which directly
affect the armed forces. Strategic cooperation with actors in
the defence industry may mitigate certain challenges of
specialised human resource management.

Further objectives include ensuring predictable, competitive,
stable long-term professional careers, the improvement of
working conditions and organisational culture, along with
strengthening a sense of professional duty. A military career


-----

model provides transparency and de`nes the competencies
necessary for promotion; this is backed by a system of
vocational training, research & development, innovation,
science and culture in support of life-long learning. Civilian

employees serving in organisations of the Hungarian Defence
Forces signi`cantly contribute to maintaining soldiers’
capability to react iexibly and the successful execution of
their tasks. Holding their efforts in high esteem is an

important strategic aim as a means to preserve the existing
synergies among the personnel in the future too.

### 5.  THE RENEWING HUNGARIAN DEFENCE FORCES

The Hungarian Defence Forces is the primary pillar of
ensuring the sovereignty and territorial integrity of our
homeland. Accordingly, the armed forces is capable of

performing tasks speci`ed in the Fundamental Law and in its

derived laws to meet the standards of the age. It is able to

guarantee the security and sovereignty of Hungary through
credible deterrence based on national capabilities on the one

hand, and within the framework of the Alliance on the other.

The future Hungarian armed forces is an organisation with
state-of-the-art equipment, a high degree of mobility, and rapid
reaction capability, one that is capable of constantly

developing, adapting itself, and being renewed at the same

time. In addition to being authentic, open, well-informed, agile
and – last, but not least – resilient, it can carry out its tasks

either on its own, or in Alliance frameworks.

The defence of Hungary and its citizens is only possible
through the effective and integrated use of available
resources and assets. The capabilities of the well-prepared
and equipped Hungarian Defence Forces, consisting of

professional and contract soldiers, civilians supporting
soldiers’ activities, along with reservists, are built up
modularly[3]. Therefore, these formations are created so as to

be able to fully cooperate with each other and with Allied

forces. The Hungarian Defence Forces is led by integrated
commands, which are able to closely work with other national
and international governmental and non-governmental
organisations through the harmonisation of command


-----

principles, organisations, procedures, and command and
control systems. The national elements of our defence are
complemented by military capabilities accessible through
collective defence and other types of security cooperation.

The most important component of defending our homeland is
a security-conscious society, prepared for its tasks to the
necessary degree. This means that the establishment of wide
spread, structured networks and cooperation systems
exercised already during peacetime is of vital importance, as
is the addressing and involvement of citizens themselves.

Through the comprehensive development of defence
capabilities, a renewed Hungarian Defence Forces will be
established, one that is prepared to carry out its tasks both

individually and in Allied framework. The development of
national resilience capacity tailored to NATO’s Crisis
Response System maintains citizens’ sense of security,
together with the preparedness of elements participating in
crisis-time activities, at a high level.

The development of the Hungarian Defence Forces is based
on the skills and abilities to carry out tasks stipulated by the

law and by international commitments. The objective of
capability development is to create competencies that meet

present and future challenges, can be iexibly adapted to
rapidly changing circumstances, and can respond accordingly

– building on past experiences and with an eye on the future.

The changing societal, economic and operational
environment, together with ever faster technological
developments, call for an ongoing transformation of the
Hungarian Defence Forces. This affects the improvement of

operational procedures, organisational modernisation, the
integration of new capabilities, the elaboration of concepts
and doctrines related to the above, as well as the increasing of
training and preparation ejciency.

The successful execution of tasks requires integrated
capabilities (arms and branches) able to gain and maintain

operational superiority against an opponent of comparable
size to the Hungarian Defence Forces, through the
harmonised and integrated use of kinetic and non-kinetic
effects.


-----

Warfare of today and of the future transcends the boundaries
of conventional armed coniict. With the expansion of
operational domains, beside the classic land and air force, the
electromagnetic, cyber and outer space become ever more

important in achieving and maintaining operational
dominance, both during times of deterrence and in cases of
crisis and armed confrontation. This necessitates the
coordinated development of tools and capabilities deployable

to new operational domains, such as the electromagnetic,
cyber and outer space, in parallel with that of the classic arms
services and branches.

As a result of the procedural and technological edge acquired
through force development, the Hungarian armed forces of
the 21 century is able to carry out conventional symmetricst

and/or asymmetric warfare, regardless of whether this is
against regular or irregular forces, or an opponent superior in

certain capabilities. Its units and sub-units are able to
successfully execute their tasks even with less personnel or in

restrictive conditions.

### 5.1 THE HUNGARIAN DEFENCES FORCES

The foundations of the Hungarian Defence Forces are the
well-trained and prepared soldiers and the civilians supporting

their work, who are able to carry out both national and

international tasks, using up-to-date knowledge and
equipment. This can only be achieved through a constructive,

modern human resource management system that facilitates
the continuous availability of motivated, professionally trained

and committed personnel, while also taking into account the
changing demand in strength numbers set forth due to force

development. Another objective of personnel management is
to adjust and maintain the proper ratio of personnel, while

also ful`lling the quota set by the Parliament.

The command and control system structured into a multilayered integrated information network, supported by state-of
the-art information communication and advanced
cybersecurity capabilities, ensures the ability of the Hungarian
Defence Forces to conduct operations, even in restrictive
conditions.


-----

Regarding Land Forces, combat, combat support and combat
service support capabilities will be gradually developed, in
accordance with the availability of incoming resources. To
this end, a three-brigade structure will be established, with the

aim of creating a heavy, a medium and a special purpose
(light) brigade. As for combat support capabilities, primarily
qualitative improvements are taking place in the areas of
communication and information systems, engineering,

chemical, biological, radioactive and nuclear (hereinafter
referred to as CBRN) defence and reconnaissance.

The Air Force – integrated into the NATO air command and

control system – undertakes air policing and air defence
tasks to uphold the sovereignty of the Hungarian and the
Allied airspace; it also supports Land Forces’ operations.

Three air bases, as well as air defence and airspace control
capabilities are being developed to ensure the successful

execution of the Air Forces’ tasks.

Cyber operation forces contribute to the ejciency of the Land

and Air Forces’ kinetic operations through operations –

including offensive ones – carried out in the cyber domain.
During peacetime, they actively contribute to national cyber
defence activities, and prepare for tasks arising in cases of

extraordinary legal order.

The successful execution of the full spectrum of tasks

requires the establishment of the appropriate logistics and

medical support capabilities as an essential prerequisite.

Therefore, a partially deployable medical and logistics
capability, organised within a supply network, will be created.

It will be able to deploy combat and combat support forces to

operational areas, to ensure the movement of forces within
and between operational areas, and to fully supply and equip
them.

The combined arms structure, complemented by the support

of the special operations forces and in cooperation with the
voluntary territorial defence forces, will be able to stop any
aggressor of comparable size and potential to Hungary, and
guarantee the country’s territorial integrity.

The Hungarian Defence Forces will achieve superiority
primarily based on its well-trained personnel, through
technological development, and this is maintained through


-----

continuous transformation. Capability development is carried
out across the entire spectrum of capability areas. This is
supported by the ongoing analysis and evaluation of changes
in the strategic environment, gathering and utilising lessons

learned from operations and exercises, defence research,
operational and technological innovation, together with
concept and doctrine development.

Capability development focuses on the coherent improvement
of the combat, combat support and combat service support
capabilities of the Hungarian Defence Forces. This enhances
soldiers’ preparedness, survivability and operational ejciency

through modern technology and innovation. Thus, national
defence industry development will focus on technological
capabilities shaping the future of warfare, such as information

technology and cyber defence; simulated, virtual and
augmented reality; arti`cial intelligence; quantum computing;

robot technology; unmanned aerial vehicles (and counter-UAV
technologies); non-lethal weapons; energy storage and

alternative energy sources; nanotechnology; material

technologies; along with biotechnology.

### 5.1.1 Command and control capabilities

The structure and procedures of a mission command-type

command and control system encompassing different phases

of peace, crisis and defence will be established. Commanders’
competencies will remain characterised by independence,

initiative, responsibility and prudent risk-taking on all levels.

Advanced, network-based, autonomous command and control
capabilities will be developed that can be effectively operated
even in technologically underdeveloped, non-supportive
environments. High-bandwidth jamming-proof, unclassi`ed

and secured data connections; the protection of forces’
information communications networks against cyber and
electronic warfare; and the readiness for intragovernmental
cooperation capabilities must be provided. Complex systems

of procedures, technical equipment and organisations should
be established to ensure the uninterrupted, timely iow of
necessary, quantitative and qualitative information to
decision-makers even in emergency and degraded information


-----

communication scenarios, where high-bandwidth data
communication is not available. Decision support systems
based on big data and arti`cial intelligence, sensor-based
data gathering, data storage and transmitting systems need to

be improved. A dedicated information communication
network comprised of standardised, stationary and
deployable elements will be established to support operations
abroad, including real-time data network connection with our

Allies.

As a result of these improvements, the command and control
elements, organisations, their supporting systems, along with

the applied command procedures will be able to support
peace, crisis and war`ghting operations without any changes,
as well as the seamless, partial or full transition from

peacetime activities to crisis and coniict situations. The
Hungarian Defence Forces will organise, place and prepare its

command structure in such a way as to ensure the command
and control of the entire Defence Forces’ operations even in

constrained environments, including nuclear, biological or

chemical contamination.

### 5.1.2 Combat and combat support capabilities

During the development of its combat capabilities, the

Hungarian Defence Forces will increase the collective and

self-defence abilities and combat effectiveness of individual
soldiers, sub-units and units, while maintaining the combined

arms structure. Within the framework of the Digital Soldier
programme, the development of modular, individual

equipment will enhance individuals’ physical protection, `re
power, lethality as well as mobility, and will also provide

network-integrated, high-bandwidth data-based
communication. This will provide operational capabilities for

night-time operations, including limited visibility and extreme
weather conditions, as well as the possibility of integrating

unmanned systems at a tactical level.

Tactical level sub-units and units of the Hungarian Defence
Forces will be able to successfully carry out their tasks
independently and self-sujciently for a speci`ed period of
time. To this end, they will be equipped with high-mobility and


-----

high-`repower combat vehicles integrating modern active and
passive self-defence systems, anti-armour weapons, support
capabilities ensuring autonomous operations, as well as
digital data devices capable of long-range communication. In

addition to the use of their own `re power, they will be able to
integrate the operational effects of the cooperating Air Forces’
manned and unmanned aerial assets, long-range `re support,
and to engage in information warfare activities.

The survivability of the troops will be further strengthened.
This will primarily be achieved through the improvement of
their camouiage and mobility, and the further development of

active and passive defence systems. Furthermore, tasks will
be automated, especially those with a higher risk of personnel
loss. To maintain and increase the survivability and

operational freedom of manoeuvre of the Hungarian Defence
Forces’ troops, individual and collective CBRN capabilities,

movement support and denial combat engineering
capabilities, as well as construction and forti`cation support

engineering capabilities will be improved.

The capabilities of the Hungarian Defence Forces are
structured in a modular system, so that task forces can be
created and tailored to the mission by the commander’s

decision. To enhance operational effects, the focus of

improvements will be placed on developing of sensors and
targeting systems, as well as stand-off weapon systems.

Passive and active cyber defence capabilities will be
established at all operational levels.

To guarantee the execution of the tasks of Hungarian Defence

Forces, it will possess an ISR[4] system that (i) is adaptable to

the dynamically changing operational conditions; (ii) can
provide adequate foresight and early warning; and (iii) has
high mobility and survivability. It will deliver timely information
needed for successful operations through a network-based,

integrated information collection, processing and
communication system. In the area of
intelligence/reconnaissance, it will strive to make the most of
the opportunities offered by technological development. Data

processing and analysis/evaluation capabilities supported by
manned and unmanned, land and air platform-based data


-----

collection sensors and arti`cial intelligence must be
developed to support operations with real-time updates
across all operational domains.

As a result of the development, the Hungarian Defence Forces
will possess a tactical, operational and strategic-level
unmanned aerial platform ieet that is able to carry out
reconnaissance, electronic warfare missions and single or

massed kinetic strikes.

Special operations forces will be further developed to

successfully and effectively execute national, regional and
Allied tasks. The special operations units will provide strategic
and operational level rapid reaction capabilities; they will also
ful`l airmobile, long-range reconnaissance and special

operations requirements. The regional defence cooperation
will be further enhanced by the establishment and
development of Hungarian-led special operations command
and control elements. They will be interoperable with similar
Allied commands and forces in technical, procedural and

information security terms.

The Air Force the Hungarian Defence Forces carries out the

country’s airspace control, air policing and air defence tasks
as an integral part of NATO’s Integrated Air and Missile

Defence System (NATINAMDS). It possesses all necessary
capabilities to effectively perform tasks in times of peace,

crisis or coniict within Alliance frameworks. The Air Force

operates as an integrated system, with the support of the

information and data communication systems belonging to its
centralised command structure and decentralised executive

units.

As a result of the development of the Air Force, the air
defence, strike, air refuelling, reconnaissance and electronic
warfare capabilities of the air assets are enhanced, together
with their deployability and air-to-ground support capability.

Tactical data link and self-defence systems will be further
improved. The air assets of the Hungarian Defence Forces will
be equipped with electronic countermeasure devices.
Priorities include the development of `xed-wing and rotary
wing air transport capabilities to deploy land and special
forces and support their operational engagement, as well as
the provision of search and rescue and aeromedical
evacuation capabilities.


-----

Air defence capabilities will ensure the defence of Hungarian
and other designated airspaces against conventional aircrafts
of various sizes, functions and capabilities, including those
used in unconventional or mass-deployed ways. The Air Force

will also be able to effectively employ weapons that can be
launched from outside the range of the adversary's air
defence assets. The capability to employ strategic,
operational and mass-deployable unmanned aerial vehicles of

various sizes and capabilities will be developed.

Military cyber space operational capabilities are being
established and will be continuously improved to identify and

effectively manage military threats and dangers originating
from cyberspace, providing relevant responses and
countermeasures. These capabilities support all land, air and

special kinetic operations, while also actively contributing to
the overall cyber security of Hungary.

The defence-oriented development of outer space will be
launched to ensure state-of-the-art defence capabilities. The

protection of command and communication,

surveillance/intelligence, targeting and dedicated, defenceearmarked navigation systems will be ensured. The
conditions for defending Hungary against space-based

systems must also be established.

Conditions for undertaking modern information operations

will be created. The effectiveness of civilian-military

cooperation, as well as that of psychological operations will

be increased. In order to further enhance military surveillance
and intelligence activities, the skills and capabilities related to

the electromagnetic spectrum and cyberspace operations will

be created. Moreover, strategic communications must be
developed, along with the principles and procedures for
information and psychological operations.

The Hungarian Defence Forces will be able to carry out

electromagnetic operations across the electromagnetic
spectrum. To this end, both Land and Air Force will establish
electronic warfare capabilities across the entire spectrum, in
`elds related to electronic attacks, electronic surveillance or

electronic defence.


-----

-----

### 5.1.3 Combat service support capabilities

The combat service support system is able to provide full

logistical and medical support for the tactical and operational
tasks of the Land Force units and Air Force assets of the
Hungarian Defence Forces, both within and outside the
borders of Hungary, and in Allied or other international

operations. The support system must also become able to
store and maintain the weapon systems and material received
during the modernisation of the armed forces to meet

contemporary standards.

The iexibility and adaptability of combat services support will
be ensured by the continuous renewal of support principles

and procedures, and through the technological improvement
of the logistical and medical system. The decisive properties
of logistical support will include (i) the wide-scale application

of predictive supply systems, reduced development and
`elding cycles, and dual-use equipment; (ii) a system of

protected and prepared supply and resupply points; as well as
(iii) the maintenance and use of autonomous systems for

combat service support purposes.

As part of peacetime battle`eld preparation, a system of wellstocked, territorially dispersed, sujciently redundant storage

and repair facilities will be established.

Inter and intra-theatre air transport capabilities will be further
developed, ensuring the transport and resupply demands of

the Hungarian Defence Forces, including rapid (re)deployment
as well as the extraction of forces across the entire spectrum
of operational tasks.

The main objective of the improvements in the military
medical system is to enhance the health care system of the

Hungarian Defence Forces during both peace and crisis times,
and to provide state-of-the-art, effective and iexible medical

support. The development and modernisation of the
deployable medical care capabilities supporting operational

tasks, along with land and aeromedical evacuation
capabilities, are of particular importance.


-----

A complex multi-stage, stationary, medical command control
and support system, integrated into the operational
information system must be established, enabling the
effective execution of strategic and operational medical care

tasks with rapid and adequate measures. This system must
be capable of effectively operating even in environments with
nuclear, biological or chemical contamination.

### 5.1.4 Adaptation and transformation capabilities

In order to effectively adapt to changes in the operational
environment, the research and development, innovation and
transformation ecosystem of the Hungarian Defence Forces

will be further improved. For this purpose, the research and
development, innovation, concept and doctrine development,
as well as the education and training system of the Hungarian

Defence Forces will be integrated into a single framework.

Organisations closely cooperating in developing technologies,
operational procedures and concepts will be established in

such a way as to ensure that the roll-out period of new

concepts, procedures and modern technologies is reduced.

The rapid adoption of lessons learned and results increases
the ejciency of the Hungarian Defence Forces, simpli`es the
operation of different systems, and ensures that training and

education are tailored to the changing operational

environment to the highest degree possible. In order to
facilitate the training of forces, the Hungarian Defence Forces

will possess state-of-the-art virtual and real-time individual
simulation systems and other training equipment, also

available outside permanent training bases. For the sake of
interoperability and Allied cooperation, the necessary

conditions for international cooperation will be ensured. To
achieve this level of quality, the national and international

connectivity of virtual and real-time simulation devices,
weapon system simulators, and systems supporting real-time

operations, installed at different locations, will be necessary.
Thanks to the development of capabilities, a harmonised, joint

and combined centre (hub) for real-time modelling and
simulating operations will be established, to improve not only

Hungarian, but also joint defence capabilities.


-----

### 5.1.5 National defence augmentation and rear area operations capabilities

In order to build a modern reserve force that can meet the
security challenges and risks of our age and support the tasks
of regular forces both in peacetime and in instances of
extraordinary legal order, the Hungarian Defence Forces

gradually increases the numbers and capabilities of the
reserve forces, and prepares them for undertaking their basic

tasks. The results of the past period realized in the framework
of the Zrínyi Programme provide a sound basis for ensuring

that – by 2030 – the voluntary reserve system will constitute a
uni`ed, coherent system with professional and contract

personnel in the execution of their tasks, including adequate
responses to new challenges.

Within the framework of establishing rear area defence
capabilities, the protection of critical system elements, force
augmentation and supplementation, major lines of

communications and supply routes, as well as support for

civilian authorities must all be improved. In addition to its
contribution to host nation support activities in Allied
operations, the rear operations command will be able to

provide military security in areas not included in operations in

Hungary. In particular, its operations will be focused on (i) the

defence of designated critical system elements and
maintaining their operational capabilities; (ii) the provision of
logistical support to military operations organised on a
territorial or centralised basis; (iii) the contribution to the

maintenance of public and legal order; (iv) the preparation of
those liable for military service and reserve forces; and (v) the
carrying out of augmentation and supplementation activities.

### 6.  DEFENCE INDUSTRY

In addition to improving the Hungarian Defence Forces so that
it becomes an effective and modernly equipped force, a
primary objective of the Zrínyi Programme is also to develop

the Hungarian defence industry, and to make Hungary a
signi`cant regional centre in this regard. Force development


-----

provides opportunities for defence industry cooperation,
which in turn facilitates the transformation of defence
industry through technology transfer and the creation of
production capacities. The building up of the Hungarian

defence industry is indispensable for sustaining the success
of force development over the long term. Maintaining and
improving national defence industry capacities, along with the
establishment of an independent defence industry research &

development and innovation system are issues of strategic
importance. This promotes iexibility, the credibility of
defence, and the country’s overall resilience, and also
contributes to easing defence economic and technological

dependence on external actors within a short period of time.

The implementation of the Zrínyi Programme is facilitated by

the related industry development programmes, which is why
close cooperation between ministries responsible for national

defence and industry development is of utmost importance.
To ensure the development of the defence industry, the

economic situation of its respective actors must be stable.

For this purpose, the Government supports the defence sector

through the competent Ministry, by using targeted economic
measures and `nancial incentives (i) to facilitate the domestic

manufacturing and maintaining of modern military equipment,

and create the necessary manufacturing capacities; (ii) to

promote technological changes needed for the functioning

and servicing of new equipment; and `nally (iii) to provide
professionally trained personnel.

The development of the defence industry aims not only to

establish sustainable armed forces. Instead, it also
contributes to facilitating economic and technological
development, strengthens supply security, reduces import

dependence, and creates employment opportunities for highly
skilled personnel. In the long term, it enables respective
companies to enter international markets. The rebuilding of
the defence industry will create jobs, offer prestige, and

provide a long-term, plannable career path within the country
for thousands of Hungarian professionals. Thus, it will directly
contribute to the development of education and specialised
training, scienti`c research centres, and the economic-social

conditions of rural areas, as well as government efforts
supporting the entry of small and medium-sized enterprises in
these areas into the international market.


-----

The role of the defence industry within the national economy
should be interpreted much more broadly than the mere
production of defence equipment. Since it is embedded in the
national economy, it serves as an active base for domestic

research & development, and is able to manufacture products
of high added value for export markets too. This is why
defence industry research and innovation are a driving force
for raising the technological standards of the national

economy, and the results of defence-related research quickly
trickle over into public use. This may provide an advantage for
domestic enterprises, potentially improving their pro`tability
in the global competition of non-military products in European

Community and worldwide markets. Therefore, it is in
Hungary’s interest to re-establish the technical, economic,
organisational and developmental know-how of the defence
industry, and to maintain and further this knowledge. The

generation, transfer and public dissemination of this

knowledge is a shared responsibility of the defence industry,
Hungarian universities and colleges, the Hungarian Defence

Forces, along with the competent ministries, and is also in the

interest of national defence as a whole.

To improve the defence industry, development objectives

based on current research trends and cutting-edge
technologies should be continuously analysed and de`ned in

line with our defence policy, for the sake of national defence in
a broader sense and the Hungarian Defence Forces in
particular. The development objectives for the renewal of the

defence industry and related technologies must be elaborated
in cooperation with the ministry responsible for industry
development. Alliance, EU, other funds and public tenders

support the `nancial implementation of such developments.
In the domestic development of own products, we should
make use of the supply experiences of the EU, NATO and
international market partners, within the framework of mutual

cooperation.

Hungary possesses internationally competitive resources yet

to be exploited for both industrial capabilities and the
scienti`c-technological base. Defence-related research &
development projects should immediately be launched with


-----

regard to niche military technological platforms addressing
several current and likely future challenges; those already
started will be continued.

Bilateral and multilateral cooperation will create synergies that
can further advance the development of the defence industry.
Hungary acknowledges that the defence industry serves as
one of the pillars of guaranteeing European security, and that

the participation of the Hungarian defence industry in
international cooperation frameworks is vital to our national
interest. This explains why Hungary is actively involved in the
establishment and strengthening of the European

technological and defence industry base, and why it strives to
decrease fragmentation between Member States. Such
efforts undertaken within both EU and NATO frameworks will

be monitored and utilised in order to make the most of
opportunities for the Hungarian defence industry.[5] We

consider the exploitation of regional cooperation possibilities,
and the creation of synergies with our partners, to be of key

importance. Hungary seeks to align the developmental

directions of the domestic defence industry with the general

trends of EU industry policy and activities, and to integrate our
defence industry within the international industry environment

as deeply and broadly as possible.

### 7.  DEFENCE BUDGET

A decisive precondition for the development of the armed
forces is the allocation and effective use of resources for the
defence sector, in proportion to the performance of the
national economy itself. The availability of resources depends

on defence expenditure and the establishment of long-term
planning conditions through governmental decisions. These
assign an ever-growing budget to the renewal of the armed
forces, and, in accordance with the agreed Alliance

commitment,[6] guarantee that defence expenditure reaches
2% of the GDP by 2024 at the latest, and is maintained at or
above that level in the period afterwards. Modernisation
expenditure already exceeds 20% of our total defence budget.

As a result of the above, a substantial budget is currently
available for the capability development of the Hungarian
Defence Forces, and will remain so in the coming years. Since
the start of the Zrínyi Programme, and in line with the


-----

Governments consistent practice, further resources may be
allocated over and above those stipulated by the respective
budgetary law to realise developments, in order to adapt to
the ever-changing security environment.

### CLOSING PROVISIONS

The guidelines set out in the Strategy should be used as a
basis for the development of the Ministry of Defence's

planning directives, regulations and the directives, doctrines,
regulations and plans of the Command of the Hungarian

Defence Forces.

The time horizon of the Strategy is essentially longer term, but
subject to signi`cant changes in the security environment or
in the system of defence management, it should be reviewed

as necessary, but at least every four years.

[1] Common Security and Defence Policy

[2] With the emergence of disruptive technologies, the market

balance of power is shifting, and the advances brought about
by technology are changing everyday life.

#### Imprint• // Privacy statement• // Cookie policy• National Defence in social

[3] Combat forces can be reinforced, and task forces can be

#### // Cookie settings• created in accordance with, and adapted to the respectivemedia

military task. **PHONE:**

[+36 1 459 5305](tel:+3614595305) www.facebook.com/honvedelem.hu•

[[4] Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance•](tel:+3614595305)

[4]

**E-MAIL:**

**[© HM ZRÍNYI NON-PROFIT LTD 2023[5] One such example is the `rst Hungarian-led PESCO projectszerkesztoseg@hmzrinyi.hu•](mailto:szerkesztoseg@hmzrinyi.hu)** www.instagram.com/magyar_honvedseg•

launched in 2019, the Integrated European Joint Training and
Simulation Centre (EUROSIM).

www.youtube.com/amagyarhonvedseg•



[[6] NATO Defence Investment Pledgehadisir.hu |](http://hadisir.hu/) [honvedkorhaz.hu |](http://honvedkorhaz.hu/) [hadkiegeszites.hu |](http://hadkiegeszites.hu/)


[kormany.hu](http://kormany.hu/)


-----

Italian defence policy director
visits Budapest


New Austrian defence

[attaché in Budapest](https://defence.hu/news/new-austrian-defence-attache-in-budapest.html)


-----

