**The National Security Strategy of the Republic of Hungary**

In the course of the Euro-Atlantic integration process that has been taking place since the regime
change, Hungary has become a member of organisations of integration, in which the stability of the
member countries is based on common values, democracy and the rule of law, as well as on respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms, with member states willing and able to help each other in
order to protect the latter. Hungary’s security situation is stable; the basic guarantee of its security is
the co-operation taking place in the framework of NATO and EU. Hungary is not threatened by military
aggression, and the risk of any other traditional type of threat is also minimal. At the same time, new
challenges and threats have emerged that can be addressed effectively only through a governmental
stance that co-ordinates our national efforts, and a well-focused development of our capabilities and
their flexible application, as well as through wide-ranging international co-operation.

Resolution No. 94/1998. (XII. 29.) of the Hungarian National Assembly on “The Basic Principles of the
Security and Defence Policy of the Republic of Hungary” sets out the fundaments of the country’s
security- and defence policy for the long term. Article 17 of the Resolution states that “the Government
of the Republic of Hungary is responsible for the elaboration of the National Security Strategy and the
National Military Strategy, as well as for their review, if required, and for the implementation of tasks
deriving from them.” With the approval of the National Security Strategy and by setting concrete tasks
related to the elaboration of the National Military Strategy, the Government is now fulfilling its
respective obligation. The National Security Strategy builds on Resolution No. 2144/2002 (V.6.) of the
Government on the National Security Strategy of the Republic of Hungary, while the evaluation of the
security environment, the definition of interests and the determination of goals, tasks and means
reflect the changes that have taken place since the approval of the latter, with special regard to the
integration-related tasks deriving from membership in NATO and the accession to the European
Union.

The National Security Strategy builds on the Basic Principles of the Security and Defence Policy of the
Republic of Hungary and is in line with NATO’s 1999 Strategic Concept and the European Security
Strategy adopted by the European Union in 2003. Its purpose is to identify - after having taken into
account the relevant values and interests, and having analysed the security environment and
identifying risk factors and challenges - those tasks and means, through which Hungary may assert its
national security interests in the international political and security system of the early 21 [st ]century.

It is on the basis of the National Security Strategy that sectoral strategies in the fields of military,
national security, law enforcement, economics and finance, human resource development, information
systems and protection, disaster-relief, environmental security and the fight against terrorism are being
developed in a co-ordinated manner, setting tasks in the field of security in its broader definition.

**I. VALUES AND INTERESTS**

The Republic of Hungary defines security in a comprehensive way: besides the traditional political and
defence components, it also contains, inter alia, economic and social elements, including human rights
and minority rights-related, as well as environmental elements.

The Republic of Hungary treats the following traditional, closely interlinked and interdependent values
as fundamental values: peace, security, stability, sovereignty, democracy, the rule of law, freedom of
enterprise and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. The Republic of Hungary provides
for the security, prosperity and advancement of its citizens, as well as for the preservation of the
cultural heritage and identity of the Hungarian people.

Globalisation and the increase of interdependence have resulted in changes to the substance and the
forms of appearance of national interests. As a consequence of the integration processes, the political
and economic sovereignty of the state has been given a new substance, with a significant part of the
particular national interests of the individual countries now embedded in the framework of common
interests. Hungarian national interests can and need to be asserted in the framework of the EuroAtlantic integration, which extends to policy and economy, as well as foreign and security policy and
defence.


-----

The Republic of Hungary considers as a national security interest

1. the preservation of its sovereignty, territorial integrity and constitutional order, as well as the
implementation of democracy, political pluralism, the rule of law, freedom of enterprise, and of
human rights and fundamental freedoms;

2. the country’s stability and its economic, social and cultural development, the unfolding of its
opportunities, the all-encompassing and rapid development of its economic, technological and
human resources; its rapprochement to the level of the developed industrial nations,
sustainable economic growth; the promotion of the security and prosperity of its citizens and
the development of a security environment facilitating the fulfilment of these goals in a multifold manner;

3. the maintenance of international peace and security, and the prevention and resolution of
regional, inter-state and intra-state conflicts in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the norms and standards of international law;

4. the widening and deepening process of the European Union’s integration, the equality of rights
and solidarity between the Member States, the enhancement of community methods, the
increase of the effectiveness of the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP), the
enhancement of the European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP) as a means of CFSP, and
the integration of Hungary in the institutional structure of the European Union, as well as the
enhancement of its capabilities to assert its interests;

5. the long term preservation of NATO’s central role in the Euro-Atlantic security system, the
adaptation of NATO’s activities to the changed security policy environment of the 21st century
and the increase of its effectiveness, as well as transatlantic cohesion, including the United
States’ military presence and its active engagement in Europe; NATO’s further enlargement
on the basis of common values and interests serving the enhancement of collective security,
and the enhancement of Hungary’s role as an allied nation;

6. the general prevalence of democratic values, including their spreading beyond the EuroAtlantic region;

7. long term stability and Euro-Atlantic integration of the countries of Central, Eastern and SouthEastern Europe, and of the countries neighbouring Hungary in particular, on the basis of the
set of democratic values; and the broadest possible implementation of the rights of the
Hungarians living in neighbouring countries;

8. long term stability based on the set of democratic values of Ukraine and Russia and their
rapprochement to the organisations of Euro-Atlantic integration;

9. long term stability in the Euro-Atlantic region, a comprehensive settlement of conflicts in the
region and the suppression of threats to the security of the region, in particular terrorism and
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction;

10. constructive co-operation between all international actors – states, international organisations,
as well as national and international non-governmental organisations, and the development of
co-operation in bilateral, regional and multilateral frameworks, as well as that of multilateral
economic co-operation.


**II. SECURITY ENVIRONMENT – THREATS, RISKS, CHALLENGES**

The range of security risks has increased parallel with the broader definition of security. In addition to
the traditional nation-state actors, the so-called non-state actors (international organisations,
transnational companies, non-governmental organisations, as well as international criminal and
terrorist groups) are playing an ever-increasing role in security policy. A particular feature of the
international system in the process of restructuring is the simultaneous presence of traditional security
risks and of new threats that often take a global shape and scope. The new types of challenges and
threats are more multi-fold, less visible and less predictable. A typical tendency has been the blurring
of the borderline between external and internal risk factors. Risk factors are manifesting themselves on
global, as well as on regional and internal level, usually not separately but simultaneously, mutually
reinforcing each other. The new challenges can be responded to most effectively through co-operation
in the framework of international organisations and institutions and other forms of co-operation.
Hungary’s membership in the European Union and NATO entails both obligations to adapt and adjust
itself, and the opportunity to participate in decision-making and common action.

II.1. Global challenges


-----

The process of globalisation accelerated and brought radical changes in all areas of international
relations. Especially in the fields of technology, information technologies, transport, trade and finances,
as well as in public health, globalisation has reached a degree where – along with its advantages –
new types of security risks have appeared. Cross-border threats are having a great impact also on the
international environment and the security of the Republic of Hungary.

II.1.1. Terrorism

The attacks on the United States that took place on 11 September 2001 have been an unambiguous
indication that global terrorism has developed into a strategic threat to security in the Euro-Atlantic
region as a result of the significant increase of its logistic, financial and operational capabilities.
Terrorist activities are directed at disrupting democratic social and political institutions, and at
undermining the trust of societies in their governments. Terrorism has a destabilising effect on
international conditions, while activities serving the purpose of organising and supporting acts of
terrorism (illegal arms trafficking, money laundering) are undermining the functioning of states and the
international system. Acts of terrorism may contribute also to the emergence of other global – political,
economic, commercial, migration- and health-related - crises.

II.1.2. Proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The proliferation of (nuclear-radiological, chemical and biological) weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery, as well as the spreading of technological skills required for their production
and the possibility of their use, as well as the linkage between this threat and terrorism constitute the
other strategic threat to security in the Euro-Atlantic region. Although the implementation of
international agreements and export control regimes hinders the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery, the risk of such weapons and materials to be acquired by
terrorist groups and of reaching states providing support to terrorist groups and terrorism has been
increasing. Besides states possessing or striving to develop weapons of mass destructions, states
possessing the necessary technologies, raw material and experts also have a special responsibility to
bear.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction constitutes a challenge in itself, since they may
reach their targets also in non-conventional ways. Chemical and biological weapons that are relatively
easy to produce but difficult to control constitute a particularly grave threat and are more likely to be
used in the context of regional conflicts and acts of international terrorism. In addition, a number of
countries are striving to acquire small- or medium-range means of delivery, either independently or in
co-operation with other states, and thus to increase their regional role and influence. The proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery primarily constitutes an increasing threat
in crisis spots, although the spreading of missile technology indirectly jeopardises the security of
Europe and the Euro-Atlantic region, as well.

II.1.3. Unstable regions, failed states

Countries of the world are receiving an unequal share of the benefits and burdens of globalisation.
This results in an increase of their differences and makes the situation of those lagging behind even
more serious. The increase of the poverty of people living in backward regions, the abridgement of
their human rights and the appearance of extremist ideologies may lead to the spreading of corruption
and a sharpening of ethnic and religious divergences as well as of internal conflicts, and eventually to
the decline or collapse of statehood, as well as to intra-state or regional armed conflicts and,
ultimately, to the destabilisation of entire regions. Such unstable regions and failed states may easily
turn into hotbeds of cross-border organised crime and offer safe havens for terrorist organisations, and
may increase the challenges of migration and the dangers of arms and drug trafficking.

II.1.4. Illegal migration

Hungary’s borders are expected to remain the external borders of the EU and the Schengen area also
for a longer term, which brings along the responsibilities and burdens of managing the Union’s
boundaries. Hungary, so far mainly a transit country, is now more and more becoming a target


-----

country. Hungary’s Eastern and South-Eastern neighbours addressed by the EU’s common or
communitarian policies vary according to their perspectives of European integration, their roles as
points of departure or transit of migration, and to the intensity of their efforts against organised crime.
We consider migration as a natural but complex phenomenon, presenting possible economic and
demographic advantages as well as carrying security risks. Both opportunities and challenges can be
exploited, i.e. managed most effectively in the framework of a medium or long-term perspective of
European integration. Tackling these security risks efficiently is not only an obligation deriving from EU
membership but is also required by our own national security interests. We must not rule out the
possibility that criminal organisations or terrorist groups may try to use migration channels to establish
or reinforce their positions in Hungary. Illegal migration appears first and foremost as a matter of law
enforcement. Following the accession to the Schengen regime, an enhanced protection of the external
borders – land borders, in particular – will require more effective co-operation between the Hungarian
border-guard and immigration authorities. In preparation for our full-fledged participation in the
Schengen co-operation, an up-to-date, secure, parallel border administration system needs to be
developed, making effective use of the assistance available from EU resources. We handle security
issues related to migration – including illegal migration – in the framework of international cooperation, paying special attention to the suppression of international organised crime and the
prevention of acts of terrorism. In shaping our migration policy, we put particular emphasis on the
particular aspects related to the sizeable Hungarian minorities living in the neighbouring countries.

II.1.5. Economic instability

Globalisation is the determining process of our age, extending economic co-operation to a worldwide
dimension through the increase of mutual interdependence, and putting economic growth on a
dynamic path through the mutual exploitation of advantages. It exerts significant influence on the
nations’ own economic policies, sets the main tendencies of development and, based on the free flow
of factors of production, accelerates international co-operation among enterprises. A negative
consequence of globalisation has been that due to the increasing interdependence, problems and
disturbances national economies are suffering from may easily spill over, causing trouble even in
areas where national economic processes do not suggest it. From this point of view, the open
Hungarian economy is considered as particularly vulnerable. The country’s energy security is a
particularly important component of economic security.

II.1.6. Challenges of the information society

With a view to avoiding the disadvantageous consequences of long-term lags, it is an outstanding task
for Hungary to catch up with the information and telecommunication standards of the developed world.
The broadest possible familiarisation with the achievements of the IT revolution and the raising of the
level of education are interests of crucial importance, that have an indirect positive impact on the
economy, as well as on social life and the country’s ability to assert its interests. In addition to
providing the technical and intellectual conditions of an IT infrastructure, attention must also be paid to
the protection of such systems and the generation of appropriate reserves. Information technologies
have created numerous opportunities for the society but also increased the dangers it is exposed to.
The vulnerability and overloading of computer networks and systems, the theft of information, the
spreading of viruses and disinformation all constitute factors of risk for the country.

II.1.7. Global natural, man-made and medical sources of danger

Problems appearing in the context of environmental protection and threats to civilisation spreading
across borders constitute some of the largest-scale challenges to mankind. The protection of our
natural resources, our natural habitat and values, as well as the preservation of the environmental
balance is putting an ever-increasing burden on our societies. Global problems such as the destruction
of rain forests, damages to the ozone layer, the greenhouse effect and the increase of air, water and
soil pollution constitute a threat to our entire Earth. Natural and man-made disasters are having a
particularly serious impact on countries with limited resources and backward economic systems. Due
to Hungary’s geographical characteristics, environmental and man-made hazards, floods, water and
air pollution, as well as eventual disasters originating from neighbouring countries in the Carpathian
Basin have a particularly serious impact on Hungary. Environmental sources of danger have an
indirect impact on the population’s state of health and contribute to the appearance and spreading of


-----

dangerous epidemics and infections. The possibility of larger-scale crisis situations in the field of public
health is likely to increase in the future.

II.2. Regional challenges

II.2.1. Central Europe

The development of the security situation in Central Europe has basically been characterised by
positive changes. The majority of states in our immediate geographical vicinity have or will in the
foreseeable future become NATO- and EU-members, while states not part of the enlargement for the
time being have similarly committed themselves to the common Euro-Atlantic values, choosing
integration as their means of advancement. The integration process and the extension of the zone of
stability have brought favourable changes both in the internal situation of the countries of the region
and in their mutual relationships. The perspective of EU and NATO membership has proved to be an
effective means of support to the democratisation and the market economy in the states of Europe in
transition and to the shaping of their neighbourhood and regional policies.

II.2.2. South-Eastern Europe

One favourable development in South-Eastern Europe has been that the countries of the region
committed themselves to the Euro-Atlantic values and expressed their intention to join the European
Union and NATO. As a result of the crisis-management activities taking place as a common effort of
international organisations (UN, OSCE, NATO, EU), the threat of destabilisation in the region and of
an outbreak of internal or interstate conflicts has diminished, with states of the region mostly heading
in the direction of self-sustaining stability. However, Euro-Atlantic values continue to be applied to
different extents, varying significantly from country to country. The slow pace of the political and
economic regime change, and the corruption rampant in the societies, political structures and
economies of certain regions, as well as social contradictions and unsolved national, ethnic, minority
and religious problems are causing a slowdown in the endeavours for rapprochement and integration,
and are creating favourable conditions for various forms of terrorism and organised crime, including
trafficking in human beings, drugs and arms in particular. Taking all these phenomena into account,
and the comprehensive role played by the EU in particular, there will be a need for a continued
international presence also in the long run.

II.2.3. CIS-countries

The transformation processes of the successor states of the former Soviet Union have still not been
completed, the establishment of economic and political structures has not been finalised, while
elements of consolidation, predictability and the strive for partnership have become stronger.
Hungary’s security in its broad definition may be affected in several aspects by the new states’ search
of orientation, the difficulties prevailing in the development of the Community of Independent States
(CIS), the development of Russia’s manoeuvring space and the changes of its possibilities in the fields
of foreign policy and external economy, and its political motivations, as well as by the situation of
Ukraine. Organised crime and illegal migration emanating from the region and considering Hungary
partly as transit, partly as a target country do constitute a threat to Hungary. Such pressure is likely to
increase with our EU-accession but, on the other hand, the latter will enable us to take action by
relying on community instruments, methods and support.

Russia continues to be an important factor in international politics because of its geographical scope,
its natural and human resources, its military potential, and its nuclear power in particular. The dangers
emanating from the country’s internal instability have decreased, but have not yet completely
disappeared. The comprehensive modernisation of its economy has not yet taken place despite the
more favourable economic and financial outlook, and the functioning of democratic institutions is not
entirely in line with European norms, either. Russia has established partnership relations with NATO,
and – in order to achieve its goals of socio-economic modernisation – with the EU. It is a mutual
interest for Russia and the states and organisations of the Euro-Atlantic region to be each other’s
stable and predictable partners.


-----

Ukraine committed itself to Euro-Atlantic integration. Hungary has an interest in the successful socioeconomic transformation of an independent and democratic Ukraine. Ukraine’s stability, prosperity, the
completion of its democratic reform processes, as well as its balanced relations with its neighbours,
constitute an important factor of peace and security in our region. The deepening of that country’s cooperation with European and Euro-Atlantic institutions constitutes a European and, at the same time, a
Hungarian security interest.

The socio-economic situation of the Caucasian and Central Asian successor states and their mutual
relations have been burdened with social tensions, ethnic and religious differences, border problems,
territorial claims, environmental problems and frozen conflicts, all of which are aggravated further by
the manifestation of various forms of organised crime and terrorism. The democratic transformation
and the establishment of a market economy has not yet been completed in the countries of this region,
and the possibilities of destabilisation, the establishment of authoritarian regimes, as well as of the
emergence of political, economic, social or environmental crises or even military conflicts must not be
ruled out, either.

II.2.4. Mediterranean, Near East and Middle East

Several states of the Mediterranean region bordering Europe from the South are characterised by
poverty, a rapid increase of the population and a lack of ability to join the processes of globalisation,
as a consequence of which risks emanating from the region and connected with illegal migration and
the spread of terrorism have lately been increasing. In its longer-term strategy, the European Union is
striving to reduce these risks through the enhancement of partnership and political dialogue.

One particular feature of the Middle East conflict has been that political differences and territorial
disputes also take a religious shape, and are aggravated further by the cultural differences between
the various ethnic groups, historic sensitivities and the diverging endeavours of the international actors
concerned. The permanent lack of resolution of this conflict constitutes one of the greatest risks to
security from the point of view of world politics, including Europe, and thus requires outstanding
attention. The conflicts of the Near and Middle East are closely linked to the security of the strategic
energy sources, as well as to the endeavours striving for control of the latter. Besides terrorism, the
endeavours striving for the acquisition of weapons of mass destructions and their means of delivery
constitute the gravest security risk.

Due to the increasing globalisation, events in remote areas do have an impact on our security, as well.
As a NATO- and EU-member, Hungary will have to pay even greater attention than before to events
taking place outside the Euro-Atlantic region, and will need to have a constructive position on the
settlement of problems of geographically remote areas, and to reckon with tasks to fulfil in relation to
the latter.

II.3. Internal challenges

The development of the security situation of the Republic of Hungary is being influenced to a
fundamental extent by the negative phenomena accompanying the process of socio-economic
transformation such as poverty, and by the demand for the co-ordination of regulatory processes.

II.3.1. Organised crime

Organised crime, which has gained in strength after the regime change, taking advantage of the
uncertainties of socio-economic transformation, constitutes a threat to Hungary’s internal security.
Organised criminal gangs have established relations with foreign criminal groups, with their activities
covering the trafficking in drugs, arms, strategic materials, vehicles and human beings. A characteristic
feature of organised crime has been that these groups have been trying to assert their interests
beyond the economic sphere, as well, and are therefore increasing their legal economic activities and
influence. The system of state control is not adapting to the changes effectively enough. It is therefore
particularly necessary to enhance co-operation between the organisations responsible for control.
Following the accession to the European Union, we will have to reckon with the increase of activities of


-----

crime gangs within the European Union and with an increase of their contacts with crime gangs
operating in states outside the EU.

II.3.2. Illegal economy and corruption

The biggest challenge to the market economy and legality, besides the illegal economy and organised
crime, is corruption, which is present in virtually all societies in one way or another, but constitutes a
particular threat in economies in transformation. Illegal economy, corruption and organised crime are
phenomena mutually reinforcing each other. Corruption is particularly dangerous if it appears in the
framework of public life and authorities. Corruption may be countered through ensuring transparency
of public life, and by providing a sound legal framework guaranteeing the latter, as well as by coordinated activities of law enforcement and other authorities.

II.3.3. The spreading of drugs

In the field of illicit drug trafficking, Hungary may traditionally be considered as a transit country
between the producers and Western consumers. As a result of the increase of domestic demand,
Hungary has also joined the ranks of consumer countries, which has a direct impact on the spread of
crime, including organised crime. The ever-increasing seriousness of this problem is highlighted by
regular or occasional drug use among school students and young people in general.

II.3.4. Political and religious extremism

Security challenges could also include extremist political and religious groups taking advantage of
social tensions and using the freedom of association, assembly and opinion ensured by the
democratic rule of law to constrain the fundamental rights of others and disturb the functioning of
constitutional institutions, or to promote their political endeavours.

II.3.5. Demographic challenges

Hungary is in an unfavourable situation from the point of view of its demographic situation. The
increase of the average age, as well as the gradual decrease of the population, will in time constitute
challenges from two different points of view. On the one hand, the change of the ratio of age groups –
due to changes in the ratio between economically active and passive inhabitants – will have a
negative impact on the country’s income-generating capacities, while on the other, growing burdens
on the side of expenditure (old-age pensions and health care) will impose increasing burdens on the
budget, as well.

**III. OBJECTIVES AND TASKS**

Hungary provides for its security primarily in the framework of membership in NATO and the European
Union, in co-operation with its allies and partners. Membership in these organisations of integration
increases Hungary’s responsibilities, as well as the range of instruments and security policy activities
serving the purpose of coping with the threats and challenges. The goals and tasks to be fulfilled
through the means available to the country emanate from Hungary’s national interests and its global
and regional environment. Hungary will be able to actively shape its security situation and environment
only if it develops its capabilities in a deliberate manner and exploits the advantages offered by
integration, and makes flexible use of the means and resources available, adapting to the changes.
During the process of practical implementation of foreign and security policy, the European and
transatlantic elements of the country’s Euro-Atlantic integration shall be required to appear in a
balanced manner.

III.1. Goals and tasks related to international organisations

III.1.1. NATO

As a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, Hungary enjoys the Alliance’s guarantees, the
purpose of which is to protect the territorial integrity, political independence and security of its member


-----

states. Along with the preservation of the Alliance’s traditional defence tasks and capabilities, NATO’s
activities ever-increasingly include the management of crises emerging in the Euro-Atlantic region and
beyond, and the relations of partnership established with countries of these regions. Hungary has a
fundamental interest in NATO remaining the primary forum of transatlantic security policy dialogue and
co-operation, preserving its effectiveness by adapting to the changing security policy environment of
the 21st century, and by contributing to the extension of the zone of security and stability.

Like other member states, Hungary contributes to the Alliance’s adaptation and – both out of selfinterest and in the spirit of fair burden sharing – takes part in the implementation of the tasks the
Alliance needs to fulfil. It is making continuously renewed efforts to fulfil the political and military
requirements stemming from allied co-operation, particularly those required by the implementation of
military operations, and to adapt its own decision-making and crisis-management system to NATO’s
decision-making and crisis-management system, as well as to ensure public support for NATO’s
decisions and the resources and legal conditions required for their implementation. On the military and
defence side, Hungary is striving for a substantial contribution to the entire spectre of allied missions,
including participation in expeditionary operations outside the Euro-Atlantic region and ensures for the
Hungarian defence forces to be able to contribute in a timely manner, and with appropriately trained
and prepared forces to NATO-led operations, as well as to coalition-type operations carried out with
allied participation.

III.1.2. The European Union

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy represents an ever-increasingly
important framework of Hungarian foreign policy. By laying the grounds of the Common Foreign and
Security Policy, as well as those of the European Security and Defence Policy that serves as a means
of the former, the Member States of the European Union have taken a significant step towards playing
a greater role in world politics and the enhancement of the European Union’s crisis management
capabilities. In proportion to this, the European Union has been assuming a more and more important
role in the enhancement of security and stability both in neighbouring and more remote regions,
although for its member states NATO remains the basis of collective defence and the framework of its
implementation. Hungary has also been taking an active part in the shaping of the European Union’s
Common Foreign and Security Policy. Hungarian foreign policy will have a stronger chance to
represent its interests in the EU-framework as compared to what would result merely from the size of
the country and its own capabilities. Besides, Hungary may also seize the opportunity of being an EU
Member State and exert a greater influence on global processes.

The objective of the Republic of Hungary as a Member State is to have an effective and strong EU,
which is capable to act on the international scene as well, where the equality of rights and the principle
of solidarity between Member States are respected, and where the community method strengthens
with the institutional balance being preserved. It is a task of outstanding importance for Hungary to
deepen the country’s economic and political integration, as well as actively participate in all policyshaping and decision-making bodies of the European Union. Embedding Hungarian foreign policy in
the European Union needs to be based in the context of two dimensions. In strategic terms, efforts
must be made for the Hungarian interests to manifest themselves as fully as possible in the external
relations of the European Union, while on the other hand, there is a need to develop our manoeuvring
space in a way that our diplomacy will not be diluted completely in the ever-deepening Common
Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union. However, as a consequence of the EU’s Common
Foreign and Security Policy, Hungarian foreign policy with third countries will be based on common
values.

All this does not exclude, but rather requires us to play a determined and active role in favour of the
assertion of our own particular national interests in those issues of vital importance to us that also
constitute the cornerstones of the role played by the European Union on the international scene. This
role covers issues such as: close transatlantic co-operation; the enhancement of the partnership with
the United States; the European Union’s Neighbourhood Policy and the emphasis on its Eastern
direction, the EU’s engagement in the Balkans, and providing the perspective of European integration
to the countries of that region; the broadest possible implementation of minority rights; as well as the
shaping of EU policy towards the Mediterranean and the Middle East in its wider sense. Hungary has
a particular interest in the democratisation of the Balkan countries. It is therefore an outstanding goal


-----

for Hungary to familiarise countries of the region with the advantages of joining the Euro-Atlantic
security structures and to share with them our experiences gained from the accession process.

Hungary takes an active part in the realisation of the European Security and Defence Policy and in the
implementation of military and civilian crisis management operations, mainly in its immediate vicinity
but also beyond that. Furthermore, it seeks to be involved in the European structures and programmes
to enhance defence capabilities, while preventing unnecessary duplications, and to develop those
capabilities and forces, that may enhance its contribution to the European Union’s activities in the field
of crisis management, whether in a national or multinational framework.

III.1.3. Transatlantic co-operation

As a power disposing of global military capabilities and a similarly strong ability to assert political and
economic interests, and striving for the development of an international network of relations favouring
the exercise of freedom, democracy and free enterprise, the United States plays an outstanding role in
the network of international relations. The United States is the leading nation of the global fight against
terrorism and of the North Atlantic Alliance. Similarly to other member countries of NATO and the
European Union, Hungary traditionally shares the same values as the United States, as well as the
advantages and burdens deriving from NATO-membership, and takes part in the fight against
terrorism. The joint commitment to democracy, the rule of law and human rights constitutes the basis
of the transatlantic link, binding Europe and North America together. Its most important components
include political relations, economic as well as value-related, moral and cultural ties and NATO as the
embodiment of collective security. However, the increasingly globalised world, the new types of threats
and challenges and the sometimes significantly different approaches to handling the latter
occasionally put the transatlantic cohesion to the test.

Transatlantic co-operation can be successful if Europe and North America maintain a strategic
dialogue – primarily in the NATO-framework – on the threats and challenges menacing the EuroAtlantic region, co-ordinate their actions against the latter and establish the capabilities required to this
end, and create the political will necessary for the application of these capabilities. The success of
conflict-management in the Euro-Atlantic region and its vicinity may be significantly increased, if NATO
and the European Union deepen the strategic partnership between the two organisations in the fields
of crisis management and development of capabilities. There is a need for the co-ordinated application
of military and non-military means available to the two organisations in the process of planning and
implementing crisis-management and peacekeeping operations. It is Hungary’s interest to see the
enlarged, strong and united Europe result also in a stronger transatlantic partnership, in which smaller
countries like Hungary are not forced to make a choice between Europe and the United States. It is
Hungary’s goal to remain a strategic partner of the United States, as well as a member of the
European Union, and to be a NATO-ally contributing to a stronger European engagement.

III.1.4. United Nations

The UN Security Council will continue to bear primary, but not exclusive responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The UN plays an important role in co-ordinating the
collective efforts pursued in such fields as the protection of human rights, economic co-operation and
development, non-proliferation and environmental protection. However, as a result of the events that
have taken place in recent years, there has been an increasing demand among international actors for
the adaptation of the legal and institutional grounds of the international community to the new
challenges, and for the increase of the UN’s effectiveness. The United Nations needs to play a
stronger role in the co-ordination of international political, financial and international legal action
against global terrorism, as well as against organised crime, illicit drug trafficking and corruption,
against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery and in meeting
threats posed by failed states, as well as the decrease of economic and social backwardness and the
improvement of global environment protection. Hungary wishes to contribute constructively to enabling
this universal organization to adapt to the new challenges, and takes an active part in the reform of the
UN, as well as in UN-led peacekeeping missions.

III.1.5. OSCE


-----

The OSCE is the only comprehensive European institution covering the three closely interlinked
dimensions of security – military, economic and human – in their entirety and continues to play an
essential role in promoting peace and stability, in enhancing security through co-operation and in
implementing democracy and human rights. The OSCE is particularly active in the field of preventive
diplomacy, conflict prevention, crisis management and post-conflict rehabilitation. An element of
outstanding importance in the organisation’s political-military dimension has been the existence of
arms control regimes and confidence- and security-building measures. Hungary participates within the
range of its possibilities in OSCE missions, in the protection of democracy, human rights and
fundamental freedoms, as well as in the dialogue between cultures.

III.1.6. Economic diplomacy

Hungary’s task is to further develop its participation in those regional economic organisations that play
a crucially important role in shaping its security environment, as well as that of the neighbouring
countries. The goal is to pursue mutually advantageous economic and trade co-operation, the
conditions of which are decisively shaped by the World Trade Organisation (WTO) and the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), as well as regional co-operation
initiatives.

From the point of view of external economic policy, particular importance is attached to the WTOnegotiations aimed at shaping the rules of international trade. The implementation of agreements to be
reached as a result of these talks will entail obligations for Hungary as an EU-member. Membership in
the EU also results in new challenges to Hungary’s participation in the OECD. At this professional
forum Hungary will continue to have the possibility to express its opinion as an independent member
state during the discussions on common sectoral policies – including trade policy issues - and
Hungarian participants will maintain close professional contacts with the representatives of EU
member states and of other OECD-members.

Transatlantic trade relations provide direct external economic advantages for Hungary but are also
important since the stability and predictability of the world trading system may only be improved if
relations between the EU and the United States are exempt of major tensions. A stronger market
presence requires export-promoting activities. Due to our interests in developing trade relations with
the countries of South-Eastern Europe, we shall endeavour to promote the improvement of conditions
for trade between those countries and the European Union.

III.2. Relations with countries of the region

III.2.1. Relations with the countries of the region on bilateral and regional level

One of the most important tasks of Hungarian foreign and security policy is to actively contribute to
ensuring stability in the regions of Central Eastern and South-Eastern Europe, and in particular to the
democratic transformation of the neighbouring countries, as well as to the safeguarding of the general
promotion of human rights with special regard to rights of national and ethnic minorities corresponding
to European norms and standards. To this end, Hungary actively supports the endeavours of countries
of the region aiming at Euro-Atlantic integration and the admission of countries that are prepared and
fulfil the respective criteria. We pay great attention to cross-border co-operation, and forms of regional
co-operation stretching beyond borders. Hungary needs to play an active role in the activities of such
fora and initiatives of regional co-operation as the Visegrád Co-operation, the Central European
Initiative and the Quadrilaterale. We deem it important to preserve the dialogue between countries
previously or recently admitted to NATO and the EU, and those expected to accede in the future, as
well as to prevent the emergence of new dividing lines. The issue of what kind of role regional
organisations and groupings such as the Visegrád co-operation may play following integration requires
further examination.

Hungary has an interest in ensuring stability and democratic transformation in the region of SouthEastern Europe. To this end, it will need to exert a stabilising impact on the region. One of the tasks of
Hungarian foreign and security policy is to take an active part – in co-operation with its Euro-Atlantic
allies and international organisations such as the UN, OSCE, NATO and the EU – in crisis
management operations taking place in the region, and in efforts aiming at the development of


-----

structure of the rule of law, of democratic conditions and of capabilities required for effective
government. We need to assist our Eastern and Southern neighbours in their institution-building; as
well as their rapprochement to the zone of freedom, security and law; as well as their ultimate
accession through the inclusion of European sources; as well as on a bilateral basis, providing
Hungarian financial assistance; as well as by sharing our experience gathered in the course of the
regime change and our integration. We need to enable Hungarian experts from the fields of public
administration, law enforcement, as well as legal and economic experts to contribute with their
experience to post-conflict management, as well.

III.2.2. Hungarians living in neighbouring countries

Hungary supports the concept, according to which Hungarians living in neighbouring countries must
enjoy forms of self-government and autonomy that best fit their particular situation and the rights
deriving from them, in accordance with European practice, as a community and remaining in their
native lands. The fulfilment of these goals is inseparable from the social and economic development of
the countries where Hungarian minorities live. With their active involvement, the Republic of Hungary
may contribute significantly to stability in the region and strengthen its relations with neighbouring
countries. Hungary therefore has a particular interest in the enhancement of processes leading to the
consolidation of democracy, the rule of law and market economy in the region, and in promoting the
integration of its neighbours into the Euro-Atlantic and European political and security structures.
Hungary wishes to fulfil its tasks related to the support of the Hungarian minorities living in
neighbouring countries in the legal frameworks provided by the institutions of integration, and in cooperation with the legitimate representative bodies of the communities in question, by means of
diplomatic and economic co-operation and with the governments of the countries concerned.

III.2.3. CIS-countries

Hungary is strongly interested in the continuation of democratic transformation in the CIS- countries, in
their rapprochement to the Euro-Atlantic structures and the political settlement of conflicts with the
inclusion of all the parties concerned. We consider the situation of Russia and Ukraine as of crucial
importance from the point of view of security in the region and are therefore particularly interested in
the stability of these two states and in the advancement of their democratic reforms, as well as in the
success of their economic and social modernisation processes. Changes in a favourable direction may
be facilitated by close links between rapprochement to and integration into Europe on the one hand,
and the reform processes in Ukraine and Russia on the other, if integration is aiming at enhancing
internal reforms and is depending on their speed. One of the tasks of Hungary as a NATO- and EUmember is to alleviate the effects of European dividing lines emerging as a result of the enlargement
processes and to identify the possible areas of engagement.

Economic relations with Russia and Ukraine are of strategic importance to Hungary. We strive for the
development of bilateral relations with Russia in all their aspects. We support the co-operation
between Russia and the West based on mutual interest to extend to the widest possible range of
fields, as well as for such co-operation to be facilitated by an ever more dynamic EU-Russia cooperation with stronger perspectives, and by political dialogue and practical co-operation between
NATO and Russia. Hungary also supports the maintenance of Ukraine’s stability and its democratic
transformation as well as its rapprochement to the structures of Euro-Atlantic integration by all the
means available. Achievement of these goals is being facilitated by our participation in the emerging
new neighbourhood policy of the European Union, notably the practical implementation of the concept
on a “European Neighbourhood Policy”.

III.3. Action against global threats and challenges

The mutually reinforcing impact of old and new types of challenges and the complexity of the factors
shaping the international security environment requires the continued adaptation of states,
international organisations and the international security system, as well as wide-ranging co-operation
among the members of the international community, in which the strategic partnership between NATO
and the EU may play a determining role. For Hungary, active participation in international
organisations, as well as in international coalitions set up for the management of certain particular
problems, offer the most favourable conditions for Hungary to cope with global challenges.


-----

III.3.1. Terrorism

Protection against terrorism can only be successful by means of enhancing bilateral and regional cooperation, joining forces on the broadest possible international level, and by co-ordinated action of
international organisations. The fight against terrorism requires an integrated approach that should
include, inter alia, means of prevention and intervention, joint international efforts aiming at eliminating
the material basis of terrorism, and the protection of critical infrastructure. The UN provides an
important forum for the international community to agree on the ways and means to handle this
problem. The framework of the European Union provides an opportunity to develop common action
plans, as well as actions concerning the EU’s internal security and its external relations. If there is a
need for military action in order to avert the terrorist threat, NATO’s capabilities will be put in the focus.
Hungary’s goal is to support international efforts in all these three organisations, which are also
supposed to serve our country’s security.

Hungary must take part in the Euro-Atlantic and other international activities serving the purpose of
joint assessment, evaluation and management of the risks of terrorism. The co-ordination of respective
activities and the establishment of the domestic conditions required to this end are tasks manifesting
themselves at governmental level. Hungarian diplomacy needs to take part in the international coordination of the fight against terrorism, while national security services and law enforcement
authorities will – besides other basic activities stipulated by law - have to participate in the international
co-operation that aims at the effective detection and prevention of intentions aiming at carrying out
such activities. An effective stance requires organisations concerned to be properly trained and
equipped and to be able to adapt quickly and flexibly.

III.3.2. Proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery

Another task of the Hungarian foreign and security policy, also related to the international fight against
terrorism, is to actively contribute to the prevention of the proliferation of missile technologies and
weapons of mass destruction in the framework of international non-proliferation regimes, and to the
reduction of risks deriving from the latter. As a member of the international export control regimes,
Hungary actively contributes to the enhancement and further development of international legal
instruments and agreements in the field of non-proliferation. Due to the global character of this
challenge, only the further deepening of international co-operation may produce lasting results: as a
participant in such co-operation, and besides its diplomatic and administrative (controlling and
licensing) activities, Hungary also needs to develop its physical capabilities of detection and protection
against such weapons. Hungary has traditionally been playing a well-respected role in the field of
disarmament and arms control, and will continue to do so.

III.3.3. Regional conflict management, state-building, humanitarian assistance

Hungary is interested in the suppression of risk factors threatening stability in the Euro-Atlantic region.
As a NATO- and an EU-member, Hungarian foreign policy faces increased responsibilities, as well.
The handling of regional instability and failed states depends to a great extent on whether the
countries and regions concerned will succeed in embarking on the road of self-sustaining social and
economic development. Assistance provided by the international community will first and foremost
have to be aimed at enabling backward states and regions to ensure their own development through
the mobilisation of internal reserves, to operate democratic institutions, strengthening statehood, and
to rehabilitate their respective economies. The active participation of international organisations and
institutions - including through the fulfilment of military tasks - is required, primarily for the development
of the capabilities needed for self-sustaining development, and for the creation of an environment
favouring internal development. Hungary will continue to be ready to contribute to international
political, diplomatic, military, law enforcement and humanitarian efforts aiming at the elimination of
dangers threatening the security of the Euro-Atlantic region, whether from within or outside.

III.3.4. Schengen co-operation, border management, migration

As a member of the European Union, Hungary will adopt the migration and immigration practices of
the EU member states. This requires the adjustment of institutional and legal conditions to EUstandards. Hungary needs to prepare for the earliest possible and full application of the Schengen


-----

regime. This will require not only an effective functioning of Hungarian border authorities but also
smooth co-operation among all authorities involved in immigration-related procedures. We have to
modernise the management of our borders, now becoming part of the external border of the European
Union, in such a way that they may not be perceived as a new Iron Curtain by our neighbours who are
to join the EU at a later stage, but rather as a place and means of transparency and co-operation. This
also includes the updating of our visa practices according to Schengen norms, considering that the
first line of defence of the external border is the visa-issuing consular authority. The adequate training
of institutions and persons authorised to issue visas, and the reconciliation of security considerations
with economic interests are tasks of outstanding importance to this end. We need to actively support
the further development of common refugee and migration policies at EU-fora, including the gradual
budgetary implementation of burden sharing, which applies also to the integrated management of the
external borders. The development of border protection may provide an outstanding field of the
exchange of experience with the countries of the region (in order to push the pervious border as far as
possible from our country). We need to apply the EU’s up-to-date approach, which strives to contribute
to the elimination of the factors generating migration, through development co-operation based on
clear criteria. It is necessary to strive for the capacities of the Hungarian society to integrate
immigrants to reach the average level of the European Union, and to increase its receptivity by
providing balanced information. It is important for any legislation on migration to take the sizeable
Hungarian minorities living in the neighbouring countries into account and to ensure the assertion of
our economic interests.

III.3.5. Development co-operation

As a member of the international donor community, Hungary strives to support the economic and
social progress of underdeveloped countries and to contribute to the reduction of poverty, as well as to
the curbing of the unfavourable effects of globalisation, in the framework of partnership, by adapting
itself to the EU’s development policies, the UN’s Millennium Goals and the OECD-guidelines.
Development co-operation programmes also need to involve non-governmental organisations and the
Hungarian stakeholders. International development co-operation programmes are parts of the
programmes aiming at conflict prevention and post-conflict rehabilitation, as well as of humanitarian
assistance related to peacekeeping, thus contributing to the achievement of the country’s security
policy goals.

III.3.6. Challenges to open societies

A significant part of the global challenges is directed against one of the three values: freedom, security
and justice, or even more against their synthesis, posing particular threats to open societies. The
achievements under this trinity of values need protection. Remarkably, however, their external
protection may be best ensured through their promotion in more remote parts of the world. This
complex challenge affects all countries belonging to the Euro-Atlantic region. It can only be effectively
tackled through joint action and the closest possible co-operation with the European Union, and
through co-operation aiming at the deepening and the extending of the area of freedom, security and
justice.

Terrorism, cross-border organised crime, corruption potentially undermining democratic institutions, as
well as illegal, massive and unmanageable migration have one consequence in common: the
countries concerned often find an answer to these phenomena at the expense of the curtailment of
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law, mainly relying on law enforcement. Successful action,
however, is not possible through mere law enforcement measures, but only with the strengthening of
the institutions of democracy, human rights and the rule of law. It is Hungary’s interest that the delicate
balance between values and interests, the synthesis of freedom and security are found in a way,
which respects the standards of fundamental freedoms and the rule of law.

III.3.7. Protection of information systems

The age of rapid technological development has brought along the new task of developing a modern
and secure infrastructure of information and of protecting governmental information systems. Such
systems must be prepared to prevent and avert cyber attacks. Successful protection requires close coordination with allies, as well as information and telecommunication providers and research centres.


-----

III.3.8. Protection of the natural and human environment

In order to provide for its ecological security and in accordance with the principles of sustainable
development, Hungary deems it important to preserve its natural resources, as well as its protected
and non-protected natural habitat and its protected natural treasures. Effective handling of global
environmental and public health problems requires broad-based – regional and global – international
solidarity, in which Hungary must also play an active part. In order to ensure sustainable development,
there is a need to change certain production and consumption habits endangering the environment, as
well as to spread environment-friendly or environment-close technologies and to take co-ordinated
steps in the domains of economic policy and international law. Hungary takes part in international
initiatives, as well as in the implementation of action programmes launched by the EU, UN and OECD,
and – to the extent of its possibilities – in remedying international problems. It strives to ensure for its
future industrial development to follow the principles of sustainable development, and for its economic
competitiveness not to endanger the state of its natural habitat, as well as for the preservation of
protected natural areas and their value. In order to avert natural and man made disasters and
eliminate its consequences, Hungary closely co-operates with the countries of the region and applies
the rules of the European Union and NATO’s civil emergency planning system.

III.4. Action against internal challenges

III.4.1. Fight against organised crime

Eliminating the extensive economic background of criminal gangs and preventing the legalisation of
their financial means constitute tasks of fundamental importance in the context of successful action
against organised crime. It is on the basis of this point of departure, that the Penal Code, as well as
laws on penal procedures, need to be further developed and that the effectiveness of tax control as
well as the fight against corruption have to be increased. The work of judiciary, law enforcement and
correctional services needs to be made more successful, increasing co-ordination between the
authorities concerned, and improving their technical equipment and organisational conditions. Due to
the nature of the problem, co-operation between Hungarian and foreign authorities needs to be further
deepened and extended.

III.4.2. Illegal economy and corruption

The national strategy of the fight against corruption includes elements aimed at the suppression of the
illegal economy: permanent and effective supervision of the flow of public money, transparency of the
legal system and the functioning of the state, as well as the appropriate selection and appreciation of
public servants. The primary means of the fight against the illegal economy include the reduction of
public burdens as well as the development of tax, legal and customs rules, and the consequent
ensuring of the application of the latter. Outstanding attention needs to be paid to preventing the
endeavours of criminal gangs from establishing contacts with representatives of politics, public
administration, the judiciary, of the armed forces and law enforcement, as well as of the media.

III.4.3. Fight against the spreading of drugs

Education plays a crucial role in the fight against the spreading of drugs. Prerequisites of determined
action against distributors and suppliers of drugs include increasing the effectiveness of detection, the
improvement of the technical equipment and the skills of the personnel, as well as exchange of
information and co-operation with international partners. Distinguished attention needs to be paid to
the spreading of new synthetic drugs.

III.4.4. Political and religious extremism

The Republic of Hungary has a fundamental national security interest in providing for its competent
state authorities to prevent and impede any endeavour aimed at disturbing the exercise of
fundamental human rights and the functioning of the country’s democratic system or its constitutional
institutions. Successful containment of political or religious extremism, in the long term, may be


-----

achieved through a more successful management of those social problems that may create bases or
circles of sympathisers of such tendencies.

III.4.5. Demographical challenges

Due to our present-day social structure, the present form of the welfare state cannot be maintained
even during times of economic growth. This negative process may be reversed through an increasing
role of self-care and through a carefully designed demographic and immigration policy that includes
fostering the willingness to have children.

**IV. INSTRUMENTS TO IMPLEMENT THE NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY**

A national economy steadily moving on a path of growth may provide favourable conditions for the
implementation of the National Security Strategy. The stability of Hungary’s democracy and security
needs to rely on solid economic and civilisational fundaments, which, on the one hand, provide for the
resources of an effective security policy, and on the other, increase the country’s recognition through
the enhancement of the country’s stability and national identity. Hungary’s long-term goal is to close
up to the advanced European countries by means of its economic performance. Instruments to fulfil
this strategic goal include: the increase of economic competitiveness, the pursuit for financial and price
stability, as well as the unfolding of the cohesive forces of the economy and the society.

In its efforts to provide for its security, Hungary relies primarily on political means, taking advantage of
the opportunities of diplomatic, economic and cultural co-operation. The main guarantee of the
country’s military security is provided by allied co-operation taking place in the framework of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organisation. Hungary needs to possess the military capabilities required for the
collective defence of Hungary within the framework of NATO, and for the collective defence of its
allies, as well as capabilities required for crisis management, and peacekeeping operations, and
disaster-relief launched with the participation of NATO-allies. Hungary needs to be able to participate
also in crisis-management activities taking place within the framework of the European Union. The
Hungarian Defence Forces need to possess rapidly deployable and sustainable forces suited for
flexible use and available also for expeditionary operations that are able to co-operate with allied
forces and can be used in crisis spots without any geographical limitations. The necessary capabilities
need to be developed in a way co-ordinated with NATO, co-ordinating force contributions committed in
the NATO and EU framework, and by making use of the opportunities lying in bi- and multilateral
international co-operation and development programs. The goal is to develop an armed force that is
new in the sense of operational philosophy, able to fulfil the commitments made to NATO; that is
financially affordable, capability-based and specialised in the framework of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation; that constitutes an integral part of the society and enjoys the latter’s support; that is
placed under democratic and civilian control; and that is composed of members committed to their
countries and profession, properly trained and motivated, commanding the respect of the society.
Respective goals and tasks need to be set down in the National Military Strategy.

Besides military operations, law enforcement, medical, and humanitarian activities, as well as activities
of civilian nature also play an ever-increasing role in crisis management operations undertaken by the
international community. The geographical distribution of such operations has changed as well;
besides the Western Balkans and the European peripheries (e.g. Caucasus), Central Asia and the
Middle East have increasingly moved into the focus of international crisis management. As a result of
membership in the UN, OSCE, NATO and the EU, Hungary has to prepare for an increasing and
permanent involvement in the fields of crisis management and peacekeeping. Our goal is for the
Hungarian participation in international operations, based on national interests, to be appropriately
timed and substantial. In order to promote the effectiveness of such Hungarian participation, there is a
need to assess human and material resources to be used, as well as to contribute a co-ordinated and
transparent structure avoiding duplications and ensuring flexible response from the public and
budgetary perspectives alike.

National security services help defend the country’s sovereignty and constitutional order and assert its
national security interests by carrying out their activities as set down by law. By providing information
required for governmental decisions, national security services need to directly support the process of
preparing decisions and the elaboration of appropriate alternatives of such decisions. They need to


-----

inform the Government on the current and long-term development of external and internal vulnerability
of the country. Information gathering must extend to global, regional and internal sources of danger
alike. In order to detect and eliminate sources of threat, national security services need to pursue
preventive and intelligence activities alike. During this process, changes taking place in the region,
integration processes, new types of challenges and threats will need to be taken into account, as well
as threats to Hungarian institutions operating abroad and to Hungarian units and experts taking part in
crisis management and peacekeeping tasks. National security services need to pay distinguished
attention to the participation in the fight against cross-border international terrorism. According to the
security challenges Hungary is facing, they need to develop and maintain a new type of co-operation
with the civilian and military national security services of allied states as well as with respective
services of other states sharing an interest in attaining the goals identified in the National Security
Strategy.

Successfully coping with the challenges to security requires closer co-operation between the various
institutions of law enforcement and the modernisation of their respective structures. In the framework
of the ongoing reform of the Hungarian Police, detection and prevention of organised crime, and of
crimes related to drugs, arms trade, international terrorism and money laundering in particular, as well
as action against cyber-crime must be enhanced by making use of the potential of international cooperation. With the context of police reform, the organisational structure needs to be transformed in
order to bring its services much closer to the citizens to be protected and their property. Co-operation
between national security services and law enforcement authorities – as well as the armed forces, if
necessary, and the improvement of co-ordination between these bodies and other authorities entitled
to supervisory activities constitute a significant reserve of our national security.

The changing set of tasks of the Hungarian Border Guards, the increased protection of the EU’s
external borders as well as the development of the controlling system of internal borders also require a
transformation of the organisational structure and a linkage to be established between the border
protection and law enforcement activities. It is our basic interest for the future external borders not only
to serve our own national security but the security of the entire European Union.

Disaster-relief forces (civil defence, fire department) protect the lives of the population and its material
assets in times of natural and man-made disasters and of states of emergency, also in co-operation
with designated units of the armed forces, if required. The conditions and the guidelines for the
development of capabilities of disaster-relief have been laid down and co-ordinated by the National
Disaster-Relief Strategy. Specially prepared units of the armed forces and their means supplement the
capabilities of these organisations to prevent and relieve natural and man-made disasters by carrying
out special kinds of activities of technical nature.

**V. SECTORAL STRATEGIES**

As a result of the comprehensive definition of security, the tasks derived from the implementation of
the National Security Strategy are divided among sectoral policies. The task of sectoral strategies is to
elaborate - within the frameworks laid down by the Hungarian National Assembly’s Resolution No.
94/1998 (XII.29) on the Basic Principles of the Hungarian Security and Defence Policy, and on the
basis of the values, interests and goals set out in the National Security Strategy of the Republic of
Hungary, and in a manner specified according to the particular features and fields of the sectoral
branch concerned - the practical modalities of the preservation of the external and internal security of
the Republic of Hungary. Sectoral strategies can be successful if their elaboration and implementation
takes place in a co-ordinated manner. A dialogue and practical co-operation with non-governmental
organisations may facilitate the implementation of the National Security Strategy.


-----

