# HUNGARY’S

 NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

 2012


-----

## FOREWORD

##### One of the basic needs of every society is to live in security. Stemming from the country’s Basic Law, it is the obligation of the Government of Hungary to guarantee Hungary’s security and that of its citizens, as well a secure environment for their freedom and welfare. 

 In a historical context, today’s Hungary enjoys an unprecedented level of security. This has come about as a result of the successful process of Euro- Atlantic integration, solidarity and cooperation between Hungary and its Allies and their joint action against foreign and global threats. Security challenges, however, are changing continuously and at a fast pace; the security of the Hungarian nation is linked to the intricate and often unpredictable processes unfolding in a globalised world by a multitude of threads. For Hungary, globalisation is the source of new opportunities, but also new threats. 

 In the fast-changing and dangerous world, our conscious choice of values and the status as member of an alliance based upon the latter, supplemented by our regional and bilateral relationships, provide us with a firm point of departure. Allied solidarity, which also includes the collective defence of NATO member states, as well as the transatlantic bond, are the cornerstone of Hungary’s independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and security. Hungary’s security is strengthened furthermore by the cooperation and political solidarity within the European Union. Hungary’s membership in these two organisations provides the country with a unique opportunity to manage the security threats and challenges of our age, together with our Allies and EU- partners, in a more effective manner. 

 In the globalised world of today, the security of Hungary begins way beyond its borders: distant security threats and challenges may reach us with dramatic speed; preventing and managing them often requires action to be taken far away from our borders. The security and well-being of Hungary’s citizens may also be subject to threats from within the country. Guaranteeing internal security – in addition to its direct benefits – is also a precondition for Hungary to be a confident and strong player on the international stage. Hungary’s external as well as internal security need to be perceived as inseparable and unified. 

 The comprehensive interpretation of the concept of security makes it indispensable for its political, military, economic, financial, environmental and human dimensions to be managed in a comprehensive manner, by applying a whole of government approach. The implementation of the National Security Strategy is therefore guided by the intention and responsibility to guarantee freedom and security for today’s as well as future generations.


-----

##### The Government will work for a Hungary that is free, independent, modern, successful, faithful to its values and strong in the area of security, a Hungary that will contribute to maintaining a strong NATO and European Union and is able to make use of the benefits arising from its membership.

 János Martonyi 
 Minister for Foreign Affairs


-----

### Hungary’s National Security Strategy[*]

##### 1. The purpose of the present strategy is to define, on the basis of values and
 interests and an analysis of the security environment, the national objectives, tasks and comprehensive governmental tools for Hungary with a view to asserting its national security interests in the international political and security context.

### I. HUNGARY’S SECURITY ENVIRONMENT

##### 2. The concept of security is interpreted in an increasingly comprehensive
 manner. In today’s continuously changing security environment challenges, risk factors and threats appear on several levels – at individual, community, state, regional and also global level – and have an impact on a wide range of individuals, governmental and non-governmental organisations and trans-national actors. The overarching management of the political, military, economic, financial and social dimensions of security – and within the latter, human and minority rights aspects – along with its environmental dimension has become indispensable in today’s world. At the same time, in the 21[st] century the military aspect of security appears with new emphases. Security policy challenges whose management requires comprehensive and coordinated political, economic and – if necessary – military action are increasingly prevalent. 

 3. Globalisation and unequal development have brought about significant
 changes in Hungary’s security environment as well. Globalisation and the process of international integration not only strengthen openness and allow better access to the achievements of development, but also result in greater vulnerability to the effects of threats and dangers. New power centres have appeared or are emerging and weak and dysfunctional states will also continue to have to be reckoned with. The possibility of certain actors using scientific and technological achievements for non-peaceful purposes poses a strategic threat. Non-state actors who jeopardise security continue to appear and their influence is growing. All these bring about a rearrangement as well as greater unpredictability with regard to the security situation of certain regions and the international balance of power.

 4. The current level of the threat of a conventional attack against Hungary
 and its Allies is marginal. However, this must still not lead to neglecting certain traditional risks and threats that have decreased in importance but not altogether disappeared: even in the Euro-Atlantic region, the conflicts of the past decades have not yet been resolved everywhere. Consequently, security in certain neighbouring regions also remains fragile, and – as

Adopted by the 1035/2012 (II 21 ) Government Decree on “Hungary’s National Security Strategy”


-----

##### recent international events have demonstrated – military force may play a primary role in a regional conflict even at the beginning of the 21[st] century, in both Europe and its neighbourhood.

 5. In our globalised world of today, security does not start at our borders.
 Distant security risks and challenges and sources of danger can cross our borders with dramatic speed. Unpredicted events can take place at any time, at short notice and without warning, requiring prompt response and possibly spanning large geographical distances. Terrorism, the global proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery, as well as the intensive build-up of modern military capabilities in certain regions increase insecurity and unpredictability, and pose a growing threat to the security of Hungary and the Euro-Atlantic structures. The foreign and internal dimensions of Hungary’s security are therefore inseparable from one another.

 6. Preventing and managing the conflicts of today call for a global
 perspective and a comprehensive approach. Lasting and sustainable security and stability require the comprehensive and coordinated use of crisis management – including development policy – tools, an integrated civil-military approach and capability development, as well as the strengthening of cooperation among international actors. A comprehensive approach needs to be applied at the level of national government, too. A national security strategy can only be effective and successful if the whole of government approach – including participation and responsibility – prevails, institutional frameworks match the challenges and sufficient resources are being allocated.

 7. The global financial-economic crisis is confronting the entire Euro-Atlantic
 community with an unprecedented challenge. The ongoing deep crisis weakens the security institutions of the developed countries, among them those of Hungary, the cohesion of the international organisations as well as the frameworks for cooperation, and decreases the amount of resources that can be devoted to strengthening security. Consequently, available resources need to be concentrated in a more innovative and effective manner in order to strengthen our security capabilities, putting a further premium on cooperation among Allies as well as a more conscious exploitation of opportunities offered by multinational cooperation.

### II. HUNGARY’S PLACE IN THE WORLD AND ITS SECURITY POLICY INTERESTS

##### 8. Hungary does not consider any country as its adversary; it wishes to settle
 disputes through peaceful means, in compliance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations (UN) and the norms and standards of international law.


-----

##### 9. Hungary considers such universal and strongly interlinked values as peace,
 security, the sovereignty and territorial integrity of states, democracy and the rule of law, human rights – including minority rights – as well as respect for fundamental freedoms as its basic values. Following a comprehensive approach to security, our values and their protection define our security policy interests and objectives.

 10. The fundamental security interests of Hungary include the protection of
 its sovereignty, territorial integrity and constitutional order, the stability of the country, its economic, social and cultural development and the upholding of human rights and fundamental freedoms. The maintenance of international peace, security and cooperation, the spreading of democracy, the stability of the Euro-Atlantic region, in particular the stability of regions in close geographical proximity to Hungary and of neighbouring countries, as well as the further deepening of Euro-Atlantic integration also constitute a national interest of Hungary.

 11. Hungary attaches great importance to security policy cooperation and
 action taking place within the framework of multilateral organisations. The role of the UN in upholding international peace and security is unquestionable. The Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) plays an important role in promoting European security and stability. Hungary wishes to contribute constructively to the adaptation of these organisations to the emerging security challenges, and,
 commensurate with its means, to take an active role in their missions. 

 12. Membership in NATO and the EU provides the basic framework of
 Hungary’s security policy. Euro-Atlantic integration constitutes a value- based community whose member states form a political-military alliance based on solidarity. They represent a global economic and political power not only capable of protecting the population of its member states, but also of actively shaping its security environment and contributing to the expansion of international stability and security. Hungary fully subscribes to the values of NATO and the EU laid down in respective treaties. A significant portion of Hungary’s basic national interests are embedded within the set of common interests. For this reason, its national interests may be asserted not only through national means but also in the framework of Euro-Atlantic cooperation. 

 13. Collective defence as enshrined in Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty
 provides the cornerstone of Hungary’s security. Active contribution to collective defence and security is Hungary’s most important security policy obligation. NATO’s Strategic Concept sets out the guidelines for the Alliance to enable it to fulfil its role as laid down in the North Atlantic Treaty


-----

##### (Washington Treaty) and defend its member states in a manner adapted to the changing security environment.

 14. Hungary is interested in a Europe remaining on a firm, unified and
 successful course of integration, where strong cohesion is maintained even in times of economic hardships, and mutual solidarity prevails. The comprehensive security challenges of the 21[st] century can be tackled only jointly and if these conditions are met. The primary security policy goal of Hungary’s EU-membership is to promote and enhance the European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy, as well as the Common Security and Defence Policy, which constitutes an integral part of the former. The Treaty of Lisbon of the European Union strengthens the European identity, further deepens integration and gives an impetus to the EU’s Common Security and Defence Policy, providing a framework for joint external action and for the internal coordination required to this end.

 15. Hungary wishes to continue to take an active part in NATO and EU-led
 crisis management activities, operations and missions, and in the development of the required capabilities in both national and collective frameworks. The country supports the development of the EU’s Common Security and Defence Policy to continue in a manner that takes into consideration the obligations of member states stemming from the North Atlantic Treaty. Hungary also supports the development of a genuine strategic partnership between the two organisations, as well as the strengthening of their military and civilian capabilities in a coordinated manner.

 16. Every state is responsible for protecting its population from crimes
 against humanity, war crimes and genocide. The protection of the innocent civilian population – especially women and children – living in conflict-ridden areas is one of the most important guiding principles and considerations of international crisis management. Guided by its values, Hungary fully endorses the principle stipulating that in the case of a grave violation of human rights – including the extreme case of genocide – the protection of the civilian population even against its own state may turn into a responsibility and obligation of the international community, while in keeping with the principles of the UN Charter.

 17. Hungary’s national security interests and objectives constitute a solid
 commitment to the security of the transatlantic region. Maintaining a close relationship and cooperation with the United States derives not only from the commonality of values but it is also Hungary’s strategic interest. The preservation of the engagement of the United States in Europe and the strengthening of its strategic partnership with the European Union is in Hungary’s interest, as well.


-----

##### 18. The protection of the freedom, welfare and security of Hungary, its Allies
 and other international partners constitutes a national, allied, regional as well as a global responsibility. In this context, Hungary’s activities in the field of security policy, pursued in the framework of NATO and the EU, assume a global and comprehensive nature. Hungary’s international role – both inside and outside the Alliance – is guided by the shared interests or solidarity, and respect for the UN Charter and the norms and standards of international law.

 19. Hungary – both at a national level and within the framework of the
 Alliance – is open to and interested in the strengthening of security policy relationships on the basis of mutual interests. Hungary actively supports the strengthening of multilateralism, and strives to cooperate with all peace-loving peoples, governments and non-governmental actors. It wishes to play an active role in the fora and organisations of regional cooperation. Hungary lays great emphasis on the strengthening of its relationships with other third countries, especially with the emerging power centres and regional organisations in Asia, South America, Africa and the Middle East. The development of such relationships is also being facilitated through the frameworks of membership in NATO and the EU; in this process, common allied interests and solidarity enjoy priority.

 20. The stability of Hungary’s Eastern and Southern neighbourhood and the
 spreading of democratic values are of paramount importance for the country’s security. Hungary wishes to help enhance stability in these regions through active foreign policy, at the levels of both bilateral relations and regional cooperation and in NATO and EU frameworks. Hungary is strongly interested in EU and NATO continuing to pay eminent attention to these regions. The country’s neighbourhood policy stipulates, as a matter of priority, that all its neighbours should have full membership in, or the strongest possible partnership with, these two organisations. Arising from Hungary’s responsibility towards the Hungarian communities in the neighbouring countries, this coincides also with Hungary’s nation-policy interests. 

 21. Hungarian communities living outside the borders of Hungary have a
 particular place in the country’s security policy. Given the presence of Hungarian communities in the neighbouring countries, the particularities of their situation and their relationship with the mother country, the security of these countries is inseparable from Hungary’s own security and vice versa. Hungary holds the position that, in accordance with European practice, Hungarians living outside the country’s borders should enjoy, as a community and staying in their homeland, the forms of self-government and autonomy most suitable to their particular situation, and the rights


-----

##### stemming from the latter. The accomplishment of these objectives is inseparable from the social, economic and financial development and the security of those countries where Hungarian minorities live. Through its relationship maintained with the Hungarian communities outside the borders and support for their legitimate endeavours, Hungary contributes to the stability of the region and strengthens its harmonious relationship with its neighbours. 

 22. Respect for cultural diversity is also seen by Hungary as a security policy
 consideration. Successfully ensuring the traditional coexistence of different cultures and the preservation of diversity and the identity of the communities – as the recognition and protection of common values – is one of the key elements of creating long-term stability both in the world and in Hungary’s immediate neighbourhood. In order to foster this objective externally, the EU should first develop a strong internal policy to realise the objectives laid out by the Treaty of Lisbon regarding the respect of cultural diversity and in the interest of preserving the traditional human, social and cultural environment of the different ethnic minorities living next to each other.

 23. The fact that Hungary is an open country, both in a geographical and an
 economic sense, requires profound consideration in shaping the country’s security policy. Its geographical position makes Hungary particularly vulnerable, especially in the areas of energy security, supply routes and environmental security. The open nature of its economy, its embedment in global economy and the complex dependencies arising from it – besides its benefits – make Hungary particularly vulnerable to the effects of unfavourable international economic processes and crises.

### III. SECURITY THREATS AND CHALLENGES FOR HUNGARY AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

##### 24. As a result of Hungary’s democratic transformation and its successful
 Euro-Atlantic integration, the security situation of the country is basically stable. In Hungary’s immediate and indirect neighbourhood, however, there are a number of security risks and threats to be faced that pose a strategic challenge seen from a national perspective. As a result of the mutual dependence evolving at both global and regional level, the direct risks and threats for Hungary are inseparable from the threats and risks deriving from our Allied status and affecting the alliance the country is part of.

 25. Accordingly, the content of the North Atlantic Treaty, NATO's Strategic
 Concept, the Treaty of Lisbon and the European Security Strategy serve as points of departure in identifying risks and threats, as well as the national tasks arising from them. One of the basic tenets of Hungary’s status as an


-----

##### Ally – along with the tangible benefits of collective security – is that through its capabilities and role, the country will not only strengthen its own security, but actively contribute to the security of its Allies, as well. 

 26. Based on the experience of the past decades, the danger and gravity of
 traditional threats and major military confrontation among states have decreased. The current likelihood of a military attack with conventional weapons against Hungary or its Allies in the foreseeable future is minimal. At the same time, the possibility of traditional conflicts continues to exist in Hungary’s broader environment; their likelihood may even grow in certain regions, which may have an indirect impact on Hungary. Despite favourable political processes, unexpected local conflicts could arise from ethnic, religious or other kinds of tensions.

 a) Membership in NATO and the EU plays a principal role in deterring
 conventional threats. Hungary’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and security can be guaranteed with its national defence forces as well as through collective defence cooperation within NATO. The country’s security is further enhanced by cooperation in the European Union based on common commitment and mutual solidarity.

 b) The majority of the states neighbouring Hungary are members of
 NATO, the European Union or both, while those non-members maintain a strong relationship with these organisations through the partnership mechanisms established by the latter. It is in Hungary’s interest to support them in their efforts to further enhance these relationships. 

 c) Stemming from the need to protect its interests and from its
 obligations as an Ally, Hungary joins Allied efforts in countering emerging threats in nearby or distant regions that might impact the country’s security directly or indirectly.

 d) Effective conventional arms control and confidence and security
 building measures are particularly important for strengthening security through cooperation. 

 27. Regional conflicts. Unstable regions, inter- or intrastate conflicts, weak or
 dysfunctional states, and the intensive arms build-up in the world pose a potential threat to the security of Hungary and its Allies. Poverty, instability and the lack of democracy in affected regions as well as the mostly ethnic and religious nature of the conflicts constitute a hotbed for violence within countries, for armed conflicts, and such cross-border threats as extremism, terrorism, or trafficking in arms, drugs or humans. 


-----

##### a) Hungary will also in the future take action – either under the
 auspices of the respective specialised international organisations or together with its Allies, and in accordance with its national interests – with a view to helping prevent and manage crises and contribute to post-conflict stabilisation efforts.

 b) In accordance with its direct foreign policy and economic interests,
 Hungary is taking an active part in promoting the stabilisation of the Western Balkans. The strengthening of economic and trade relations in Hungary’s Eastern and Southern neighbourhood will at the same time also contribute to regional stability.

 c) Hungary supports the efforts aimed at resolving the protracted
 conflicts of the post-Soviet region, and at strengthening the democratic character of the transformation under way in the Middle East and North Africa.

 d) Hungary’s responsibilities and interests as a NATO-member also
 require its continuous contribution to the assessment of developments in, and threats emanating from more distant regions, as well as to the prevention and management of crises and conflicts.

 e) Hungary considers the expanding forms of international
 cooperation taking place in NATO and EU frameworks, and the strengthening of the framework of NATO and EU partnerships as effective tools for preventing regional conflicts.

 28. The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
 delivery. Hungary does not possess any weapons of mass destruction. The proliferation of chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear capabilities of mass destruction (weapons and their means of delivery, including dual-use products) and the know-how required for their production pose an unpredictable source of threat to international peace and security. Despite the important results achieved in reducing the amount of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery and limitations on their use, several states continue to attribute great significance to obtaining them, and wish to improve their geopolitical position through the possession of such capabilities. While international disarmament and export control agreements restrict the proliferation of mass destruction capabilities, they have no effect in the case of a number of countries. The possibility of an increase in the number of countries possessing weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery and production – potentially also reaching Hungarian territory – and the obtainment of such weapons by non-state actors, potentially even terrorist groups, would also pose a strategic threat to Hungary


-----

##### a) Hungary is interested in preventing the proliferation of weapons of
 mass destruction, their means of delivery, and the capabilities required for their production, in further strengthening the international disarmament process and in an effective worldwide implementation and regulation of arms control.

 b) For Hungary’s security, multilateral diplomacy and the
 strengthening of international organisations, regimes and cooperation frameworks, and active participation in the latter, constitute the most important means to be used to bring about a world free of weapons of mass destruction. At the same time, Hungary shares the view that as long as nuclear weapons exist, NATO must have a credible deterrent capability, based on the combination of conventional and nuclear weapons.

 c) Hungary is interested in creating a defence capability against
 ballistic missiles at NATO level.

 29. Terrorism remains a significant global threat of our age in its constantly
 evolving manifestations in space and time, threatening both our alliances and core values. In Hungary, the overall threat of terrorism is low. At the same time Hungary needs to stay vigilant to potential threats of foreign origin, and to threats to its interests abroad. Besides such threats, terrorist attacks perpetrated abroad may also have adverse security and economic impacts on Hungary. Terrorism can only be tackled through coordinated measures tailored to meet global as well as regional and national challenges. It is therefore in our national interest to continue to participate in the international fight against terrorism, the enhancement of the international counter-terrorism regimes, and to support relevant efforts of the UN, the EU and NATO. Bilateral and multilateral cooperation is essential for successful domestic activities in the field of counter-terrorism. At the national level, Hungary needs a whole of government response, further capacity and institution-building measures, synchronisation of authorities, horizontal coordination, as well as the harmonisation of threat assessment, reporting, and crisis management procedures.

 a) An integrated approach to counter-terrorism encompasses the
 prevention and elimination of terrorism, strengthening protective capacities and preparation for crisis situations.

 b) Prevention focuses on addressing the causes conducive to
 terrorism, countering extremism and radicalisation, the fight against poverty, support for good governance and the promotion of human rights, rule of law and democratic core values.


-----

##### c) Elimination of terrorism, besides the detection and prevention of
 terrorist acts, the detection of terrorist networks and bringing terrorists to justice, concentrates on the prevention of illegal acts supplementary to, or associated with terrorism, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and countering the financing of terrorism.

 d) Among the protective measures, priority is given to potential
 targets of terrorism, including Hungary’s critical infrastructure, with a view to enhancing their protection and resilience.

 e) Adequate preparation for and response to crisis situations require
 the improvement of emergency management authorities, and their coordinated cooperation. It also requires a resilient, well- prepared and well-informed society, as well as the establishment of regimes for the provision of assistance to victims of terrorism.

 30. Financial security. As a result of the global economic crisis, the question of
 financial stability has gained significantly in importance. The stability and resilience of Hungary’s economic and financial system are important national interests and security policy considerations. Given its significant foreign and internal debt levels, with most of the debt in the hands of foreign investors, Hungary is vulnerable in this respect. The high ratio of debt held in foreign currency further increases the country’s vulnerability. 

 31. Cyber security. The functioning of the state and society, our economy,
 public administration, and national defence as well as numerous other realms, is increasingly built on information technologies. Hungary will have to face increasingly pressing and intricate challenges in the physical and virtual space of IT and telecommunications networks and related critical infrastructure. The unhindered proliferation of the results of scientific and technological development and their potential malicious use by state or non-state actors, and even terrorist groups, to interfere with the normal operation of IT and communications systems and core governmental networks constitutes an additional threat. It is often difficult to identify the origin of and motivation behind such attacks. Hungary must be ready to manage risks and threats related to national security, defence, the fight against crime, as well as disaster-prevention, which are gaining in prominence in cyberspace across the globe, as well as to guarantee an adequate level of cyber security, perform the tasks related to cyber defence, and secure the operation of critical national infrastructure.

 a) It is a primary task to systematically identify and prioritise actual or
 potential threats and risks in cyberspace, to strengthen governmental coordination, to increase societal awareness, and to capitalise on opportunities provided by international cooperation


-----

##### b) In addition to strengthening the protection of the critical national
 information infrastructure, Hungary strives to enhance the security of information systems and to participate in the development of appropriate levels of cyber defence in cooperation with Allies and fellow EU-members.

 32. Energy security is of key importance for Hungary. The country is highly
 dependent on imports while diversity in sources and routes of fossil fuels lags behind the desired level. This entails numerous risks. Stable and predictable energy supply available at a competitive price is of strategic importance both in terms of providing energy for the population and securing the energy requirements of the Hungarian economy. 

 a) The establishment of an integrated internal European energy
 market is of primary importance for Hungary. Supporting international initiatives and infrastructure-projects to this end is also a fundamental interest of the country. 

 b) In the field of electricity supply, nuclear energy will remain a
 determining factor for Hungary in the foreseeable future.

 c) Hungary needs to make use of new opportunities for the supply
 and transit of fossil fuels – with respect to natural gas in particular.

 d) In anticipation of the risks posed by the depletion of available
 cheap resources and price increases, Hungary must increase the efficient use of energy, and provide an impetus for the use of domestic renewable energies, thus improving the long-term sustainability of the energy structure.

 33. The global climate and environmental change, the impacts of extreme
 weather, the depletion of raw materials and natural resources, the problems of access to clean potable water, as well as the worsening food supply problems all entail serious global security risks and may become sources of conflict. The environmental, civilizational and health-related sources of danger, arising either globally, in the region or Hungary, may pose a threat not only to the security and development of the country, but to that of the region as well. Furthermore, due to its geographical characteristics, Hungary is particularly exposed to the effects of environmental and civilisation hazards emanating from the countries bordering the Carpathian Basin, to floods and water and air pollution. The environmental sources of danger also have an indirect effect on the health of the population. 

 a) The preservation of natural resources and values, increasing the
 security of flood and inland water protection, the elimination of health risks and epidemics, the maintenance of food and water


-----

##### security, the elimination of pollution found in the soil and in the sub-surface waters as well as the recovery of environmental damage and managing the associated risks all constitute security policy considerations for Hungary. 

 b) The protection of water supplies and farmland, securing the
 conditions for supplying the population with clean potable water and with non-GMO food, as well as the continuous provision of services and ensuring preventive public healthcare against epidemics are indispensable for the creation of environmental security.

 34. Natural and industrial disasters. Uncontrollable processes in certain
 industrial, biological, chemical and especially nuclear facilities may jeopardise or cause damage to the health of masses of people, as well as to the environment, the security of life or property. Further risks are posed by the transportation of hazardous goods by land and rail, on waterways, in the air or through pipelines.

 a) Hungary considers the effective protection of critical
 infrastructures required for the maintenance of conditions of everyday life in the country and the operation of the economy and the state apparatus a priority.

 b) Hungary also views further strengthening of nuclear security and
 protection within the country and its continuous monitoring as particularly important, and supports international efforts to strengthen global frameworks serving such purpose. 

 c) The likelihood of accidents occurring can be decreased through the
 assumption of a greater role by the state and through the extension and rationalisation of licensing and controlling. Based on their special skills and preparedness, voluntary and civil organisations also have a significant role to play.

 d) Given its geography, Hungary will have to increase exchanges of
 information and cooperation in both multilateral and – with respect to neighbouring countries – bilateral frameworks. The recurrence of floods in the drainage basins of the neighbouring states requires permanent, day-to-day communication with them.

 e) In the interest of protecting life and property, special attention
 must be paid to the appropriate preparation of professional disaster-relief agencies and all other institutions playing a role in disaster-relief, as well as to the preparation of the population and industrial facilities in the areas affected.


-----

##### 35. Organised crime. Organised crime, especially in its more serious cross border forms – exploiting the uncertainties caused by social-economic transformation – confront society with an ever growing challenge, and put greater demands on the operation of the law enforcement and judicial sectors. Organised criminal groups are striving to increase their legal economic activities and influence, as well as to assert their interests outside the economic sphere. Organised crime fosters the continued existence of black and grey economies that have a detrimental effect on the national economy, and restricts competition on the market through the use of various means of corruption. Organised crime is attempting to infiltrate law enforcement and the judiciary. This may lead to a distortion of their activities or even make them inoperable. Criminal organisations have targeted the employees working in public service and law enforcement and are also trying to infiltrate political decision making.

 a) Close cooperation between criminal investigation authorities and
 law enforcement authorities, the judiciary and the national security services is an indispensable tool in the fight against organised crime.

 b) One of the most important goals of effective action is to
 investigate the financial background of these groups, to prevent money laundering, through the development of criminal and criminal procedural law, by improving the effectiveness of tax audits, and by taking strong measures against corruption.

 c) Exchange of information as well as cooperation with competent
 authorities of European Union member states as well as with EU structures is of particular importance in this context. 

 d) One of the prerequisites of the fight against organised crime is the
 introduction of legal regulations and the operation of a supervisory system able to prevent the infiltration of the state administration criminal investigation authorities and the judiciary, as well as law enforcement and national security services, by criminal groups.

 36. Drug trafficking. In Hungary, drug abuse and trafficking have dramatically
 increased in recent years and become a social problem. Once a transit country moderately affected in terms of consumption, Hungary has become a target country, where drug production – intertwined with migration and organised crime – is also on the rise. 

 a) Increasing the efficiency of police work and building the capacity
 of competent agencies in terms of equipment and training, as well as effective exchange of information and cooperation with the


-----

##### competent international agencies constitute the prerequisite of quick and more targeted action against drug-related crimes. 

 b) The effectiveness of counter-measures needs to be increased, the
 agencies responsible for fighting organised crime, as well as the personnel, material and technical base of the activities of criminal experts have to be strengthened, and a national drug enforcement agency also needs to be set up. 

 c) The fight against drugs is also a comprehensive social task. With a
 view to ensuring successful action, decreasing the level of threat to the younger generations, including by preventive education is of particular importance.

 37. Migration. Migration is treated as a natural and at the same time complex
 phenomenon, bringing economic and demographic advantages and, at the same time, carrying public and national security risks. Some of Hungary’s borders will remain as the external border of the EU or the Schengen Area for the foreseeable future, with tasks of and responsibilities for managing that border. As far as illegal migration is concerned, Hungary is at present primarily a transit country. However, in the long term it cannot be ruled out that an increasing number of illegal migrants will consider Hungary as a target country. In addition to being an obligation deriving from our EU membership, the management of security risks entailed by illegal migration constitutes a national interest as well. Security issues in this context are therefore dealt with by Hungary in the framework of international cooperation. 

 a) The tasks arising from Hungary’s membership in the Schengen
 Area and the successful implementation of the enhancement of external border protection requires more effective cooperation between Hungarian law enforcement and immigration authorities, as well as agencies contributing to the execution of tasks related to migration. Without ensuring the necessary national and international support, authorities concerned cannot be expected to be able to combat the different forms of illegal migration effectively.

 b) Marginalisation of migrants can be avoided through effectively
 combating illegal migration and with the development of an integration strategy. This, in turn, may result in the decrease of influence of organised criminal groups on migrants.

 c) A European Union capable of effectively managing the effects of
 migration caused by regional conflicts and unstable areas is also in Hungary’s interest. Countering illegal migration calls for the


-----

##### intensification of the fight against organised crime and human trafficking, as well as the further development of expulsion, repatriation and reintegration policies.

 d) Hungary should strive to apply an effective visa policy, and to
 operate and develop closer cooperation with third countries where migrants originate from, with special emphasis on identifying and managing people posing a national security risk.

 e) Serious security risks can also be associated with legal migration.
 Also given Hungary’s EU-membership, the country can protect itself by increasing the efficiency of procedures related to entry and residence permits, and by enhancing cooperation with its EU partners and third countries.

 38. Extremist groups. A security challenge is posed by extremist groups
 exploiting social tensions and the freedom of association, assembly and expression provided by the democratic state based on the rule of law to restrict the basic rights of others, disrupt the functioning of the constitutional institutions, or promote their anti-democratic political aspirations. The aims and activities of extremist groups pose both a national security and a constitutional risk by challenging and seeking to usurp the state’s legitimate monopoly of force. 

 a) In the short-term, extremists can be successfully contained
 through reinforcing the state’s monopoly of force. 

 b) Long-lasting results can be achieved by more effectively tackling
 those social problems that create the basis of, or support for extremism.

### IV. WAYS AND MEANS OF IMPLEMENTING THE NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

##### 39. The security of Hungary needs to rest on a solid economic basis providing
 the resources required for an effective security policy and increasing the country’s ability to assert interests through enhancing its stability. Therefore, and taking Hungary’s obligations as a NATO-member also into account, the Government considers the provision of adequate resources for the defence of the country as its citizens in accordance with its burden- sharing capabilities as an enduring task and obligation. The continuous strengthening and monitoring of economic and financial stability, enhancing macro-prudential regulation, as well as decreasing the exposure of the national economy to external risks, and strengthening the well-being of the society in the long-term in a well-founded and secure manner are all fundamental security policy goals. Joining the Eurozone in the future will be another important tool in decreasing vulnerability. The main tool for


-----

##### widening our economic room for manoeuvre is to decrease our foreign and internal debt – including the ratio of our foreign currency debt – as well as the budget deficit, to create the conditions for economic growth, to increase the employment and to effectively combat the black economy and corruption. 

 40. Hungary’s security also needs to rest on solid social foundations. An
 integral part of this is managing Hungary’s social and demographic problems, and especially mitigating deep poverty and social
 marginalisation, which is a society-wide interest and at the same time one of the most important national and common European causes. The sustained chronic population decrease jeopardises the stability and sustainability of the entire society, and its management requires a complex long-term approach. Social advancement requires continuous endeavours to eliminate the causes and prevent the rise of poverty, and to mitigate the significant disadvantages caused by poverty.

 41. The efforts aimed at enhancing the security of the country – including
 Hungary’s international engagement – need to be founded on broad- based national consensus and support. Guaranteeing the country’s security and accepting that Hungary’s contribution to international crisis management requires material, and potentially human sacrifice calls for a high level of social awareness and maturity. All this needs to be underpinned by a consistent, sincere and intensive social dialogue and efforts to inform the public.

 42. Hungary seeks to assert its security policy objectives and interests
 through an active foreign policy in both a bilateral and multilateral set of diplomatic frameworks and relationships. It pursues a predictable, proactive, committed and value-based foreign policy relying on political and economic stability, unity in domestic policy, and a balanced neighbourhood policy. Hungary wishes to pursue is interests effectively in the international organisations, as well. To this end, Hungary will contribute to the strengthening of those international organisations relevant to the country and of constructive multilateral diplomacy, which will also enhance the country’s ability to assert its interests. Relying on a pool of experienced professionals, Hungary wishes to strengthen its involvement and participation in the decision-making processes of these organisations. Hungary deems it important for cooperation between international organisations playing a decisive role in maintaining stability and security to become more intensive and to mutually strengthen and complement each other’s activities. Hungary wishes to underpin the credibility of its intention to strengthen international organisations through the development of its capabilities to contribute. 


-----

##### 43. The comprehensive management of the threats appearing in the National
 Security Strategy requires a comprehensive, whole of government approach. Accordingly, close and effective cooperation and coordination between the defence, national security, law enforcement, justice, disaster prevention and civilian crisis management institutions, along with the related adaptable frameworks must be strengthened. All government institutions have to be tasked to continuously evaluate in their own area of responsibility the elements of national and international security and exposure to threats, and to take steps necessary to manage and avert them. This can only be successful if governmental and sectorial resources are used in a coordinated and concentrated manner. Special attention must also be paid to adjusting government-wide coordination to the forms of international cooperation.

 44. The Hungarian Defence Forces are the primary institution to guarantee
 Hungary’s sovereignty and one of the main means of implementing Hungarian foreign policy in the context of international engagement. The fundamental task of the Hungarian Defence Forces – in compliance with the Basic Law – is to guarantee the security of our country and to contribute to the collective defence of Hungary’s Allies. In order to be able to carry out their domestic and international tasks, the Hungarian Defence Forces need well-equipped and trained forces as well as flexible, usable, deployable and sustainable capabilities to defend the sovereignty and territory of the country, to contribute to collective defence within the NATO-framework and to UN, NATO, EU or OSCE-led international peacekeeping, stabilisation or humanitarian operations. Hungarian Defence Forces also need to possess capabilities to actively contribute disaster relief in case of natural or industrial catastrophes. Defence planning and doctrines of the Hungarian Defence Forces need to be based on tasks set out in the Basic Law, as well as international commitments, and be developed in coordination with Allies. Providing the resources required and their purposeful and effective use is essential. Multinational cooperation including the development and sharing defence capabilities through international cooperation may serve as a flexible and economically efficient tool to this end. In developing its defence capabilities, Hungary must increasingly rely on domestic, NATO as well as EU-programmes, thus facilitating the development of the national defence and security industry. 

 45. The full-scale and effective fulfilment of international peacekeeping and
 crisis management tasks requires the dedicated military structures to be matched by an appropriate civilian component. In the context of international crisis management and post-conflict reconstruction, civilian crisis management operations play an increasing role in the areas of monitoring, mentoring, advising, law enforcement, rule of law, civil


-----

##### protection and other civilian-type missions requiring the civil component to be adequately represented in terms of both quantity and quality. Given Hungary’s membership in the UN, the OSCE, NATO and the EU, and in accordance with its own security interests, the country has to prepare for more engagement in the field of civilian crisis management and peacekeeping. With a view to ensuring substantial, sufficiently expeditious and adequately equipped Hungarian participation, a unified strategic framework has to be provided with a view to assessing human and material resources available for crisis management and to establishing a structure facilitating the involvement of all institutions concerned that will help avoid duplications, and allow for flexible response also from the legal and budgetary point of view.

 46. The enhancement of civil-military cooperation is playing a significant role
 in crisis management undertaken in the framework of international operations. In this regard, particular emphasis is laid on establishing the conditions of lasting stability through the development of democratic institutions as well as of the capabilities of military and law enforcement agencies, through economic recovery and the strengthening of civil society. Cooperation with civil organisations has a special significance in this context, as their expertise and work are indispensable for ensuring lasting stability.

 47. Hungary’s international development cooperation policy also takes
 security policy considerations into account. The absence of political, economic and social development in its totality increases the likelihood of the emergence of the aforementioned threats. As an important element of foreign relations, development policy contributes to enhancing security, improving social conditions and strengthening the economy. By addressing the root causes of the challenges, it serves the interests of both the developed and developing world, and increases Hungary’s security. Hungary’s activities in the field of development cooperation focus on contributing to the stability and sustainable development of our partners, at both a bilateral and a multilateral level. In line with Hungary’s international commitments and its resources available and in accordance with the system of norms accepted by the international donor community, and the European Union as well as the Organisation for Economic Co- operation and Development (OECD), Hungary strives to increase both resources spent on development activity and the effectiveness of their use.

 48. Intelligence and national security are important elements of the
 implementation of Hungary’s security strategy, the protection of the country’s sovereignty and its constitutional order, as well as of the realisation of its security policy objectives and national interests. It is


-----

##### indispensable to render available protected and classified information of foreign nature or origin that is necessary to identify and avert risks and threats in a timely manner and to support government decisions. There is a need to examine changes and potential variations in the external environment and in the integration processes, as well as threats against Hungarian institutions abroad and Hungarian troops and experts participating in crisis management and peacekeeping missions. The asymmetric threats posed by terrorism, organised crime and other illicit activities, as well as the global, regional and internal challenges and the protection of political, military and economic information require Hungary to rely on strong intelligence and national security capabilities. In response to the security challenges affecting Hungary, in addition to the coordinated activities of the respective domestic agencies, closer cooperation must be developed and maintained with the intelligence and national security services of allied countries and, on certain issues, with the services of other countries pursuing similar security policy objectives.

 49. Maintaining internal security, as well as Hungary’s responsibilities for the
 management of challenges threatening the security of NATO and the EU require the strengthening of the structure of law enforcement and crisis management institutions and the improvement of the quality of intelligence-gathering, the sharing and assessment of information on internal and external threats, as well as the further development of their respective structures. The capabilities of law enforcement agencies, required to guarantee internal security, need to be strengthened through institutional and resource development, more effective crime prevention, as well as through international cooperation, in particular with the EU, taking into account the contents of the EU Internal Security Strategy. International cooperation should also be used to chart new criminal trends, identify new types of criminal activities and to adopt best practices.

 50. Hungary must increase capabilities at its disposal with a view to allowing
 the operation of a complex prevention system ensuring a quick, effective and well-organised response to natural or industrial disasters in order to protect the life and essential property of the population, and to minimise consequences. Special attention must be paid so that such a response interferes as little as possible in the life of the population and the activities of the productive units in the course of reacting to events. To this end, organisations concerned need to be in possession of tools required for command, control and implementation, both domestically and
 internationally. In line with international processes and requirements, special attention must be paid also to the usability of internal crisis management capabilities abroad, and to the optimisation of capability development on site.


-----

##### 51. A comprehensive definition of security means that the tasks flowing from
 the implementation of the National Security Strategy concern numerous governmental and non-governmental organisations. A whole of
 government approach requires all governmental tasks to be fulfilled through the coordinated work of state structures and by making the fullest possible use of the comprehensive set of means available. Security related activities of the different state institutions must comply with the National Security Strategy, and the periodic review of the sectorial strategies will be guided by the relevant provisions of the National Security Strategy.

 * * *


-----

