-----

-----

###### ANNUAL REPORT
## 2018-19


###### MINISTRY OF DEFENCE Government of India


-----

-----

#### Contents

1. Security Environment 1

2. Organisation and functions of Ministry of Defence 9

3. Indian Army 17

4. Indian Navy 31

5. Indian Air Force 41

6. Indian Coast Guard 49

7. Defence Production 57

8. Defence Research and Development 91

9. Inter Service Organisations 113

10. Recruitment and Training 135

11. Resettlement and Welfare of Ex-Servicemen 161

12. Cooperation Between Armed Forces and Civil Authorities 177

13. National Cadet Corps 187

14. Defence Cooperation with Foreign Countries 197

15. Ceremonial and Other Activities 205

16. Activities of Vigilance Units 219

17. Empowerment and Welfare of Women 229

18. Initiatives Towards Simplification, Decentralization and Enhancing
the Ease of doing Business 239

APPENDIX

Appendix-I Matters Dealt with by the Departments of the Ministry of Defence 249

Appendix-II Ministers, Chiefs of Staff and Secretaries Who were in position
from January 1, 2018 onwards 253

Appendix-III Report No. 8 of 2018 Executive Summary 255

Appendix-IV Age-wise analysis of Pending Audit Paras 272


-----

-----

###### chapter
###  1

#### Security Environment


-----

###### SECURITY ENVIRONMENT
# 1


###### SECURITY ENVIRONMENT
# 1


1.1 It is increasingly evident that the world is

undergoing rapid and unexpected changes, described

by some as tectonic shifts. The world is in a transition,

driven by rapidly evolving security and technological

challenges, causing stresses in international order and

transforming the global hierarchies. The need to craft an

appropriate response, aimed at shaping an international

environment conducive to India’s development and

security, is imperative.

1.2 India’s foreign and defence policies seek

to provide a peaceful and enabling environment

for achieving transformative national growth and

development. A complex and increasingly unpredictable

interplay of regional and global developments

characterize India’s security environment. Guided by the

principles of strategic autonomy and mutually beneficial

cooperation, India continues to address the wide

spectrum of conventional and non conventional security

challenges by pursuing constructive engagement with

partner countries at the bilateral, regional and global

levels.

1.3 Terrorism and radicalisation are the biggest

threats to peace and security that the world is facing

today. India has reiterated, at a number of bilateral

and multilateral platforms, its resolve to combat

terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. The global

concerns regarding proliferation of Weapons of Mass

Destruction (WMD) and their delivery systems, continue

to pose serious threats to international security. WMD

terrorism will remain a potent threat as long as there are

terrorists seeking to gain access to relevant materials

and technologies for malicious purposes. India had

###### 2


contributed actively, with partners, to the success of

Nuclear Security Summit (NSS) process and continues

to engage with partners in the Nuclear Security Contact

Group.

###### Regional Security Environment

1.4 The Government has continued to accord

a high priority to relations with countries in Asia. In

general, India’s approach of seeking closer ties, building

stronger connectivity and expanding cooperation

has been appreciated by our partners in the larger

neighbourhood.

1.5 India has been committed to the policy

“neighbourhood first” aimed at expanding the close and

friendly relations with India’s neighbours. It continued

with its policy during the year. India’s defence and

security policy is a function of its principled commitment

to regional and international peace and prosperity.

1.6 The regional cooperation in the area of regional

security has progressed significantly under BIMSTEC

[Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi Sectoral Technical and

Economic Cooperation]. The 4[th] BIMSTEC Summit, held

in Kathmandu on August 30-31, 2018, was instrumental in

giving regional cooperation under BIMSTEC a significant

push. The summit was attended by all BIMSTEC leaders.

The Kathmandu Declaration, adopted at the Summit,

provides vision and Leaders’ directions for intensifying

regional cooperation in key areas of security and counter

terrorism, disaster management, connectivity and trade,

agriculture and poverty alleviation, S&T, culture, tourism

and people-to-people contacts, among others. The


-----

4[th] BIMSTEC Summit also institutionalized Meeting of

BIMSTEC Home Ministers which is likely to give further

push to regional security cooperation. To promote

cooperation and mutual understanding among the

armed forces of member States, a BIMSTEC Multilateral

Military Exercise on the theme of counter terrorism and

a Conclave of Army Chiefs was organized in Pune from

September 10-16, 2018.

1.7 India has been contributing to the regional

maritime security by ensuring safety and security

of maritime traffic through helping our maritime

neighbours set up their coastal surveillance networks for

developing shared Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA).

In this context, India launched an Information Fusion

Centre-Indian Ocean Region (IFC-IOR) in Gurugram in

December, 2018. The IFC-IOR is a major initiative to put

in place a mechanism for MDA and to ensure situational

awareness of the maritime activities in the region. This

Centre will establish linkages and coordination with

national and multi-national organizations that are

relevant to maritime safety and security. It will collate,

analyse and disseminate information related to maritime

safety and HADR requirements at sea. In furtherance

of this goal, India has also signed White Shipping

Agreements with a number of countries, provided

capacity building assistance and ensured capability

enhancement by imparting training.

1.8 In the immediate neighbourhood, the security

environment remained challenging. Afghanistan is

presently undergoing a phase of important multiple

transitions. The Afghan National Security Forces have

taken over the security responsibility and are facing a

daunting challenge in fighting terrorism with reduced

international combat support. Past year witnessed

increased level of terrorist violence. The country is

challenged by a revitalized Taliban led insurgency

coupled with deterioration of the law and order

situation. As a result, terrorism has been spreading

to the relatively peaceful parts of Afghanistan. The

international community is genuinely concerned about


the deteriorating situation, as seen from the number of

initiatives undertaken by world community. However,

the efforts of international community towards peace

and reconciliation efforts are yet to produce tangible

results. India continues to play a role in training and

supporting capacity building of the Afghan National

Defence and Security Forces (ANDSF) as a part of

larger developmental cooperation assistance. Last year,

India trained an all women batch of 20 ANDSF officers

in India. India has so far committed US $ 3 billion in

assistance towards development in Afghanistan.

1.9 Bangladesh went in for elections in December,

2018 and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina’s Party was re
elected to power. Under her leadership, good relations

between India and Bangladesh and deeper cooperation

in all the fields of bilateral relations have expanded. The

security scenario in Bangladesh remained stable. After

the terrorist attacks in 2016, Government of Bangladesh

has effectively curbed the activities of the radical

groups. India and Bangladesh continued to undertake

efforts to bolster the defence cooperation, which

includes operationalising the USD500 million Defence

LOC extended to Bangladesh by India. The institutional

defence cooperation mechanism, such as of Annual

Defence Dialogue and Staff Talks at Tri-Services and

Services levels, is now in place to facilitate engagements

between both the Armed Forces. India wishes to

continue with its excellent relations with Bangladesh

and strengthen defence and security cooperation with

the country in future. India continues to attach priority

to Bangladesh as a neighbour, a close partner for

regional development, security and cooperation, and a

central pillar in India’s “Neighbourhood First” policy.

1.10 A new government under the leadership of Dr.

Lotay Tshering of the Druk Nyamrup Tshogpa (DNT)

party assumed office in November 2018, after the

conduct of third general elections in Bhutan. Prime

Minister Dr. Lotay Tshering visited India in December

2018 on his first official overseas visit, which is reflective

of the unique relationship between India and Bhutan.

###### 3


-----

1.11 India’s security concerns are closely linked with
the neighbouring littoral nations in Indian Ocean Region

(lOR) including Maldives. Engagement between the
defence forces of both the nations has enhanced over
the years. India continues to assist Maldives National
Defence Forces in their capability and capacity building.
Bilateral exercises between the Army (Ekuverin), Navy
(Ekatha) and Coast Guard (Dosti) of the two countries
take place on an annual basis. India has undertaken
close to 200 search and rescue operations in Maldives
and these lifesaving operations have been widely
appreciated by the local populace.

1.12 Since formation of a new government under
Prime Minister Shri KP Sharma Oli in Nepal in February,
2018, three reciprocal visits, at the Heads of Government
level, have added a new vigour to India-Nepal bilateral
relations. Prime Minister of Nepal, Shri K.P. Sharma Oli
visited India in 2018 followed by a bilateral visit of Prime
Minister Narendra Modi to Nepal in May 2018 and in
August 2018 for BIMSTEC Summit. The major focus has
been on the timely and expedited implementation of
bilateral projects and initiatives. The 13[th] edition of IndiaNepal Joint Military Exercise ‘Surya Kiran’ was held in
Pithoragarh in May – June 2018.

1.13 The security cooperation between India
and Myanmar has significantly improved and Indian
defence agencies are working in close coordination
with Myanmar Defence forces to address the problem of
insurgent groups along the India-Myanmar border.

1.14 The political situation in Pakistan continues to
remain challenging with a severe deficit of inclusive
and balanced economic development. Pakistan army
consolidated its position as the institution driving
Pakistan’s foreign security and defence policies after
the elections. Pakistan also continues to relentlessly
expand its military forces, especially nuclear and missile
capabilities despite a financial crisis. The country has
been torn by ethno-regional conflicts, with the zone
of conflict expanding from tribal areas on Pakistan

Afghanistan border to hinterland. Religious extremism
is also on the rise. The military has avoided taking

action against jihadi and internationally proscribed
terror outfits that target Pakistan’s neighbours. Support
to such group persists. Such outfits continued to be
encouraged to infiltrate into India under the cover of
massive cross-LOC and cross border firing in Jammu and
Kashmir and other areas throughout the year, triggering
an appropriate response by Indian Armed Forces. The
Pulwama Terror attack, in February-2019, perpetrated by
the Pakistan-based UN Designated Terror entity Jaishe-Muhammad (JeM) confirmed yet again that India
remains a persistent target of Pakistan’s state sponsored
cross border terrorism policy. India’s response, amongst
other measures, included a successful pre-emptive nonmilitary anti-terror aerial strike on the largest training
camp of JeM at Balakot in Pakistan. India’s position is
that Pakistan takes credible and irreversible steps to
stop supporting terrorists and terror groups operating
from territories under its control and dismantle the
infrastructure operated by terrorist outfits to launch
attacks against India. India will continue to take robust
and decisive steps to ensure its national security.

1.15 India-Sri Lanka relations have improved
significantly especially in the field of defence and
security matters. The armies of India and Sri Lanka held
their sixth annual ‘Mitra Shakti’ military exercise. Training
of Sri Lankan security personnel continued during the
year with visits by high level officials cementing defence
ties further. Indian Army Chief visited Sri Lanka in March
2019 and held talks with top Lankan military leadership.
Commander of the Sri Lanka Navy (SLN), along with a
delegation visited Southern Naval Command (SNC) in
end March 2019. India kept up its constructive diplomatic
engagement with Sri Lanka.

1.16 Relations with China moved towards greater
stability in the overall context of Closer Developmental
Partnership. Following the informal summit between
Prime Minister Narendra Modi and President Xi Jinping
held in Wuhan in April 2018, there was improved and


-----

sustained stability in the India-China border areas. The

period also witnessed renewed momentum in defence

and military to military exchanges between the two

sides. The visit of State Councillor and Minister of

National Defence of China to India in August 2018 and the

meeting of the Defence Secretary- level Annual Defence

and Security Dialogue in Beijing in November 2018 laid

the ground for continued bilateral engagements and

exchanges in the defence field. Both sides recognised

that peace and tranquillity in the India-China border

areas is an important pre-requisite to development of

bilateral relations and agreed that progress in bilateral

relations should be guided by the consensus reached

between their leaders.

1.17 India has abiding interests in Indo-Pacific region,

and its engagements with the countries and institutions

in the region have been deepening. The country’s new

Indian Ocean policy was articulated by Prime Minister

Narendra Modi during his visit to Mauritius in March

2015. The policy, encapsulated in SAGAR (meaning

ocean) which stands for “Security and Growth for All in

the Region”, includes deepening economic and security

cooperation with our friends in the region, especially

our maritime neighbours and island states and favors

collective action and cooperation for peace and security

in India’s maritime region. In the Indian Ocean Region,

India’s relationships with littoral States have grown

stronger. To the east, the Malacca Strait and South

China Sea connect India to the Pacific and to most of

its major partners – ASEAN, Japan, Republic of Korea,

China, Americas and the pacific countries. Trade within

the region is growing rapidly. India intends to continue

its active engagements with the countries of the region

bilaterally as well as at regional and global fora and

enhance its capacity building efforts. India’s vision for

the Indo-Pacific region was outlined by Prime Minister

Narendra Modi during the Shangri La Dialogue on June

1, 2018. It stands for a free, open, inclusive Indo-Pacific

region, which embraces all in a common pursuit of

progress and prosperity. It includes all nations within

this region as also others beyond who have a stake in


it and ASEAN is central to this vision. A common rule

based order for the region must equally apply to all

individually as well as to the global commons. India

has regularly participated in the ASEAN Regional

Forum (ARF) events to promote maritime cooperation

initiatives. India organized the 3[rd] EAS Conference on

Maritime Security and Cooperation in Orissa on June

8-9, 2018. India is also a part of various other multilateral

institutions which are actively deliberating maritime

security issues in the region including ADMM Plus,

Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy

and Armed Robbery against Ship in Asia (ReCAAP)

and Expanded ASEAN Maritime Forum (EAMF). India

and Africa are part of India-Pacific Continuum. The

maritime element of our cooperation with countries of

Africa, especially in the East & Southern African region,

is expanding.

1.18 West Asia has always remained important for

India. Our people to people connect with the region

is enormous and can be gauged by the fact that it is

home to nearly nine million Indians who remit about 60

percent (US$39 billion) of the total of approximately

US$62 billion foreign remittances. Over half of our

energy requirements are also met from this region.

Apart from economic considerations, the region also

assumes importance for India due to ongoing civil strife,

sectarian conflicts and rise of Islamic fundamentalism.

Indian nationals have not been attracted by the radical

Islamic ideology but the proliferation of this radical

ideology is a threat to our national security and stability.

Involvement by a large number of foreign powers in the

West Asian politics notwithstanding, India continues to

engage with the established Governments of the region.

Indian approach towards the conflicts in the region has

been that only the dialogue among all the concerned

parties will ensure lasting peace in the region. India

was invited as ‘Guest of Honor’ at the 46[th] Session of

Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)’s Council of

Foreign Ministers Meeting by the host UAE in March

2019.


-----

1.19 India-Russia relations continue to be warm and
the same has been reflected in regular meetings of the

leaders of the two countries. India has longstanding and
wide-ranging cooperation with Russia in the field of
defence. Joint exercises between the two countries, both
bilateral and multilateral, were conducted with increased
scope and complexity. The scope of defence cooperation
between the two countries has been further enhanced by
the signing of the Agreement on establishing the IndoRussian Inter governmental Commission on Military and
Military Technical Cooperation. Russia is one of the most
important suppliers of defence equipment to India.
India-Russia military technical cooperation has evolved
from a buyer-seller framework to one involving joint
research, development and production of advanced
defence technologies and systems.

1.20 Europe is facing internal and external Foreign

Policy challenges. Europe is yet to find solutions to the major

issues at hand like BREXIT. Indian engagement with some

of the major European nations has picked up momentum.

1.21 Indo-US partnership is on a positive trajectory
with India been designated ‘Major Defence Partner’ in
NDAA-17 [National Defence Authorization Act] and has
been upgraded to Strategic Authorisation Act-1 Status
(STA-1) equating India at par with the closest allies of
US. Important agreements have been signed in the

form of LEMOA (Logistical Exchange Memorandum
of Agreement) and COMCASA (Communication
Compatibility and Security Agreement) indicative
of Indo-US relationship becoming stronger and
the improving mutual trust. Maritime cooperation,
Joint Military Exercises and Mil-to-Mil exchanges are
expanding. Defence trade is also on the increase.
This is expected to grow further, with easing of U.S.
export control laws and its willingness to offer more
sophisticated military platforms to India. Both countries
are also pursuing co-development and co-production
initiatives. Cooperation in Defence Innovation is an
another prospective area of engagement between the
two countries.

###### 6


1.22 Today most African countries are reaping the
benefits of democratic polity. Transitions of power

in many African countries have been democratic,
smooth and peaceful. The continent recently witnessed
democratic elections in Kenya, Zimbabwe, South
Africa, and Madagascar, DRC, the Gambia and several
other countries. The strengthening of democratic
political institutions is bound to deliver socio-economic
development benefits.

1.23 The African Union has become pro-active
in resolving conflicts and stepping forward to lead
regional initiatives to address long-running conflicts and
humanitarian crises.

1.24 African countries have a large coastline. This
underlines the potential for cooperation in the maritime
domain. Indian Ocean is a common factor and the Red
Sea which laps the countries of the region is a major
shipping link for India for both security and commerce.

1.25 The significant percentage of India’s trade,
including oil, passes through the Gulf of Aden and the
Indian Ocean. The safety and undeterred continuity of
maritime trade through this route is a priority. India Navy
ships have been escorting ships and have undertaken
various initiatives to strengthen anti-piracy efforts.

1.26 Focus on maritime domain has become another
significant feature of our policy. Among the Indian
Ocean littoral countries (IOLC), 9 (nine) happen to be
in Africa. Over one third of members of IORA belong
to Africa. We are strengthening cooperation within the
framework of IORA to undertake specific projects. We
have formalized frameworks of Defence cooperation
with South Africa, Kenya, Tanzania, Mauritius, Seychelles
and Madagascar.

1.27 We have also been assisting some of these
countries by deployment of Indian Armed Forces
training teams. A tri-service training team has been
deployed in Tanzania. An Indian Coast Guard team is


-----

deployed in Mozambique. Uganda and Namibia also

have Indian defence training teams. We are in the

process of sending a Navy training team to Madagascar.

1.28 Countries on the Eastern coast of Africa and the

island countries of the Indian Ocean are being appraised

of the benefits of continuity between Africa and the

dynamic economies of Asia through the oceanic link.

1.29 India is also a participant in capacity building,

including training of sailors. We are conducting

hydrographic surveys to improve navigability of

coastal waters and provision of maritime equipment

for Tanzania, Kenya and Mozambique. Agreements

on White Shipping have been signed with Kenya and

Nigeria.

1.30 Indian soldiers are deployed in almost all

peacekeeping missions in Africa and have been working

shoulder-to-shoulder with their African counterparts.

India has also supported the Africa-led peacekeeping

efforts, including through financial assistance to the

AMISOM (AU Mission in Somalia) and African-led

International Support Mission to Mali. Currently, our

largest contingent of Indian peacekeepers is present in

DRC.

1.31 We have undertaken a wide range of HADR

operations and evacuation efforts to providing relief

supplies to several African countries.

1.32 Indian Navy was the first responder in the

evolving humanitarian crises in the aftermath of Cyclone

IDAI that hit Mozambique on March 15, 2019. Under

Operation Sahayata, 3 Indian ships, INS Sujata, ICGS

Sarathi and INS Shardul undertook HADR (Humanitarian

Assistance Disaster Relief) in coordination with local

authorities. IN Helicopter Chetak took several sorties to

facilitate aerial survey by Disaster management officials

of Mozambique, for evacuation of people in coordination

with local authorities and for dropping of food & water

packets in cyclone affected areas. To sustain HADR


operations, another ship INS MAGAR, suitably loaded

with relief materials was also sent to Mozambique.

1.33 Mozambican Government expressed its

gratitude for support and solidarity extended by the

Government of India. The professionalism, human

approach and proficiency of Indian naval crew received

great appreciation from Government and the people

of Mozambique as well as the international agencies

including the UN staff involved in HADR operations in

Mozambique.

1.34 Earlier IN ships provided relief material to

Madagascar. Assistance is also being sent to Zimbabwe

and Malawi, two other countries hit by the cyclone.

###### Internal Security Environment

1.35 The overall internal security environment in

the country is under control due to the continuous

and unrelenting efforts of the Central and State

Governments. In our federal structure, the primary

responsibility for ‘Public Order’ and ‘Policing’ rests

with the State Governments. However, the Central

Government is steadfastly assisting the States in dealing

with problems such as terrorism, militancy, insurgency

and extremism. The range of challenges to internal

security in India, emanating from terrorism/insurgency,

can be categorised into four broad theatres, namely (i)

Terrorism in the hinterland, (ii) Cross border terrorism in

Jammu & Kashmir (J&K), (iii) Insurgency in North East

and (iv) Left Wing Extremism (LWE) in certain states.

1.36 As far as terror related cases in the hinterland

is concerned, the overall situation is under control. No

major terror attack took place in the hinterland of the

country during the year 2017. In November 2018, a

grenade attack took place in Adliwal Village, Amritsar

which resulted in loss of 3 lives and injuries to 23 others.

No major terror attack took place in the first quarter of

2019 in the hinterland.


-----

###### 8


1.37 State sponsored terrorism by Pakistan in J&K various insurgent outfits have entered into Suspension
remains the foremost internal security challenge faced of Operation (SoO) agreements and some of them

by the country. During the period from January 1, 2018 have signed Memorandum of Settlements (MoS) and
to March 31, 2019, our security forces were able to dissolved themselves. As a result, a number of cadres
neutralize 305 militants. Several development initiatives of insurgent outfits have surrendered after laying down
like strengthening of infrastructure, education, health, arms and joined the mainstream of society. Sustained
high and security equipments for J&K Police, etc., under counter-insurgency operations are continuing against
Prime Minister Development Package, 2015 have been the insurgent.
taken in the State of J&K.

1.40 The declining trend of LWE violence which

1.38 The overall security situation in the North started in 2011, continued in 2018 as well. In the last five
Eastern (NE) States improved substantially since years, there has been an unprecedented improvement in
2013. The year 2018 witnessed the lowest number of LWE scenario across the country.
insurgency incidents and civilian deaths since 1997.
Compared to 2017, insurgency incidents have registered 1.41 The improved security situation is a
a decline of 18% in the year 2018. Similarly, there was result of resolute implementation of the multi-
25% reduction in number of civilians and security forces pronged strategy encompassing security measures,
personnel deaths in 2018. In the first three months development measures, ensuring rights and
of 2019, security situation has further improved in entitlements of local communities etc. Greater
the region with the decline in insurgency incidents, presence of security forces across LWE States and
civilian casualties, Security Forces (SF) casualties and severe attribution on armed LWE cadres through
kidnapping/abduction cases. Compared to the peak of arrests, surrenders, desertions and neutralization
insurgency in the region in the last two decades since in operations have contributed to the reduction in
1997, there has been phenomenal improvement in violence. Several developmental initiatives have been
security situation in the region. taken specifically for development of LWE affected

area including focused schemes for development of

1.39 While there is almost no insurgency left roads, setting up of mobile towers, skill development
in Tripura and Mizoram, there has been a marked and financial inclusion etc. apart from the flagship
improvement in security situation in other States of schemes of Central Government in infrastructure,
the region. Pursuant to policy of talks/negotiations, education, health, agriculture etc.




-----

###### chapter
###  2

#### Organisation and functions of Ministry of Defence


-----

# 2

###### ORGANISATIONAL SET-UP AND FUNCTIONS

2.1 After Independence, Ministry of Defence was

created under the charge of a Cabinet Minister and each

Service was placed under its own Commander-in-Chief.

In 1955, the Commanders-in-Chief were renamed as the

Chief of the Army Staff, the Chief of the Naval Staff and the

Chief of the Air Staff. In November 1962, the Department

of Defence Production was set up to deal with research,

development and production of defence equipment. In

November, 1965, the Department of Defence Supplies

was created for planning and execution of schemes for

import substitution of defence requirements. These two

Departments were later merged to form the Department

of Defence Production and Supplies. In 2004, the name

of Department of Defence Production and Supplies was

changed to Department of Defence Production. In 1980,

the Department of Defence Research and Development

was created. In 2004, the Department of Ex-Servicemen

Welfare was setup.

2.2 The Defence Secretary functions as head of the

Department of Defence and is additionally responsible

for co-ordinating the activities of the four Departments

in the Ministry.

###### THE MINISTRY AND ITS DEPARTMENTS

2.3 The principal task of the Ministry is to frame

policy directions on defence and security related

matters and communicate them for implementation to

the Services Headquarters, Inter-Service Organisations,

Production Establishments and Research & Development

Organisations. It is required to ensure effective

###### 0


###### ORGANISATION AND FUNCTIONS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

# 2


implementation of the Government’s policy directions

and the execution of approved programmes within the

allocated resources.

2.4 The principal functions of the Departments are

as follows:

(i) The Department of Defence deals with the

Integrated Defence Staff (IDS) and three

Services and various Inter Service Organisations.

It is also responsible for the Defence Budget,

establishment matters, defence policy, matters

relating to Parliament, defence cooperation

with foreign countries and co-ordination of all

defence related activities.

(ii) The Department of Defence Production is

headed by a Secretary and deals with matters

pertaining to defence production, indigenisation

of imported stores, equipment and spares,

planning and control of departmental production

units of the Ordnance Factory Board and

Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs).

(iii) The Department of Defence Research and

Development is headed by a Secretary. Its

function is to advise the Government on

scientific aspects of military equipment and

logistics and the formulation of research, design

and development plans for equipment required

by the Services.

(iv) The Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare

is headed by a Secretary and deals with all


-----

resettlement, welfare and pensionary matters

of Ex-Servicemen.

2.5 A list of subjects dealt with by various

Departments and Finance Division of the Ministry of

Defence is given in Appendix-I to this report.

2.6 Information regarding the Ministers in the

Ministry of Defence, the Chiefs of Staff, the Secretaries

in the Departments of the Ministry and the Secretary

(Defence Finance)/Financial Advisor (Defence Services)

who held positions during the period of this report is

given in Appendix-II to this report.

###### HEADQUARTERS INTEGRATED DEFENCE STAFF (HQ IDS)

2.7 HQ IDS was raised on October 1, 2001 based on

the recommendations of Group of Ministers (GoM) on

the Kargil Review Committee (KRC) report. The HQ was

raised under the command & control of Chairman Chiefs

of Staff Committee (COSC) to foster jointness and

synergy amongst the three Services. Since its inception,

this HQ has achieved considerable milestones in joint

and integrated planning, coordination of intelligence,

joint conduct of Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster

Relief (HADR) Operations and prioritising/streamlining

procurements. Salient achievements of HQ IDS,

during the ensuing year are enunciated in succeeding

paragraphs.

2.8 _Unified Commanders’ Conference – 2018: HQ_

IDS conducted the Unified Commanders’ Conference

(UCC) at New Delhi on July 30 & 31, 2018. The

conference provided a platform for discussions at

the apex level on all ‘Joint’ issues amongst the three

Services. The conference was attended by the Raksha

Mantri, National Security Advisor, Service Chiefs

and other Senior military and civil officials of the

Ministry of Defence and Tri-Services Organisations/

Institutions.


2.9 _Combined Commanders’ Conference – 2018:_

HQ IDS conducted the Combined Commanders’

Conference - 2018 on September 28, 2018 at Air Force

Station, Jodhpur. The Conference was aimed to provide

a platform for exchange of ideas at the apex level with a

view to taking stock of the activities of the past year and

to formulate a way ahead for the future. Participation

of Commander-in-Chiefs of the three Services ensured

feedback from the field formations to the highest

decision making body thereby facilitating formulation

of a way ahead in a comprehensive manner. Under the

Chairmanship of the Prime Minister, the conference

was attended by the Raksha Mantri, Raksha Rajya

Mantri, National Security Advisor, Defence Secretary

and Financial Advisor (Defence Services) from the

Ministry in addition to the three Service Chiefs, Chief of

Integrated Staff to Chairman COSC (CISC), Vice Chiefs

and all Commander-in-Chiefs (C-in-Cs).


-----

2.10 _Turnover of Chief of Integrated Staff to_
_Chairman COSC (CISC): Lt Gen PS Rajeshwar, AVSM,_
VSM took over as CISC on November 1, 2018. The officer
was Director General Perspective Planning, IHQ of MoD
(Army) prior to his present assignment. As CISC, he is
coordinating various important Tri-Services Operational,
Training, Planning & Administrative issues.

2.11 _New Raisings: Three new agencies viz Armed_
Forces Special Operations Division, Defence Cyber
Agency and Defence Space Agency are being raised
under Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff with the
issuance of Government Sanction Letters from the
Ministry of Defence. The new agencies with its mandate
and charters are designed to further embolden the idea
of jointness and integration amongst the three Services

###### 2


achieving common national goal.

2.12. _Joint Special Forces Training Camp: Joint_
Special Forces Training Camp is conducted annually
under the aegis of Headquarters Integrated Defence
Staff with a view to furthering integration between the
Services in the field of Special Operations. This year the
camp was conducted in March 2018 at Bagdogra.

2.13 _Inauguration of National War Memorial:_
National War Memorial at ‘C’ Hexagon of India Gate
was inaugurated and dedicated to the Armed Forces on
February 25, 2019 by Prime Minister to commemorate
the valour, sacrifice and selfless service of the Indian
Armed Forces. The entire project was steered by HQ IDS.


-----

_Armed Forces Veterans’ Day_


2.14 _Armed Forces Veterans’ Day:_ The 3[rd] Armed
Forces Veterans’ Day was held on January 14, 2019
as a mark of respect and commitment towards our
Veterans. It was celebrated at Delhi, Shillong, Patiala,
Bikaner, Alwar, Kota, Dehradun, Meerut, Mumbai, Port
Blair, Guwahati, Nagpur, Trivandrum and all major
stations. The Armed Forces Veterans’ Day is an outreach
programme to interact with Veterans and to apprise
them of the measures taken by the Services HQ and
Ministry of Defence on matters concerning their pension
and welfare on the occasion. Chief of Integrated Staff to
Chairman COSC alongwith one senior officer from each
Service also laid a wreath at Amar Jawan Jyoti, along
with Veterans of the three Services.

###### Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR) Activities

2.15 _Kerala Floods:_ Kerala state received incessant
rainfall for a period of two weeks from August 7, 2018
onwards. The heavy rainfall created unprecedented
flood situation (worst in last 100 years), affecting 13
districts in the state. The gates of 35 dams in the state
had to be opened, exacerbating the floods situation
in Central Kerala. Idukki, Kochi, Ernakulam and
Pathanamthitta were the worst affected districts. INCP
was activated during the crisis period. HQ IDS acted as


Point of Contact for coordination of rescue/relief effort
on behalf of Armed Forces.

2.16 _Op SAMUDRA MAITRI (Indonesia floods):_
Sulawesi province in Indonesia was hit by an earthquake
and Tsunami on September 28, 2018. Palu in Central
Sulawesi was most severely affected by the twin
tragedy. On October 1, 2018, decision was taken to
extend humanitarian aid to Indonesia.

###### ARMED FORCES TRIBUNAL (AFT)

2.17 The Government has established Armed Forces
Tribunal (AFT) for the adjudication of complaints and

###### 3


-----

dispute regarding service matters and appeals arising
out of verdicts of the Court Martial of the Members
of the three Services (Army, Navy and Air Force) to
provide speedy justice to the members of the Armed
Forces.

2.18 At present Armed Forces Tribunals have been
functioning at Delhi (Principal Bench) and at Regional
Benches at Chennai, Jaipur, Lucknow, Chandigarh,
Kolkata, Kochi, Guwahati, Mumbai, Jabalpur and
Srinagar are functional.

###### BORDER ROADS ORGANISATION (BRO)

2.19 Border Roads Organisation (BRO) is a road
construction organization to meet the requirements of
the Armed Forces. Starting operations in May 1960 with
two projects, it has now grown to 18 projects. Nine BRO
projects are located in North West India (4 in J&K, 2 in
Himachal Pradesh, 2 in Uttarakhand and 1 in Rajasthan),
8 BRO projects are located in North Eastern India (1
in Sikkim, 4 in Arunachal Pradesh, 1 in Nagaland, 1 in
Mizoram and 1 in Tripura) and 1 in Bhutan.

2.20 BRO has earned a reputation of being the only
road construction agency to construct and maintain
roads in difficult, isolated and inhospitable terrain in
inclement weather conditions. BRO has constructed
approximately 53600 km of roads, 633 major permanent
bridges of 57600 meter length and 19 Airfields. At
present, BRO is undertaking construction/up-gration
work of 19415 km roads and maintaining 7992 km roads,
seven airfields besides snow clearance of 4219 km roads
to ensure connectivity of border regions with rest of the
country.

2.21 _Major achievement by BRO_

(a) _Completion of Theng Tunnel: To negotiate_
frequent land slides at km 86 km on road
Gangtok-Chungthang, a Horse Shoe shaped
tunnel of NHDL specification having length


578 meter has been completed. This tunnel has
been dedicated to nation by by Raksha Rajya

Mantri on June 7, 2018.

(b) _Se La Tunnel: Prime Minister has laid the_
foundation stone of Se La Tunnel on February
9, 2019 and construction work through EPC
contract has been awarded.

(c) _Akhnoor – Poonch Road: The Akhnoor – Poonch_
Road is planned to be upgraded to National
Highway Double lane (NHDL) specs with
paved shoulders. The proposed upgradation
also includes four tunnels and bypass that will
ensure all weather connectivity and result in a
reduction of about 34 km in the overall distance.
Foundation stone for this up-gradation works
was laid by the Prime Minister on February 3,
2019.

(d) _Rohtang Tunnel: After breakthrough of Rohtang_
Tunnel in Himachal Pradesh was achieved, the
concrete lining works have been progressed at
an accelerated pace. Civil works are expected
to be completed by third quarter of Financial
Year 2019-20.

(e) _Completion_ _of_ _ICBRs:_ Government has
identified 3812 km roads for development along
Indo-China border. Out of this, road for 3418 km
have been entrusted to BRO, overall completed
length 2300 km and connected length 3205
km.

(f) _Highest Motorable Road in Ladakh: Project_
Himank has constructed the World’s highest
motorable road in Ladakh region of Jammu and
Kashmir, passing Umingla Top at an altitude of
19300 feet. This strategically important road of
length 86 km, connects border villages (China
border) Chismle and Demchok to the mainland
of Leh and will play important role in safe


-----

movement of troop to Indo-China border.

(g) _Adoption of EPC mode in BRO: Adoption of_

Engineering Procurement Contract (EPC) mode

of execution has been approved by Ministry of

Defence on August 29, 2017. Accordingly, all

works costing more than ` 100 crore has been

planned to execute through EPC mode.

At present, 40 numbers of works have been

planned to be outsourced through EPC mode.

As on date 33 contracts for preparation of

DPRs have been accepted and 7 cases are in

tendering process. The following civil works

have been awarded through EPC mode:

(i) _Chardham Yatra Projects: Contract_

for construction of 83.215 km on

Chardham Yatra Projects on Road

Rishikesh-Joshimath-Mana, Rishikesh
Dharasu and Dharasu-Gangotri Roads

in Uttarakhand for ` 724.19 crore has

been awarded to various firms.

(ii) _Se La Tunnel: Contract for construction_

of two tunnels of length 0.475 km and

1.79 km at Sela Pass along with the

approach Roads of length 9.775 km

on Balipara-Charduar-Tawang Road in

Arunachal Pradesh for ` 647.22 crore

has been concluded on February 15,

2019.

(iii) _Up-gradation:_ Contract for

construction Road Balipara-Charduar
Tawang stretch between km 70 km to

88 km in Arunachal Prades from CI-9 to

NHDL specifications for ` 170 crore has

been concluded.


###### DEFENCE (FINANCE)

2.22 Finance Division in the Ministry of Defence

deals with all matters having a financial implication.

This Division is headed by Secretary (Defence Finance)/

Financial Advisor (Defence Services) and is fully

integrated with the Ministry.

2.23 The Ministry of Defence enjoys enhanced
delegated financial powers to facilitate quicker
decision making. These powers are exercised with
the concurrence of the Finance Division. With
a view to ensuring transparency in exercise of
these powers in respect of defence procurement
matters and compliance with the laid down policy
guidelines, the Defence Procurement Procedure
(DPP) and Defence Procurement Manual (DPM) are
updated from time to time.

2.24 Finance Division prepares and monitors

Defence Services Estimates, Civil Estimates of the

Ministry of Defence and the Estimates in respect of

Defence Pensions (Table 2.1). Break-up of the actual

expenditure for the years 2017-18, as also the Revised

Estimates for 2018-19 and Budget Estimates for 2019-20

in respect of the four grants of this ministry and Defence

Services Estimates are given in Table No. 2.1 and Table

No. 2.2 respectively, and the relevant graph/chart at the

end of this Chapter.

2.25 Summary of latest report of the Comptroller

& Auditor General (C&AG) of India on the working of

the Ministry of Defence is given in Appendix-III to this

Annual Report.

2.26 The position of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) as

on March 31, 2019 in respect of observations made in

the C&AG Report is given as Appendix-IV to this Annual

Report.


-----

||Col2|Col3|(` in crore)|
|---|---|---|---|
|Details of Grant|2017-18 Actuals|2018-19 RE|2019-20 BE|
|Grant No 19 MoD (Misc.)|15144.57|16318.49|17065.12|
|Grant No 20 Defence Services (Revenue)|182121.42|188118.10|198485.76|
|Grant No 21 Capital Outlay on Defence Services|90438.39|93982.13|103380.34|
|Grant No 22 Defence Pensions|91999.58|106775.14|112079.57|
|Grand Total|379703.96|405193.86|431010.79|

||Col2|Col3|(` in crore)|
|---|---|---|---|
|Service/Department|2017-18 Actuals (Rev.+Cap)|2018-19 RE (Rev.+Cap)|2019-20 BE (Rev.+Cap)|
|Army|154655.74|156628.05|166379.77|
|Navy|38833.63|41685.91|45368.14|
|Air Force|62310.79|63875.60|68948.88|
|DGOF|650.85|1276.50|934.63|
|DGQA|905.76|1023.79|1213.66|
|R&D|15203.04|17610.38|19021.02|
|Total|272559.81|282100.23|301866.10|


###### 6


TABLE No. 2.1
Grant-wise Break-up of Defence Expenditure

 (` in crore)

Details of Grant 2017-18 Actuals 2018-19 RE 2019-20 BE

Grant No 19 MoD (Misc.) 15144.57 16318.49 17065.12

Grant No 20 Defence Services (Revenue) 182121.42 188118.10 198485.76

Grant No 21 Capital Outlay on Defence Services 90438.39 93982.13 103380.34

Grant No 22 Defence Pensions 91999.58 106775.14 112079.57

_Grand Total_ _379703.96_ _405193.86_ _431010.79_

TABLE No. 2.2
Service/Department-wise Break-up of Defence Services Estimates

 (` in crore)

Service/Department 2017-18 Actuals 2018-19 RE 2019-20 BE
(Rev.+Cap) (Rev.+Cap) (Rev.+Cap)

_Army_ 154655.74 156628.05 166379.77

_Navy_ 38833.63 41685.91 45368.14

_Air Force_ 62310.79 63875.60 68948.88

_DGOF_ 650.85 1276.50 934.63

_DGQA_ 905.76 1023.79 1213.66

_R&D_ 15203.04 17610.38 19021.02

_Total_ _272559.81_ _282100.23_ _301866.10_

_DGOF - Directorate General of Ordnance Factories_
_DGQA - Directorate General of Quality Assurance_
_R&D_ _- Research & Development_


-----

###### chapter
###  3

#### Indian Army


-----

###### Indian Army
# 3


###### Indian Army
# 3


3.1 The changing global geo-political dynamics

presents the Nation with multiple security challenges.

While constantly reviewing its operational preparedness/

postures to meet the perceived security challenges, the

Indian Army (IA) is committed to the defence of the

country from external and internal threats across the

entire spectrum of warfare. Also, in times of disaster/

natural calamities, the Indian Army is in the forefront,

providing aid and succour to the affected people.

###### JAMMU AND KASHMIR

3.2 The situation in J&K has remained volatile. Our

deployment along the Line of Control (LC) and hinterland

along with accretional forces has facilitated the Security

Forces to maintain momentum of operations against

terrorists. In the hinterland, the districts of Pulwama,

Shopian, Anantnag and Kulgam remained the hub of

terror related activities. Along the LC, areas South of

Pir Panjal Ranges remained violent due to frequent

Ceasefire Violations while the infiltration attempts from

North of Pir Panjal Ranges have continued as hither to

fore.

3.3 _Ceasefire Violations (CFV): The ceasefire_

along the Actual Ground Position Line (AGPL), LC and

International Border (IB) Sectors in J&K was generally

held. In the year 2016 post Uri terrorist attack (September

18, 2016), the tempo of CFVs increased considerably

and has remained constant this year too. There were

228 CFVs along the LC in 2016, 860 CFVs in 2017 and

1629 CFVs in 2018. Appropriate and effective retaliation,

wherever required, was carried out to the CFVs initiated

by Pakistan. The incidents of CFVs are taken up through

###### 8


the established mechanisms of hotlines, flag meetings

and Directorate General of Military Operation talks

between both countries.

3.4 _Infiltration: Active training and aiding of_

terrorists continue from across the border to infiltrate

through the LC. The efficacy of own Counter Infiltration

grid has resulted in heavy attrition on infiltrating terrorists

and lowering of successful infiltration across the LC. In

2018, Army eliminated 15 infiltration bids resulting in

35 terrorists killed. In 2017, the Army had eliminated 33

infiltration bids resulting in 59 terrorist killed.

###### Situation in Hinterland

3.5 Security Forces achieved remarkable success in

the year 2018. Operations were conducted in excellent

synergy with J&K Police and CRPF. Terrorist leadership

and Over-Ground Workers (OGWs) were targeted in

efficacy. 254 terrorists have been eliminated by the

Security Forces in 2018 in J&K.

3.6 Suspension of Offensive Operation (SoOO)

declared by the Government with effect from May 17 to

June 16, 2018 provided an opportunity to the populace

for peaceful celebration of the holy month of Ramzan.

The terrorists, however, disregarded the initiative

and used the opportunity to coerce the population,

neutralize sympathizers of security forces, strengthen

their network and increase terror incidents.

3.7 Tempo was, however, restored after the

resumption of operations. Significant dent has been

made to the terrorist organisations by inflicting heavy


-----

attrition and eliminating its leadership. Attempts of the

terrorist groups to revive militancy in North Kashmir was

thwarted by maintaining sustained pressure. As a result

the recruitment was largely restricted to the districts of

South Kashmir.

3.8 Terrorists on their part tried to maintain
higher levels of violence. As compared to 131 Terrorist
Initiated Incidents (TIIs) in 2017, 318 were reported
in 2018. This was done with a view to expanding
their writ in the society by terrorizing the population
and subverting Government institutions. SPOs, SF
personnel on leave and innocent civilians including
women were brutally killed. The incidents, however,
were largely restricted to South Kashmir and by
the end of the year, due to sustained pressure,
recruitment declined. Attempts of Tanzeems to
boost their number also received setbacks as 71% of
terrorists was eliminated within months of picking up
arms. As a result, due to sustained pressure, the local
recruitment which had seen a spurt in activity during
SoOO, declined by year end.

3.9 Overall security situation remained under

control. Amarnath Yatra, Urban Local Bodies and

Panchayat elections were conducted without any

security related incidents.

###### Situation Along the Line of Control (LC)

3.10 _Cease Fire Violations (CFVs): Sustained pressure_

was maintained on the LC and violations by Pak Army

were appropriately retaliated. Pak Army sought DGMO

talks on May 29, 2018 during which implementation of

Ceasefire Understanding of 2003 was proposed. The

proposal was accepted by our DGMO. During talks held

on June 13, 2018, our concerns including infiltration of

terrorists from Pakistan were conveyed.

3.11 Pakistan also sought a Brigade Commanders
Level Flag Meeting on June 20, 2018. During the Flag
meeting, our concerns of infiltration was reiterated and


measures to ensure controlled movement of civilians
close to the LC were proposed.

3.12 The CFVs reduced post DGMOs talk. CFVs,
however, increased in the run up to the Surgical Strike
Anniversary celebrations. The CFVs in September,
October and November have been largely reported
in Poonch and Naushera Sector in South of Pir Panjal
Range. Caliber escalation reduced significantly post the
May 29, 2018 talks.

3.13 Probing attempts continued from across and
standoff firing on our posts occurred in regular intervals.
A befitting retaliation was done to Pak in Sunderbani
Sector on November 12, 2018. In response, Pakistan
sought DGMO talks on November 15, 2018 and Brigade
Commander Level Flag Meeting on November 23, 2018.
Our commitment to maintain peace along the LC was
conveyed to Pak. At the same time, it was emphasized
that infringement of our Red Lines would invite massive
punitive retaliation.

3.14 The Army has assiduously combated terrorism
in the State through people friendly operations based
on precise intelligence to break their nexus, with a larger
aim of helping the civil administration in establishing its
writ and bring about peace and stability in Jammu and
Kashmir. The endeavor would be to further strengthen
the counter infiltration grid and maintain sustained
pressure on Pakistan Army along the Line of Control
by well calibrated punitive retaliation to any act of
misadventure.

###### Human Rights in J&K

3.15 Indian Army continues to maintain its
stellar Human Rights record in J&K and assiduously
investigates cases of alleged violations received from
National Human Rights Commission. In 2018, Indian
Army received 15 allegations from NHRC of which six
investigations have been completed and all of them
have been found false. Balance allegations are currently
under investigation.

###### 9


-----

3.16 Pakistan, with renewed vigour in 2018,

orchestrated an international campaign on Kashmir

through its sponsored proxies by trying to project law

& order maintenance actions as trumped up human

rights cases of excess use of force. Pakistan’s effort to

portray Kashmir issue has received a fillip, following the

publication of two international reports by the Office of

the United Nations Human Rights Commission and the

British Parliaments ‘All Party Coordination Committee’.

Indian Army is proactively engaging with MEA and

MHA to counter propaganda both at international and

national fora.

###### NORTH EAST

3.17 The security situation in the North Eastern

States has improved on all parameters with only

sporadic incidents of violence over the year. Inputs

reveal that insurgent groups are facing acute

administration and financial crunch due to relentless

operations by Security Forces and have been forced to

form umbrella organisation to maintain their capability

for orchestrating violent activities. Concurrently, the

tribal and ethnic divide, fuelled by the issue of illegal

immigrants, has gained momentum and is likely to

have a pan North East impact. Proactive operations by

Security Forces continued and in 2018, 620 terrorists

were neutralized (Killed - 16 and Apprehended - 604)

along with recovery of 619 weapons.

3.18 _Assam: The security situation in the State_

remained largely peaceful and under control. Calibrated,

synergised and coordinated operations by security forces

significantly reduced the operational space of insurgent

groups. NDFB (S) and ULFA (I) have been marginalised

leading to demoralisation and disenchantment amongst

its cadres. Insurgent groups are facing acute financial

crunch and have resorted to extortion and sporadic acts

of violence to prove their relevance. National Citizen

Register (NRC) update and Amendment to Citizenship

Bill remain challenging issues and are likely to adversely

impact law and order situation in the State.

###### 20


3.19 _Nagaland: Security situation in the State has_

improved considerably since 2015. State elections were

held peacefully in February 2018 and resulted in a record

turnout. In September 2017, the Naga Peace Process

reached an important juncture with the signing of

Framework Agreement with the NNPGs (conglomerate

of six Naga insurgent groups). Talks between the

Government and the Naga groups are underway to

ensure early finalization of the peace process.

3.20 The impeachment of Khango Konyak from

NSCN (K) resulted in a split in the group based on Indian

and Myanmar Nagas. The Khango Konyak led faction

has shown inclination of joining the peace talks and the

ceasefire agreement. The developments have ensured

that the Naga Peace Talks have become more inclusive

and are progressing towards the solution for achieving

lasting peace in the State.

3.21 _Manipur: Security situation in the State_

continues to remain fragile and it remains the most

disturbed State in the North East region. Majority of the

violence has been perpetrated by valley based groups as

they accounted for approximately 60% of the violence

in Manipur. Inter-tribal rivalry and insider - outsider

divide were prominently visible during 2018.

3.22 With the passing of Manipur People’s Protection

Bill by Manipur Assembly, there are increased demands

for implementation of Inner Line Permit in the State.

Politics of Blockades and Bandhs continued to prevail

and led to increasing fissures amongst the three major

communities namely Meiteis - Nagas - Kukis. There is

also increased activity of Civil Society Organisations

seeking clarification on the content of the Frame Work

Agreement and who have been voicing concerns over

maintaining territorial integrity of Manipur in light of the

NSCN (IM)’s claim for Nagalim.

3.23 _Arunachal Pradesh: Security situation in_

Arunachal Pradesh has been gradually improving in

terms of reduction in violent incidents, lower civilian


-----

casualties and increasing number of apprehension of

terrorists. Synergised operations by Special Forces have

reduced the operational space of insurgents. Apart from

the complete districts of Longding, Tirap and Changlang,

areas falling under the jurisdiction of eight Police

Stations along the Assam border have been declared

as ‘Disturbed Area’ for six months beyond September

30, 2018. Earlier, areas under 11 Police Stations were

declared as ‘Disturbed Area’.

3.24 Longding, Tirap and Changlang districts of

the State are affected by the presence of various Naga

insurgent groups which continue with their revival

attempts. Since the area shares its borders with Assam

and Myanmar it is frequented by cadres of NDFB(S)

and ULFA (I) for shelter/transit. There are attempts by

joint groups under United National Liberation Front of

West South East Asia (UNLFWSEA) to showcase their

relevance in these areas.

3.25 _Meghalaya: The State continues to remain_

peaceful with dwindling support base for Garo National

Liberation Army (GNLA). The violence perpetrated

by the GNLA remained largely confined to Garo hills.

Spillover of the activities of terrorist groups was also

visible in neighbouring districts of Goalpara and Dhubri

in Assam. The State Assembly elections were conducted

peacefully in February 2018.

3.26 _Mizoram: The State continued to remain_

peaceful. However, there were increase in attempts

by insurgent groups to smuggle arms and narcotics.

Due to the ongoing counter insurgency operations by

Myanmar Army against Myanmar Ethnic Armed Groups

(EAG) along the tri-junction of India, Myanmar and

Bangladesh, a spill-over of EAG activities and influx of

Myanmar population fearing violence by EAGs were

observed in South Mizoram. Proactive measures are

thus being taken to establish a coordinated intelligence

grid and undertake effective border management to

preclude any deterioration of situation on our side of

India Myanmar Border.


3.27 _Tripura: The State has remained comparatively_

peaceful and violence was within the threshold of law

and order domain. The year 2018 witnessed reduced

levels of violence which reflect the efforts of the Security

Forces to ensure transition of security environment

from volatility to peace and tranquility. The region is

at the cusp of major changes and large infrastructure

and communication projects are on the anvil as part of

‘Act East Policy’. The ongoing NRC update and Naga

Peace Accord is likely to have a pan regional impact

and situation needs to be proactively monitored in the

coming months.

3.28 _Left Wing Extremism (LWE):_ Anti LWE

operations are being conducted by State Governments

and MHA. Army is involved only in advisory capacity

and is providing training to the State Police/ CAPFs

including training for Counter Improvised Explosive

Devices Operations. Nominated young officers from

CAPF units are attached with Army battalions deployed

in J&K and in the North East Region with the aim of

grooming them for leading their sub units in Anti LWE

operations & by giving them ‘operational exposure’ and

‘hands on training’.

###### Situation Along the India-China Border

3.29 The situation along the India-China border

has remained peaceful. There are few areas along the

border where there are differing perceptions of the LAC.

Both sides patrol upto their respective perceptions of

LAC. Specific cases of transgression by Chinese patrols

into such areas are taken up with Chinese Authorities

through the established mechanism of Hotlines, Border

Personnel and Flag Meetings.

3.30 Compared to last year, the number of

transgressions this year have considerably reduced.

Concomitantly, the percentage of Face Offs/ Aggressive

Interactions during these transgressions has also

reduced this year. Post the Wuhan Summits, there has

been an increase in the numbers of Flag Meetings. This

###### 2


-----

may be attributed to intent to resolve outstanding issues

through discussion at various levels.

3.31 Standoff at CNN Junction, Eastern Ladakh due

to our construction of a benign track and the constant

raising of the construction of our Temporary Operating

Base at Andrathang, Arunachal Pradesh were the only

instances where there was major difference of opinion

between the two sides. A few Confidence Building

Measures (CBMs) which had been proposed by both

sides for consideration have been implemented in

sensitive areas of Arunachal Pradesh thereby easing

the tension to some extent. Some additional CBMs are

under consideration by both sides.

3.32 _Situation in Doklam Plateau:_ Post the

disengagement on August 28, 2017, after the 72 days

standoff at Doklam, troops of both sides have redeployed

themselves away from their respective positions near

the face off site. The strength of either side has, however,

reduced. The Indian Army is continuously monitoring

Chinese activities in the area and is adequately prepared

to respond to any contingency.

3.33 _Defence Minister Level Interaction: Defence_

Minister of China visited India from August 21 to 23, 2018

and interacted with the Raksha Mantri in New Delhi. It is

pertinent to note that the previous such incoming visit

by the Chinese Defence Minister was in September 2012.

Raksha Mantri also visited Beijing as part of the SCO

Defence Ministers’ Conclave where a bilateral meeting

with the Chinese counterpart was held.

3.34 _Annual Defence and Security Dialogue: The_

Defence Secretary led an MoD delegation to China

to attend the 9[th] India-China Annual Defence and

Security Dialogue (ADSD), held from November 12 to

15, 2018. Both sides held wide ranging and substantive

discussion in a positive and friendly atmosphere.

Inter alia, the proposal for establishment of Hotlines

between respective Military Headquarters as well as

corresponding military formations was also discussed.

###### 22


###### DEFENCE COOPERATION WITH FRIENDLY FOREIGN COUNTRIES

3.35 Defence Cooperation activities constitute

an important tool for furtherance of our national

interests and foreign policy objectives. In keeping with

India’s rising global stature in recent years, there has

been a considerable increase in Defence Cooperation

activities undertaken by the Indian Army. Accordingly,

an increasing number of Friendly Foreign Countries

(FFCs) have shown keen interest to engage with the

Indian Army, which is viewed not only as the world’s

second largest standing Army but also as a professional,

apolitical force with extensive combat experience and

exemplary training standards. Till mid May, 2019, Indian

Army is engaged with 99 countries through Defence

cooperation activities.

3.36 _Structured Engagements: The Government_

of India (GoI) has entered into Memorandums of

Understanding (MoUs) / Defence Cooperation

Agreement with 59 countries. Indian Army holds bilateral

Army-to-Army Staff Talks (including Executive Steering

Groups) with 15 countries. These provide the formal

basis for progressing our defence cooperation initiatives.

For engagement with Nepal, we have a joint Ministry of

Defence / Ministry of External Affairs mechanism called

Nepal India Bilateral Consultative Group on Security

(NIBCGS). A similar multi Ministry engagement exists

with Russia wherein a ‘Road Map for the Development

of India – Russia Defence Cooperation’ was signed

during the Annual Meeting of Defence Ministers held in

Russia on June 23, 2017. There are 70 Military/Defence

Attachés in 44 Defence Wings including 31 from the

Army posted in 27 Defence Wings abroad. Similarly,

63 countries are represented by resident Defence

Attaches and five countries through accredited Defence

Attaches in foreign embassies in New Delhi. The Foreign

Service Attaches in Delhi were actively engaged in 2018

through conduct of Foreign Service Attache’s Briefing,

conducted on November 27, 2018 and Foreign Service


-----

Attache’s tour to Leh conducted from October 16-17,

2018.

3.37 _Visits: The year 2018 was witness to the conduct_

of numerous high level and functional level visits. The

Army Chiefs of UK, Sri Lanka, RoK, Nepal, Bangladesh

and Myanmar visited India while the COAS visited

Nepal, Sri Lanka, Russia, Vietnam, Tanzania and Kenya.

A ‘Conclave for Chiefs of BIMSTEC Countries’ was also

organised in India from September 15 to 16, 2018.

3.38 _Joint Exercises: Joint Exercises with Friendly_

Foreign Countries constitute the most visible component

of our defence cooperation activities. These events

showcase our professionalism globally and provide

valuable exposure to our troops. Three new joint

multilateral / bilateral exercises have been instituted

with BIMSTEC nations, African Nations and Japan

during the year where the following new exercises have

been approved:

(a) Joint Exercise with Uzbekistan - to be held in

Uzbekistan in year 2019.

(b) Joint Exercise with UAE - to be held in India in

year 2019.

(c) Joint Exercise with Saudi Arabia - to be held in

Saudi Arabia in year 2019.

(d) Joint Exercise with Egypt - to be held in India in

year 2019.

3.39 Indian Armed Forces contingent participated

in Exercise PEACE MISSION 2018 in Russia under SCO

framework for the first time in August 2018. Joint

bilateral Exercise with Kazakhstan has been upgraded

from Platoon level to Company level and renamed as

KAZIND. India hosted the inaugural multilateral Exercise

for BIMSTEC nations at Pune in September 2018 wherein

all BIMSTEC nations including India participated in the

exercise. We hosted inaugural multination exercise for


African nations at Pune in March 2019 where in 17 African

nations participated in exercise with troops and three

African nations deputed observers. India also co-hosted

“Exercise on Military Medicine with Myanmar” under

the frameworks of ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting

Plus (ADMMP) at Lucknow in March 2019 wherein 16

countries participated. 23 Exercises with friendly foreign

countries have been conducted by Indian Army in the

year 2018-19.

3.40 _Courses: Courses conducted in our training_

establishments are valued worldwide for professional

content and apolitical nature. Indian Army offered

2821 slots to foreign officers and NCOs for courses in

Indian Army Training institutes. On the other hand, 76

Indian Army personnel were trained abroad in foreign

military institutions. Tailormade training in desired fields

has been planned for 1205 personnel of Afghanistan,

Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and certain CAR and African

Nations. Additionally, structured exchanges were also

undertaken between instructors / cadets of our training/

pre-training institutions with their Friendly Foreign

Countries counterparts both in India and abroad.

3.41 _Exchanges Under SCO Framework: Indian_

Army participated in all practical actions under the SCO

framework including Joint Exercise PEACE MISSION 2018

(August 2018), Defence Ministers’ Meeting (April 2018),

Military Band display (alongside Defence Ministers’

Meeting) and Meetings of Heads of International Military

Cooperation Departments, Experts working Groups and

Meeting of Chiefs of Joint Staff in 2018. The interaction

with SCO member States through the SCO Forum in

military domain will be pursued further in the coming

years.

3.42 _International Army Games (Russia) 2018:_

The Indian Army contingents participated in the Tank

Biathlon and Elbrus Ring Competitions of International

Army Games (Russia) – 2018 from August 1 to 10, 2018

in Russia. Indian Army also deputed five observers in

various competitions held in Russia and China.

###### 23


-----

3.43 _Military Ceremonial Events: 32 member India_

Army Band participated in the Military Band Display

of SCO member states held in Beijing from April 22

to 25, 2018. Our Pipers also participated in the Annual

Commemoration Ceremony of WW-I held in France from

November 3 to 10, 2018. A contingent of Indian Army

participated in Haifa Day Centenary on September 6,

2018 at Haifa, Israel.

3.44 _Medical Assistance: Medical assistance provided_

to FFCs has emerged as an important cornerstone of our

defence cooperation initiatives. Our medical missions,

training of foreign medical personnel in our medical

schools and establishment of hospitals/gifting of

medicines have earned us tremendous goodwill. Indo
Tajikistan Friendship Hosp (ITFH) continued to function

efficiently in Qurgen Teppa, Tajikistan. Treatment of

numerous FFC Armies’ personnel / their dependents

from Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Nepal and Sri Lanka was

carried out in India during the year.

_Indian Army Contingent Participating in Exercise_
_Kazind in Almaty Kazakhstan: September 2018_

_India - Russia Joint Exercise Indra (Army) 2018_

###### 2


_Tactical Action : India - Russia Joint Exercise Indra_
_(Army) 2018 Conclusion_

3.45 Defence Cooperation has emerged as an

important pillar of India’s diplomatic efforts and Indian

Army has been at the forefront of these endeavours.

With India’s growing stature and eagerness of various

countries to engage with us, activities in this field

are poised to grow manifold in the years to come.

Indian Army’s Defence Cooperation efforts are being

synergised to meet our key national objectives.

Endeavour in coming years would be to further optimise

our efforts in creating dependencies in our immediate/

strategic neighbourhood.

###### MODERNISATION & EQUIPMENT

3.46 Indian Army’s modernisation strategy covers

the entire spectrum of conflict. Major initiatives have

been undertaken at organisational and ministerial levels

to provide impetus to acquisition and defence reforms.

3.47 During the Financial Year 2018-19, 13 contracts

worth ` 8277.40 crore have been signed for capital

procurement of defence equipment for Army such as

Bullet Proof Jacket (BPJ), Guns, Short Span Bridge,

Electronic Fuzes and Ammunition. The key facts of

modernisation pursuits for various Arms and Services

are as follows:

(a) _Mechanised Forces: Emphasis is on increasing_

effectiveness index of existing fleet of Tanks and

BMPs through night enablement, enhancing

mobility and accuracy.


-----

(b) _Infantry: Impetus is being given to augmenting_

survivability, mobility and close quarter battle

capability for combat and special operations.

A major boost has been given to Infantry with

the procurement of Bullet Proof Jackets and

Assault Rifles.

(c) _Artillery: Capability enhancement of Artillery_

is focused on acquiring long range firing

platforms and increasing lethality, precision and

surveillance capabilities. Upgrades of Unmanned

Aerial Vehicle systems, weaponisation of aerial

platforms and induction of additional artillery

guns.

_214mm Pinaka MLRS Weapon System_

(d) _Army Air Defence: Emphasis is being laid_

on upgrades of existing fleet, responsive air

defence for Strike formations in plains and

tactical air defence in mountains. In addition,

procurement / upgrades of Air Defence Guns

and equipment are at fairly advanced stages.

(e) _Army Aviation: Army Aviation is enhancing_

its firepower and surveillance capability.

The Army Aviation fleet will undergo a

major transformation with induction of new

helicopters including weaponised platforms

which enhance the fighting capability.

(f) _Signals: Major impetus has been laid on_

Electronic Warfare equipment, achieving robust


communication grid in high altitude area and

end to end data encryption.

(g) _Engineers & Combat Logistics: Emphasis has_

been laid on acquiring all terrain mobility,

versatile bridging equipment, family of

mines and enhanced engineering support in

mountains as well as for mechanised forces in

plains / deserts.

3.48 A number of initiatives have been undertaken

to streamline and hasten the procurement process

keeping in view the provisions of Defence Procurement

Procedure – 2016. The Government regularly monitors

progress of ongoing procurement projects, so as to

ensure that the Army is equipped to meet the entire

spectrum of security challenges.

3.49 _Alignment with ‘Make in India’:_ Indian Army’s

capability development plans are aligned with the ‘Make

in India’ initiative to commitment to Nation Building. Of

the 16 cases of Acceptance of Necessity(AoN) accorded

to major Schemes in the current Financial Year, 10

Schemes are ‘Buy Indian (IDDM)’, 4 are ‘Buy (Indian)’

and 1 Scheme is ‘Buy’ and ‘Make’ with ToT to OFB.

The Armed Forces have also been accorded enhanced

financial powers to meet immediate requirements.

3.50 _Army Design Bureau: The Army Design_

Bureau(ADB) in the Perspective Planning Directorate is

spearheading the Indian Army’s initiative of supporting,

developing and handholding of Indian Defence Industry

so as to achieve self reliance in defence equipment as

part of ‘Make in India’ initiative of Government of India.

One of the major initiatives undertaken by the ADB

was the publication of three Compendiums of Problem

Definition Statements which identified the core issues

of concern for the Indian Army. ADB is also supporting

development of technology through Army Technology

Board (ATB), Technology Development Fund (TDF),

Make-II and Innovation for Defence Excellence (iDEX).

In the year 2018, nine ATB projects, nine TDP projects,

###### 2


-----

seventeen Make-II projects and three iDEX projects have

been launched to support development of technologies

which can provide solutions to Problem Statements.

Twenty two solutions provided by Industry are under

examination by Field Formations at operational

locations.

3.51 _Ammunition_

(a) _Ammunition Stocks: A number of major_

initiatives have been taken for improving

ammunition stocks of Indian Army. This multi
pronged strategy is going to result in gradual

build-up of ammunition.

(b) _Ammunition Roll on Plan: The management of_

ammunition is done by placing five year Roll on

Indent on Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) to

enable it to plan its production. The indent is

placed on mutually agreed targets keeping the

OFB capacity in view. The first five year Roll on

Indent for 2010 to 2014 was placed on OFB in

February 2010. The second Roll on indent was

placed on OFB in October 2013 for projected

requirement of five year perspective plan for

year 2014 to 2019. Production reports of OFB

are being monitored monthly and shortfalls are

being highlighted.

(c) _Ammunition Road Map: During mid course_

evaluation of Five Year Roll on Plan of ammunition,

need was felt for preparing Ammunition Road

Map to address the criticalities. Ammunition

Road Map was approved by Ministry of

Defence to meet ammunition requirement.

The ammunition procurement plan approved

under the Ammunition Road Map includes

placing of additional requirements on OFB and

procurement of some ammunition items ex
import.

###### 26


(d) _Emergency_ _Procurement_ _of_ _Ammunition:_

Ministry of Defence delegated Emergency

Procurement powers to VCOAS in October

2016. As a result of this delegation, done with

a view to making up of critical deficiency of

Indian Army, many contracts were finalized for

various critical ammunition, armament, vehicles

and spares item. The procurements undertaken

have improved the state of equipment holdings

of Indian Army.

(e) _Delegation of Powers to Maintain Minimum_

_Stock Level of Critical Ammunition and Spares:_

In order to ensure that the Armed Forces are

always well-equipped for meeting emergent

operational requirements, the powers for

procurement to maintain minimum levels of

critical ammunition and critical spares, have

been delegated to the Service Headquarters

(SHQs). The power and responsibility is

therefore given to the Armed Forces to ensure

that the minimum critical levels for ammunition

and spares are maintained at all times.

(f) _Manufacture of Ammunition for Indian Army_

_by Indian Industry: To facilitate development_

of indigenous capacity and reduce import

dependence with the long-term objective

of building capacity within the industry as a

robust alternative source of ammunition, the

Government has approved manufacturing of

selected ammunition for Indian Army by Indian

Industry.

3.52 _Armament_

(a) _Armament Ex OFB: Based on Annual Provision_

Review, indent is placed on OFB for manufacture

of armament for which OFB has the Capacity

and Technology.


-----

(b) _Armament Ex Import: Due to non-availability of_

technology, certain armaments are also being

imported to make up the deficiency.

(c) _Delegation of Powers for maintaining 100%_

_stock level of Critical Armament & Mines:_

Financial powers have been delegated to

VCOAS for undertaking procurement upto 100%

authorization in respect of some identified

critical armaments and mines.

###### Weapon Night Sights and Surveillance Devices

3.53 The requirement of Image Intensifier Night

Vision Devices (NVD) for Armoured Fighting Vehicle

(AFV) and Non- AFV applications of Indian Army are

being met. Present procurement cases include Hand

Held Thermal Imager (HHTI), HHTI with Laser Range

Finder (LRF), Passive Night Vision Goggles (PNVG),

Passive Night Vision Binoculars (PNVB), Passive Night

Sight (PNS) for INSAS Rifle/LMG and from OLF include

Image Intensifier & Thermal Imagery Sights for AFV

platforms.

3.54 With a view to maintaining the operational

preparedness of Armed Forces, the scope of delegated

financial powers to Service HQ has further been widened

through delegation of Emergency Procurement powers

to Vice-Chief of Services for undertaking procurement

of operationally critical Arms, Weapons, Ammunition,

Spares and Missiles, to be exercised under the

authorisation of respective Service Chiefs.

###### RASHTRIYA RIFLES

3.55 Rashtriya Rifles (RR), since its raising, has

rendered invaluable assistance towards security as

well as socio-economic development of the State of

Jammu and Kashmir. During 2018, Rashtriya Rifles has

relentlessly pressed on with its operational tasks. The

Force as a whole provided pivotal support for maintaining


peace and tranquility in J&K which otherwise continues

to be in turmoil.

3.56 Utmost patience and perseverance along with

a sense of urgency, were maintained for conversion of

the untiring efforts of Rashtriya Rifles into successful

operations. Units of Rashtriya Rifles were able to

exert unrelenting pressure on the terrorists and their

sympathizers. The efforts of the Force have ushered

in peace and normalcy in the area, to a large extent.

The Rashtriya Rifles has neutralised 251 terrorists (Two

hundred four killed, forty seven apprehended) and has

also recovered significant cache of warlike stores.

3.57 RR units and formations played a major role in

ensuring peaceful conduct of Shri Amarnath Yatra by

early and tiered deployment, aggressive domination and

sound intelligence network. Full assistance including

medical cover was provided to facilitate the move of the

devotees.

3.58 A large number of people friendly activities

were undertaken to shape perception about the Army

and the Government. This has made a visible change in

the way people perceive the Army, besides increasing

the comfort levels between ‘Awaam’ and ‘Jawan’. Also,

Youth Employment and Guidance Nodes (YEGN) set

up by Rashtriya Rifles, targeted the youth of the State

effectively. This has helped them explore avenues of

higher education and employment, thus guiding them

away from the lure of easy money and a misplaced

sense of power through terrorism.

3.59 Creation of Rashtriya Rifles, the only specially

structured Counter Insurgency/Counter Terrorism Force

in the world has been one of the finest examples of

strategic decision with a long term perspective. The

expertise gained is invaluable in building comprehensive

National Power and needs to be preserved in perpetuity.

It will be the endeavour of the Force to eliminate

terrorism in its entirety and continue to guide the

populace, particularly the youth, to join the national

###### 2


-----

mainstream. In doing so, catering to the aspirations of
the people and complete prevention of human rights

violations will remain to be the imperative guiding
parameters for the Rashtriya Rifles.

###### TERRITORIAL ARMY (TA)

3.60 The Territorial Army Act was enacted in 1948.
The concept of the Territorial Army is to provide part
time military training to gainfully employed citizens who
become competent soldiers as a result of the military
training imparted to them and work as a back-up force
to regular Army.

3.61 _CI/CT and Internal Security: Approximate 75_
percent of TA units are deployed in Counter Insurgency/
Counter Terrorism environment in Jammu & Kashmir
and North-East. These units are playing an important
role in security insurgency prone areas and are carrying
out assigned tasks in a professional manner.

3.62 _Territorial Army Company for Security Duties_
_of National War Memorial (NWM): TA Company has_
recently been deployed for Security duties of National
War Memorial (NWM) at New Delhi.


3.63 _Induction of Women TA Officers: The induction_
of women officer in Department TA is already in vogue.

Advertisement has been published for Commissioning
of Ex Defence women service officers into TA.

3.64 _Flood Relief: The TA units (122 Infantry Battalion_
(TA) MADRAS and 414 ASC Battalion Marketing (TA))
have actively participated in relief and rescue work
during Kerala floods. They have worked selflessly
and relentlessly to rescue and provide shelters to the
affected citizens. Their hard work was appreciated by all
stakeholders including the State Government.

###### Other Initiative/ Achievements

3.65 _Reach Out Campaign: A campaign has been_
launched to showcase the organization with all its
features, to the public, by conducting presentations at
professional institutes and leading corporate houses. It
has been an initiative with an aim to attract youth and
professionals.

3.66 _Army Day and Republic Day Parade 2019:_
Contingent of 102 Infantry Battalion (TA) PUNJAB
participated in Army Day and Republic Day Parade 2019.


_Marching contingent in the Republic Day Parade 2019_


###### 28


-----

_Calling on the President of India by TA Fraternity_


The success of Army Day and Republic Day Parade has

been immensely contributed by the Battalion contingent

on behalf of Territorial Army and the same has been

appreciated by the senior dignitaries.

3.67 _Territorial_ _Army_ _Day_ _Celebrations:_ The

Territorial Army celebrates its Raising Day on October 9

every year. Following events were organised at Delhi to

celebrate the occasion for the year 2019:

(a) _Calling on The President of India: As part of_

TA Day Celebrations, Officers, JCOs, ORs and

families of the Territorial Army, called on The

President of India, at Rashtrapati Bhawan on

October 11, 2018.

(b) _TA Half Marathon: TA Half Marathon was held_

by the Territorial Army along with the Athletic

Federation of India as the ‘First official National

Marathon of India’ at Carriappa Parade Ground

on October 2, 2018 with an aim to project TA

as a vibrant and committed organisation and

also to promote healthy lifestyle. The event

was open to all citizens of India. The event saw


enthusiastic participation by more than seven

thousand participants.

(c) _Band Display at India Gate: Territorial Army_

Symphony Band conducted a band display

at India Gate on October 13 and 14, 2018. The

event was witnessed by a huge gathering who

appreciated the display.

3.68 _COAS Silver Trophy For The Year 2018-19: 105_

Infantry Battalion (TA) RAJ RIF has been declared

as Best Infantry Battalion (TA) amongst 43 TA units

(Infantry & Home & Hearth Units).

###### 29


-----

###### 30


_Band Display at India Gate_

3.69 _Honours & Awards 2019: The following_ Indian peacekeepers have repeatedly been recognized
Gallantry/Distinguished service Awards have been by the UN. Our outreach programmes to integrate
conferred to Territorial Army personnel on the occasion internally displaced personnel, communities and tribes
of Army Day & Republic Day 2019: into mainstream social fabric have had a major impact

on the peace process in these violent areas which

(i) Ashok Chakra - 1 has been appreciated by the missions, international

(ii) Param Vishishth Seva Medal - 1 community and local populace.

(iii) Sena Medal - 3

3.71 The enhanced equipment serviceability and

(iv) COAS Commendation Card - 10

availability due to measures undertaken at Ministry

(v) VCOAS Commendation Card - 2

of Defence and Army Headquarters are ensuring the

(vi) GOC-in-C Commendation Card - 25 highest standard of operational efficacy in UN missions.

India has also taken a lead role in enhancing women

###### UN MISSIONS representation in UN missions by implementing the UN

requirement of deploying 15% women officers as Staff

3.70 Indian Army continues to play a lead role in UN Officers and Military Observers.
peacekeeping with presence in 7 out of 14 UN missions
worldwide. The Indian Army’s contribution of over 3.72 For the first time in the history of Indian Army,
6000 personnel deployed either as part of contingents a company of Kazakhstan has been co-deployed with
or as Staff Officers and Military Observers places India Indian Battalion in Lebanon (UNIFIL) with effect from
amongst the top five troop contributors to UN missions. October 31, 2018. This initiative by India has been lauded
The contingents of Indian Army are deployed in some by the United Nations and the international community.
of the most violent and volatile UN missions. In defence Indian Army has trained approximately 150 officers
of the mandate and in the interest of world peace, the and soldiers from 45 countries over the last one year
troops have carried out a number of major operations in CUNPK. Five Mobile Training Teams have also visited
earning praise from the UN as well as the international Kazakhstan, Myanmar, Vietnam and Zambia to train
community. The professionalism and gallant actions by their troops for peacekeeping.


-----

###### chapter
###  4

#### INDIAN NAVY


-----

###### INDIAN NAVY
# 4


###### INDIAN NAVY
# 4


4.1 India is a maritime nation and the country sits

astride a large number of busy International Shipping

Lanes that criss-cross the Indian Ocean. About 90% of

our trade by volume and 70% by value is transported

over the seas. For a rapidly growing economy seeking

new markets worldwide, the volume of maritime trade

will only grow in times to come.

4.2 India’s economic resurgence is directly linked

to her overseas trade and energy needs, most of which

are transported by sea. Mercantile trade constitutes

a substantial portion of India’s GDP and is likely to

increase in the future. Maintenance of a secure maritime

environment which enables unhindered pursuit of

economic activities is, therefore, essential for the overall

economic development and security of the country.

4.3 The last decade has witnessed India’s

dependence on her maritime environment expanding

substantially as her economic, military and technological

strength grew, her global interactions widened and her

national security imperatives and political interests

stretched gradually beyond the Indian Ocean Region. It

can thus be assumed that the 21[st] century will be the

‘Century of the Seas’ for India and that the oceans will

remain a key enabler in her global resurgence.

4.4 The Indian Navy (IN) has been playing a

maritime leadership role in the Indian Ocean Region due

to its multi-dimensional capabilities and active presence

in the region. The environment in India’s maritime

neighbourhood is dynamic with increased instabilities,

deepening geopolitical and ethnic faultiness, growing

military capabilities and wide range of security

###### 32


challenges. These pose a combination of conventional

and sub-conventional threats emanating to India, at

and from the seas. These threats and challenges require

the Indian Navy to remain effective across the entire

spectrum of combat operations and constantly reshape

itself to meet future challenges.

4.5 The Indian Navy is the key enabler and guarantor

of the country’s maritime sovereignty and myriad use
of-the-sea activities. This is discharged by the Navy

through its four roles – military, diplomatic, constabulary

and benign. The objective of the Navy’s military role is

deterrence/ dissuasion against any intervention or act

which is against our national interests, and the ability to

inflict a crushing defeat on the adversary in the event of

hostilities. A major objective of the Navy’s Constabulary

role is to ensure coastal and offshore security and

implement anti-piracy measures in conjunction with the

Coast Guard and other Central and State agencies.

4.6 A high degree of Maritime Domain Awareness

(MDA) is being maintained by utilising IN assets

and resources. The IN stands fully ready to respond

to any contingency in an appropriate manner. A

new Mission-based deployment concept has been

implemented. Mission-ready ships and aircraft are being

deployed in ‘pole-positions’ along critical sea lanes of

communications and choke points. The deployed assets

are ready to meet any eventuality across the spectrum

of operations. One frontline Fleet ship has been

continuously deployed in the Gulf of Aden region since

October 2008 for anti-piracy operations and provides

safe escort to merchant ships of Indian and foreign

nationalities.


-----

4.7 Protection to our offshore assets, including
Offshore Development Areas (ODAs) is being
ensured through deployment of Immediate Support
Vessels (ISVs) and other assets. Regular exercises
have been conducted to validate the safety and
security of ODA platforms, which are vital to India’s
energy security.

4.8 The IN has been actively pursuing activities

towards capability building and capacity enhancement

of Navies of friendly countries in the IOR. Towards this

end, India has been providing hardware and platforms,

which includes ships and aircraft, for Exclusive Economic

Zone (EEZ) surveillance. IN has also been instrumental

in development of maritime infrastructure of friendly

nations. IN initiatives contribute towards developing

operational and technical skills to friendly foreign

countries.

4.9 A new Transition cycle that allows for a

focused and gradual transition of ships from periods

of maintenance layoffs to full scale operations has

been implemented. The new Transition cycle focusses

efforts of Operational Commanders on the training and

safety inspections of ships prior to their deployment for

operations. This is enhancing both ‘Combat Readiness’

and ‘Safety Standards’ on board ships.

###### Overseas Operations

4.10 _DIMDEX-2018: IN ship Kolkata participated_

in the Doha International Maritime Defence Exhibition

(DIMDEX-18) from March 11-14, 2018 wherein the ship

showcased the ‘Make in India’ drive of the Government.

A Passage Exercise (PASSEX) was also conducted with

Qatar Navy.

4.11 _Western Fleet (WF) Overseas Deployment_

_(OSD)_

(a) WF ships comprising IN ships Mumbai and

Trikand were deployed for WF OSD to Southern


Indian Ocean Region countries of Seychelles,

Mauritius, Reunion, Madagascar and Comoros

from April 15 - May 23, 2018. During the

deployment, the ships, along with P8I aircraft,

participated in Phase III of EX-VARUNA, at/ off

Reunion Island.

(b) IN Ships Tarkash & Kolkata participated in WF

OSD from September 4 – October 29, 2018. The

main aim of the deployment was participation

in Exercise IBSAMAR-VI off Simon’s Town,

South Africa with South African and Brazilian

navies. The ships visited Mombasa (Kenya),

Maputo (Mozambique), Simon’s Town (South

Africa) and Toamasina (Madagascar) during

the deployment.

4.12 _Eastern Fleet (EF) Overseas Deployment_

(a) IN Ships Sahyadri, Shakti and Kamorta visited

various ports in IOR, South China Sea and

West Pacific region during EF OSD from April

30 - July 6, 2018. The ships took part in various

bilateral/ multilateral exercises during the OSD

namely SLINEX-18, MALABAR-18, RIMPAC-18,

KAKADU-18 and SIMBEX-18.

(b) EF ship Rana was deployed for EF OSD from

September 17 – November 24, 2018. The ship

participated in International Fleet Review (IFR)

at Jeju, South Korea from October 8-15, 2018.

The ship also participated in IND-INDO Bilateral

Exercise at Surabaya, Indonesia from November

12-16, 2018.

4.13 _NAVDEX/ IDEX 2019: IN ship Prabal was_
deployed to Abu Dhabi from February 12-21,
2019, to participate in Naval Defence Exhibition
(NAVDEX)/ International Defence Exhibition (IDEX2019), to showcase India’s indigenous ship building
capability.

###### 33


-----

###### Major Exercises

4.14 _Exercise Sea Vigil-19: The maiden large scale,_

Pan India Coastal Defence Exercise Sea Vigil-19 was

conducted along the entire coastline and Exclusive

Economic Zone of India on January 22-23, 2019

activating all agencies involved in the coastal security

construct, and to identify gaps and mitigating measures.

The mega exercise undertaken along the entire 7516.6

kms coastline and Exclusive Economic Zone of India

saw participation by more than 200 ships, aircraft and

patrol boats manned and operated by various security

agencies.

4.15 _AMPHEX-19: IN ships Shakti, Kuthar, Gharial and_

Airavat participated in Tri-Service Exercise ‘AMPHEX-19’

at Port Blair from January 21-24, 2019. Various naval

operations, including airdrops as well as amphibious

landings were exercised at Radhanagar beach on Swaraj

Dweep, as part of the exercise.

4.16 _TROPEX-19: IN’s largest biennial war game,_

Theatre Level Operational Readiness Exercise

(TROPEX-19) was conducted from January-March 2019

across the entire IOR. The exercise was coordinated

by the Naval Headquarters with participation of three

Commands of the Navy and the Tri-Service Command

at Port Blair. In addition, units of Indian Army, Indian

Air Force and Indian Coast Guard participated in the

exercise.

###### Exercise with Foreign Navies

4.17 _Milan-18: Milan-18 was conducted at Port Blair_

from March 6-13, 2018. More than 30 delegates from 16

countries and 11 ships from eight countries participated

in the Milan.

4.18 _Varuna – 18: Exercise Varuna 2018 (16[th] Edition)_

between the Indian and French Navies was conducted

in three phases namely Harbour Phase (March 18–20,

###### 3


2018) and Sea Phase I (March 20-24, 2018) as well as

Sea Phase II (May 2-3, 2018).

4.19 _IN-UAE Navy Maiden Bilateral Exercise ‘Gulf_

_Star’: IN Ships Gomati and Kolkata participated in the_

maiden IN – UAE Navy bilateral exercise Gulf Star off

UAE from March 18-22, 2018. The exercise helped in

maintaining and strengthening maritime relations with

another Navy in the IOR.

4.20 _INMEX-18: IN ships Sahyadri and Kamorta_

participated in maiden Indian-Myanmar Navy Bilateral

Exercise from March 31 - April 3, 2018 off Visakhapatnam.

Myanmar Navy ships UMS Sin Phyu Shin and Inlay

participated in the exercise.

4.21 _Malabar-18: IN ships Sahyadri, Kamorta and_

Shakti alongwith P8I participated in Malabar-18 from

June 7-15, 2018. Harbour Phase was conducted from

June 8-10, 2018 at Guam, USA and the Sea Phase was

conducted off North Mariana Islands in Pacific Ocean

between IN, US Navy and JMSDF.

4.22 _SIMBEX-18: The silver jubilee edition of the_

annual Singapore-India Maritime Bilateral Exercise,

was held from November 10-21, 2018. Six ships and one

submarine each of Republic of Singapore Navy and

Indian Navy participated in the exercise.

_SIMBEX-18_

4.23 _Konkan-18: India-UK Bilateral Naval exercise,_

Konkan was conducted from November 28 – December


-----

5, 2018. The Indian Navy was represented by IN ship

Kolkata, IN submarine Shankush and a Dornier aircraft

and the Royal Navy by HMS Dragon, a Type 45 Destroyer.

4.24 _Indra Navy – 18: Indra Navy-18 between Indian_

& Russian Navy was conducted off Visakhapatnam.

RFN ships Varyag, Penteleyev and Boris Butoma (RFN

Tanker) and IN Ships Ranvir, Satpura, Kadmatt, Kuthar,

Khanjar, Jyoti and a submarine participated in the

exercise.

###### Coordinated Patrol (CORPAT) with Indian Ocean Region Littoral Navies

4.25 Coordinated Patrols along the IMBL are being

conducted with littoral Navies of the Indian Ocean

Region (IOR) as per established MoUs and Standard

Operating Procedures (SOPs).

4.26 _India-Thailand Coordinated Patrol: The 25[th],_

26[th] and 27[th] cycle of Indo-Thai CORPAT was held

from January 23-31, June 16-23 and November 8, 2018

respectively.

4.27 _India-Myanmar Coordinated Patro: The 6[th] and_

7[th] Cycle of Indo-Myanmar CORPAT was conducted from

March 13-18, 2018 and September 24 – October 1, 2018

respectively.

4.28 _India - Indonesia Coordinated Patrol: The_

Opening Ceremony of 31[st] and 32[nd] Ind-Indo CORPAT

was held on May 24, 2018 and October 9-27, 2018

respectively.

###### Anti-Piracy

4.29 _Anti-Piracy Patrol: As part of its wider role_

of providing security to shipping in the Indian Ocean

Region, the Indian Navy continues to deploy one ship

for anti-piracy patrol in the Gulf of Aden (GoA). A total

of 72 IN warships has been deployed till March 2019,

which have safely escorted more than 3440 (including


413 Indian flagged) ships with over 25,062 mariners

embarked. Till April, 2019, IN has thwarted 44 piracy

attempts and apprehended 120 pirates. IN’s presence

in this region is being maintained to ensure safety and

security of Indian trade.

_Boarding Operations_

###### Coastal Security

4.30 Indian Navy is the nodal agency responsible for

overall maritime security which includes coastal security

and offshore security. Due impetus has been accorded

to coastal security issues in coordination with various

national agencies and organisations. IN is offering

assistance to Border Security Force/ Central Industrial

Security Force/ State Marine Police for procurement,

maintenance and exploitation of boats for coastal

security.

4.31 The National Command Control Communication

Intelligence (NC3I) Network inter-linking 51 stations

of the IN and ICG and integrating multiple sensors

is being effectively exploited towards developing

domain awareness and for inter-agency coordination.

IN is also enhancing coordination between all maritime

###### 3


-----

stakeholders, including the Indian Coast Guard, Indian
Air Force, Central and State maritime agencies, and

national intelligence agencies for Maritime Domain
Awareness and Network Centric Operations. In addition,
the Navy is pursuing agreements for sharing of white
shipping and air traffic information between friendly
nations, both in the IOR and beyond.

4.32 Towards strengthening coastal and offshore
security, Fast Interceptor Craft (FICs) and Immediate
Support Vessels (ISVs) inducted into the IN are being
utilised. Coastal and Offshore Security exercises
are being conducted regularly in all coastal States
and UTs towards streamlining existing mechanisms,
improving inter-agency coordination and strengthening
maritime, coastal and offshore security. The IN
continues to proactively engage with the fishermen
and coastal communities through community
interaction programmes towards integrating them into
the maritime security matrix. IN is strengthening the
existing mechanisms and increasing the complexity of
such exercises, with the involvement of all stakeholders.

4.33 _GSAT 6 Based Tracking Transponders for Sub-_
_20 m Fishing Boats: Towards strengthening maritime_
and coastal security, the Indian Navy and Indian Space
Research Organisation (ISRO) are jointly steering pilot
implementation of GSAT-6 satellite-based tracking
transponders for 500 boats each, in the coasts of Gujarat
and Tamil Nadu, in conjunction with Ministry of Home
Affairs (MHA) and Department of Animal Husbandry
and Fisheries (DADF)/ State Fisheries Depts.

###### Foreign Cooperation

4.34 _White Shipping Information Exchange (WSIE)_
_Agreements: The Indian Navy has been engaging with_
various Friendly Foreign Navies for concluding and
signing of Agreements for exchange of White Shipping
Information, towards enhancing our Maritime Domain
Awareness in our areas of interest. Till 2017 White
Shipping Agreements had been signed with 13 countries

###### 36


in the past year, WSIE agreements have been signed
with Nigeria, Qatar, Kenya, Seychelles and Thailand.

Further, WSIE agreements have been operationalised
with Brazil, France, Israel, Kenya, Spain and United
Kingdom and Virtual Regional Maritime Traffic Center
(V-RMTC), Italy in the last year.

4.35 _37[th] Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica:_

A Hydrographic survey team consisting of one Long
Hydrography course qualified officer and one Hydro
sailor participated in the 37[th] Indian Scientific Expedition
to Antarctica from December 2017 to March 2018 for
surveying India Bay area. In addition, two Naval Medical
Officers were also deputed from November 2017 March/ April 2019.

_37[th] Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica_

4.36 _Commissioning of SLNS Sindhurala: The second_
Advanced Offshore Petrol Vehicle (AOPV) built by Goa
Shipyard was delivered to the Sri Lankan Navy on March
23, 2018 and was commissioned as SLNS Sindhurala on
April 19, 2018.

4.37 _Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) Surveillance:_
The IN has regularly undertaken EEZ surveillance of
Maldives, Mauritius and Seychelles, as indicated below,
based on the request of the host Government:

(a) _EEZ Surveillance of Maldives: IN ship Sumedha_
was deployed to undertake Joint EEZ
surveillance off Male in accordance with the


-----

area promulgated by MNDF Coast Guard from
May 5-23, 2018.

(b) _EEZ Surveillance of Mauritius and Seychelles:_
IN has continued to undertake EEZ surveillance
of Mauritius and Seychelles once in six months,
with the latest one being undertaken in
February 2019.

4.38 _Handing Over of 2[nd] Dornier to Seychelles: A_
second Dornier aircraft was handed over to Seychelles
Air Force on June 25, 2018 at a ceremony held at New
Delhi. The first Dornier was supplied to Seychelles in
January 2013.

4.39 _Cyclone ‘Idai’’– Mozambique: Based on a_
request received from the Government of Mozambique
to provide Humanitarian Assistance Disaster Relief
(HADR) to local population post devastation caused by
Cyclone ‘Idai’, which struck the coast of Mozambique
on March 15, 2019, the ships of the First Training
Squadron (1TS) namely IN Ships Sujata and Shardul
and Indian Coast Guard Ship (ICGS) Sarathi operating
in the Southern Indian Ocean were diverted to Port
Beira, Mozambique. The ships have rescued more than
192 survivors from Buzi area, which is cut off from the
mainland. Medical assistance has been provided to over
1,500 affected people.


_Humanitarian Assistance Disaster Relief at_
_Mozambique_

###### Navy to Navy Interaction

4.40 _IWG Meeting on HADR: The 3[rd] meetings of_

IONS Working Group (IWG) on HADR was conducted

under the aegis of Headquarters Eastern Naval

Command, Vishakhapatnam from September 27
28, 2018. Participants from the IWG member nations

including Australia, Bangladesh, France, India, Indonesia,

Iran, Kenya, Oman and Thailand participated in the two

day event. The ‘Guidelines on HADR for IONS nations’,

prepared by IN was validated by conducting of a Table

Top Exercise as part of the meeting.

4.41 _Indian_ _Ocean_ _Naval_ _Symposium_ _(IONS)_

_Activities: The IONS presently has 24 member countries_

with eight countries with observer status. Iran is the

current ‘Chair’ of IONS. The construct has become an

important Maritime initiative to promote maritime

cooperation amongst the member countries. Indian

Navy conducted commemorative activities for IONS 10[th]

anniversary from November 13-14, 2018 at Kochi. Events

included commemorative Seminar, Tall ship sail together

from Kochi to Muscat, tracing the ancient maritime trade

and spice route, and release of Special Day cover. Chiefs

of 11 Navies and 27 countries participated in the event.

4.42 _Training of Vietnam Peoples Navy (VPN)_

_Personnel: Training of 20 VPN personnel in Submarine_

Mechanical and Electrical Repairs was successfully

###### 3


-----

undertaken at Naval Dockyard, Visakhapatnam for
duration of six months.

###### Commissioning and Decommissioning

4.43 _Landing Craft Utility (Mk IV): The third, fourth_
and fifth ship of the LCU (Mark IV) project, IN LCU L53
was commissioned on April 25, May 25 and December
19, 2018 respectively at Port Blair.

4.44 _INDC Danteshwari: Naval Institute of Dental_
Sciences was commissioned as Indian Naval Dental
Centre (INDC) Danteshwari on December 12, 2018 by
the Chief of the Naval Staff. The multi-specialty Dental
Surgical Unit with latest treatment facilities has also
been augmented with the additional task of training
staff of IN as well as Foreign Navies.

4.45 _IN Hospital Ship Sandhani: Naval Hospital_
Karanja was commissioned as INHS Sandhani on
December 24, 2018. Sandhani is the 10[th] Indian Naval
Hospital Ship to have joined the medical services of the IN.

4.46 _INS Kohassa: Naval Air Station Shibpur was_
commissioned as INS Kohassa on January 24, 2019.

4.47 _Dornier Induction: The first two aircraft of the_
12 new Dornier Contract were formally inducted into the

Indian Navy at Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL),
Kanpur on January 28, 2019. Equipped and fitted with
latest sensors, these aircraft will boost the surveillance
effort towards security of maritime areas of the nation.

_Inducted Aircraft – IN 252_

###### 38


4.48 _Delivery and Induction of Floating Dock Navy_
_(FDN) – 2: FDN-2, constructed by M/s Larsen & Tubro_
(L&T), was delivered on March 12, 2018. The induction
ceremony was held on May 25, 2018 with the LG,
Andaman and Nicobar Islands as Chief Guest. The vessel
has significantly enhanced the repair capability at ANC.
The FDN-2 is capable of docking ships with draught up
to 7 meters and displacement up to 8000 tons.

_Induction of FDN-2_

4.49 _Decommissioning: Indian Naval ships Nirbhik,_
Nirghat, LCU 36, LCU 37, Ganga, Cuddalore, Cannanore
and Konkan were de-commissioned in 2018. Indian
Naval ships LCU 38 and LCU 39 was decommissioned
on March 30, 2019.

4.50 _Launching: The 3[rd] submarine of Project-75,_

namely Karanj (SM-3), was launched on January 31, 2018
at MDL, Mumbai.

_Launch of Karanj (SM-3)_


-----

###### Naval Aviation

4.51 Naval Aviation is poised at a crucial juncture on

its path towards modernisation. Numerous initiatives

have been undertaken in the quest towards ensuring

a potent, professionally competent and operationally

ready Naval Air Arm of the future. Towards this, modern,

state-of-the-art aircraft such as P8I, Hawk AJTs and MiG
29K fighters have been inducted. In addition, contracts

concluded for procurement of 16 ALH MK III, 12 Dorniers,

four P8I and eight Chetak Helicopters have been

progressed. Further, AoNs have been accorded for 24

Multi Role Helicopters and 111 Naval Utility Helicopters.

4.52 _MiG 29K/KUB: MiG 29K/KUB is a multirole,_

ship-based fighter aircraft designed for destroying

aerial targets as well as surface ships and shore objects

of the enemy. The aircraft has a high thrust-to-weight

ratio, high maneuvering performance, modern avionics

and weapons for air-to-air, air-to-ground and air-to-sea

target engagement. All 45 contracted aircraft have been

delivered.

_MiG 29K_

4.53 _Project NAISS: Project NAISS (Naval Airfield_

Integrated Security System) was formulated as a maiden

comprehensive case for upgradation/ implementation

of security equipment/infrastructure of Naval Airfields.

Contract for Project NAISS has been concluded in

January 2019, which will greatly enhance security of

Naval airfields.


4.54 _‘Garud’ Microlight Aircraft Induction: ‘Garud’_

the Pipistrel Virus SW 80 Microlight aircraft inducted

into Indian Naval Air Squadron 550 on March 15, 2018

at a ceremony held at INS Garuda at Kochi. Induction of

‘Garud’ into the Navy is envisaged to play a pivotal role

in enhancing Bird Survey capability, thus augmenting

anti-bird hazard menace measures and promoting

Flight Safety.

###### Important Events of Interest

4.55 _Raksha Mantri Day at Sea: IN ships Vikramaditya,_

Kolkata, Kochi, Brahmaputra, Teg, Chennai, Trikand,

Gomati, Deepak and Subhadra took part in RM’s Day at

sea. Vikramaditya embarked Raksha Mantri off Goa on

January 8, 2018. The Raksha Mantri witnessed various

naval operations during the deployment.

_Raksha Mantri Day at Sea_

###### 39


-----

###### 0


4.56 _Prime Minister’s Shram Award: The scheme_
is implemented by Ministry of Labour & Employment

for the Workmen in recognition of their outstanding
contribution towards production and for showing
exemplary zeal and enthusiasm in discharging of their
duties. Out of twenty two awardees declared by Ministry
of Labour and Employment for Public Sector, for the
year 2016 (announced on January 25, 2018) five awards
were awarded to Indian Naval Civilians, four for the
prestigious ‘Prime Minister’s Shram Vir Award” and one
for prestigious ‘Prime Minister’s Shram Shree Award”.

_Prime Minister onboard INS Satpura_

4.57 _MLAs/ MPs/ State Government Officials Day at_ 4.59 _International_ _Yoga_ _Day:_ IN joined the
_Sea: In pursuance of the PM’s directives, familiarisation_ Prime Minister along with other fellow citizens and
sorties have been conducted for the states of West the International community across the globe in
Bengal, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Kerala. wholeheartedly celebrating the International Yoga
The aim of the event is to provide an overview of the Day. Maximum participation was observed at various
coastal security architecture of India and to assist the locations conducting Yoga coordinated by units,
senior leadership of the state to appreciate the threats Establishments and stations on June 21, 2018.
and challenges that can come from the sea. MLAs/ MPs/
State Government officials Day at Sea for Maharashtra
was conducted on April 8, 2018, off Mumbai. A total of
146 MPs/ MLAs/ State Government officials including
the Chief Minister embarked five IN ships for the Day at
Sea.

4.58 _Visit of Prime Minister: The Prime Minister,_
during his Singapore tour, visited IN ship Satpura during
the ship’s Operational Turn Around at Singapore, on
June 2, 2018.

_International Yoga Day_


-----

###### chapter
###  5

#### INDIAN AIR FORCE


-----

###### INDIAN AIR FORCE
# 5


###### INDIAN AIR FORCE
# 5


5.1 The IAF is pursuing a focused modernisation
plan to transform into a strategic aerospace power with
full spectrum capability. Continuous upgradation of
the existing equipment and induction of new weapon
platforms and systems have ensured that IAF continues
to progress on the desired trajectory of modernisation.
Future inductions of Rafale aircraft, Attack Helicopters,
Heavy Lift Helicopters, Combat Support Elements,
Surface-to-Air Guided Weapon (SAGW) and Air Defence
Radars will bolster operational capability and capacity.
The IAF is also strengthening its ability to undertake
Network Centric Operations (NCO) by integrating all
sensors, weapon systems and Command and Control
structures.

5.2 The IAF is working to transit towards selfsufficiency by promoting ‘Make in India’ through focused,
sustained and evolved Indigenisation Programmes.


The IAF is committed to progressively reducing India’s
reliance on foreign manufactured defence equipment
and to continue to strive in supporting country’s ‘Make
in India’ initiative.

###### FIGHTER PLATFORMS

5.3 _BrahMos on Su-30MKI: Contract with BAPL to_
integrate BrahMos missile on Su-30 MKI aircraft has
been signed. IAF coordinated with all stakeholders to
integrate the weapon. The first successful release from
the Su-30 MKI was undertaken in August 2016. Live
firing of the combat missile against a sea based target
was successfully carried out on November 22, 2017.
Successful integration of the BrahMos missile on the
Su-30 MKI has enhanced the strategic reach and combat
potential of the aircraft.


_Actual Picture of BrahMos Missile Suspended on a Su-30 MKI_


###### 2


-----

5.4 _Mirage-2000_ _Upgrade:_ The upgrade

programme including a new, more powerful upgraded

radar, complete revamp of old avionics suite and

integration of newer and smarter weapons is being

carried out. This would keep the aircraft operationally

relevant for future combat operations. The upgrade

is being undertaken in two phases. Initial Operation

Clearance (IOC) Design and Development (D&D) was

completed at OEM facilities’ in France.

_Mirage 2000 Upgrade in Air Defence Configuration_

5.5 _MiG-29 Upgrade: The MiG-29 upgraded aircraft_

is equipped with state of the art avionics, an array of

smart air-to-air and air-to-ground weapons and are

capable of in-flight refuelling, which would significantly

increase its combat capability and radius of action.

_Mig-29 Upgrade_

5.6 _Jaguar DARIN-III Upgrade: The upgrade of_

DARIN-I Jaguar aircraft to DARIN-III standards envisages

integration of fire control radar, hybrid navigation

system, engine and flight information system and air

data attitude and heading reference system. With

this upgrade, the operational capability of the Jaguar

aircraft in detecting air, surface and sea targets would

enhance manifolds.

_The Jaguar: Ready for Any Eventuality_

5.7 The operational capability of the aircraft in

terms of weapon carrying capability and mission

reliability would improve due to higher available thrust

and improved reliability. Currently, the case is being

progressed with HAL as the lead integrator in the

programme.

5.8 _Rafale: Rafale aircraft will provide long range_

capability to engage targets in depth and will provide

a strong weapons and systems capability edge over

our adversaries. The Rafale aircraft will provide IAF

the strategic deterrence and requisite capability cum

technological edge. The training of first batch of Officers

and technicians is underway with the French Air Force.

_Rafale Aircraft_

###### 3


-----

5.9 _Light Combat Aircraft (LCA): LCA has been_

developed by Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA)

and produced by Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd (HAL).

Two contracts for procurement of 40 LCA were signed

with HAL in 2006 and 2010 respectively. The first LCA

squadron was formed on July 1, 2016. Till May 2019,

fourteen (14) LCAs have been delivered to the IAF in

the IOC configuration. The activities for FOC are in full

swing. Recently, LCA undertook air-to-air refuelling

trials, which will enhance its endurance and radius

of action. Further integration of other weapons is in

progress.

_LCA (Air to Air Refuelling)_

###### TRANSPORT PLATFORMS

5.10 _C-17_ _GLOBEMASTER_ _III:_ The Boeing

manufactured C-17 aircraft is a heavy lift military cargo

aircraft capable of conveying combat units along with

their equipment up to a distance of 4,200 kms, with

a maximum payload of 70 tonnes and approximately

9,000 kms with a payload of 40 tonnes in a single hop.

The long range and capability to operate from high

altitude airfields in hot conditions ensures reduction in

the effective deployment time and all terrain operations,

thereby enabling efficient movement of combat units

within India and abroad.


_C-17 Globe master Airborne for a Long Haul Mission_

5.11 _Hercules C-130J-30:_ The C-130J is a medium

sized, all weather transport aircraft capable of inter

theatre and intra theatre airlift operations. It is capable

of delivering combat troops/personnel or cargo by

airdrop or air-landed operations. IAF has also enhanced

the operational capability of the aircraft by procuring

latest generation Night Vision Goggles to be used by

the aircraft crew.

_C-130J Aircraft in IAF Colours_

###### HELICOPTER PLATFORMS

5.12 _Mi-17 V5 Helicopters: Mi-17 V5 helicopters have_

been inducted. The helicopter is specially designed to

meet the operational requirement of IAF, with glass

cockpit, advanced avionics, weather radar, auto pilot

and powerful aero engines for high altitude operations.

It has been extensively exploited for transportation,

troop induction, search & rescue, medical evacuation


-----

and fire fighting. The glass cockpit of MI-17 V5 helicopter

is adapted for the usage of Night Vision Goggles

(NVG), which enables the IAF to conduct its operations

unhindered even during low visibility and dark night

conditions.

_Mi-17 V5: ‘Backbone of the Helicopter Fleet’ Taking_
_Part in SHBO_

5.13 _Apache_ _AH-64_ _Attack_ _Helicopter:_ The

procurement of Attack Helicopters is progressing as

scheduled and the delivery is planned in 2019. The

training of pilots and technicians has commenced in

USA. The training will continue in batches.

_Apache AH-64 Operating from an_
_Undisclosed Location_

5.14 _Chinook Heavy Lift Helicopters: A total of 15_

Chinook Heavy Lift Helicopters are being delivered to

the IAF from March 2019 onwards. A team of aircrew

and ground crew have commenced training in USA.


_Heavy Lift Helicopter_

###### MISCELLANEOUS PLATFORMS

5.15 _Restoration of Vintage Flight: IAF maintains_

and operates vintage aircraft of World War-II era.

These aircraft represent an important part of Indian

aviation and IAF heritage. In 2008, after undertaking

detailed survey of expertise available across the globe

on restoration of vintage aircraft and spares support,

a decision was taken to restore these aircraft with

assistance from vendors within and outside the country.

The restoration was undertaken in a phased manner to

ensure adequate safety and training of manpower on

operations and maintenance of the vintage aircraft.

5.16 One Tiger moth and one Harvard aircraft were

sent to UK for restoration. Both these aircraft have

since been received and are presently operating in

IAF colours. Both aircrafts have regaled audiences all

over the country as they have been an integral part of

flypasts and air displays of National importance. Their

presence over Indian skies serves to remind Indian

Citizens of our rich aviation heritage and motivates

countless youngsters to become a part of the IAF.

5.17 The Dakota DC-3 VP 905, was formally accepted

by the Chief of Air Staff on behalf of the IAF on February

13, 2018. The aircraft was then ferried in from the UK

on April 17, 2018. The aircraft flew a total of 9750 km to

reach India and transited through seven countries. The

aircraft was formally inducted into the IAF on May 4,

2018 at AF Station Hindon. The aircraft flew during the

Air Force Day parade at Air Force Station Hindon, on

October 8, 2018.


-----

5.18 _UAV Upgrade: A combined case for upgrade_
of Heron UAV systems for three Services (IAF-10) is in

progress and IAF is the lead service.

_Weapons and Associated Avionics_

5.19 _New Developments and Innovations: Trials_
are underway to integrate Surface to Air weapon
systems with IACCS. Integration of IACCS, the ground
network with the airborne network through Software
Defined Radio (SDR) is planned to facilitate Net Centric
Operations. Integration of IACCS with Surveillance
Network of Civil Aviation is also planned to be executed
in a phased manner.

###### MAKE PROJECTS

5.20 _AEW&C (Indigenous): For the Airborne_
Early Warning and Control (AEW&C) Project, Centre
for Airborne Systems (CABS) was designated as
nodal agency to indigenously design and develop
operational AEW&C systems for IAF and engineering
prototype. The AEW&C is a system of systems
consisting of Primary Radar (PR), Secondary
Surveillance Radar (SSR), Electronic Support Measures
(ESM), Communication Support Measures (CSM),
Self-Protection Suits (SPS), Mission Communication
System (MCS) and Data Links on board Embraer-145
aircraft. The aircraft is capable of Air-to-Air refuelling
for facilitating extended operations.

###### 6


5.21 The AEW&C is to be employed in support of Air
Defence and offensive strike missions over the tactical

battle area. Presently, one AEW&C aircraft has been
inducted in IAF in September 2018. The second aircraft
is likely to be inducted in near future.

_AEW&C (Indigenous)_

5.22 _Smart Anti Airfield Weapon (SAAW): Smart_
Anti Airfield Weapon is being developed by DRDO
for integration on fighter aircraft. Release trials to
evaluate the performance of the weapon have been
successful.

_Smart Anti Airfield Weapon (SAAW)_

5.23 _S-400: The contract for supply of five Firing_
Units of S-400 was signed between Russia and India
on October 5, 2018. This extremely capable Long Range
Area Defence Weapon networked with the Integrated
Air Command and Control System of IAF would
enhance capability to engage hostile targets. With the
procurement of this system, IAF will significantly bolster
its air defence capability.


-----

_S-400_

5.24 _Spyder LLQRM System:_ IAF has procured

SPYDER LLQRM Systems from Israel. The system is

equipped with Python 5 and Derby missiles. It is an

excellent Low Level Quick Reaction Surface-to-Air

Missile system to provide air defence against aircraft,

helicopters, cruise missiles and UAVs. The system is

capable of destroying targets with extremely low Radar

Sections, in a dense jamming environment.

_Spyder LLQRM System_

5.25 _ARUDHRA RADAR (MPR): IAF is procuring_

Medium Power Radars (Arudhra) under ‘Make’ category.

These radars are first Medium Power Active Phased

Array Radar designed and developed by Electronics

and Radar Development Establishment (LRDE), DRDO.

M/s BEL has been nominated as Production Agency. The

User trials were successfully completed in June 8, 2017.

Presently the Project is at RFP stage.


5.26 _ASHWINI (LLTR): IAF is inducting Low Level_

Transportable Radars (Ashwini) under ‘Make’ category.

Ashwini is a rotating Active Phased Array Radar using

Solid State Technology designed and developed by

LRDE, DRDO. M/s BEL has been nominated as Production

Agency. The performance of Proto radar was verified

during User Trials by undertaking dedicated ac sorties

in December 2017. Post validation of air transportability

of radar, User Trials would be concluded.

5.27 _IACCS: A contract for IACCS node in WAC and_

SWAC AOR was signed with M/s BEL on September

9, 2007 and all IACCS nodes are under operational

utilisation since February 2013. For Pan-India coverage,

contract for CAC, EAC and SAC AOR was signed with M/s

BEL, on October 1, 2015. The IACCS is fully indigenous

project which will integrate all sensors (including Civilian

radars) to give composite Air Situation Picture for quick

decision making.

5.28 _Development of Operational Wing at Deesa:_

IAF is developing an airfield and forming an operational

Wing at Deesa, with necessary infrastructure for basing

combat Sqns, to meet future challenges. GoI sanction

for the same was accorded on March 23, 2018.

5.29 _Aerospace Safety: The Aerospace Safety record_

of the Indian Air Force (IAF), through the past decade,

has improved as a result of various steps taken by the

IAF and the Government.

5.30 _Aircraft Accident Rates: The annual aircraft_

accident rates, calculated as number of Cat I accidents

per 10,000 hours of flying have shown a progressive

decline over the years.

5.32 _Flying Effort: There has been an increase in_

the flying effort on one hand and reduced accident rate

on the other. This indicates that the safety measures

taken by the IAF are in the right direction. The reduced

accidents, with a comparative increase in flying, directly

contributes to enhanced operational capability. Financial


-----

###### 8


year wise flying efforts by IAF for the past ten financial years are depicted below:

###### Indigenisation the challenges posed by obsolescence. Display of 14

innovations was conducted during Air Force Day on

5.32 _Indigenisation of Maintenance Spares: As_ October 8, 2018 and Certificate of Excellence was
part of the Government’s ‘Make-in-India’ initiative, awarded.
substantial progress has been made in indigenisation
drive of IAF towards development and manufacturing of **e - Maintenance Management System**
maintenance spares for various systems procured from
foreign OEMs. During the last financial year, more than 5.35 Indian Air Force has embarked on digitizing/
1300 spares have been indigenously developed. automating maintenance documentation and

management through ‘Project e-Maintenance

5.33 _Setting Up of Nodal Technology Centers: IAF_ Management System’. The project is one of the largest
has created 13 Nodal Technology Centre (NTC), each and most complex implementation of “Enterprise
specialising in a niche area. Each NTC coordinates with Asset Management System” at 170 IAF bases. It would
designated academic institutions and major DRDO/ help IAF to transform from paper based maintenance
CSIR labs. These centers, established at BRDs, are documentation system to an online Maintenance
pursuing various major projects essentially aimed Management system, in line with “Digital India”theme.
towards enhancing maintenance support through Indian
industries for the critical IAF systems. 5.36 e-MMS is a web based application designed to

cover all maintenance activities and decision making

5.34 _Innovations: Innovations at Base Repair Depots_ process. It rides over AFNET infrastructure and has
and operating units have helped in finding solutions to centralized architecture. It will enhance effectiveness of
problems for want of some critical spares and TTGE, management decisions by capturing data at the source
thus saving precious time and enable us to surmount and providing tools for analysis of this data realistically.




-----

###### chapter
###  6

#### INDIAN COAST GUARD


-----

###### INDIAN COAST GUARD
# 6


###### INDIAN COAST GUARD
# 6


6.1 Indian Coast Guard (ICG) came into existence
on February 1, 1977 with two frigates and five patrol
boats transferred from the Indian Navy and was formally
instituted on August 19, 1978. Since its inception, the
service has acquired a wide range of capabilities, both
surface and airborne, to undertake the assigned tasks
during peace time and to supplement the efforts of the
Indian Navy.

6.2 _Organisation: The Command and Control_
of Coast Guard organisation lies with the Director
General Indian Coast Guard (DG, ICG), New Delhi. The
organization has 5 Regional Headquarters located at
Gandhinagar, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata and Port Blair
which have been further sub-divided into 16 Coast
Guard Districts HQs covering the entire coastline of
India. There are 42 Coast Guard Stations, 10 Coast Guard
Air Stations and Air Enclave for undertaking effective
deployment of ships and airborne operations.

6.3 _Duties and Functions: The duties and functions_
of Indian Coast Guard are as follows:

(a) Ensuring the safety and protection of the
artificial islands, offshore terminals, installation
and other structures and devices in any
maritime zone.

(b) Provide protection to the fishermen including
assistance to them at sea while in distress.

(c) Taking such measures as are necessary to
preserve and protect the Marine Environment
and to prevent and control marine pollution.

###### 0


(d) Assisting the Customs and other authorities in
Anti-Smuggling Operations.

(e) Enforcing the provision of such enactments as
are for the time being in force in the maritime
zones; and

(f) Such other matter, including measures for the
safety of life and property at sea and collection
of scientific data, as may be prescribed.

6.4 During the Course of time, Indian Coast Guard
has been assigned the additional duties of enforcement,
monitoring and surveillance of Deep Sea Fishing, Search
and Rescue for mariners and Marine oil-spill response
measures. ICG also provides coastal security in territorial
waters in coordination with central and state agencies
and it is the Lead Intelligence Agency for coastal and
sea borders.

6.5 _Existing Force Level:_ At present, Indian Coast
Guard is equipped with 62 ships, 61 Interceptor Boats,
18 hovercrafts and63 aircrafts.

###### Coastal Security

6.6 _Extended Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ)_
_Surveillance: In addition to undertaking maritime_
surveillance in Maritime Zone of India, ICG ships and
aircraft are also deployed for undertaking maritime
surveillance of littoral states. In 2018, ICG undertook
three extended EEZ deployments in the Maldivian EEZ.

6.7 _Coastal Security Exercises: Since 2009, a total_
of 185 Coastal Security Exerciseshave been conducted


-----

by Indian Coast Guard, in coordination with Indian

Navy, for ensuring effective coordinated patrolling and

validating of Standard Operating Procedure. Exercise

‘Taiyaar-19’ was conducted on January 28-29, 2019 to

test and revalidate the transition phase from peacetime

to hostilities and multiple activities towards preparation

for hostilities during precautionary stage were simulated.

6.8 _Coastal Security Operations: A total of 369 Coastal_

Security Operations and 2,02,710 Boarding Operations

have been conducted since 2009, in coordination with all

stakeholders. A total of 45,736 boarding operations were

carried out by ICG ships in 2018.

6.9 _Community Interaction Programmes: Since_

2009, a total of 7176 Community Interaction Programmes

have been conducted by ICG to sensitize fishermen

on safety and security issues and to create awareness

about usage of lifesaving equipments like Distress Alert

Transmitters, lifebuoys and life jackets etc.

_Community Interaction_


6.10 With a view to have professional skills, so far,

4584 Marine Police Personnel have been trained by the

Indian Coast Guard.

###### Significant Milestones and Achievements

6.11 Two Offshore Patrol Vessels, 1 Fast Patrol

Vessel, 8 Interceptor Boats and 1 ALH Mk-III ‘Green’

aircraft have been inducted in ICG during the period

2018-19.

6.12 Two Coast Guard Afloat Support Units (CASUs)

at New Mangalore and Goa, 2 Coast Guard District

Headquarters at Okha and Tuticorin and 1 Pollution

Response Team at Vadinar have been activated

in 2018-19.

_Pollution control exercise_

###### International Cooperation

6.13 _Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs): A_

Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the

Coast Guard of the Republic of India and the Coast Guard

of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka was

signed on May 9, 2018 in Colombo for the establishment

of a collaborative relationship to combat transnational

illegal activities at sea and develop regional cooperation

between the Indian Coast Guard and Sri Lanka Coast

Guard.


-----

6.14 _Signing of Memorandum of Understanding_
_(MoU) for Cooperation on the response to Oil and_

_Chemical Pollution in the South Asian Seas Region:_
Government of India deposited instrument of consent
to South Asia Cooperative Environment Programme


(SACEP), Colombo, Sri Lanka on May 12, 18 in respect of
‘Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)’ for cooperation

on response to oil and chemical pollution in the South
Asian Seas Region (comprising of maritime nations –
India, Bangladesh, Maldives, Pakistan and Sri Lanka).


_Signing of MoU for Cooperation on the response to Oil and_
_Chemical Pollution in the South Asian Seas Region_


###### Bilateral Interactions

6.15 _Visit of Foreign ships to India_

Sl. No. Ship Duration (place)

1 Tsugaru, Japan Coast Guard

2 Badaro, Korea Coast Guard Ship

3 Tajuddin, Bangladesh Coast Guard

4 CSB 8001, Vietnam Coast Guard

6.16 _Training of Foreign Personnel: During 2018-_
19 Indian Coast Guard have trained 25 foreign officers
and 34 sailors under the Course on ‘Maritime and Law
Operations’.

###### 2

|Sl. No.|Ship|Duration (place)|Remarks|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|Tsugaru, Japan Coast Guard|January 16-17, 2018 (Chennai)|ICG-JCG annual joint exercise|
|2|Badaro, Korea Coast Guard Ship|April 5, 2018 (Chennai)|6th ICG-KCG joint exercise|
|3|Tajuddin, Bangladesh Coast Guard|May 25-28, 2018 (Chennai) May 30 to June 2, 2018 (Vizag)|Professional interaction and exercises with ICG under the provisions of MoU|
|4|CSB 8001, Vietnam Coast Guard|October 1-6, 2018 (Chennai)|Professional interaction and first ICG-VCG joint exercise|


6.17 _Gifting of Interceptor Boats to Government_
_of Mozambique: On a proposal two Interceptor Boats_
C-442 & C-443 have been gifted to Government of
Mozambique.


-----

6.18 _High Level Meetings_

|Sl. No.|Host|Participant|Remarks|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|Indian Coast Guard|Japan Coast Guard|Annual High Level Meeting on January 15-17, 2018|
|2|Indian Coast Guard, Delhi & Chennai|Korea Coast Guard, South Korea|High level meeting and Joint exercise on April 1-6, 2018|
|3|Indian Coast Guard|Pakistan Maritime Security Agency|High Level Meeting on May 27 – 30, 2018|
|4|Indian Coast Guard, Kolkata|Bangladesh Coast Guard|2nd Table Top Exercise between ICG-BCG on July 26-27, 2018|
|5|Indian Coast Guard, Delhi|Bangladesh Coast Guard|Annual High Level meeting on August 26-30, 2018|
|6|Indian Coast Guard|Vietnam Coast Guard|Annual High Level meeting on October 1-4, 2018|
|7|Sri Lanka Coast Guard|Indian Coast Guard|Signing of MoU between SLCG-ICG on May 9-11, 2018|
|8|Korea Coast Guard|Indian Coast Guard|Participated in Multi-Mission Multi-lateral exercise (MMEX)-2018 on June 5-7, 2018.|
|9|Israel Navy|Indian Coast Guard|Meeting held on July 8-12, 2018 to explore the possibilities for cooperation in the domain of coastal security.|
|10|Royal Oman Police Coast Guard|Indian Coast Guard|2nd High Level Meeting on August 6-8, 2018|
|11|Dhaka, Bangladesh|Indian Coast Guard|14th HACGAM forum held on October 23-27, 2018|
|12|Shanghai, China|Indian Coast Guard|Participated in East Asia Summit Workshop on Maritime Search & Rescue on October 25-26, 2018|
|13|Indian Coast Guard, Delhi|Indonesia Maritime security Agency|High Level Meeting held on December 16-19, 2018|
|14|Japan Coast Guard|Indian Coast Guard|18th High Level Meeting and joint exercise between ICG-JCG held on January 21-25, 2019|
|15|London, United Kingdom|Indian Coast Guard|Participated in the 6th meeting of Navigation, Communication and Search and Rescue (NCSR) on January 9-18, 2019.|
|16|Republic of Korea|Indian Coast Guard|Participated in the ICG-KCG Working Level Meeting February 6-10, 2019.|
|17|Saudi Arabia|Indian Coast Guard|Participated in Regional training in combating security in Maritime domain on March 10-28, 2019.|


###### 3


-----

|Sl. No.|Host|Participant|Remarks|
|---|---|---|---|
|18|Singapore|Indian Coast Guard|Attended 13th GCM of ReCAAP on March 19-22, 2019|
|19|Republic of Korea|Indian Coast Guard|High Level Meeting between ICG-KCG held on March 24-28, 2019|
|20|Malaysia|Indian Coast Guard|Participated in Langkawi International Maritime and Aerospace Exhibition- 2019 on March 26-30, 2019.|


6.19 _Overseas Deployment of ICG Ship to Foreign_

_Ports: Indian Coast Guard Ships are being deployed_

overseas from time to time to interact with foreign Coast

Guards’ and other Maritime Agencies in the region. A

total of 12 ICG ships visited 27 foreign countries in 2018-19.

6.20 _India, Maldives, Sri Lanka Trilateral Exercise_

_DOSTI: India, Maldives, Sri Lanka trilateral exercise_

DOSTI-XIV was conducted at Male, Maldives during

November 25-29, 2018.

###### Search & Rescue

6.21 The XVII National Maritime Search and Rescue

(NMSARB) Meeting was held at Vigyan Bhawan Annexe,

New Delhi on July 5, 2018. During the meeting, annual

NMSAR awards were distributed for saving and rescuing

lives in sea.

6.22 _Distress Beacon Exercise:_ Active participation

was witnessed from Defence and Civil agencies in the

14[th] and 15[th] Beacon exercises conducted in 2018.

6.23 _Search and Rescue (SAR) Exercises_

(a) National Maritime Search and Rescue Workshop

& Exercise (SAREX-18) was conducted off

Chennai on January 16-17, 2018.

(b) With a view to reinforce the operational linkages

with leading Maritime SAR service providers in

the Indian Ocean Region, Indian Coast Guard


conducted Search and Rescue Communication

Exercises (SARCOMEX) with following 12

countries in 2018-19:

(i) Oman (vii) South Korea

(ii) Thailand (viii) Vietnam

(iii) Bangladesh (ix) Philippines

(iv) Indonesia (x) Sri Lanka

(v) Malaysia (xi) Myanmar

(vi) Qatar (xii) Australia

6.24 _Maritime SAR Workshop & Interactive Sessions:_

Under the aegis of NMSAR (National Maritime Search &

rescue) Board, ICG conducted Maritime SAR Workshop

& interactive session for mariners, fishermen and other

stake holders at Thiruvananthapuram, Kolkata, Mumbai,

Port Blair. In addition, a series of Special Search and

Rescue Workshops for fishermen and Stakeholders have

also been conducted in seven Coastal States.

6.25 The 7[th] National Level Pollution Response

Exercise (NATPOLREX-VII) was conducted by Indian

Coast Guard on January 7-9, 2019 at Mumbai. During

the exercise 24 foreign delegates from 19 countries

and 75 delegates from Central and State departments

participated in the exercise.

###### Some Rescue Operations

6.26 ICGS Dahanuon January 13, 2018 rescued

34 school children from a capsized private boat off


-----

Parnaka Beach (Dahanu, Maharashtra) using local

fishing boats.

6.27 ICGS Samudra Pavakduring January 17-18, 2018

gave firefighting assistance to extinguish fire onboard

MT Genessa (Flag- India) off Kandla Port.

6.28 On March 6, 2018, ICG received relayed

message regarding fire onboard container carrier MV

Maersk Honam West of Agatti Island. MV ALS Ceres

reported and rescued 23 out of 27 crew from life boats

and departed area with the rescued crew. After initial

fire and damage assessment of the container vessel, the

fire fighting operation was commenced.

6.29 ICGS Shoor on June 13, 2018, rescued all seven

crew from a stranded vessel ‘Jalarag’ which was drifting

off Porbandar due to total power failure.

6.30 Coast Guard ship Rajkiranon June 14, 2018,
rescued 22 crew from MV SSL Kolkata South of
Sagar Island which had caught fire onboard in its
containers.

_Fire fighting_


6.31 ICGS Rani Durgavati, on June 22, 2018, rescued

three fishermen from the toppled vallums and provided

first aid. The remaining two fishermen were retrieved

from the mother boat.

6.32 On January 25, 2019, ICGS C-439 rescued 7

crew onboard from sinking vessel MSV Amar Jyoti off

Prongs Lt.

6.33 On January 21, 2019, ICGS Karwar with

coordinated efforts from Indian Navy, local fishermen and

Coastal Security Police teams rescued 19 survivors out

of 35 tourists from a capsized boat off Kurmagadgudda

Island. Bodies of remaining 16 crew were also recovered.

6.34 ICGS Vikram and ICGS Sujay on March 16, 2019,

successfully undertook firefighting and de-flooding

operation onboard Research Vessel ‘ORV Sagar

Sampada’ off New Mangalore with 36 Crew and 16

Scientists were ascertained safe.

###### Medical Evacuation

6.35 On January 4, 2018, ICGS Aruna Asaf Ali

evacuated a 40 years old Philipino crew who had a

deep cut on left forearm while working onboard MV

‘Zealand Almere’ (Flag - Netherlands). The patient was

administered first-aid enroute by ship’s Medical staff

and brought to Campbell Bay on January 4, 2018 for

onward transfer to Port Blair by Indian Air Force aircraft.

6.36 ICGS Raziya Sultana, on February 3, 2018,

safely evacuated an injured Chinese national in critical

condition from MV Yanduanjino-I (Flag - Panama).

He was kept under medical observation throughout

the night onboard ICGS Raziya Sultana and was later

handed over to the local agent at Haldia.

6.37 ICGS Samudra Prahari, on February 25, 2018 safely

evacuated a fisherman from fishing boat ‘Pavitra Traikya’

suffering from paralytic attack.


-----

|S. No.|Achievements during the period January, 2018 to March, 2019|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|(a)|Search and Rescue (SAR) Mission|253|
|(b)|Search and Rescue (SAR) Sortie|368|
|(c)|Lives Saved at Sea|801|
|(d)|Medical Evacuation at Sea|45|
|(e)|Poaching Trawler Apprehension|10 Boats, 53 Crew|
|(f)|Repatriation of fishermen|174 Indian Fishermen from Sri Lanka 11 Sri Lankan fishermen from India 26 Pakistani fishermen from India|


###### 6


6.40 _Achievements of Indian Coast Guard_

S. Achievements during the period January, 2018
No. to March, 2019

(a) Search and Rescue 253
(SAR) Mission

(b) Search and Rescue 368
(SAR) Sortie

(c) Lives Saved at Sea 801

_Medical Assistance by ICGS Samudra Pavak_
_off Mumbai_ (d) Medical Evacuation at 45

Sea

6.38 ICG Dornier on January 29, 2019, evacuated

(e) Poaching Trawler 10 Boats, 53 Crew

two critically injured Navy personnel from Campbell Bay

Apprehension

to Port Blair.

(f) Repatriation of 174 Indian Fishermen
fishermen from Sri Lanka 11 Sri

6.39 ICGS C-158, on March 21, 2019, evacuated

Lankan fishermen

one passenger having Cardiac arrest/Heart blockage

from India 26

onboard ‘MV Queen Mary-2’ and was safely handed over

Pakistani fishermen

to the Shipping agent at Mormugoa for further medical

from India

management.




-----

###### chapter
###  7

###### DEFENCE Production


-----

###### Defence Production
# 7


###### Defence Production
# 7


7.1 The Department of Defence Production (DDP)

was set up in November 1962 with the objective of

developing a comprehensive production infrastructure

to produce the weapons/systems/platforms/equipment

required for defence. Over the years, the Department

has established wide ranging production facilities for

various defence equipment through the Ordnance

Factories, Defence Public Sector Undertakings

(DPSUs) and private defence industry. The products

being manufactured by these units include arms and

ammunition, tanks, armoured vehicles, heavy vehicles,

fighter aircraft and helicopters, warships, submarines,

missiles, ammunition, electronic equipment, earth

moving equipment, special alloys and special purpose

steels. Department also recognizes that true self
reliance is only possible when the technology is also

with the country. Therefore, the Department has been

encouraging promotion of innovation and Intellectual

Property creation in the defence industry ecosystem of

the country.

7.2 As a result of the efforts taken to develop

defence production ecosystem, the country has

achieved capability in wide range of defence and

aerospace. As far as land systems are concerned, these

include Artillery guns, tanks, various types of heavy

vehicles, mine protected vehicles, various kinds of small

arms, armoured material including bullet proof jackets

and helmets, wide range of ammunition, propellants

and explosives, etc. As regards aero-systems, fourth

generation fighter aircrafts, helicopters of 3-5.5 tonne

class, trainer aircrafts, missiles of several types, and

as regards naval systems are concerned, capability

to manufacture practically all type of naval vessels

###### 8


including offshore patrol vessels, corvettes, frigates,

destoyers, aircraft carriers, submarines etc. has been

created in the country.

7.3 _Growth in Value of Production by Defence_

_PSUs: With the objective of achieving self-reliance_

in defence and making India a global hub in defence

manufacturing, the defence industry ecosystem has

enhanced, their capabilities upgraded and product

range widened. A number of major products have been

developed through research and development initiatives

in addition to a number of products and equipment

being produced through transfer of technology. As a

result of these efforts, increase in Value of Production

(VoP) of Defence PSUs is indicated in the following

figures:

 (` in crore)

Although, figures of value of production are not

readily available, as several industries are in delicensed

category, similar growth in value of production is also

projected for private industry. Ordnance Factories have

shown slight decline in the value of production as 275


-----

items earlier reserved for Ordnance factories have been

notified for open industry procurement.

Several Defence PSUs have recorded their highest-ever

turnover during 2018-19. Details in this regard are as

follows:

Defence PSU Turnover during 2018-19

HAL ` 19705 crore

BEL ` 11780 crore

MDL ` 4550 crore

BEML ` 3450 crore

7.4 _Vision 2022-23 for Defence PSUs: In order to_

redefine the role and functioning of CPSEs in the context

of Vision-2022, Department of Public Enterprises

organized CPSE Conclave on April 9, 2018. Prime

Minister had posed five specific challenges to the CPSEs

and directed all the CPSEs to prepare action plans to

achieve the targets emanating from recommendations

of CPSE Conclave. In follow up of first challenge, i.e.

Maximizing Geo-Strategic reach of Defence Public

Sector Undertakings (DPSUs), it is proposed that

25% of Annual Turnover of respective DPSUs should

be from Export by 2022-23 so that India becomes a

significant exporter instead of being a mere importer.

The second challenge which the DPSUs have to achieve

relates to reduction in their import dependence for

components and parts used by them in production of

various platforms and equipment. Import substitution

amounting to ` 15,000 crore by 2022-23 through

indigenization of products/process is targeted as part

of this effort. With regard to developing capability and

capacity in latest technologies, the third challenge is

that the DPSUs have been asked to develop a roadmap

for developing Artificial Intelligence based technologies

for their platforms/equipment and implement the same.

7.5 _Defence Exports: Over one dozen reforms /_

steps taken during 2018-19 which have provided a big


boost to defence exports in the country. As a result, the

authorisations for defence exports in the country have

seen quantum jump in the last two years. The defence

export authorizations have touched ` 10,745 crore

during 2018-19, a growth of over 100% over 2017-18 when

the authorizations were ` 4,682 crore and over 800%

since 2016-17 when the defence authorizations were

` 1521 crore.

Further, due to several measures to enhance ease
of doing business in exports by refrming export
permission processes and developing a completely
end-to-end online portal for receiving and processing
authorization permissions, the time taken for
authorization has reduced to less than 50% of time
taken in 2017-18.

New export offices have been opened by Defence
PSU, BEL. BEL opened an Export Office in Hanoi,
Vietnam, on June 13, 2018 and another Export office in

###### 9

|Defence PSU|Turnover during 2018-19|
|---|---|
|HAL|` 19705 crore|
|BEL|` 11780 crore|
|MDL|` 4550 crore|
|BEML|` 3450 crore|


-----

Myanmar. This exponential growth is a notable success

of “Make in India in defence” and gives confidence

that the country is moving towards becoming a net

exporter of defence equipment / platforms after

being one of world’s biggest importers of defence

equipment for decades.

Some of the policy initiatives reforms/steps taken in this

regard are mentioned as below:

(a) Special Chemicals, Organisms, Materials,

Equipment and Technologies (SCOMET)

Category 6 titled “Munitions List” that was

hitherto “Reserved” has been populated and

Military Stores list notified vide Notification

No.115(RE-2013)/2009-2014 dated March 13,

2015 stands rescinded.

(b) The Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for

issue of Export Authorisation for export of

Munitions List has been revised and published

on the website. Consultation process has been

done away with in repeat orders of same

product to the same entity and export of items

for exhibition purposes. Legitimate export of

the parts and components of small arms and

body armour for civil use being permitted

in consultation with MEA, Powers have been

delegated to DRDO, DGOF, and CMD’s of

DPSUs for exploring export opportunities

and participation in global tenders. In Intra
Company business the requirement of getting

End User Certificate (EUC) from the Government

of importing country has been done away with

and ‘Buying’ Company is authorized to issue

the EUC and a new provision for importing

and re-exporting parts and components

for undertaking repair or rework to provide

replacement for a component under warranty

obligation is inserted in the SOP as a sub
classification of repeat orders.

###### 60


(c) The existing online application system of

export authorisation made more user friendly.

New Online system for processing of export

authorization applications launched. The entire

process made paper less right from filing of

application by the industry to issue to export

authorisation, including consultation with

stakeholders.

(d) MHA vide Notification dated November 1,

2018 delegated its powers to Department of

Defence Production for issue of export license

under Arms Rules 2016 in Form X-A, for parts

& components of small arms to ensure that

Department of Defence Production remains a

single point of contact for exporters.

(e) Scheme for Promotion of Defence Exports

notified to provide an opportunity to the

prospective exporters an option to get their

product certified by the Government and

access to the testing infrastructure of Ministry

of Defence for initial validation of the product

and its subsequent field trials. The certificate

can be produced by the prospective exporter

for marketing their products suitably in the

global market. Standard Operating Procedure

for implementation of the scheme has been

notified and published on the website.

7.6 _Export Promotion Cell: This cell is formed to_

co-ordinate and follow-up on export related action

including enquiries received from various countries and

facilitate private sector and public sector companies for

export promotion. DPSUs & OFB have been directed

to have at least 25 percent as export target from out

of their total sales. Defence Attaches have also been

mandated to provide support for defence export

promotion. An Export Booklet has also been published

in which products of DPSUs /OFB and private companies

dealing in manufacturing of defence products have been

included.


-----

Seminars for MSMEs were organized in association with
Industry associations (SIDM-CII, Bharat Shakti, Bharat
Chamber of Commerce, PHD Chamber of Commerce &
Industry) at Nasik, Belgaum, Pune, Nagpur, Kolkata and
Delhi to bring the MSME’s in the defence ecosystem in
order to promote Export of Defence products.

7.7 _Defence Industrial Corridors: Finance Minister_
in his Budget Speech on February 1, 2018 announced
setting up of two Defence Corridors in the Country.
Consequently, it has been decided to develop one such
corridor in Uttar Pradesh and the other one in Tamil
Nadu. While not restricting the growth of defence
industry in any location, the five nodal points in Tamil
Nadu and six nodal points in Uttar Pradesh with
potential to develop defence industries in the corridor
are indicated below.

(a) _Uttar Pradesh: Agra, Aligarh, Chitrakoot, Jhansi,_

Kanpur and Lucknow.

(b) _Tamil Nadu: Chennai, Coimbatore, Hosur, Salem,_

and Tiruchirappalli.

To elicit the views of the stake-holders in the vicinity of

these areas, five Industry Interactions in Uttar Pradesh

and six industry interactions in Tamil Nadu were

organized.

Based on these consultations, on August 11, 2018,

investments of over ` 3700 crore were announced for

UP Corridor in an event held in Aligarh. In a similar

event held in Trichurapalli, Tamil Nadu on January 20,

2019, investments of over ` 3100 crore were announced

for Tamil Nadu Defence corridor. A Committee under

chairmanship of Additional Secretary, DDP has been

formed to monitor the implementation of these projects

announced for the two corridors.

Additionally, a Joint Venture between OFB and Concern

Kalashnikov, Russia along with Rosonboron Export

(ROE), Russia has also been approved in Korwa, UP for


manufacture of AK-203 rifles and is expected to bolster

the UP corridor.

Similarly, Defence Innovation Hub has been approved

for Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu and is being developed

with Coimbatore District Small Industries Association

(CODISSIA) and is expected to provide a boost to Tamil

Nadu Defence Industrial corridor.

7.8 _Creating a Startup Ecosystem for Defence and_

_Aerospace: Innovations for Defence Excellence (iDEX)_

is a scheme formulated in collaboration with Startup

India and Atal Innovation Mission, with the objective of

bringing Start-ups to innovate, develop technology and

solve problems related to defence and aerospace. iDEX,

a first initiative of its kind in the country, was launched

by the Prime Minister on April 12, 2018. iDEX is aimed

at creation of an ecosystem to foster innovation and

technology development in Defence and Aerospace

by engaging Industries including MSMEs, Start-ups,

Individual Innovators, R&D institutes and Academia and

provide them grants/ funding and other support to carry

out R&D. It is expected that India can take advantage of

its vibrant startup ecosystem to develop technologies

related to defence and aerospace.

Under the iDEX scheme, Defence India Startup

Challenges (DISCs) are being organized. DISC comprises

of real-life problems statements identified by Indian

forces/ Defence PSUs/OFB and thrown to the Startups

to respond. In the very first year of its existence, iDEX

has organized two rounds of DISC challenges. DISC-1,

organized in August 2018, comprised of 11 challenges.

DISC-2 organized in January 2019 involved 4 challenges.

Working through partner incubators, iDEX has been able

to galvanize a big startup community to take interest

in problems floated under DISC challenges. Over 600

responses have been received for the problems offered

under DISC. The status of DISC responses relating to the

three Services are as follows:

###### 6


-----

|Service|No. of Challenges|No. of Startups responses|
|---|---|---|
|Indian Army|4|159|
|Indian Air Force|5|222|
|Indian Navy|4|173|
|HAL|2|82|
|Total|15|636|


Under the iDEX scheme, a maximum of ` 1.5 crore

funding is available to a participant for development

of a prototype based on a collegiate led by respective

Service. The selection is competitive and financial

amount is released based on achievement of certain

milestones. The scheme provides for elimination based

development wherein for each development, multiple

participants are selected and at each milestone, some

of the participants are dropped based on progress/

performance.

iDEX is being implemented by Defence Innovation

Organization, a SPV floated for this purpose with ` 50

crore support each from BEL and HAL. Other Defence

PSUs have also been asked to fund DIO.

A Special Purpose Vehicle, namely Defence Innovation

Organization, was floated as a section 8 company,

with equity of ` 50 crore each from Bharat Electroncis

Ltd. and Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. Subsequently,

all Defence PSUs have been requested to contribute

another ` 100 crore to the DIO.

A Memorandum of Intent (MoI) between iDEX

(Innovations for Defence Excellence) and DIU (Defence

Innovation Unit), USA was signed on September 6, 2018

This MoU will enable Indian Start Ups in Defence to have

greater exposure to similar initiative being implemented

in USA.

7.9 _Developing_ _Artificial_ _Intelligence_ _based_

_capabilities: Task Force was constituted under the_

###### 62


Chairmanship of Shri N. Chandrasekaran, Chairman,

Tata Sons to study the strategic implications of Artificial

Intelligence in National Security and Defence needs and

to make appropriate recommendations in this regard.

On the recommendation of the Task Force, Ministry of

Defence has issued directions to:

 Establish a high level Defence AI Council (DAIC)

headed by the Raksha Mantri, with the three

Service Chiefs, Defence Secretary, Secretary

(DP), Secretary (DRDO), FA(DS), National Cyber

Security Coordinator, CISC, representatives

from industry and academia as its members.

DAIC is to provide necessary guidance to

enable and effect development or tailoring of

operating framework, policy level changes and

structural support for AI implementation in

Defence.

 Establish a Defence AI Project Agency (DAIPA)

with Secretary (DP) as the ex-officio head of

the agency and members drawn from three

Defence Services, IDS, DRDO, DPSUs, academia

and industry. DAIPA, besides acting as a

secretariat for the Defence AI Council (DAIC),

will have the prime responsibility of enabling

the design, development and production of AI

based systems and AI based processes across

the services and other defence organisations.

Accordingly, DAIPA was constituted vide DDP’s

order dated March 1, 2019.

 Funds amounting to ` 100 crore to be earmarked

each year by each Service Headquarter for

AI specific application development for next

five (5) years from their annual budgetary

allocations. Further, a budgetary allocation

of ` 100 crore to be made by MoD each

year for the next five (5) years to DAIPA for

implementing recommendations made by the

AI Task Force including setting up AI projects,

AI infrastructure, clearing and preparing AI


-----

related data, Capacity Building etc. in MoD Some of the AI based products/technologies under
organisations. development by Defence PSUs and OFB are as follows:

|Defence PSU / OFB|AI based product / technologies|
|---|---|
|BEL|1. Terrorist activity analysis in terms of Terrorist Initiated Incidents (TII), Terrorist Committed Atrocities (TCA) and Crime analysis as part of Social Network Analysis. 2. Proof of Concept Human Face Recognition|
|HAL|1. Voice Activated Command System (VACS). 2. Automatic Target Recognition.|
|MDL|1. Robotic Weld Inspection Using Advanced Phased Array Technique To Replace Manual Radiography. 2. Design & Prototyping of Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV).|
|GRSE|1. Unmanned Surface Vessel (USV).|
|BEML|1. Sleep/Fatigued operator alert system on Dump trucks. 2. Autonomous Dozer for snow clearing application.|
|GSL|1. Shipboard Equipment Condition Monitoring System.|
|HSL|1. Unmanned Underwater Vehicle.|
|BDL|1. Smart Counter Measures Dispensing System (CMDS). 2. Smart Assistant for Product Support (AI enabled 24X7 Chat Bot).|
|MIDHANI|1. Development of alloys with online process control and Decision Making through a sensor based instrument system.|
|OFB|1. Drone Assisted Mine Protected Vehicle.|


7.10 _Development of Intellectual Property by_

_Defence PSUs and OFB: During the year, DDP has_

initiated a new programme to promote greater culture

of innovation and technology development in Defence

PSUs and OFB. As part of this effort, “Mission Raksha

Gyanshakti” programme was started targeting to train

DPSU and OFB employees and to file greater number of


patents for new technologies/process innovations made

by them.

This Mission was launched formally by Raksha Mantri

on November 27, 2018. Salient achievements of

Mission Raksha Gyan Shakti for the year 2018-19 are as

follows:

###### 63


-----

(a) A total 12,088 personnel have been trained.

(b) A total 730 IPR applications have been filed

by DPSUs/OFB. It is remarkable to note that

for some DPSUs and OFB filed their first ever

patents as part of this process despite decades

of their existence.

7.11 _Other Major Initiatives: Several Initiatives have_

been taken by Department of Defence Production,

Ministry of Defence to promote defence production in

the country. Some of the salient initiatives are mentioned

below:

(a) _Revised Make-II procedure: A Revised Make-_

II procedure was approved by Government in

February 2018 to enable greater participation of

industry in defence supply of capital items. The

salient features of the new Make-II procedure

include the following:

There will be no limit to the number of

industry who may respond to the Expression

of Interest (EoI) for development of the

prototype subject to meeting the minimum

qualification criteria.

(i) Once the RFP is issued, it shall not be

retracted. The industry who wins the

bid, is assured of an order.

(ii) The case will be progressed even

if there is single entity offering an

innovative solution.

(iii) Normally, there shall be no negotiations

by Contract Negotiation Committee

(CNC) in multi-vendor contracts.

(iv) It aims to reduce time from in-principle

approval to placing of order by 50%.

###### 6


Upto December 31, 2018, 34 Make-II projects

had been granted Approval-in-Principle. These

include 14 projects for Indian Army, 9 projects

for Indian Airforce and 11 projects for the Indian

Navy.

(b) _Suo-Moto proposals: Under the Revised Make-_

II, a new feature has been introduced which

enables industry to make proposals to the

Services for their use. A Standard Operating

Procedure (SOP) for consideration of ‘suo
moto’ proposals of Capital Acquisition has

been issued in June 2018. The Services examine

the proposal and if they find it relevant to their

needs, they can take its development under

the Make-II procedure. This suo-moto proposal

is novel and for the first time enables industry

to initiate proposals for use of the Services.

The suo-moto has particular relevance for new

technologies/new products being developed

by start-ups/industry. The suo-mote proposals

can be submitted online through website

makeinindiadefence.gov.in. Till December 31,

2018, 4 proposals have been granted Approval
in-Principle and 41 proposals are consideration

of the three Services.

(c) _Indigenization Policy: A new Policy for_
Indigenization of components & spares
in defence platforms for DPSUs and OFB
has been notified on March 8, 2019. The
Indigenization Policy is a set of strategies
for indigenization of components & spares in
defence platforms.

The objective of the policy is “to create an

industry ecosystem which is able to indigenize

the imported components (including alloys

& special materials) and sub-assemblies for

defence equipment and platform manufactured

in India and to leverage the said capability

to create components export market”. It is


-----

estimated that Defence PSUs will reduce

the import bill more than ` 15000 crore by

2022 through indigenization of products and

processes.

(d) _Streamlining Industrial Licensing: Based on_

the initiative taken by Department of Defence

Production the following liberalisation has been

done in licensing of items covered under Arms

Act:

 MHA vide notification dated November

1, 2018, had notified Arms Rules 2016

(Third Amendment) wherein it has

notified that Firearms (Small Arms and

ammunitions and allied items of caliber

upto 12.7 mm) and their following parts

only are licensable under Arms Act,

1959/Arms Rules 2016.

a. Barrel b. Cylinder

c. Bolt d. Breach block

e. Slide f. Firing Pin

g. Frame or Receiver h. Extractor

i. Hammer/Striker

 Further, MHA vide notification dated

December 14, 2018 in supersession of

their earlier notification S.O. 1636(E)

dated May 19, 2017 had revised the

schedule of items requiring Industrial

License (IL) under delegated powers

to Secretary(DIPP) under Arms Act/

Arms Rule according to which “Tanks

and other armoured fighting vehicles”

and “Arms and ammunitions and allied

items of defence equipment; other

than small arms of caliber 12.7 mm and

above” are only licensable under Arms

Act, 1959/Arms Rules 2016”.


There has been steady increase in the number

of Industrial Licenses issued for defence

manufacturing. Government has issued 439 ILs

till March 2019 for manufacture of a wide range

of defence items to private companies. This

is almost double the number of licenses that

existed in March 2014. The bar chart indicating

Industrial Licenses issued during last three

years is as shown below:

(e) _Foreign Direct Investment: In May 2001, the_

defence industry sector, which was hitherto

reserved for the public sector, was opened up

to 100% for Indian private sector participation

with Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) up to 26%,

both subject to licensing. However, Department

for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade,

Ministry of Commerce & Industry vide Press

Note No. 5 (2016 Series), has allowed FDI under

automatic route upto 49% and above 49%

through Government route wherever it is likely

to result in access to modern technology or for

other reasons to be recorded. Further, defence

industry is subjected to IL under Industries

(Development & Regulation) Act, 1951 and

manufacturing of small arms and ammunitions

under the Arms Act, 1959/Arms Rules, 2016. So

far 42 FDI proposal/ Joint Ventures have been

approved in defence sector for manufacture of

various defence equipments. Further, significant

FDI inflows in Defence and Aerospace sectors

###### 6


-----

have been witnessed. As per data furnished
by the companies, out of 42 companies which

have received approval in defence sector, so far,
19 companies have furnished FDI inflow of over

` 475 crore while FDI of over ` 2178 crore has
been received through the automatic route in
defence and aerospace sector.

(f) _Defence Investor Cell (DIC): Defence Investor_
Cell was launched in January 2018, to act as a
friend to industry working in defence sector.
DIC has been launched to facilitate investment
in defence production sector and to directly
interact with all the interested investors with
regard to potential investment and the queries
related to policy and projects handled by the
MoD. Defence Investor Cell (DIC) has made
it easier for industry to deal with defence
requirements. DIC can be accessed online at
https://defenceinvestorcell.gov.in. 429 requests
from industry mostly MSMEs have been
received by DIC since inception and their issues
dealt with. The DIC is ensuring response time of
less than 2 days to its queries/cases, whereas
the average time for successfully closing the
query/case is less than 7 days.

(g) _Defence Production Information Technology_
_(DPIT) Division:_ Department of Defence
Production (DDP) had constituted a DPIT
Division vide order dated February 9, 2018 to
provide IT support for various applications which
can aid the objectives of DDP. DPIT Division
has started working w.e.f. August 10, 2018. The
DPIT Division has been created to implement
IT related initiatives in DDP including OFB and
DPSUs. The DPIT Division is being headed by
CEO, DPIT Division who is Joint Secretary level
officer. The DPIT division has implemented the
complete IT based solution for Aero India 2019.
The Aero India website provided all services
related to the event, including selection and

###### 66


booking of exhibition spaces, online payment
of spaces booked, booking passes for the

exhibition, booking B2B meetings, etc. DPIT has
undertaken following IT projects to make Aero
India 2019 digital.

 Making aeroindia.gov.in as dynamic
website where exhibitors could book
exhibition space of their choice on first
cum first serve basis by making online
payments using Multi-Currency/MultiMode Payment Gateways.

 Visitors could purchase e-tickets by
making payments online and getting
QR code based e-tickets on their
registered email ids.

 Setting up QR readers on all gates at
Aero India to facilitate smooth entry of
visitors having e-tickets

 Aero India mobile app on IPhone and
Android phone platform to disseminate
information on schedule, exhibitors,
layout maps with google overlays and
other dynamic information to visitors

 Making the whole exhibition area
Wi-Fi enabled to provide free Wi-Fi
service to visitors

DPIT Division has also developed the Offset
portal for the Defence Offset Management Wing
(DOMW) of DDP. The portal has been launched
during March 2019 which facilitates end to
end electronic system for online submission of
offset claims and their processing.

DPIT Division has also initiated the work to
develop an Indigenization portal for all Defence
PSUs and Ordnance Factories which will provide
search facility to the industry to see details of


-----

items to be indigenized based on manufacturing

capabilities required and enabling online

registration of vendors expressing interest for

indigenizing a product.

(h) _Third Party Inspection (TPI) of Defence Stores:_

To align with Government of India initiative to

promote ‘Ease of Doing Business’ for MSMEs

and private sector and achieve national vision

“Make in India”, HAL developed a model for

effective administration of inspection function

of out-sourced work with involvement of third

parties for inspection services. A document

titled “Policy Document on Utilisation of

Third Party Inspection Services” was jointly

developed by HAL and DGAQA. The policy

document was released by Raksha Mantri on

February 22, 2018.

Similarly, DGQA has also developed a

framework for third party inspection for land

systems which was approved by Government

on May 30, 2018.

(i) _Defence Import: The Directorate General of_

Foreign Trade (DGFT) vide Order dated May 28,

2018 delegated powers to the Department of

Defence Production (DDP) to grant license for

import of restricted items only for defence use.

The Standard Operating Procedure for issue of

Import License for import of restricted items

only for defence use has been notified and

published on the website. 28 Import Licenses

have been issued to private defence industry

during the FY 2018-19 by DDP.

(j) _Development of indigenous industry ecosystem_
_for Software Defined Radio: Software Defined_
Radio is a basic device which is required for all
communications by forces and is set to replace
the traditional radio systems. A committee
was constituted on November 8, 2018 under


the chairmanship of Dr Abhay Karandikar,
Director IIT Kanpur for preparing a roadmap
for development of Indigenous Software
Defined Radio (SDR) ecosystem with a focus
to meet requirements of strategic sector and
Defence Service indigenously. The committee
comprised of all stakeholders including
members from three Services, Academia,
DRDO, DAE, BEL, Industry and DDP. Based on
their recommendations, the following major
decisions have been taken:

(i) A Defence Standard Authority

to be set up under Directorate of

Standardisation, which will consist of

all stakeholders including Academia,

Services, DRDO and industry. This

Authority will undertake all activities

to prepare and maintain Indian SDR/

SCA standards, develop and hold a

repository of common waveform,

manage issues related to testing and

certifications in due course.

(ii) Decision to source SDRs from

indigenous sources.

In accordance with above decisions, a

Standards Development Authority (SDA)

has been constituted on March 7, 2019 under

Directorate of Standardisation (DoS/DDP)

towards development/preparation of standards

for critical/emerging technologies which have

defence & strategic sector applicability and are

critical for self-reliance. As part of their initial

work, technical work for developing standards

for Software Defined Radio (SDR) has been

initiated by SDA under Chairmanship of

Dr. Abhay Karandikar, Director IIT Kanpur.

(k) _Public Procurement Order for DPSUs/OFB: To_

promote greater indigenization by Defence

###### 6


-----

PSUs and Ordnance Factories, Department of

Defence Production has issued 4 notifications

under the Public Procurement (Preference to

Make in India), Order, 2017 of the Department

of Industrial Policy & Promotion. These

notifications were issued on June 29, July

26, August 27 and November 16, 2018. These

notifications cover 111 items being procured

by Defence PSUs and Ordnance Factories. As

a result of these notifications, it has become

essential for these Defence PSUs to provide

preference to domestic manufacturers over

imported suppliers, in terms of the said policy.

7.12 _Strengthening of Defence PSUs and OFB: The_

Department of Defence Production has taken several

steps to strengthen and expand the activities of DPSUs

and OFB. Some of these initiatives are as follows:

(a) _Strengthening of OFB: The following steps have_

been taken for strengthening of OFB during

2018-19:

(i) Approval for capital upgradation/

modernization: DDP has provided

approval for 15 proposals of OFB for

capital upgradation/modernization

amounting to ` 861 crore.

(ii) Reskilling of workers of OFB:
OFB has been asked to develop a
comprehensive reskilling plan on new
technology areas/skills. As part of this
initiative, 51 workers in Avadi and 173
workers in Kanpur have been trained.
Besides Avadi and Kanpur, 170 and
100 workers have also been trained
at Shajahanpur and Hazratpur (U.P.)
respectively.

(iii) OFB has created an Export Cell

headed by a Member level officer at

###### 68


its Headquarters and corresponding

Export cells in its factories to enable

them to promote export. Additional

powers have been delegated to

Member OFB to be able to respond

to export queries in a timely and

meaningful manner.

(iv) IP Cells have been created in all OFB

factories to enable greater generation

of IP by OFB. During the year 2018-19,

4732 persons of OFB were trained on

IP and OFB filed 157 IPs, thanks to the

efforts of the IP Cells.

(v) OFB has started a new plant

for manufacture of Ammonium

Perchlorate, a strategic ingredient used

in propellants for Rockets and Missiles

in its factory at HEF, Khadki. The plant

is in operation since March, 2019.

(vi) Revised Procurement Manual has been

approved for OFB in August, 2018

thereby streamlining a number of

procurement related issues by OFB.

(b) _Capital Investments for Defence PSUs: The_

Defence PSUs have been encouraged to make

additional capital investments in the two

Defence Indusry Corridors as well as in other

areas including for modernization. The capital

investments made by DPSUs during the year

include:

|DPSU|Capital Investment during 2018-19 (in ` crore)|
|---|---|
|HAL|1475.00|
|BEL|649.40|
|MDL*|169.14|


-----

|DPSU|Capital Investment during 2018-19 (in ` crore)|
|---|---|
|BEML#|64.16|
|GRSE|46.80|
|GSL|101.70|
|BDL^^|89.55|
|MIDHANI$|193.57|
|HSL^|15.74|
|* In other areas including for modernization. # During the year 2018-19, investments were made for augmenting manufacturing of Missiles/ Space components, robust cyber security and to meet the future requirements $ Out of ` 193.57 crore, capital investment, ` 92.65 crore Capital Investment through customer funding. ^ Provisional figure. ^^ Approx.||


(c) _Expansion of HAL`s production capacity for_
_Light Combat Aircraft (LCA): The Government_
has, in March 2017, approved a proposal for
expansion of production capacity of LCA at
HAL from 8 aircraft per year to 16 aircraft per
year, at an estimated cost of ` 1381.04 crore, of
which 50% is being funded by HAL.

###### Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs)

 Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)

7.13 Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) has 11
R&D Centers and 20 Production Divisions situated
in 7 States at 9 geographical locations. HAL so far
has indigenously designed and developed 17 types
of aircrafts and helicopters. In addition, HAL has also
produced 14 types of aircrafts and helicopters under
license from foreign Original Equipment Manufacturers
(OEMs). So far, HAL has produced over 4100 aircraft and


over 5100 aero-engines. HAL has also completed over
11300 overhauls of aircraft and over 34000 overhauls of
engines. HAL has achieved Export Sales of ` 404 crore
for the FY 2018-19. The Company had achieved highest
turnover of over ` 19400 crore (Provisional) for the
FY 2018-19.

###### Important events and achievements:

 HAL became a listed company on BSE and NSE
on March 28, 2018.

 The LCA Tejas has successfully completed
Air to Air Refueling (AAR) trial by mid-air
engagement and transferring fuel from fuel
tanker aircraft to LCA on September 10, 2018.
With this, India joins the elite group of countries
who have developed the Air-to-Air refueling
system for military class of aircraft.

 2 LCA Tejas aircrafts participated in the flying
display at the 15[th] Langkawi International
Maritime & Aerospace Exhibition (LIMA), 2019
from March 26-30, 2019

_LCA Tejas being refueled in mid-air air to air refueling_
_trail on September 10, 2018_

 HAL completed the production of 16 LCA
aircrafts as per Initial Operational Clearance
(IOC) contract.

 HTT-40 has completed all the technical
requirements for Initial Operational Clearance

###### 69


-----

(IOC) except the Spin Trial which is under

progress.

 Light Combat Helicopter (LCH) has successfully

completed all weapon integration and firing

tests in January 2019 and is ready for operational

induction. Initial Operational Clearance (IOC)

of LCH for Army version was accorded by

CEMILAC on February 15, 2019.

 HAL was the nodal DPSU for Organisation of

Defexpo 2018 at Chennai and Aero India 2019

at Bangalore.

 In Aero India 2019, HAL has showcased its

prowess in defence and aerospace centered on

the theme ‘Innovate, Integrate and Lead’. HAL

has also carried out flying display of indigenous

products Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) Tejas,

HTT-40 (Basic Trainer Aircraft), indigenously

upgraded Hawk Mk132 i.e. Hawk-i, Civil Do
228, ALH-WSI (Rudra), Light Utility Helicopter

(LUH), Light Combat Helicopter (LCH).


 HAL manufactured Do-228 aircraft has been

handed over by the External Affairs Minister to

the President of Republic of Seychelles on June

26, 2018.

 Service clearance document for FOC of Mirage

2000 Upgrade from RCMA has been received

on May 29, 2018.

 The modified Lander Craft Module Structure

of Chandrayaan-2 was delivered to ISRO by

HAL Aerospace Division on September 5, 2018.

The structure facilitates jerk free ejection and

smooth landing on the lunar surface.

 Maiden flight of third prototype (PT3) of Light

Utility Helicopter (LUH) has been conducted

successfully on December 14, 2018.

 HAL has successfully achieved running of

HTFE-25 core-2 engine upto 100% with IGV

modulation in March 2019.


_Raksha Mantri visited HAL stall during AeroIndia-2019_


###### 0


-----

 HAL has successfully flown Light Utility

Helicopter (LUH) from Greenfield Helicopter

Manufacturing facility, Tumakuru on December

29, 2018.

 HAL displayed the Naval Utility Helicopter

(NUH) with Tail Boom Folding and Main

rotor folding as a Technology Demonstrator

during the Aero India 2019. The NUH is the

Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH) Dhruv

with customization to meet the operational

requirements of the Navy.

 HAL floated Request for Information (RFI) for

selection a private Indian partner for Civil ALH

production through Transfer of Technology

(ToT).

###### Initiatives toward supply chain management:

 HAL has implemented the Public Procurement

Policy for Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs)

and has achieved more than 25% procurement

from MSE Entrepreneurs (excluding Defence

Procurement as per Sl. No. 14 of the Policy).

 HAL has implemented the Purchase Preference
Policy (Make in India) Policy w.e.f July 1,
2018 and includes the provision of Purchase
Preference Policy (Make in India) in all
tenders where the Local / Non-Local suppliers
included.

###### Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL)

7.14 BEL, a Navratna Company, established in

1954 under MoD has nine Units across India with core

competencies in Radars & Weapon Systems, Sonars &

Fire Control Systems, Communication, Network Centric

Systems, Electronic Warfare, Electro-Optics and Tank

Electronics. Non-Defence product range includes EVMs,

Tablet PCs, Access Control Systems, Homeland Security


Systems and Solar Systems etc.

_Research & Development: BEL has R&D facilities in all_

nine Units to achieve self-reliance. Company has made

a 3 year R&D Plan identifying future programs & various

technologies, Knowledge Management Portal etc. On an

average 10 new products are introduced annually. BEL

spends around 9% of its annual turnover on R&D.

###### Major achievements in 2018-19:

 Launching of SWAGAT, the Automatic Fare

Collection Gating System jointly developed

by BEL & C-DAC by Prime Minister on the

inauguration of Ahmedabad Metro Ph-I.

 Establishment of 16MW Grid Connected Solar

Power Plant at HVF, Avadi (Chennai).

_Inauguration of 16MW Grid Connected Solar Power_
_Plant by Raksha Mantri at Heavy Vehicles Factory_
_(HVF) - Avadi (Chennai)_

 Inauguration of BEL Representative Office at

Vietnam


-----

_Recognition & Patent for innovation in EVM_


 Receipt of ISO 27001 Information Security

Management System Certification

 Recognition & Patent for innovation in EVM/

VVPAT.

_Future Outlook: With ever increasing competition,_

customizing the latest technologies introduced for

the civilian market & adopting them for defence is

a perennial challenge for BEL. To sustain growth,

BEL has adopted various strategies like changes in

organization structure, enhanced thrust on New Product

Development, Diversification, Process/Infrastructure

Improvement etc.

_Indigenization: Achieved 89% of turnover through_

indigenous technology. Major products in recent past

include Akash, Low Level Light Weight Radar, 3D

Tactical Control Radar, Identification of Friend or Foe,

Combat Management System, Low Intensity Conflict

EW System, Digital Flight Control Computer & Avionics

for LCA, etc. Government’s emphasis on ‘Make in India’

###### 2


initiative in Defence sector provides a great opportunity

for BEL to enhance its indigenization efforts.

_Modernization:_ BEL has been continuously

modernizing its infrastructure to be in tune with

changing needs of technology/products. Major

facilities established in recent past include Shock &

High Temperature Test Facilities, BEL Academy of

Excellence, Advanced EMC Testing Facilities/Anechoic

Chamber, Secured Manufacturing Test facilities for

EVMs/VVPATs, State-of-the-art Electronic Artillery

Fuse manufacturing etc.

###### BEML Limited (BEML)

7.15 BEML is a diversified Company and engaged

in design, development, manufacturing, sales and after

sales activities of a wide range of Mining & Construction,

Defence & Aerospace and Rail & Metro products. The

Company has exported its products to 68 countries over

the years.


-----

_Mounted Gun Systems Showcased During DEFXPO 2018_

During the year, R&D has designed and developed high

technology products/ aggregates and up-gradation of

existing products like 155mm Mounted Gun System, 180T

Hydraulic Excavator, 860 HP Bulldozer, Arjun Armoured

Repair & Recovery vehicle, Intermediate Metro Cars for

Bangalore & Metro Cars for Kolkata and Diesel Electric

Tower Cars (DETC). The Company has bagged a major

order worth ` 3000 crore for supply of Metro cars to

Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation Limited. During the year,

sixty-five patents were filed. The Company has already

achieved over 90% indigenization level in Mining &

Construction and Rail products. Over 60% in Metro cars,

and over 80% in BEML High Mobility Vehicle 8x8.

_India’s biggest in–house designed & developed 190 Ton_
_dump truck BH205E supplied to M/s. NCL_


_BMRCL Intermediate Metro Car_

###### Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL)

7.16 Bharat Dynamics Limited, Hyderabad (BDL), a

Miniratna Category-1 Company, was incorporated in the

year 1970 under the Ministry of Defence is a pioneer in

the manufacture of Anti-Tank Guided Missiles (ATGMs)

in the country. BDL is evolved as a conglomerate

manufacturing ATGMs of new generation, Surface to

Air Missiles (SAMs), strategic weapons, launchers,

underwater weapons, decoys and test equipment. BDL

is fully geared up to meet the demands of Armed Forces

by capacity augmentation of all its major projects. The

Company is achieved a sales turnover (net) ` 3187

crore during the current year i.e. 2018-19. Company is

manufacturing Akash Missiles for both the Army and the

Air Force. Country’s first indigenous Nuclear Submarine

INS Arihant has BDL manufactured weapons i.e. C-303

Anti-Submarine Decoy System and B-05 strategic

missile. BDL is also the lead Integrator for MRSAM.

BDL is developing Amogha-III a 3[rd] generation Fire
and-Forget, IIR Seeker based ATGM. Prototypes of all

the sub-assemblies of the missile are being developed

as per in-house design. Pop-out test, which is the first

milestone of the project, was successfully conducted

twice on December 27, 2018 and January 18, 2019 at

BDL-Bhanur. During both tests, parameters such as

Launch Velocity, Launch Acceleration, Combustion

Chamber pressure, Missile ejection time etc. have been

achieved as per design.

###### 3


-----

BDL has received an order for supply of 4331 Nos of
Konkurs-M valued at ` 830.46 crore (Including Taxes)

from Indian Army on December 31, 2018. Also order for
Supply of 250 nos of Konkurs-M ATGM Launcher valued
at ` 72.27 crore (Including Taxes) has been received by
BDL.

On January 25, 2019, Secretary (Defence Production)
inaugurated the Acoustic Tank Test Facility at BDL’s
Visakhapatnam Unit. The test facility is one of its kind
world class test facility used for testing underwater
weapons like Torpedoes, Mines, Son buoys, Decoys and
other related systems.

_On January 25, 2019, Secretary (Defence Production)_
_inaugurated the Acoustic Tank Test Facility at BDL’s_
_Visakhapatnam Unit_

BDL has successfully completed the Sea Acceptance
Trails (SAT) of 3 Nos of Drill & Practice Torpedoes, LWTXP at Myanmar in March 2019.

In pursuance of high quality standards Milan-2T,
Konkurs-M, Invar, Akash and Electronics divisions have
upgraded to AS 9100 D Aerospace Quality Management
system standards.

_Indigenization: BDL is putting up determined efforts_
towards indigenization of ATGMs with the objective
of increasing self-reliance, reduction of Foreign
Exchange (FE) out flow and achieving cost reduction.
Indigenization of products like Konkurs-M, Invar,


Milan-2T has been achieved upto 95%, 78.6% and 71%
respectively.

_CAPEX & Modernization:_ ` 90 crore has been earmarked
for 2018-19 on CAPEX towards modernization of Plant
and Machinery and other infrastructure developments.

_Corporate Social Responsibility: BDL has taken up_
the various programs such as; adoption of village:
construction of community Hall, additional class rooms
in elementary school, primary health centre and toilets
in individual houses & Skill Development Programme:
skill development for unemployed Divyangajans through
NHFDC, adoption of Government ITI, Skill Development
Programme through CIPET, Establishment of Centre of
Excellence (CoE) etc. for betterment of the life of people
of Telangna and Andhra Pradesh.

###### Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited (GRSE)

7.17 GRSE, a Mini Ratna Category - I Company,
under the administrative control of Ministry of Defence,
is one of the most diversified nationalised Establishment
in the country that has played a very important role in
the defence preparedness of India ever since it has been
taken over by the Government in the Year 1960. What
started in 1961 with the delivery of INS Ajay, a Seaward
Defence Boat (Mark–I), as the first warship dedicated
to the nation has seen a splendid culmination with
the delivery of the 100[th] warship delivered by GRSE
on March 30, 2019. The ship is constructed with over
90% indigenous content giving further boost towards
indigenisation and self-reliance. Besides, the modern
infrastructure facilities available at its shipyard, with
integrated facility to construct 20 ships concurrently
coupled with its vast design expertise, gives GRSE a
significant edge over other domestic defence shipyards.
GRSE developed successfully an array of world-class
platforms including Frigates, Missile Corvettes, Survey
Vessels, Marine Acoustic Research Ship, Anti-Submarine
Warfare Corvettes, Landing Ship Tanks (Large), Fleet


-----

Tanker, Water-Jet Fast Attack Crafts and the Landing
Craft Utility and also the First Export Warship, an

Offshore Patrol Vessel to Mauritius. All these Warships
are armed with high-tech infrastructure. Besides
shipbuilding the Company has also diversified its
business in Engineering products such as Portable Bailer
Bridges, Deck machinery equipment like Capstans, Boat
Davits, Rail less Helo Traversing System, Marine Pumps,
diesel alternators and high powered diesel engines.

_Financial Performance: The Company achieved a_
turnover (Value of Production) of ` 1342.38 crore in 201718. The Profit Before Tax of the company for 2017-18 is

` 127.75 crore and the Net Profit (PAT) was ` 86.80 crore.
The Net Worth of the Company is ` 1015.93 crore. The
Company achieved a Turnover (VOP) of ` 893.18 crore
up to December 31, 2018 of FY 2018-19. The company
declared a Dividend of ` 50.80 crore for the FY 2017-18
on October 4, 2018. For FY 2016-17 Dividend was paid
for an amount of ` 54.08 crore on February 28, 2018 and
also declared an Interim Dividend of ` 21.19 crore for FY
2018-19.

_Handing over of GRSE built 100[th] warship_

Deliveries and Commissioning: During the period from
April 1, 2018 to March 31, 2019, GRSE delivered 3 Nos.
Landing Craft Utility Ships (IN LCU L-54 to IN LCU L-56)
to Indian Navy and 1 No. Fast Patrol Vessel (Priyadarshini)
to Indian Coast Guard. Further, 3 Nos. Landing Craft
Utility Ship IN LCU L-53 on April 25, 2018, IN LCU L-54
on May 25, 2018 and IN LCU L-55 on December 19, 2018


were also commissioned during this period.

_Landing Craft Utility (LCU)_

_Fast Patrol Vessel (FPV)_

_Modernisation: Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers_
underwent major modernization and infrastructural
augmentation and can now construct 20 ships (i.e. 8 large
ships & 12 small ships) concurrently. Also, modernization
of Raja Bagan Dock (RBD) unit of the company is
underway. On completion of this modernization project
by 2021 the shipbuilding capacity will increase from
20 to 24 ships concurrently. A Modern Pump Test Bed
facility has been created at GRSE’s Taratala unit on June
11, 2018 towards fruitful implementation of ‘Make in
India’ programme. Virtual Reality Lab of Central Design
Office has been commissioned at GRSE’s 61 Park unit on
July 7, 2018 for future ship designs & marketing and also
as a new Profit Centre, extending the facility for further
utilization by Indian Government & Private Industries.
Shipyard’s Central Design Office has been recognized


-----

and certified by Department of Scientific & Industrial

Research (DSIR), Ministry of Science and Technology as

an in-house “R&D Unit”.

###### Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL)

7.18 GSL, a Mini Ratna Group-I status company, has

proven capabilities of in-house design and building

sophisticated high technology warships for Indian

Defence Forces and other varied clients, including Export

markets. It builds a wide range of Patrol Vessels, Missile

Boats, Landing Crafts, Training Vessels, Survey Vessels,

Sail Training Ships, Fast Patrol Vessels and Yardscrafts

for the Defence Sector, besides other types of vessels in

the commercial sector. GSL has delivered over 210 ships

and more than 160 Fast Interceptor Boats.

_1000 T Barge for Indian Navy_

_Financial Performance: The company has achieved VOP_

of ` 1342.67 crore during FY 2017-18. The Profit Before

Tax of company is ` 330.54 crore during 2017-18, highest

in last six years.

_Deliveries/Launching/Keel Laying/Guarantee Refit/_

_Inaugurations during the Year: During the year GSL has_

delivered one OPV to Sri Lanka Navy, two Fuel Barges

and one NBCTF to Indian Navy ahead of contractual

schedule. The 1[st] Vessel of the indigenous Project for

5 Offshore Patrol Vessels for Indian Coast Guard was

launched on February 21, 2019. Keel was laid for on
going third Coast Guard OPV Yd 1235 and fourth Coast

Guard OPV Yd 1236 and inauguration of accommodation

###### 6


facility for Foreign Specialist /ToT Providers by Secretary

(Defence Production) on November 10, 2018. Guarantee

refits of 5 ships completed during the year comprising

of 3 OPVs for Indian Coast Guard, 1 OPV for Sri Lanka

Navy and 1 Fast Patrol Vessel for Mauritius.

_Make in India Initiative: GSL has signed contract with_

Russia for indigenous construction of Advanced

Stealth Frigates 1135.6 for Indian Navy. GSL has also

made concrete plans for indigenous construction of

Hovercrafts. The process for identification of collaborator

for indigenous construction of MCMV is in progress.

GSL supports the initiative by way of ordering of

Gear Boxes from Indian vendor and Development of

Steering Gear system, Fin Stabilizer System, Heli Grid,

Doors (Water & Weather tight) and Gemini Boats have

increased the indigenous content to 70% in ongoing

5 CGOPV Project as against 62 % in earlier 6 CGOPV

Project. Further Shipyard is in the process of indigenous

development of Equipment / items for the Frigate 1135.6

project through the ancillary industries.

_105M of Offshore Patrol Vessel for Sri Lanka Navy_

_CAPEX-_ _Modernisation:_ Yard Infrastructure

Augmentation Plan is being executed in four phases,

of which phase 1 & 2 (6000 T shiplift and dry berths)

was completed in March 2011 and Phase 3A (ship

construction bays and fabrication bays) was completed

in August 2016. The balance phases 3B and 4, comprising

of facility for erection of GRP hull and Command and

Control Centre for upcoming MCMV Project, are likely to

be completed by end 2020.


-----

_R&D: As part of indigenous design and development_

of product for future requirement, GSL has developed

design of 105 meter Multi-Purpose Offshore Patrol Vessel

and Landing Ship Tanks for export. Further, Design of

High Speed Missile Platform and Coastal Patrol Vessel

are in progress. The construction, of Prototype (First of

the Class) of New Offshore Patrol Vessel for Coast Guard

is in progress.

###### Hindustan Shipyard Limited (HSL)

7.19 HSL is the largest and strategically located

shipyard under Ministry of Defence. The yard has so

far built 186 vessels (including 11 wellhead platforms)

and repaired about 1968 vessels for the defence and

maritime sector. HSL, earlier under the Ministry of

Shipping and Surface Transport, came under the

administrative control of Ministry of Defence on

February 22, 2010.

_Financial Performance: HSL achieved a Value of_

Production (VoP) of ` 644.78 crore and total income of

` 651.67 crore in FY 2017-18 which are the highest and

third best since inception of the company respectively.

The operating profit achieved in FY 2017-18 i.e ` 69.80

crore is the highest since inception of the company. HSL

has achieved profit after tax (PAT) of ` 20.99 crore in Fy

2017-18. The VoP, total income and PAT achieved in FY

2018-19 are ` 540 crore (Prov.), ` 553 crore (Prov.) and

` 20 crore (Prov.) respectively.

_Shipbuilding: HSL has delivered 7 vessels and repaired_

14 vessels during the period from January 2018 to April

2019. The vessels delivered during the period are:

- Inshore Patrol Vessel ‘ICGS Rani Rashmoni’

delivered to Indian Coast Guard on May 25,

2018

- 50T Bollard Pull Tug, Krittika delivered to

Deendayal Port Trust on September 20, 2018



- 2 Nos 10 T Bollard Pull tugs ‘Abhishek’ and ‘Aja’

delivered to Andaman & Nicobar Command on

March 11, 2019.

- 1 No 10 T Bollard Pull tug ‘Bahadur’ delivered

to Naval Ship Repair Yard Kochi on March

30, 2019

- 2 Nos Pontoons constructed for Naval Dockyard

(Visakhapatnam) March 30, 2019

HSL has signed two contracts for construction of

2 Diving Support Vessels worth ` 2393 crore and

4 Nos. 50 T BP Tugs worth ` 260 crore for Indian

Navy for on September 20, 2018 and February

14, 2019 at MoD, New Delhi. The shipyard has

won these contracts in the competitive tendering

process involving both public and private sector

shipyards. Further, HSL has also signed a contract

worth ` 20.72 crore with Director General Naval

Projects, Visakhapatnam for construction of 3

Flap Gates to Naval Dockyard (Visakhapatnam) on

March 14, 2019

_Submarine Refits/ Construction: The Normal Refit of_

EKM Class Submarine, INS Sindhuvir scheduled for 27

months is progressing within the timelines.

_Modernisation: To meet the futuristic requirements_

of Indian Navy and Coast guard including submarines

and weapon intensive war vessels, refurbishment and

replacement of machinery and infrastructure is in

progress. Further, implementation of SAP ERP solution

is in progress and expected to ‘GO LIVE’ in 2019
20. The unique feature of this ERP system would be

integration of Design software, Aveva Marine including

its 3D features with an embedded PLM in SAP. This

would be first time in any Indian Shipyard that Design

software would be integrated with any ERP software

through PLM.


-----

###### Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders Limited (MDL)

7.20 Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders Limited (MDL) is

a leading Shipyard amongst Defence PSU Shipyards,

engaged in construction of advanced Missile Destroyers,

Stealth Frigates and Submarines for the Indian Navy.

_Financial Performance: The value of Production (VoP)_

target for the year 2017-18 ending March 2018 is

` 4399.16 crore. The Profit after Tax is ` 439.80 crore.

_Projects: MDL is presently building four missile_

destroyers under Project P15B, four stealth frigates

under Project P17A and six Scorpene submarines under

Project P75. MDL is also undertaking ‘Medium Refit and

Life Certification’ job of INS Shishumar.

MDL plans to develop a Greenfield shipyard at

Nhava. This facility would also aim for construction of

commercial ships.

MDL is currently undertaking capital expenditure by way

of construction of a submarine launch facility, for the

newly built Submarine Assembly Workshop. This would

enable creation of capacity for building and launching

submarines from two independent lines.

###### Research and Development (R&D) Activities:

(a) Assessment (Buckling analysis) of Pole mast

structure to ascertain adequacy of scantlings

to withstand the loads due to self-weight of

equipment and other environmental loads.

(b) Analysis of the structure in way of dual probe

receiver for given load to ascertain the maximum

stress induced in the structure is within the

yield stress and optimize the structure.

(c) Shaft Alignment Calculations for innovation

to minimize the time for alignment activity

to establish alignment procedure in dry dock

###### 8


condition and carry out the final alignment in dry

dock and load checks in alignment condition.

(d) Aerodynamic simulation for modified

superstructure of ship and to determine the

positioning of surveillance equipment.

(e) Enhancement of Ergonomics in one machinery

compartment and four accommodation

compartments in Destroyer/Frigate class ships

to improve aesthetic appeal ease of operation

and better man machine interfaces in a ship.

(f) Development of Artificial intelligence (AI)

enabled prototype of a remotely operated

underwater vehicle (ROV).

(g) Development of Artificial intelligence (AI)

enabled robotic weld inspection using

advanced phased array technique to replace

manual radiography.

(h) Development of Artificial Intelligence (AI)

Enabled Weld Inspection with Computerized

Radiography

_Modernisation: MDL has successfully put to use_

for production its infrastructure under Mazdock

Modernisation Project These includes a new Wet Basin,

Heavy Duty Goliath Crane, Module Workshop, Cradle

Assembly Shop, Store Building and associated ancillary

structures, 50 mtrs extended track of Golaith Crane

towards sea, and state-of-the-art Submarine Section

Assembly (SSA) Workshop with green building features.

Work on modernization of the following facilities is in

advanced stage:

(i) Modernisation of marine pile jetty at North

Yard.

(ii) New improvised network of piped services

across MDL.


-----

(iii) Construction of Submarine Launch Facility.

(iv) Creation of new Navigational Channel with 10m

draft in order to facilitate safe navigation of

warships being constructed at MDL.

_Indigenisation: MDL has already set up dedicated_

indigenization department and has “Make-In-India”

webpage linked to MoD’s website. Many items of Ships

& Scorpene Submarine are taken up for indigenization

to achieve more self-reliance.

###### Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI)

7.21 Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI) is a

specialized metal and metal alloys manufacturing “Mini
Ratna Category-I” company set up on the November

20, 1973 to manufacture critical and complex alloys /

material like Superalloys, Commercially Pure Titanium

and Titanium Alloys etc. required in the strategic sectors

of India’s defence industry and for sectors like nuclear

power, satellite launch vehicles, aircraft etc.

_Financial Performance: Highest Value of Production of_

` 697.68 crore for the FY 2017-18 over the VoP of ` 695.64

crore achieved last year. Profit Before Tax (PBT) for the

FY 2017-18 is ` 196.78 crore as against ` 187.85 crore last

year, registering an increase of 4.75 % and Operating

Profit of ` 162.64 crore.

_Timely Deliveries to Customers: In order to expedite_

deliveries and cut down the incidence of contractual

penalties and damages for delayed deliveries, strategic

decisions like modernization and outsourcing of some

of the company’s non-core operations to premier

institutions are resorted to wherever such facilities are

cost effective and efficient.

_Research & Development (R&D): MIDHANI’s R&D_

initiatives are focused on developing new grades and

Products for its customers, Process development and


modification and Yield improvement. A Technology

Advisory Board consisting of eminent personalities

in Metal Industry regularly meets to guide and review

the R&D activities of MIDHANI. The in-house research

and development team works towards improvement

of product quality and process innovation for meeting

the expected demands at competitive prices. We have

entered into collaborations with Indian and international

research institutions and organizations to gain access

to the required know-how for developing various key

advanced technology products.

_Modernization & Up-Gradation Program: Phase 1_

Modernization of MIDHANI at a Capital Outlay of around

` 400 crore was successfully completed by revamping /

upgrading /enhancing production capacities. Prominent

among them are new 6000 T Forge Press with 20 T

Manipulator, Radial Axial Ring Rolling Mill, Establishment

of a New Fastener Plant, R&D Building, Installation of

20 Ton Electric Arc Furnace with Vacuum Degassing

(VD) / Vacuum Oxygen Decarburizing (VOD) and Ladle

Refining Furnace (LRF). Phase 2 of Modernization

pegged at around ` 1000 crore is currently underway.

MIDHANI has thus successfully positioned itself to serve

existing and new customers in domestic markets.

_Level of Indigenization: In MIDHANI, Indigenous_

Procurement as percentage (%) of VoP has increased

from 81.58% in FY 2016-17 to 83.87% in FY 2017-18

resulting in MIDHANI achieving an increase of 2.81% in

indigenization over previous year.

###### Ordnance Factories under the Ordnance

 Factory Board (OFB)

7.22 Indian Ordnance Factories are the oldest and

largest industrial setup which functions under Ordnance

Factory Board (OFB) with the objective of achieving

self-reliance in equipping the armed forces with state
of-the-art battlefield equipment.

###### 9


-----

_Core competence of Ordnance Factories:_

Weapons

Ammunition, Explosives &
Propellants
Propellants

Military Vehicles

Armoured Vehicles

Instruments & Optical devices

Parachutes

Troop comfort & General Stores

_Overall indigenous content:_ Presently, Ordnance

Factories are manufacturing items with overall indigenous

content of 87%. A milestone was achieved in 2018-19

when Ordnance Factories handed over 100% indigenous

engines of tank T-72 and Tank T-90 to Indian Army.

_In-house R&D: Continued thrust on in-house R&D over_

last decade has yielded positive results. OFB’s ambitious

155x45 Cal Dhanush gun has cleared firing trials

conducted by Indian Army. Army has conveyed Bulk

Production Clearance (BPC) for Dhanush in February,

2019 and OFB has made six Guns ready duly cleared by

DGQA in March, 2019 to be handed over to Army.

_155x45 Cal Dhanush Artillery Gun System_

###### 80

|Weapons|Small, Medium and Large Calibre Weapons & Mortar Equipment|
|---|---|
|Ammunition, Explosives & Propellants|Small, Medium and Large Calibre Ammunition, Mortar Bombs, Signaling and related stores, Rockets & Aerial Bombs, Fuzes, Explosives, Chemicals & Propellants|
|Military Vehicles|Trucks, Mine protected and Special Security Vehicles|
|Armoured Vehicles|Tanks & its variants, Armoured Personnel Carrier(APCs) & Engines|
|Instruments & Optical devices|Night & Day Vision Sights & Instruments|
|Parachutes|Brake Parachutes, Man dropping & Supply dropping Parachutes|
|Troop comfort & General Stores|Tentage, Clothings, Personal equipment, Bridges, Boats, Cables etc.|


Further, OFB was successful in signing contract with
Indian Army for 130/155mm Up-gun where it emerged
the single technically acceptable offer in competition
with equipment of imported origin. In the ammunition
segment OFB has successfully established production
of 7.62mm A-7 Ammunition for AK-47 Rifle and bulk
supply has commenced. OFB has developed 20mm AMR
Ammunition (SAPHEI) for MHA and GHASHA propellant
for 30mm Ammunition for Indian Navy.

_Export: Special focus was given on exports resulting_
in orders/ supply of pistols, large calibre barrel and
ammunition, mine protected vehicles and other items.
Consequently, OFB has executed an all-time high
export orders worth over ` 267 crore during the year
2018-19.

_Green Energy: OFB is significantly contributing to Green_
Energy and has installed 76.49 MW Solar Power Plants
across various Ordnance Factories.

_Value of Production & Value of outsourcing: OFB_
has achieved value of production of ` 12790 crore
(provisional) direct issues excluding duties and taxes
during 2018-19. During 4[th] quarter of 2018-19, OFB has
issued ` 4631 crore direct issues to various indentors.
Value of outsourcing achieved upto 3[rd] quarter and upto
4[th] quarter of 2018-19 is as under:


-----

 (` in crore)

||Col2|Col3|Col4|(` in crore)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Year (provisional)|Value of Production|Direct Import|Labour and overheads|Value of Outsourcing|
|2018-19 (Upto 3rd quarter)|8185|212|5421|2552|
|2018-19 IV quarter (January 1 to March 31, 2019|4631|1478|2678|475|
|2018-19 (Upto 4th quarter)|12816|1690|8099|3027|


_Indo-Russian Rifles Pvt. Ltd (IRRPL): In accordance_

with the Inter-Governmental Agreement (IGA) between

Union of India and Russian Federation signed on

February 18, 2019, a Joint Venture Company (Indo

Russian Private Limited) under the Companies Act,

2013 has been constituted between Ordnance Factory

Board (OFB) & JSC Rosoboronexport (JSC ROE) and

JSC concern Kalashnikov (JSC CK), for production of AK

series Assault Rifles including AK-203 and other small

arms in India. The JV Company will manufacture at least

7, 50,000 Nos of assault Rifles @ 75,000 Nos. per annum

to meet the requirement of the Services and MHA etc.

The production line will be 100% indigenized within a

time frame of 32 months from the date of placement

of contract on the Company by the Ministry of Defence.

###### Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA)

7.23 Directorate General of Quality Assurance

(DGQA) is an Inter-Service Organisation functioning

under the Department of Defence Production in the

Ministry of Defence. DGQA is responsible for Quality

Assurance of all defence stores and equipment, both

imported as well as indigenous for the Army, Navy

(excluding Naval Armaments) and common user items

for the Air Force procured from the Private Sector,

Public Sector Undertakings and Ordnance Factories.

_Organisational_ _Structure_ _and_ _Functions:_ DGQA

Organisation is structured into eleven Technical

Directorates, each responsible for a distinct range

of equipment. The Technical Directorates are

structured in two tiers for functional purposes,


comprising of Controllerates and Field Quality

Assurance Establishments. In addition, there are Proof

Establishments in Armament Discipline for carrying out

proof of weapons and ammunition.

###### Achievements

- _Quality Assurance of Stores: DGQA organisation_

has carried out inspection of defence stores for

total value of ` 32567.35 crore during the period

January 2018 to February 2019. Manufacturer

-wise value of stores inspected during the last

three years is as under:

_Value of Stores Quality Audited (` in crore)_

- _DGQA Technical Evaluation: During the period_

January 2018 to February 2019, DGQA has

carried out a total of 180 Technical evaluations

and attended 17 User Trials of various stores,

ammunition and equipment, comprising of a

number of complex sub-systems. 77 PDIs and

633 JRIs of various equipment/stores were

conducted during the period January 2018 to

February 2019.

###### 8


-----

- _Grant of Green Channel Certification for_
_Procurement of Defence Stores & Spares: With_
a view to promote ease of doing business to
achieve national vision of ‘Make in India’, it
has been decided to institute a mechanism for
awarding Green Channel Status to firms having
predefined financial and quality credentials for
broad categories of items having continuous
requirement / mass consumption in Defence
forces. Accordingly, a Green Channel Policy has
been formulated by the Department of Defence
Production with the approval of Raksha Mantri.
MoD has issued a policy on Green Channel
Status vide order date March 24, 2017 for
procurement of defence stores & spares.

- _Defence Export Scheme:_

(a) Scheme for promotion of Defence
Export was issued by Ministry of
Defence. The scheme provides for
two options to prospective Defence
exporters to request for a certificate
from DQA/DGAQA/DGNAI and other
DDP notified agencies in respect
of Defence equipments/systems
indicating “Fit for Indian Military Use”
or “Tested and Certified against the
QR provided by the prospective Indian
Defence Exporter/Manufacturer”, for
improving the marketability of their
products globally.

(b) DGQA SOP for ‘Certification, Testing
and Certification under Defence
Exports Promotion Scheme’ has been
promulgated on March 6, 2019.

- _Modernisation of DGQA Labs_

(a) _Testing of Tyres and Tubes for Grant of_
_BIS Certification: CQA(V) Ahmednagar_
Laboratory has become the only

###### 82


laboratory under Ministry of Defence to
have the honour of getting recognition
from BIS as authorised Laboratory for
testing of Tyres and Tubes for grant of
BIS Certification.

(b) _Goose Down Feather Testing:_ CQA
(T&C) Kanpur lab has got IDFB
accreditation certificate for carrying
out the Goose Down feather testing.

(c) _Commissioning of SCADA System:_
A supervisory Control and Data
Acquisition (SCADA) System
commissioned in Environmental
Testing Lab (ET Lab) at CQAE(WE) has
facilitated auto online data logging and
test records archiving leading to higher
accuracy and transparency.

- _Skill India: Internship programme to improve_
QA awareness in country has been launched
for students undergoing technical education at
various diploma/degree colleges in India.

- _QA-Industry Meet: A number of QA-Industry_
Conclaves have been organised pan India
during the past year, where reps from various
industries have participated. Presentation have
been made by various Tech Directorates of
DGQA during these conclaves to spread the
initiatives taken by Government of India, QA
procedure and Capacity Assessment /Vendor
Registration etc.

- _DRDO Award for Performance Excellence-2016,_
_MRSAM Air Force Project: “Medium Range_
Surface to Air Missile (MRSAM)” is a codevelopment Project between DRDO & IAI
Israel with a Missile Range of 70 Km. ‘DRDO
Performance Excellence Award-2016’ has been
awarded to the Team(Members from DGQA Sr
No. 56 Brig Vikram Ahuja, PD MSQAA) handling
the MRSAM Project of the Indian Air Force.


-----

- _155mm/ 52 Cal. Tracked Self-Propelled Gun- K_
_9 VAJRA:_

(a) The Indian Army was in need of artillery
gun to meet the requirements of 21[st]
century warfare as well as to overcome
the depleting fleet of guns over a
period of time. To address these issues,
a contract of 100 No’s K9 Vajra guns
was awarded to M/s L&T by Ministry of
Defence.

(b) DGQA was entrusted with prime role of
facilitator of project, ensuring speedy
delivery of Guns to Indian Army by
means of PDI, JRI and Proof firing. The
time lines given in contract are very
narrow (4 to 5 Guns per Month).

(c) To achieve the timelines, Innovative and
proactive approach is being adopted
by DGQA which includes precise
planning, coordination and addressing
QA issues with manufacturer in time
bound and professional manner, proactive communication with order
placing authority and user.

(d) By incorporating above methodology,
PDI, JRI and Firing at Pokhran of first
ten guns were completed within due
date and Guns were handed over to
Indian Army.

_155mm/ 52 Cal. Tracked Self-Propelled Gun- K 9 VAJRA_



- _Training Initiatives:_

(a) Defence Institute of Quality Assurance

(DIQA) carries out training of

DGQA officers and officers of other

organizations in the field of Quality

Management.

(b) Country vide refresher courses for

AHSP and SQAE officer were organized,

the curriculum included visit to various

factories.

###### Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality Assurance (DGAQA)

7.24 DGAQA is the Quality Assurance (QA) regulatory

authority for Defence PSUs, Ordnance Factories, DRDO

etc. and provide QA coverage to Military Aircrafts,

Associated Accessories, Air Armaments, Unmanned Air

Vehicle (UAV), Missiles etc. during design, development,

production, overhaul, repair, defect investigation,

up-gradation and modification at various Defence

PSU’s, Ordnance Factories, DRDO Labs, Oil Refineries

& Private Trade Firm’s etc. DGAQA also plays vital

role in Technical Evaluation, Field Trials, Pre-Dispatch

Inspection (PDI) during foreign procurement of Military

Aviation stores. DGAQA is a member of Court of Inquiry

set up for Accident Investigation of Military Aircrafts.

DGAQA is authorized by MOD for capacity assessment

and registration of Indian vendors for manufacturing &

supply of defence aviation stores to the services. During

the year DGAQA has registered 45 firms under different

categories. During the financial year 2018-19, DGAQA

has provided quality assurance coverage to Military

Aviation Stores of the value ` 22879.95 crore up to

March 31, 2019.

###### Directorate of Standardization (DoS)

7.25 Since inception, the Directorate of

Standardisation is paving way to mitigate proliferation

###### 83


-----

so as to optimize complete inventory of the three

services by means of establishing commonality, duplicity

in equipment/components. The assigned duties to the

Directorate of Standardisation towards Standardisation

and Codification is being accomplished through

continual process of formulating new and updating the

existing varied Standardisation documents, Codification

of items, variety and entry control. In addition with

formation of Cyber Security Group of DDP under the

Directorate, the Directorate is ensuring implementation

of Cyber Security guidelines and policies amongst the

DDP organisations. A standards development authority

has also been set up to develop defence standards in

respect of newer technologies.

_Targets & Achievement: Committee of Chairman_

Standardisation Sub Committee (CCSSC) has target

of 1276 Standardisation Documents (113 New & 1163

Revision cases) for year 2018-19. Total of 4870 active

standardisation documents have been formulated by

Std Group.

The Directorate of Standardisation has implemented

globally accepted NATO codification system using

advanced web based software for codification

and cataloguing of Indian Defence inventory. The

new codification tool besides aiding in systematic

Codification and Cataloguing of Defence inventory

is also enabling distinct visibility of Indian products

in International Logistic Systems resulting in

their enhanced participation in Global Defence

Procurement System. After complying with all the

basic requirements of laid down process India has

attained the Tier-II member nation status in Allied

Committee -135 w.e.f February 1, 2019. This paved the

way for issuing India specific Cage Codes (NCAGE)

and adoption of foreign NSNs in respect of platforms

sourced from all member nations of AC/135. It is also

proposed to harmonize joint standards with various

guides and processes in use within NATO Codification

System.

###### 8


###### Directorate of Planning & Coordination

7.26 The Directorate of Planning and Coordination,

an attached office of Department of Defence

Production, was established in 1964. The Directorate

is primarily mandated to establish robust indigenous

defence industry, improve domestic production by

expediting Indigenization process in defence sector

through various enabling policies viz ‘Make in India’

initiative, liberalization of FDI Policy/ Industrial licensing

policy, providing level playing field to private sector,

creating defence technical hub and giving preference

to procurement from indigenous route. Further, the

Directorate strives to foster international cooperation in

defence sector and boost export of defence equipment

to other countries.

###### Defence Exhibition Organisation (DEO)

7.27 The main charter of DEO is to organise and
co-ordinate Defence exhibitions in India and abroad,
primarily with a view to promote export potential of
defence oriented products and services, developed
and manufactured by the Indian Defence Industry. The
exhibitions conducted offer an excellent opportunity
to show case the capabilities of the Defence Industry.
The shows are conducted on an international level. The
forum also facilitates interaction with senior foreign
delegations. The primary objective is to promote defence
export from both the DPSUs and the Indian industry.

_International Exhibitions in India: To provide a platform_
for the Indian Defence Industry to showcase its
capabilities, DEO organises two biennial International
exhibitions in India, namely Aero India and Defexpo
India. While Aero India is dedicated to the aerospace
and aviation industry, the focus of Defexpo India is on
land and naval systems.

(a) _DEFEXPO INDIA-2018: The 10[th] edition of_
Defexpo India with the theme ‘India: The
Emerging Defence Manufacturing Hub’, was


-----

held from April 11 to 14, 2018 at Kancheepuram,
Chennai, Tamil Nadu State. Defexpo India
received an overwhelming and unprecedented
international response. The exhibition
showcased India’s emergence as an attractive
destination for investment in the defence sector
and acted as a platform for alliances and joint
ventures in the defence industry. An interactive
seminar on the defence procurement procedures
and offset policy along with B2B meetings,
exhibitors’ press conferences, product launches
were organised, to bring the participants
abreast with the latest developments. This
show also attracted an unprecedented network
of international government and military
agencies. The highlights of the event included:

- Revenue generation of approx ` 70.27
crore as against ` 82.82 crore in DefExpo 16.

- Innovations for Defence Exhibitions
(iDEX), a scheme of Department of
Defence Production, formulated in
collaboration with Startup India and
Atal Innovation Mission, was launched
by Prime Minister on this occasion.

- Defexpo India Pavilion showcased
India Public Sector and Private Sector
capability in Defence Production
with more than 100 indigenously
manufactured products like Aakash
Missile System, Brahmos etc.

- The Defexpo 2018 also featured
for the first time, a combined live
demonstration of indigenously
manufactured aero, naval and land
system.

- Business Seminars and other related
events were also conducted which
witnessed large business delegates
participation. 40 B2B MoUs agreements


were signed.

- India Russia Military Industrial

Conference was held on the sidelines
of Defexpo - 2018 in which 75 Indian
Defence Sector Manufacturing
company and 28 Original Equipment
Manufacturers from Russian Industry.
7 MOUs were also signed for B2B
Collaborations.

- 702 exhibitors participated comprising
of 542 Indian exhibitors including 160
MSME and 160 International exhibitors.
42 Official delegations including 13
Ministerial delegations participated.
Total 284 foreign/official delegates
reported participation.

- Over 50 bilateral meeting were held at
various levels including by RM.

- Total exhibition space was
2,90,000 Sq ft.

- Over 3.5 lakh people visited Defexpo
2018 and its events. Arrangements
for visit to Naval warships were also
conducted.

- DRDO organised a Transfer of

Technology Mela in which 10
technologies were transferred in an
event.

_DEFEXPO-2018_

###### 8


-----

(b) _AERO INDIA-2019: The 12[th] edition of Aero_

India-2019 with the theme - ‘Runway to a

billion opportunities’, was organised from

February 20-24, 2019 at Air Force Station

Yelahanka, Bengaluru. The net area as sold

during the exposition was 28398 Sqm. The

Business Seminars were conducted by CII /

SIDM, FICCI, ASSOCHAM, PHD, USIBC, USISPF,

Bharat Shakti, Synergy Foundation, Aerospace

& Aviation Sector Skill Council. In addition,

Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of Commerce

& Industry /DGFT, Kerala Govt / KINFRA, MoD /

DDP also conducted the Seminars. The Business

Seminars was held in the 3 adjacent Seminar

Halls at the Aero India venue. Important salient

features are:

      - Revenue generation of approximately

` 133.45 crore as against ` 94.19 crore

in Aero India 2017.

      - Startup were also encouraged during

the event. About 450 startups

participated in the show.

      - Indian exhibitors participation was

238 and 165 Foreign companies

participated. International exhibitor

increased by 101% from 82 in 2017 to

165 in 2019.

      - 63 aircrafts participated in the show.

      - 470 B2B meetings were conducted.

      - For the first time, Global CEO,

Conference was conducted, in which

22 CEOs, (11 Global CEOs and 11 Indian

CEOs) participated.

      - Conduct of first ever Drone Olympics

at Aero India. 121 applications were

###### 86


received and thereafter 58 were

shortlisted to participate.

- Several investment decisions/MoUs

have been signed by Global and Indian

organisations. The highlights of the

same include:

 Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL)

and Elettronica SpA (ELT), Italy,

have entered into an MoU for joint

development, commercialisation

and production of new

generation Electronic Warfare

(EW) surveillance systems.

 BEL signed an MoU with JSR

Dynamics Pvt Ltd (JSR), a

Nagpur based start-up company

to leverage the individual design

and manufacturing capabilities

of BEL and JSR to develop

weapons and light weight cruise

missiles.

 BEL and Hughes India entered

into a Teaming Agreement for

design, development, supply,

installation, integration and

commissioning of Satellite

Communication solutions for

helicopters.

 Rafael Advanced Defence

Systems presented a $30 million

purchase order to ASTRA

RAFAEL COMSYS PVT LTD

(ARC) for the manufacture,

test-before-integration and

lifecycle support management

for a complete set of the B Net

Software Defined Radio system

for the Indian Air Force.


-----

 Russian Helicopters Holding
Company (a part of State

Corporation Rostec) and a
number of Indian companies
signed five Memorandums of
Understanding.

 To boost the tactical capabilities
of the Indian Armed Forces,
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
(HAL) has awarded Thales a
contract to supply 135, 2.75-inch
(70-mm) rocket launchers.

 Bengaluru-based aerospace and
defence company, Turbo Tech,
signed a contract with Safran
Helicopter Engines (previously
known as Turbomeca) for the
supply of Oil Cooling System for
its new engine.

 AXISCADES, an engineering
solutions company has tiedup with Virtual Reality Media
(VRM), a Slovakian technology
company which produces flight
simulators and training systems
and the companies announced
the signing of the deal.

 Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
(HAL) handed over the first three
Advanced Light Helicopters as
part of the 22 ALH MK III contract
to the Indian Army during the
its partnership with the Adani
group.

 Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
(HAL) signed a Memorandum
of Understanding (MoU) with
the Central Public Works
Department (CPWD) for the
execution of the stage 2 works


of Infrastructure development
works at Green Field Helicopter

factory at Bengaluru.

- International participation included

Defence Ministers from Spain, Czech
Republic, Mauritius and Afghanistan
Industry Ministers from Russia,
Aerospace Minister from Kazakhstan
and Vice Minister from South Korea,
Ghana, Foreign Air Chiefs and other
foreign dignitaries.

- National Skill Development Corporation
(NSDC) Aerospace and Aviation Sector
Skill Council (AASSC) in collaboration
with Singapore Polytechnic and
Singapore-based private sector firm
signed an agreement for skilling the
Indian youths in the aviation sector
by setting up academies in Bengaluru.

- The first time ever following were also
conducted during the Aero India 2019:

 Academic seminars on Regional
Air Connectivity by Ministry of
Civil Aviation.

 Pacific area coding and
codification seminar.

 Knowledge seminars by DRDO.

 Skill Pavilion NSDC under
the aegis of Ministry of
Skill Development and
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) set
up an Aero Skill Pavilion. Aero
Skill Pavilion housed twenty
booths, with had participation
from Companies in Aerospace
and Aviation domain including
related skill training entities

###### 8


-----

_Aero India 2019- Inaugural Ceremony_



      - First time participation by Airbus 330

Neo, Airbus C-295 Transport Jet, NAL 
Saras, Regional Transport Aircraft, HAL
HTT- 40 Basic trainer and HAL-LUH.

      - Vintage Display, B-52 Bomber, Boeing

and Dakota. Aerobatic display by

team Yakovlev from UK and Indian

teams Sarang and Surya Kiran also

participated.

_International Exhibitions Abroad: During the Financial_

Year 2018-2019, the following international exhibitions

had participation from DPSUs, OFB and Private

Industries:

(a) _Farnborough Air show 2018: Farnborough_

Airshow 2018 from July 16-22, 2018 at London,

UK. HAL and BDL participated in the show.

(b) _ARMY - 2018:_ International Military Technical

Forum “ ARMY” 2018 held from August 21 to 26,

2018 at Moscow, Russia. MDL, BEL, GRSE and

HAL participated in the show.

###### 88


(c) _AAD 2018: AAD 2018 from September 19-23,_

2018 at South Africa. HAL, BEL, BEML and BDL

participated in the show.

(d) _DEFPOL 2018: DEFPOL 2018 from October 3-4,_

2018 at Hanoi, Vietnam. OFB, HAL and BEL

participated in the show.

(e) _Euronaval 2018: Euronaval 2018 from October_

23-26, 2018 at Paris, France. BDL, GSL and MDL

DPSUs participated in the show.

(f) _Indo Defence Expo: Indo Defence Expo in_

Indonesia scheduled from November 7 to

10, 2018 at Indonesia. BEL, GSL and MDL

participated in the show. Economic Advisor and

DDG (Export) represented the MoD delegation.

(g) _EDEX - 2018: 1[st] Egyptian Defence Exhibition_

(EDEX- 2018) in Cairo, Egypt from December

3-5, 2018. BEL participated in the show.

7.28 _Working Results: The Value of Production and_

Profit after Tax of Defence PSUs are indicated in the

Table No. 7.1 and Table No. 7.2 respectively.


-----

Table No. 7.1
Value of Production of Defence PSUs

 (` in crore)

Name of DPSU 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 Provisional

HAL 17152 17103 17553 18100

BEL 7775 9244 9706 11900

BEML 2740 2624 3227 3450

BDL 4297 5011 4641 3235

GRSE 1661 928 1342 1375

GSL 726 1030 1343 906

HSL 593 629 645 605

MDL 4106 3523 4399 4625

MIDHANI 679 696 698 815

_Total_ _39729_ _40788_ _43554_ _45011_

Table No. 7.2
Profit after Tax of Defence PSUs

 (` in crore)

DPSUs 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 Provisional

HAL 1998.00 2616.00 2070.00 2100

BEL 1307.00 1548.00 1399.00 1825

BEML 63.66 84.44 129.45 100

BDL 564.88 524.06 528.15 422

GRSE 162.05 11.47 86.80 105

GSL 62.29 117.40 217.33 132

HSL 19.00 53.77 20.99 44

MDL 568.48 548.99 439.80 524

MIDHANI 119.37 126.31 131.26 131

_Total_ _4864.73_ _5630.44_ _5022.78_ _5383_



###### 89

||Col2|Col3|Col4|(` in crore)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Name of DPSU|2015-16|2016-17|2017-18|2018-19 Provisional|
|HAL|17152|17103|17553|18100|
|BEL|7775|9244|9706|11900|
|BEML|2740|2624|3227|3450|
|BDL|4297|5011|4641|3235|
|GRSE|1661|928|1342|1375|
|GSL|726|1030|1343|906|
|HSL|593|629|645|605|
|MDL|4106|3523|4399|4625|
|MIDHANI|679|696|698|815|
|Total|39729|40788|43554|45011|

||Col2|Col3|Col4|(` in crore)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|DPSUs|2015-16|2016-17|2017-18|2018-19 Provisional|
|HAL|1998.00|2616.00|2070.00|2100|
|BEL|1307.00|1548.00|1399.00|1825|
|BEML|63.66|84.44|129.45|100|
|BDL|564.88|524.06|528.15|422|
|GRSE|162.05|11.47|86.80|105|
|GSL|62.29|117.40|217.33|132|
|HSL|19.00|53.77|20.99|44|
|MDL|568.48|548.99|439.80|524|
|MIDHANI|119.37|126.31|131.26|131|
|Total|4864.73|5630.44|5022.78|5383|


-----

-----

###### chapter
###  8

###### DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT


-----

###### DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
# 8

###### BACKGROUND

8.1 DRDO has emerged as one of the premier

scientific and technological organisations in the country

and has played a major role in the development of state
of-the-art platforms, sensors and weapon systems. The

organisation has set its sights on making India self
sufficient in Defence equipments ranging from missiles,

radars, sonars, electronic warfare, engineering systems,

surveillance & recce systems, communication systems,

electro-optics, night vision, information security products

to name a few. At the core of its technological strength

is its expertise in system design, system integration

and testing & evaluation built over the last six decades.

8.2 DRDO’s mission essentially covers the following

broad activities:

                             - Design, develop and lead to production of state
of-the-art sensors, weapon systems, platforms

and allied equipment for our Defence Services.

                             - Provide technological solutions to the Services

to optimize combat effectiveness and to

promote well-being of the troops.

                             - Develop infrastructure and committed quality

manpower and build strong indigenous

technology base.

                             - Support National Cyber Security Architecture

– Testing capabilities, security solutions,


_Pre-induction Trials of Long Range Surface-to-Surface_

_Ballistic Missile ‘Agni-5’_

###### 92


###### DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
# 8


hardware testing, indigenous network systems,

cyber defence tools


-----

8.3 DRDO’s major achievements were made

possible by working in close synchronization with

all its major partners which include tri-Services,

industries and academia. Today over 1000 industries

including Defence Public Sector Undertaking

(DPSUs) and Ordnance Factory Board (OFBs) are

vital partners in DRDO’s development programmes.

In addition, DRDO collaborates with other S&T

organisations like Department of Space (DoS),

Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) and Council of


Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) for common

requirements and applications. DRDO has also

selectively chosen its global partners and has MoUs

signed with over 30 countries worldwide for joint

collaboration in requisite areas with complementary

work share.

DRDO Partners and Linkages are reflected in the chart

below:


###### ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE


DRDO – Partners and Linkages

charge as Secretary, Defence R&D, Chairman, DRDO

in August, 2018. DRDO labs are grouped into seven


8.4 DRDO is headed by Secretary DD R&D &

Chairman DRDO. Dr G Satheesh Reddy has taken over


technology clusters each headed by a cluster Director

General as shown below:

###### 93


-----

|Col1|DG (Cluster)|Laboratories & Establishments|
|---|---|---|
||DG (AERO)|ADE, ADRDE, CABS, GTRE|
||DG(ACE)|ARDE, CVRDE, DTRL, HEMRL, PXE, R&DE(E), SASE, VRDE|
||DG (ECS)|CHESS, DARE, DEAL, DLRL, IRDE, LASTEC, LRDE|
||DG (LS)|DEBEL, DFRL, DIBER, DIHAR, DIPAS, DIPR, DRDE, DRL(T), INMAS|
||DG (MED &CoS)|ANURAG, CAIR, JCB, MTRDC, SAG, SSPL|
||DG (MSS)|ASL, DRDL, ITR, RCI, TBRL|
||DG (NS&M)|DLJ, DMRL, DMSRDE NMRL, NPOL, NSTL|


8.5 DRDO headquarters (HQ) at Delhi, which
coordinates the overall functioning of the organisation,
is an interface between the Government and the cluster

Corporate Structure of DRDO

DG (Corporate) Corporate HQ

DG (HR)

DG (R&M)

Office (PO), Rajbhasha and O&M, Vigilance and Security (DV&S)

DG (PC & SI)

Technical Advisors Abroad

DG (TM)

DG (SAM) Public Interface (DPI), Quality, Reliability & Safety (DQR&S)

###### 9


HQs and laboratories. There are five corporate DGs to
oversee the activities of the corporate HQ.

|DG (Corporate)|Corporate HQ|
|---|---|
|DG (HR)|Centre for Personnel Talent Management (CEPTAM), Defence Institute of Advanced Technology (DIAT), Defence Scientific Information and Documentation Center (DESIDOC), Human Resource Development (DHRD), Institute of Technology and Management (ITM), Personnel (DOP), Recruitment and Assessment Centre (RAC), Right to Information (RTI) Cell|
|DG (R&M)|Civil Works and Estates (DCW&E), Finance and Material Management (DF&MM), Management Services (DMS), Parliamentary Afaf irs (DPA), Planning and Coordination (DP&C), Programme Office (PO), Rajbhasha and O&M, Vigilance and Security (DV&S)|
|DG (PC & SI)|Industry Interface and Technology Management (IITM), Interaction with Services for Business (DISB), International Cooperation (DIC) and JVs, Low Intensity Conflicts (LIC), SA to Chiefs, Technical Advisors Abroad|
|DG (TM)|Extramural Research and Intellectual Property Rights (DER&IPR), Futuristic Technology Management (DFTM), Research Boards, Research Innovation Center (RIC), Centers of Excellence|
|DG (SAM)|Public Interface (DPI), Quality, Reliability & Safety (DQR&S)|


-----

8.6 Additionally, DRDO has 3 human resource bodies and 1 joint venture under its fold as detailed
institutions, 3 certification agencies, 4 autonomous below.

|Human Resource (HR) institutions|1. Centre for Personnel Talent Management (CEPTAM), 2. Institute of Technology Management (ITM) 3. Recruitment and Assessment Centre (RAC)|
|---|---|
|Certification agencies|1. Centre for Military Airworthiness and Certification (CEMILAC) with associated Regional Centers for Military Airworthiness (RCMAs) for airworthiness products, 2. Centre for Fire Explosive and Environment Safety (CFEES) for fire and explosives 3. Scientific Analysis Group (SAG) for grading of information security products.|
|Autonomous bodies|1. Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA), Bengaluru 2. Defence Institute of Advanced Technology (DIAT), Pune (Deemed University) 3. Society for Integrated Circuit Technology and Applied Research (SITAR), New Delhi 4. Electro Optical Instruments Research Academy (ELOIRA), Hyderabad|
|Joint venture|1. BrahMos Aerospace|


###### MANPOWER

8.7 DRDO has a total strength of 24,732 employees,

out of which 7,329 are working in Defence Research

and Development Services (DRDS), 9,105 in Defence

Research and Technical Cadre (DRTC) and 6,255 are in

Admin & Allied Cadre.

###### BUDGET

8.8 For the current financial year 2018-19, DDR&D

has been allocated ` 17,861.19 crore (BE) which is about

6% of the total Defence Budget. A total of ` 9734.45

crore has been allocated under Capital head and

` 8126.74 crore under Revenue head.


###### PROGRAMMES AND PROJECTS

8.9 DRDO projects are categorized as follows:

- _Mission Mode (MM): These are taken up based_

on Users’ requirements with stringent time

lines and normally involve more than one lab

with Users having a major say in steering the

project.

- _Technology_ _Demonstration_ _(TD):_ These

are normally initiated by DRDO as feeder

technologies for future or imminent MM

projects. The purpose is to develop, test and

demonstrate a particular technology.

###### 9


-----

- _Science & Technology (S&T): These are normally_
of basic research/applied research type taken

up by labs with alignment to future technology
needs.

- _Infrastructure & Facilities (IF): Projects which_
typically involve creation of advanced test
& qualification facilities, are taken through
IF mode. It is essentially a capital investment
which plays a major role in validating the
technology/system generated/developed.

- _Product Support (PS): Projects in this category_
are aimed at upgradation of existing systems in
production or maintenance/technical support
of the system for a limited period.

- _User Trials (UT): The scope of this category_
includes conduct of User trials including DRDO
support during the trials.

8.10 During the period (January 2018 - March 2019),
87 new projects have been sanctioned at a total cost of

` 4,100 crore and 34 projects have been completed at a
total cost of ` 1,613 crore.

8.11 DRDO currently has 372 ongoing projects
(excluding strategic projects) amounting to

approximately ` 78,135crore (including User share). Out
of 372 ongoing projects, 61 large projects (cost ≥ ` 100
crore) have a cost of ` 70,740crore.

8.12 There are 11 major programmes approved by
Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) amounting to

` 54,370 crore (of which DRDO’s share is ` 24,703 crore).
Out of these, four CCS projects are related to design and
development of missiles: Long Range Surface-to-Air
Missiles (LRSAM) for Indian Navy, Indian Aircraft Carrier
(IAC) for the Indian Navy and Medium Range Surfaceto-Air Missiles (MRSAM) for Indian Army & Indian Air
Force. The CCS projects in the field of Aeronautics are:
Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) Air Force Mk-I, LCA Air

###### 96


Force Mk-II, LCA Navy Mk-I, LCA Navy Mk-II, Airborne
Early Warning and Control (AEW&C) System, Medium

Altitude Long Endurance (MALE) Unmanned Aerial
Vehicle ‘TAPAS-BH’ and Kaveri Engine.

8.13 The year 2018 witnessed a number of significant
milestones/achievements in DRDO projects, some of
which are detailed in succeeding paragraphs:

_Anti-Satellite Missile (Mission Shakti): DRDO on March_
27, 2019 successfully conducted an Anti-Satellite
(A-SAT) missile test ‘Mission Shakti’ from the Dr APJ
Abdul Kalam Island in Odisha. A DRDO-developed
Ballistic Missile Defence (BMD) interceptor missile
successfully engaged an Indian orbiting target satellite
in low earth orbit (LEO) in a ‘Hit to Kill’ mode. The
interceptor missile was a three-stage missile with two
solid rocket boosters. Tracking data from range sensors
has confirmed that the mission met all its objectives.
The test has demonstrated the Nation’s capability to
defend its assets in outer space. With this India joins a
select group of nations which have such capability.

_Ballistic Missile Defence (Programme AD): DRDO has_
taken up development of two layered BMD programme
for defending the vital assets from ballistic missile
attacks. The successful demonstration of the BMD
system was conducted through two interception trials
in 2018 validating all the elements of the BMD systems
in an operation scenario. Endo-atmospheric interceptor
missile (AAD-26) mission was successfully conducted on
August 2, 2018 in combat mode from LC-IV (Kalam Island)
against long range simulated targets with a miss distance
of ~2 m. Exo-atmospheric interceptor missile (PDV04) was
successfully
te s t - fi re d
from Abdul
K a l a m
Island for
the first
time during


-----

night on September 24, 2018 against two stage ship
launched target missile.

_Long Range Surface-to-Surface Ballistic Missile ‘Agni-_
_5’: During the year Agni-5 was successfully flight tested_
thrice in January, June & December, 2018. A total of
seven flight trials have been conducted and all the
missions have been successful meeting the desired
range objectives.

_Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile ‘Astra’: Beyond_
Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile (BVRAAM) ‘Astra’ (60
km) possessing high single shot kill probability & making
it highly reliable is being developed by DRDO to engage
and destroy highly manoeuvring supersonic aerial
targets. The missile incorporates many unique features
like active radar terminal guidance, excellent electronic
counter-counter measure (ECCM) features, smokeless
propulsion and process improved effectiveness. A series
of flight trials of the missile by IAF were conducted at
ITR, Balasore as part of final development trials of the
missile in September-October, 2018.

_Long Range Surface-to-Air Missile (LRSAM): LRSAM is_
a joint development programme of DRDO and Israel
Aerospace Industries (IAI), Israel for Indian Navy
(IN). It has a range of 70 km using dual-pulse rocket
motor and active Radar seeker in terminal phase and
inertial/mid-course update for guidance. The weapon
system would provide a point and area defence for
three P15 A ships of Indian Navy against vast variety
of aerial threats including fighter aircraft, subsonic and
supersonic missiles, etc. Operational Flight Test (OFT-3)


was conducted successfully in January 2019 from INS
Chennai which proved the Joint Target Coordination

(JTC) mode capability of LRSAM weapon system with
INS Kolkata & INS Chennai participation. A number of
operational missiles have been delivered to the Indian
Navy by DRDO. On-Job Training (OJT) to IN personnel
on rear-section maintenance at INS Vajrakosh, Karwar
was also completed.

_Supersonic Cruise Missile ‘BrahMos’: BrahMos, the_
world’s most formidable supersonic cruise missile is a
two stage precision strike weapon. Operating on fire
and forget principle, it can be launched from multiple
platforms against land and sea targets. Flying at top
speed of 2.8 Mach carrying a warhead up to 300 kg, the
3 ton BrahMos is capable of destroying high value enemy
targets within shortest possible time. During March,
2018, flight trial of BrahMos missile with indigenous
seeker developed by DRDL was completed successfully
at Pokhran, meeting all the mission objectives for land
target in mono-pulse mode. The missile was successfully
test fired twice during
May, 2018 from the test
range of ITR Chandipur
along the Odisha coast
to prove the indigenous
sub-systems. The missile
was also successfully test
fired from ITR at Balasore
in July, 2018 as part of
service life extension
programme for Indian
Army under extreme
weather conditions.

_Medium Range Surface-to-Air Missile (MRSAM) for IAF:_
MRSAM weapon system is a state-of-the-art Air Defence
system capable of intercepting aerial targets like fighter
aircrafts, helicopter cruise missile up to range of 70 kms.
The system is jointly developed by DRDO and IAI, Israel.
During the year 2018, qualification of all sub-systems
was completed and the weapon system has been made

###### 9


-----

ready for production.Updated Identification Friend or
Foe (IFF Mk-XII) integration with Long Range Detection

& Tracking Radar (LBMFSTAR) was carried out during
January, 2019. Design Verification Tests (DVT) of
LBMFSTAR has been conducted during February, 2019.

_Third Generation Helicopter Launch Anti-Tank Guided_
_Missile ‘HeliNa’: HeliNa is a 3[rd] generation helicopter_
launch anti-tank guided missile with Lock-On-BeforeLaunch (LOBL) capability with imaging Infra-Red for
integration on ALH. ‘HeliNa’ Guided Flight Trials were
conducted during August 2018 at Pokhran Field Firing
Ranges (PFFR), Rajasthan. Two successful firings were
carried out against tank simulator. During the trials,
thermal target system (TTS) was successfully tracked
from helicopter mounted missiles. During February, 2019,
two Programmed Control Flight Trials (PCFTs) were
successfully conducted to prove Jet Vane configuration
with ground static launcher.

_Anti-Tank Missile ‘PROSPINA’: ‘NAG’ is a 3[rd] generation_
Anti-Tank Missile with ‘Fire & Forget’ and ‘Top Attack’
capabilities, which can be used in day and night. It is
deployed on a specially modified ICV BMP-2 vehicle
called NAG Missile Carrier (NAMICA). Two successful
flight trials of ‘NAG’ were carried out in February, 2018.
AoN approval of Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) on

###### 98


April 27, 2018 was obtained for initial production of 293
nos. ‘NAG’ missiles and 13 nos. NAMICAs. PKT 7.62 mm

gun firing trials were successfully conducted from KK
Ranges, Ahmednagar during November, 2018. Winter
User trials were completed at PFFR in February, 2019.

_New Generation Anti-Radiation Missile (NGARM): DRDO_
is involved in the design and development of NGARM
having a range of 100 km. AKU-58 launcher after suitable
modification will be used for missile integration on Su30 MKI aircraft. Successful static firing of integrated
P-l & P-ll rocket motor was conditioned at high & low
temperatures in June & July, 2018 respectively. Captive
Flight Trials (CFT) was also successfully conducted from
AF Station, Halwara in September, 2018 & January, 2019.
Release Flight Trials (RFTs) in point to point mode from
Su-30 has also been completed.

_Quick_ _Reaction_ _Surface-to-Air_ _Missile_ _(QRSAM):_
QRSAM weapon system is capable of search on move,
track on move and fire on short halts while engaging
multiple targets at ranges of about 30 km with two
vehicle configuration for area Air Defence. All ground
system equipments for the Battery Combat Vehicle
(CV) and Support Vehicles, Mobile Launcher Vehicle
(MLV), Battery Multi-Function Radar Vehicle (BMFRV),
Battery Surveillance Radar Vehicle (BSRV), Battery
Command Post Vehicle (BCPV), embossed canister and
Transport and Loader Vehicle (TLV) has been realized.
During the period (January, 2018 – March, 2019), four
developmental flight trials were conducted wherein all
objectives were met. Weapon system integration trials &
performance evaluation is under progress at Kolar.


-----

_Man-Portable Anti-Tank Guided Missile (MPATGM):_
MPATGM is a 3[rd] generation ATGM with ‘Fire & Forget’

and ‘Top Attack’ capabilities, which can be used by day
and night. Design & development of MPATGM weapon
system is undertaken for deployment by Infantry and
Parachute Battalions of the Indian Army. It is intended
to be a replacement for 2[nd] generation MILAN & Konkurs
ATGMs, in service with the Indian Army. Two PCFTs were
carried out successfully over 2500m and 1300 m in ‘Top
Attack’ mode in September, 2018. During March 2019,
Guided Flight Trials (GFT) was completed in which top
attack capability was established at required range.

_Solid Fuel Ducted Ramjet (SFDR) Technology for Air_
_Launched Tactical Missiles:_ The state-of-the-art air-toair missile powered with ‘SFDR’ propulsion technology is
a joint development project between DRDO and Russia.
The missile is designed with an advanced propulsion
system and is configured with nozzle-less booster,
thrust modulation system and boron based sustainer
to deliver specific impulse of 1000 - 1200 sec in ramjet
mode. The missile can hit the air targets in the ranges
from 70 - 340 km in the power ‘ON’ mode. During
the flight test conducted on May 30, 2018, nozzle-less
booster technology was successfully demonstrated
in the mission for the first time in the history. In the
flight tested conducted on February 8, 2019 from ITR,
Chandipur all objectives were met towards realisation
of the SFDR propulsion system consisting of nozzle less
booster, solid fuel ramjet sustainer with air intakes & fuel
controller and insulation system.


_Stand-off Anti-Tank (SANT) Guided Missile: DRDO_

is involved in design, development and technology

demonstration of Stand-off Anti Tank (SANT) Guided

Missile. During the year SANT mission-01 campaign was

conducted during May, 2018 at Jaisalmer, Rajasthan

during which successful firing of SANT from Mi-35

helicopter platform was demonstrated. SANT RFTs with

mathematical model of seeker was also conducted at

Pokhran in November, 2018 wherein safe separation

from Mi-35, transfer alignment algorithm, launch release

sequence and latex/roll control auto pilot algorithms

were successfully demonstrated. Carriage trials of SANT

missile with MMW seeker have also been successfully

completed.

_Smart Anti Air Field Weapon (SAAW): SAAW is long-_

range, stand-off, precision air-to-surface weapon (125 kg

class) capable of engaging ground targets. Impact trial of

SAAW was

c o n d u c t e d

in May, 2018

to access

penetration

capability of

SAAW in full

configuration

mode. Three tests of SAAW were also successfully carried

out during August, 2018 from IAF aircraft at Chandan range.

The weapon has undergone 8 developmental flight trials till

date.

###### 99


-----

_Surface-to-Surface Short Range Tactical Ballistic_

_Missile ‘Prahaar’: DRDO successfully test fired tactical_

ballistic missile ‘Prahaar’ from ITR Chandipur, Odishaon

September 20, 2018. The demonstration test launch was

successful which was witnessed by Chief of Army Staff.

_X Band Seeker: DRDO has successfully carried out_

the sea trials of X Band Seeker at Vizag with INS

Astradharini as carrier and Multipurpose Support Vessel

SCI Saraswati as target in March, 2018.

_User Trials of Inducted Missiles: The following trials were_

carried out by Users:

 - Agni-1 February 6, 2018, October 30, 2018

 - Agni-2 February 20, 2018

 - Prithvi February 7, 2018, February 21, 2018

 - Dhanush February 23, 2018, November 3, 2018

 - Akash October & December 2018

_Subsonic Cruise Missile ‘Nirbhay’: Nirbhay is India’s_

first indigenously designed and developed long-range

subsonic cruise missile having 1000 km range and

capable of carrying up to 300 kg warheads. The system

incorporates the Ring Laser Gyroscope (RLG) based

inertial navigation system as primary navigation and

Micro Electro-Mechanical System (MEMS)-based inertial

navigation system as secondary navigation system. The

integration of NGL-06 missile sections is in progress

and section level vibration test is being carried out. The

system would be ready for flight trials by mid-2019.

_Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) ‘Tejas’: LCA Tejas is India’s_

first indigenous multi-role fighter aircraft designed

and developed to meet the requirements of the IAF.

It is an advanced technology, supersonic, light weight,

all-weather, multi-role fighter aircraft designed for

multiple combat roles. As on date, 4428 flight tests on

Tejas aircraft (including more than 700 during January,

2018 – March, 2019) have been completed. Declaration

of Full Operational Clearance (FOC) and handing

###### 00


over of formal FOC certificate along with Release to
Service Document (RSD) to the Chief of Air Staff was

conducted on February 20, 2019 during Aero India
2019. IAF Ex Gaganshakthi requirements for simulated
mode firing of R-73E and Derby Missile were completed.
Trials to assess landing and takeoff characteristics
were conducted at IAF base, Jamnagar. Night flying
assessment was carried out in dark phase on LSP5, PV6
and SP6 aircrafts. Ground refuelling tests with IAF IL-78
tanker was completed at Gwalior. Air to air refuelling was
successfully demonstrated on LSP8 aircraft at IAF base
Gwalior. Trials of Phase-2 air to air refuelling were flown
towards clearing envelope expansion. LSP8 participated
in DefExpo Flypast as part of larger formulation of HAL
aircraft.

_Airborne Early Warning & Control (AEW&C) System:_

The AEW&C system consists of sensors mounted on an
aircraft (Embraer-145) for locating and providing early
warning to air and ground stations of airborne & sea
surface targets, and hostile emissions. AEW&C in Initial
Operational Capability (IOC) configuration was accepted
by IAF and inducted at the IAF in February, 2017 and
has been deployed at IAF base Bhatinda for operational
exploitation. During the period (January, 2018 – March,
2019), Acceptance Test of AEW&C Phase-I induction of
AEW&C Aircraft #1135 was completed. A total of 153
sorties for a total duration of 338 hours 45 minutes were
completed including 69 mission sorties for a duration of
174 hours. The system has been formally inducted into
IAF under IOC configuration in September, 2018. During


-----

February, 2018, testing and performance optimization in

the presence of multiple radars was carried out on ground

for indigenous ESM system for EMB aircraft. System

installation, integration and ground testing on aircraft

were carried out and flight clearance was obtained. Two

sorties were conducted and analysis of the test results

is in progress. AEW&C aircraft participated in Republic

Day fly-past & also participated in Aero India 2019. Apex

Board has accepted that programme mandate has been

met and recommended for technical closure.

_Medium Altitude Long Endurance (MALE) Unmanned_

_Aerial Vehicle (UAV) ‘TAPAS BH’: TAPAS-BH, a multi-_

mission UAV is being developed with an endurance

of 24 hours to carry out the intelligence, surveillance

and reconnaissance (ISR) roles for the three Armed

Forces. It is being designed to operate at 30,000 ft

Above Mean Sea Level (AMSL) altitude and is capable

of carrying Electronic Warfare and Electro-Optic &

Synthetic Aperture Radar (EO & SAR) payloads. It can

carry a variety of other payloads weighing up to 350 kg.

The flights with High Power Engine (HPE) commenced

in February, 2018. During January, 2018 – March, 2019,

39 flight trials using airframe AF5 (with HPE) have

been completed (total 50 flight trials completed since

the maiden flight in November, 2016). Flight trials on

airframe AF6 also commenced in January, 2019 and as

on date, 9 flight trials have been conducted. Indigenous

SATNAV INS system, indigenous payloads (GPA Mk-IV,

MREO) and imported payloads (SATCOM, LREO, ELINT&

SAR) has also been tested during these trials. The

payload was able to localize radars successfully.

_TAPAS BH_


_Controlled Aerial Delivery System (CADS): Airdrop_

technology is a vital capability for rapid deployment

of payloads to specific rendezvous points. A flight trial

of CADS-1T in manual control mode was successfully

conducted in June, 2018 from Bari Drop Zone, Dholpur.

As per the specifications of Human Space Program

(HSP) of ISRO, there is a mandate for the safe recovery

of the astronauts after completing their space mission

on their way back to Earth. This system has been

successfully developed. The system has been proven at

different stages such as aircraft drop test, Crew Module

Atmospheric Re-entry (CARE) Mission and finally the

critical test on emergency situation called PAD ABORT

test. The most recent PAD ABORT test conducted at

SHAR by ISRO on July 5, 2018 has proven the technology

for meeting the emergency situation at the launch pad

itself.

_Small Turbo Fan Engine (STFE): DRDO is involved_

in the development of technologies for indigenous

STFE. It is proposed to develop 5 engine sets for

development testing and 3 engine sets for Nirbhay

integration with development partner M/s Brahmos

Aerospace Thiruvananthapuram Limited (M/s BATL).

Five prototypes (T1, T2, T3, T4 and T5) have been

realized. High altitude start trials and endurance tests

were completed.

_Advanced Towed Artillery Gun System (ATAGS): DRDO_

has taken up a programme to design and develop 155

mm X 52 cal Advanced Towed Artillery Gun System

(ATAGS) to meet the future requirements of Indian

Army. The state-of-the-art indigenous large caliber Gun

system will be capable of achieving firing ranges of the

order of 40 km for ERFB Boat Tailed & 48 km for ERFB

Base Bleed ammunition. During the period (January,

2018 – March, 2019), mobility and high altitude firing

trials of the gun systems (G-1 & G-2) were completed

at LMDR Menia Firing Ranges, Sikkim. AHS and Ballistic

trials of Gun were completed in September, 2018 which

was followed by trials conducted at Pokhran, Rajasthan

during October, 2018 wherein the communication testing

###### 0


-----

between Battery Command Post (BCP) and Gun was

successfully conducted using Voice Data Communication

Unit (VDCU) over line and radio media. All Fire Mission

Commands were successfully transmitted between BCP

and Gun. Contract for 6 additional gun systems was

signed with the developmental partners. Gun G-1 and

G-2 were showcased during live & static demonstration

at DefExpo held in Chennai in the presence of Prime

Minister & Defence Minister. Gun G-3 integration trials

were completed in February, 2019. Track trials of Gun G-4

in towing mode are in progress at VRDE, Ahmednagar.

Both the gun systems are being made ready for conduct

of User Assisted Technical Trials (UATT).

_Guided Pinaka Rocket System: Guided Pinaka Rocket_

system is being developed by DRDO to engage targets

from 20 km to 80 km range with an accuracy of 60
80 m. The rocket uses propulsion system developed for

Pinaka Mk-II rocket and has canard based aerodynamic

control and Inertial Navigation System (INS)/Global

Positioning System (GPS) based guidance. The system

was successfully test fired from PXE, Chandipur in May,

2018. Dynamic trials of Guided Pinaka rocket were

successfully conducted in

March, 2019 at PFFR wherein

total 3 nos. of guided Pinaka

rockets were fired for

assessment of accuracy on

ground.

###### 02


_Ammunitions:_

- _125 mm FSAPDS (500 DoP) Ammunition: DRDO_

is developing 125 mm FSAPDS Mk-II ammunition

having 500 mm Depth of Penetration (DoP) for

T-72 & T-90 Tanks. It is two piece ammunition

which is fired through 125 mm smooth bore

gun. During the year, consistency trials of the

ammunition were carried out at PXE, Balasore.

- _105 mm HEEB Ammunition for IFG: During the_

year, performance demonstration of 105 mm

HEEB ammunition was successfully conducted

at School of Artillery, Deolali Camp, Nasik

wherein a total 28 no. of HEEB ammunition &

20 no. of TNT ammunition were fired in direct &

indirect mode.

- _120 mm FSAPDS Mk-II Ammunition: DRDO has_

successfully developed 120 mm FSAPDS Mk-II

Ammunition, User trials have been conducted

and all the parameter set by User have been

met. User has accepted this ammunition having

enhanced lethality in RHA plate & placed an

indent of Qty. 8000 rounds on OFB. Presently

bulk production of this ammunition is in

progress at OFB.

_500 Kg General Purpose Bomb: DRDO is involved in the_

development of aircraft bomb which can provide good

blast and fragmentation effects and limited concrete

penetration capabilities, impact/impact delay fuze,

suitable package for the tail unit and rolling rings for the

bomb. During the period (January, 2018 – March, 2019),

RTRS trials to assess the penetration capability were

completed. Suitable penetration was achieved at strike

velocity against ASR requirement.

_500 kg Pre-Formed Fragmentation Bomb: DRDO has_

designed the 500 kg pre-formed fragmentation bomb

with steel spheres as fragments. The bomb is designed

to be compatible with Russian as well as Jaguar aircrafts


-----

by providing dual suspension lugs of 250 mm and 14”

spacing. During the period (January, 2018 – March,

2019), static fragmentation trials were conducted at

TBRL Chandigarh in which lethality of the bomb was

established and found to meet ASR requirements.

_New Family of Munitions (NFMS): Six types of munitions_

are being designed and developed by DRDO viz. Soft

Target Blast Munition ‘NIPUN’, Anti-Tank Point Attack

Munition ‘VIBHAV’, Anti-Tank Bar Munition ‘VISHAL’,

Directional Fragmentation Munition ‘PARTH’, Anti
Tank Influence Munition ‘PRACHAND’ and Jumping

Fragmentation Munition ‘ULKA’ to improve the existing

munitions and enhance its performance. During the

period (January, 2018 – March, 2019), PSQR based User

Trials of PRACHAND was completed.

_Main Battle Tank (MBT) ‘Arjun’: MBT Arjun Mk-II_

has been designed and developed incorporating 84

improvements (73 tank fittable) over and above MBT

Arjun Mk-I. During the year, two MBT Arjun Mk-1A

prototypes were positioned at PFFR. After completion

of DRDO trials, MBT Arjun Mk-1A P1 was offered for User

trials which were completed in December, 2018.

_Arjun Armoured Recovery and Repair Vehicle (Arjun_

_ARRV): ARRV is intended for carrying out recovery,_

repair and replenishing functions pertaining to MBT

Arjun in operational areas under a wide variety of field

conditions. During the period (January, 2018 – March,

2019), 1[st] prototype was demonstrated during DRDO


internal trials at PFFR and 2[nd] prototype is under

developmental trials duly incorporating improvements

emanating from DRDO trial at M/s BEML. AoN for Qty

10 nos. of ARRV has been obtained.

_Electric Gun and Turret Drive System (ELEGANT): DRDO_

is involved in the design and development of a gun

control system with electric drive for Armour Fighting

Vehicles (AFVs). Seven prototypes are to be developed

in the project including two for pilot production/

production reference. During the period (January,

2018 – March, 2019), CAN based Gyro prototype has

been developed successfully. The system will be made

available for bench trials by mid-2019.

_Composite Sonar Dome: DRDO has developed the_

first indigenous composite sonar dome for P15A class

ship. By this development, India joins a select group of

nations with capability of realizing large composites

structure with multi-functional requirements, complex

geometry and high structural rigidity with acoustic

transparency. During the period (January, 2018 – March,

2019), successful sea trials of the sonar dome were

conducted successfully on INS Chennai.

_46m Military Load Class (MLC-70) Modular Bridge:_

DRDO has developed a mechanically launched single

span 46m MLC-70 modular bridge with bridge length

variable from 14m to 46m in step of 6.5m. Technical trials

of the system have been completed. The equipment

has completed all the crucial parameters of Qualitative

###### 03


-----

Requirements (QR). User trials of the system were

successfully completed during March, 2019.

_Unexploded Ordnance Handling Robot (UXOR): UXOR_

is remotely operated platform capable to handle and

defuse unexploded ordnance weighing up-to 1000 kg

from a distance of 1 km Line of Sight (LoS). Three UXOR

systems have been realized. During the period (January,

2018 – March, 2019), trials of small and medium size

mortar (81 mm dia.) using UXOR manipulator were

carried out and configuration of cutting-surface laid

conditions were checked and tried out. Internal trials of

long range communication system on UXOR were also

carried out.

_TRAWL Assembly for T-72/T-90 Tanks: TRAWL assembly_

has been developed for creation of vehicle safe lane in

a minefield using trawls, plough and electromagnetic

device. The equipment has been designed as a blast

resistant system using DRDO developed high nitrogen

stainless-steel material. The equipment has successfully

undergone DRDO trials at operational locations such as

desert, semi-desert and planes.

_65 hp Rotary Engine and 180 hp Indigenous UAV Engine:_

During the period (January, 2018 – March, 2019), high

altitude test were completed at Leh (11,400 ft) and

Changla (17,600 ft) for 65 hp Rotary Engine and 180

hp indigenous UAV Engine. Flight trials of 65 hpWankel

engine were also carried out.

###### 0


_Counter Mine Flail: Counter Mine Flail has been_

developed for creation vehicle safe lane (VSL) in a

composite minefield. The design philosophy has been to

disintegrate the buried mines and thus creating a VSL of

4.5m irrespective of types of mines/fuzes. The system is

currently undergone technical trials.

_Wheeled Armour Platform (WhAP): WhAP is a multi-_

utility armoured platform with modular design,

configurable for variety of combat and combat support

roles up to 26 T Gross Vehicle Weight (GVW). During the

period (January, 2018 – March, 2019), more than 900 km

running completed on AP-II during trials conducted in

the NE region.

_Advance Light Towed Array Sonar (ALTAS): ALTAS is an_

efficient sensing system for detection, localization and

classification of submarines operating especially in the

below surface layer ocean conditions. It is useful in Anti
Submarine Warfare (ASW) operations and is the apt

sensor for warships to locate silent submarines capable

of launching high speed torpedoes. User Evaluation

Trials of the system onboard INS Sharda has been

completed satisfactorily.

_USHUS – 2: USHUS-2 is an integrated submarine sonar,_

designed and developed by DRDO for the EKM class

of frontline submarines of Indian Navy. USHUS-2 is a

state-of-the-art upgrade of USHUS sonar operational

onboard five EKM submarines. Design and development

of the engineered model of USHUS-2 was completed

at NPOL. Four production grade systems have been

productionized by M/s BEL, Bengaluru. All the four

systems are under various stages of installation onboard

submarines. During the period (January, 2018 – March,

2019), installation, setting to work and Sea Acceptance

Trials (SATs) Phase-1 of the first USHUS-2 installation

onboard INS Sindhukesari was successfully completed

at Russia.

_Portable Diver Detection Sonar (PDDS): DRDO is involved_

in the design and development of a PDDS system that


-----

is capable of detecting small targets such as divers and

diver delivery vehicles in and around harbours and ships

in harbor/anchorage, thus enabling its protection. The

system will be deployable and retrievable as and when

required. During the period (January, 2018 – March,

2019), one PDDS system and PDDS deployment system

has been developed. Field evaluation of the deployment

system will be by early 2019.

_Air-borne Sonar for Coastal Security (ASCS): DRDO is_

involved in the development of a qualified Low Frequency

Dunking Sonar (LFDS), an airborne sonar system for

the ALH Mk-III helicopters being acquired by the Navy.

The system installed on helicopter platform would

provide Airborne ASW capability for Naval operational

scenarios. During the period (January, 2018 – March,

2019),contract for development of 3 LFDS systems,

airworthy certification and onboard installation was

placed on M/s BEL, Bengaluru. The system integration

started at HAL in November, 2018. UETs will be carried

out from March, 2019 onwards.

_Supersonic Missile Assisted Release of Torpedo_

_(SMART): DRDO has taken up a project to develop and_

demonstrate a missile assisted release of light weight

anti-submarine torpedo system for ASW operations

far beyond torpedo range (50-650 km). During

August, 2018, pneumatic ejection test of TAL dummy

torpedo from canister was carried out at 150 bar which

established the design of safe shear pin failure. Ejection

speed of torpedo was also estimated during the trials.


_Advanced Light Weight Torpedo (ALWT): ALWT is an_

anti-submarine torpedo launched from ship, helicopter

or fixed wing aircraft. ALWT has dual speed capability

and endurance of 25 km at low speed (25 knots) and 12

km at high speed (50 knots). During the period (January,

2018 – March, 2019), discharge test of 70 kW battery

was conducted with full torpedo assembled. Static test

was conducted at sea off Visakhapatnam to prove the

operation of recovery aids used in ALWT. Automated

electrical firing of ALWT from single tube launcher and

dynamic sea trials was conducted wherein the torpedo

made full run as per the mission sequence.

_Advanced Light Weight Torpedo (ALWT)_

_Land Based Prototype (LBP) for Air Independent_

_Propulsion (AIP): DRDO is involved in the development_

of indigenous technologies for the development of a LBP

for AIP system for Indian submarines in collaboration

with M/s L&T, Mumbai as Lead System Integrator (LSI)

and other industry partners viz. M/s Thermax, Pune and

M/s Centre for Development of Advanced Computing

(M/s CDAC), Thiruvananthapuram. The successful

development of the LBP will ultimately lead to realization

of fuel cell based AIP for P-75 class (Scorpene) submarine,

which would result in additional underwater endurance

of the submarine at nominal power consumption level.

It aims to package the AIP plant sub-systems, reactant

tanks and waste tanks inside the simulated hull section

of the P-75 submarine. During the period (January, 2018

– March, 2019), all piping modification design/drawing

were completed and approved. Equipment mounting

###### 0


-----

and hull modification was also completed. Endurance

mode trials are expected in June, 2019.

_System Definition & Engineering of DRDO AIP System_

_on P-75 Submarines and Development of Deliverable_

_LOX System: The primary objective of the project is_

to develop the optimized design of Phosphoric Acid

Fuel Cell (PAFC) system, hydrogen generators, power

conditioners, control systems, heat exchangers, DM

water system and auxiliaries of AIP system and qualify

the same for P-75 platforms. The project is progressing in

collaboration with M/s DCNS France. During the period

(January, 2018 – March, 2019), major safety reservation

data was submitted and accepted. Naval Group France

cleared all blocks and declared sufficiency to take-up

detailed design phase.

_Internal EW System for MiG-29 Upgrade Aircraft (D-_

_29 System): D-29 is an integrated EW system for_

warning and jamming that encompasses RWR, ECM

and Electronic Support Measures (ESM) functions

and utilizes state-of-the-art active phased arrays for

selectively jamming the multiple threat radars. Lab

testing of the system was carried out under different

emitter scenarios encountered during multi emitter

trials at Gwalior in February, 2018. Joint evaluation of

software ver 2.7 of D-29 with ELISRA & ASTE reps,

on the Rig with Dynamic Threat Simulator (DTS)

and in anechoic chamber was completed. CEMILAC

certification was also obtained for the software. During

the year 2018, a total of eight sorties have been flown so

far for multi-emitter trials and the performance in terms

of DF, detection and jamming is satisfactory. Tests &

measurements of radar parameters for ascertaining on
board radar compatibility were carried out at AF station

in January, 2019.

_Internal Radar Warning Jammer (RWJ) System for_

_Jaguar DARIN III Upgrade Aircraft (D-JAG System):_

D-JAG is an integrated EW system for radar warning and

jamming that encompasses Radar Warning Receiver

(RWR) and Electronic Communication Measures (ECM)

###### 06


functions. The system intercepts and identifies airborne,

ship-borne and ground based radars used for target

acquisition, tracking and missile guidance. During the

period (January, 2018 – March, 2019), preliminary system

ATP for D-JAG system and ESS of Core EW Unit (CEWU)

was completed.

_Digital Radar Warning Receiver (Dhruti): DR118 digital_

RWR is a state-of-the-art, six channel digital RWR for

Su-30 MKI. It is an airborne, tactical EW system that

performs the function of creating situational awareness

to the pilot about ground-based, air-borne or ship
borne emitters present in the scenario. During the year,

RWR was tested on Su-30 integration rig to verify the

compatibility of the digital RWR with the existing avionic

architecture of Su-30 MKI. Ground testing of RWR

against fly catcher, SRE (S-band), SRE (L-band), Bharani

Mk-I and AEW&C radars was also carried out. Ground

integration on Su-30MKI and ground acceptance tests

was successfully completed.

_Software Defined Radio (SDR): DRDO, in a consortium_

approach with C-DAC and WESEE as development

partners and BEL as the production partner, is working

towards the development of a family of network-enabled,

interoperable and modular SDRs having frequency in

the range of 3-2000 MHz. The SDRs being developed

to provide wireless secure communication capability to

both mobile and fixed forces as required by the Indian

Navy are: Naval Combat (SDR-NC), Tactical (SDR-TAC),

Airborne (SDR-AR), Manpack (SDR-MP) and Hand held

(SDR-HH). All developmental

activities for realization of

5 Form Factors have been

completed. During the period

(January, 2018 – March, 2019),

Acceptance Test (ATP) and

User Evaluation Trials of SDR
TAC were completed after

fitment on five Naval ships at

Vizag. V/UHF, HF and L-bands

ground and flight trials of


-----

SDR-AR were completed. After DAC approval and

security evaluation, CNC has been completed for SDR
NC by Users.

_Digital Tropo Scatter/LOS Communication System for_

_IAF: Tropo scatter communication system communicates_

microwave radio signals over considerable distance.

During the period (January, 2018 – March, 2019), field

evaluation of Tropo OFDM Modem with production ready

2 KW SSPA, diplexers and EOW at IAF Tropo stations

were carried out. OFDM Tropo Modem performance

testing over Tropo Channel was also conducted.

_EW Systems ‘Samudrika’ for Capital Ships, Aircrafts_

_and Helicopters for Indian Navy: DRDO has taken up_

the development of a family of seven EW systems

which includes three ship-borne systems (Shakti,

Nayan&Tushar) and four air-borne systems (Sarvadhari,

Sarang, Sarakshi & Nikash). During August, 2018,

liquidation of observations of User Evaluation Trials

(UET-II) was conducted. Strengthening of 3 Bay DF

Antenna Array was carried out as per structural analysis

of the antenna array. Limited Qualification Tests have

commenced. Safety of flight and functional tests on

aircraft has also been conducted for ‘Sarvadhari’ system.

_Vehicle Mounted ELINT System: Field trials of vehicle_

mounted ELINT system were conducted at ARC facility

near Bhuj against signals of interest to ARC. All the

signals belonging to ground, airborne and ship borne

radars were intercepted successfully.

_Critical Sub-systems for Integrated EW System_

_‘Samyukta’ (SAMISHTI): The first integrated indigenous_

EW programme ‘Samyukta’ was successfully designed,

developed and commissioned by DRDO in the Indian

Army in 2008. DRDO has recently taken a new project

for upgradation of critical sub-systems for COM segment

of ‘Samyukta’ and establishment of reference COM

entity work posts (HF, VUHF, SALPJ& RDF). During the

period (January, 2018 – March, 2019), DRDO evaluation

of the sub-systems was completed and functional


demonstration of ISHF, LPJ, SAJ, RFDS, Entity Controller

Software & Model Unit Rack Automated Test Equipment

(MURATE) to the Army Users was completed.

_Project HIMRAJ for Indian Air Force: The role of the_

system is to intercept, monitor, analyse and locate

adversary’s radar transmission in 70 MHz to 40 GHz

band. DRDO is responsible for the system design,

development of critical sub-system, and realisation

of a truncated reference version of the engineered

system for Ground Base Mobile ELINT System (GBMES),

which are being pursued towards production at BEL.

Production order for 6 nos. of GBMES systems on M/s

BEL is under execution. During the period (January,

2018 – March, 2019), trials were conducted at AFS, Bidar.

On-site acceptance tests of GBMES are in progress at

IAF site in Bhuj.

_Sights for Corner Shot Weapon System (CSWS): CSWS_

is a special purpose weapons & ammunition that can

fire around corners and for the use of Special Forces

under Low Intensity Conflict (LIC) operations. User

demonstration along with firing trials was conducted

during May, 2018 for day and night sights for both pistol

& under barrel grenade launcher (UBGL) versions of

CSWS.

###### 0


-----

_Athermal Laser Target Designator: Development of_

compact, light weight and power efficient diode pumped

Laser Target Designator based on Athermal Laser

technology has been completed and demonstrated.

The system will be used for futuristic requirements of

precision semi-active laser guided munitions.

_Border Surveillance System (BOSS):_ DRDO has

completed the design and development of BOSS

equipped with advanced image processing features for

hassle free surveillance and powered with hybrid power

source. It eases the work of patrolling by automatically

detecting the intrusion, if any. It has 20 km remote

operation capability. It provides electronic surveillance

solution for high altitude border areas exposed to sub
zero temperature. Two systems have been installed and

are under User exploitation. Phase-II of User Readiness

Review was carried out.

_Air Defence Fire Control Radar (ADFCR) ‘Atulya’: ADFCR_

‘Atulya’ in conjunction with anti-aircraft guns, forms a

ground based air defence system whose main purpose

is effective point defence against all air threats at short

and very short ranges during day and night. During the

period (January, 2018 – March, 2019), DRDO evaluation

of the radar system was completed and integrated test

firing of ADFCR with guns and targets were carried out

at GFFR, Gopalpur. DRDO firing trials were completed in

October, 2018 at Gopalpur.

###### 08


_Air Defence Tactical Control Radar (ADTCR): ADTCR_

has been developed for Army AD as a successor to

existing Indian Doppler Radar (INDRA) and P19 radars

for surveillance detection, tracking and Identification of

Friend/Foe (IFF) of aerial targets and transmission of

data to multiple Air Defence command posts/weapon

systems. During the year, DRDO internal evaluation of

ADTCR system was completed. All the PSQR parameters

were complied and verified by demonstration/analysis.

The system is ready for User trials.

_Active Electronically Scanned Array Radar (AESAR)_

_‘Uttam’: AESAR ‘Uttam’ is an airborne fire control radar_

for our indigenous fighter aircraft LCA ‘Tejas’. It is a

multi-mode radar which can be configured for fitment

on different airborne platforms. Shake down sorties

were completed in January, 2019 on modified executive

Jet hired. Indigenous AESA radar integration and EMI/

EMC tests on LCA ‘Tejas’ LSP2 aircraft are nearing

completion and flight evaluation is planned shortly.


-----

_Laser Threat Detection & Decoy System for Protection of_

_High Value Assets (LTDDS): Field testing of engineering_

units of laser weapon system (LWS) and master

controller were carried out for decoying of laser seeker

under various test conditions.

_Directed Energy Laser Systems (DELS): DRDO is_

involved in the development of 10kW proof-of-concept

directed energy system against UAVs like target and

establishment of critical technologies of precision

tracking/pointing and laser beam combination. During

the period (January, 2018 – March, 2019), tests for

detection and tracking of mini drone (hexacopter) with

Battle Field Surveillance Radar (BFSR) and cuing to 10

kW DELS were carried out at ATR, Chitradurga. Testing

of radar interfacing with 10 kW DES was carried out with

10 kW DES radar interface simulator and Air Defence

Fire Control Radar (ADFCR) ‘Atulya’ at BEL, Bengaluru.

Track acquisition, tracking and laser pointing of 10 kW

Anti-UAV Laser Weapon (AULW) system were carried

out on flying DRONEs at CHESS site up to the range of

0.7 km.

_S-band Digital Multimedia Broadcast (DMB) Terminal_

_for Satellite Communication (AMBAR): AMBAR is_

ANURAG’s handheld Multimedia Broadcast Receiver

Terminal for GSAT-6 Satellite and supports different

data rates of content with maximum data rate of 2

Mbps. AMBAR’s content server and AMBAR’s modulator

are setup at GSAT-6 Satellite Hub located at DEAL,

Dehradun. During June, 2018, the AMBAR terminals

have been demonstrated at EETSU, Signal Intelligence

for broadcasting as well as content-on-demand feature

at a rate of 350 kbps.

_Ground based High Power Microwave (HPM) Directed_

_Energy Weapon System: DRDO has taken up a project_

to develop a HPM system of RF power in S-band which

will be affecting drones at the distance of 5 km. During

June, 2018, indigenous Marx generator was tested up to

300 KV, 20 Hz and excellent performance was obtained.


_Indian Maritime Situational Awareness System (IMSAS):_

IMSAS is being developed by DRDO which incorporates

comprehensive situational picture based on Indian

Navy’s requirements. IMSAS Build 1.0 has been deployed

across Indian Navy MOC/Op centers at Delhi, Mumbai,

Visakhapatnam, Kochi, Port Blair, Chennai, Goa and

Karwar.

_VerifY Organize Maintain Analyze (VYOMA): DRDO_

has taken a project to build an easy to use information

repository of ‘Signal Intelligence Reports’ and ‘Signal

Intelligence Summaries’ with semantic querying

facilities, social network analysis, spatial and temporal

visualization over digital maps. VYOMA Build 1.0 has

been deployed at User premises and User training

conducted for 22 personnel at Delhi.

_Chaff Cartridges for Defence Application: DRDO is_

involved in indigenous development of chaff cartridges

to bridge technology gap in the field of chaff cartridges

development. Chaff is one of the most widely used

and effective expendable electronic counter measure

devices. User trials for fitment and inventory check of

indigenously developed Chaff cartridge 118/1 on Jaguar

Darin-II aircraft was successfully completed at ASTE,

Bengaluru in July, 2018. User trials for safe ejection of

chaff from indigenously developed Chaff cartridge 118/1

on Jaguar Darin-II aircraft and envelope clearance trials

in sub-sonic, super-sonic range & maneuverability was

successfully completed at Air Force station, Gwalior in

August, 2018. Efficacy checks against Mirage-2000 (Air
to-Air, X Band) in different configurations of Nose-on,

sideways (beam forming) and tail-on are underway at

AF Station, Ambala.

_Cold Isostatic Pressing Technology for Manufacture of_

_Fused Silica Radomes for Missile Application: DRDO has_

carried out an innovation driven R&D and developed a

most sophisticated technology based on Cold Isostatic

Pressing (CIP) and sintering route for manufacture of

fused silica radomes for the first-time in the country

for missile application. The CIPedradomes met all the

###### 09


-----

property requirements for use in missiles and have

made the Astra flight release test successful.

_NBC Permeable Suit Mk V: NBC Permeable Suit_
developed by DRDO is based on state-of-the-art
technology of activated spherical carbon beads
sandwiched between the fabric layers. The bulk
production, test and evaluation of 50,000 nos.
of NBC Suit Mk V and NBC socks Permeable Suit
against the Army order worth ` 97.87 crore have
been completed.

_Telemedicine System: Telemedicine system has been_

successfully developed by DRDO for far-flung/land

locked areas. The system has been accepted by Indian

Navy for installation across Naval platforms (63 Ships, 12

Submarines, 21 Remote locations, 6 Island locations and

4 Hospitals - Total 106 nos.).

_Individual Under Water Breathing Apparatus (IUWBA):_

User Evaluation Trials (UET) of IUWBA was conducted in

January 2018 at Bengaluru and during February, 2018 at

Armed Corps Centre and School (ACC&S), Ahmednagar.

DAC on September 18, 2018 has cleared the induction of

2430 nos. of the system for use by T-90 tank crew of the

Indian Army.

_Integrated Fire Detection & Suppression System_

_(IFDSS): User trials as per trial directive for Integrated_

Fire Detection & Suppression System (IFDSS) for T-72

tank were conducted at MFFR, Suratgarh during July/

August, 2018.

_Army Wargaming Simulation System (SAMAR): SAMAR_

is a computerised wargaming system on a Corp canvas

to train Commanders & staff of Indian Army at Division,

Brigade and Battalion level, in planning and conduct of

offensive & defensive operations over plains/ desert/

semi-desert terrain of 400 km x 400 km. The system has

been developed and integrated at ISSA based on the QR

of the Indian Army. The joint testing by ISSA & WARDEC

at WARDEC RTI has been done. Testing of all functional

###### 0


abscessions (FAs) with corrected ATP observations

have been completed in January, 2019. Integration of

VIOP solution with SAMAR is also completed. Fielding

of SAMAR system in Army establishment started after

final ATP in March, 2019.

8.14 _CORPORATE INITIATIVES_

_Services Interaction: Major systems developed/to be_

developed by DRDO and Acceptance of Necessity (AoN)

accorded for induction during the period January, 2018

– March, 2019 include: Nag missile system, vertically

launched SRSAM, Advanced Towed Artillery Gun

System (ATAGS), New Family of Munitions – ‘VIBHAV’

& ‘VISHAL’, mountain foot bridge, anti-thermal anti
laser smoke grenade for AFVs, unit maintenance vehicle

(UMVs) for MBT Arjun, Advanced Torpedo Decoy

System ‘Maareech’, ground based systems for AWACS,

P-16 heavy drop platform & parachute system, digital

instant fire detection & suppression system (IFDSS),

individual under water breathing apparatus, EON 51

for Teg & Talwar classes of ships, supersonic cruise

missile ‘BrahMos’, multi mode hand grenade etc. at a

total cost of ` 9517.63 crore.The production value of

DRDO developed systems (inducted and approved for

induction) today stands over ` 2.73 lakh crore.

DRDO has established mechanisms for regular

interaction with the Services to boost up the induction

of indigenously developed systems and increase

self-reliance of the Armed Forces which is achieved

through Annual Joint Reviews between Secretary DD

R&D and Chief/Vice Chiefs of Staff of Air Force, Army

and Navy; Quarterly Interaction Meetings (QIMs) with

the line Dtes of Army; Quarterly Progress Reviews

(QPRs) with Air Force; Annual Synergy Meetings (IN
DRDO) with Navy and Biannual Reviews conducted at

the VCOAS/DCOAS level for the Army. A new initiative

has been taken and three batches of DRDO scientists

(>200 scientists) underwent internships with IA units/

formations.


-----

_Industry Interface: DRDO has promulgated Transfer_
of Technology (ToT) guidelines/SOPs to provide

transparent system for ToT to industries with an emphasis
on level playing field for DPSUs/OFs/PSUs and private
industries. Recently launched user friendly portal has
brought more transparency and clarity for the industry
entrepreneurs. The benefits of partnering with DRDO
have been realized by the Indian industries. During
the period January, 2018 – March, 2019, 116 Licensing
Agreement for Transfer of Technology (LATOTs) were
signed. Formal ToT handing over ceremonies were held
in the presence of Mantri during Vendor Development
Meet at Chennai and DefExpo 2018 at Chennai.

The export potential of DRDO developed systems has
also increased. The Indian industries have been directly
receiving export orders/ Request for Proposal (RFP)
for DRDO developed products from foreign countries.
DRDO inputs were provided for 102 NOCs for export of
Defence products.

Technology Development Fund (TDF) has been
implemented by DRDO to promote public and private
sector industries especially MSMEs that may work in
collaboration with the academia or research institutions
to carry out innovation, R&D for realization of products
as per Services requirements. 4 projects have been
sanctioned and awarded to the industries against
the requirements of tri-services, approximately 1800
industries, 390 academic institutes, 587 experts has
been registered and brainstorming workshop at various
locations had been conducted for the feasibility study
for the Round 3 projects.

Participation in International Exhibitions: During the
period January, 2018 – March, 2019, DRDO participated
in more than 20 National/ International exhibitions
showcasing DRDO’s technologies at various forums.
Major ones being DefExpo 2018 at Chennai, Indian
Technology Congress (ITC) at Bengaluru, Exhibition
at Chief’s Conclave of BIMSTEC countries at Pune,
India International Science Festival (IISF) at Lucknow,


ARMY-2018 at Moscow, Russia, IDEF - 2018 at Jakarta,
Indonesia and EDEX 2018 at Cairo, Egypt.

_International Cooperation: During the period January,_
2018 – March, 2019, DRDO has conducted regular annual
bilateral Defence R&D meetings with USA, UK, Russia
and Singapore. DRDO jointly conducted a workshop on
C4ISR Technologies with the US DoD in August, 2018.
Some strong possibilities for cooperation leading to
possible information exchange and project agreements
have been identified during the workshop. DRDO hosted
foreign visits including NDC delegations at DRDO HQ
and DRDO labs and held major technology show at
DefExpo 2018 and Aero India 2019. DRDO explored
co-operation in Defence R&D with African nations and
an MoU concerning co-operation in Defence R&D was
signed with Nigeria. Project Agreements were signed
with Japan, USA and Russia. DRDO participated as a part
of Intra-Ministerial Working Group (IMWG) under DGFT,
Ministry of Commerce on matters relating to import/
export of SCOMET items. DRDO actively participated
in multilateral regimes which enable India’s entry in
Australia Group and Wassenar arrangement. DRDO also
participated as part of the Technical Expert Meeting
at the MTCR, Certain Conventional Weapons Session.
DRDO also participated in the Industry Outreach
programs conducted in conjunction with MEA and
DGFT for harmonization of SCOMET list and Wassenar
arrangement.

_Academia Interaction:_ DRDO provides support to
academia to carry out directed research in the identified
research thrust areas related to defence applications
through advanced technology centers created across
India. As on date, 5 centers are operational viz. Advance
Centre for Research in High Energy Materials (ACRHEM),
Research and Innovation Centre (RIC) at IIT Madras,
JC Bose Centre for Advance Technology (JCBCAT) at
Jadavpur University, Bi-nodal Centre of Propulsion
Technology (CoPT) at IIT-Bombay & IIT Madras and
DRDO-IIT Delhi, Joint Advanced Technology Centre
(JATC) at IIT Delhi. Currently, >110 projects at a total


-----

###### 2


cost of ` 463.09 crore are being executed through these through Defence Travel System have been implemented

centers of excellence. Technology for Fault Tolerant & and online review meetings for critical projects are

Trusted Platform developed by RIC was delivered to RCI being undertaken through video conferencing (VC)

and ADRDE for relevant application on December 13, between labs and HQ wherein ~100 meetings are

2018 being held on VC every month. On October 15, during

Dr. Kalam anniversary celebrations, DRDO launched

38 projects costing ` 30 crore were sanctioned to

a new web initiative “Dare to Dream” for drawing in

various academic institutes through the extra mural (ER)

budding innovators. The portal is now in full operation

initiative of DRDO and 76 projects were sanctioned at a

with over 500 registrations in this short period. Giving

total cost of ` 27 crore to various academic institutes

an impetus to the mission of ‘Make in India’ initiated by

through the four Research Boards (Aeronautics, Naval,

the government, workshops on the theme are being

Armaments & Life Sciences) functioning under DRDO.

organised by DRDO labs. Steps have also been taken

for initiatives pertaining to ‘Minimum Government,

_Intellectual Property Rights (IPR): 170 IPR applications_

Maximum Governance’ in an integrated manner. DRDO

(including 10 in foreign countries) were filed. 77 patents

was awarded one of the best performance awards in

(including 5 in foreign countries) were granted during

2018 based on e-tendering under Central procuring

the period (January, 2018 – March, 2019). In addition,

category.

12 copyrightsand 12 designs were registered in India.

In an effort to promote IPR awareness among DRDO

8.16 _DRDO celebrated its 60[th] Anniversary by_

scientists, an advanced workshop and five IPR awareness

_organising several events: DRDO Cyber Challenge,_

programmes were held during the period in different

DRDO National Level Essay Competition, DRDO@60

DRDO laboratories.

Mobile app, DRDO Robotics and Unmanned Systems

Exposition (DRUSE), Navrachna: Brochure, Movie

_Implementation of Government Initiatives: Annual_

and five year action plans for ‘Swachh Bharat’ has Making. DRDO is steadfast in its journey towards

been prepared and the activities are being pursued as achieving self-sufficiency in Defence requirement. With

per the plan e.g. cleanliness drive, tree plantation etc. its commitment to fulfil the requirement of advanced

International Yoga Day was celebrated across all labs. weapon systems and platforms for Armed Forces

As a tool for promoting Digital India, E-procurement supported with contemporary technology, this was a

across labs have been actively taken-up, E-ticketing year of successful trials.




-----

###### chapter
###  9

#### Inter service organisations


-----

###### INTER SERVICE ORGANISATIONS
# 9


###### INTER SERVICE ORGANISATIONS
# 9


9.1 The following inter-Service organizations

function directly under Ministry of Defence:

(i) Military Engineer Services (MES)

(ii) Armed Forces Medical Services (AFMS)

(iii) Directorate General Defence Estates (DGDE)

(iv) Office of the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO)

(v) Directorate of Public Relations (DPR)

(vi) Services Sports Control Board (SSCB)

(vii) Armed Forces Films and Photo Division (AFFPD)

(viii) National Defence College (NDC)

(ix) School of Foreign Languages (SFL)

(x) History Division

(xi) College of Defence Management (CDM)

(xii) Defence Services Staff College (DSSC)

(xiii) Ministry of Defence Library (MDL

(xiv) Army Purchase Organization (APO)

###### MILITARY ENGINEER SERVICES (MES)

9.2 Military Engineer Services (MES) is one of

the largest construction and maintenance agencies in

India. It is responsible for creating the strategic and the

operational infrastructure other than major roads, as also

the administrative habitat for all three Services and the

associated organisations of the Ministry of Defence. It

provides engineering support to various formations for

Army, Air Force, Navy, Coast Guard, Ordnance Factories


and Defence Research & Development Organisation

(DRDO).

9.3. The MES functions under the overall control of

the Engineer-in-Chief (E-in-C) at the Army Headquarters,

who is the adviser to the Ministry of Defence and the

three Services Chiefs on all facets of works related

issues. MES has a total annual budget of approximately

20000 crore. MES has also been supporting military

diplomatic initiatives by creating infrastructure abroad

for friendly foreign Governments/ countries. The MES

organization, comprising of proficient personnel who

are deployed across the length and breadth of the

country at remote locations in all types of terrain and

inhospitable climatic conditions, has been playing an

important role in empowering the combat effectiveness

of the Armed Forces.

###### Annual Major Works Programme (amwp)

9.4 _AMWP: In Financial Year (FY) 2017-18, AMWP_

for the three Services including Coast Guard works

costing ` 14968 crore were listed, against a ceiling of

` 11625 crore, out of which works costing ` 10784 crore

were sanctioned for execution.

9.5 _Budget: In FY 2017-18 under Capital Head a_

budget of ` 6609 crore was allotted to the three Services

including Coast Guard and Married Accommodation

Project (MAP) works, out of which, the total expenditure

carried out by MES was ` 6480 crore. Under Revenue

Head a budget of ` 9432 crore was allotted for all three

Services including Coast Guard. The total expenditure

under this head was ` 9093 crore.


-----

9.6 In FY 2018-19, AMWP for the three Services

including Coast Guard works costing ` 5754 crore were

listed against ceiling of ` 5158 crore, out of which works

costing ` 3050 crore was sanctioned for execution.

9.7 _Performance Budget 2018-19: In FY 2018-19_

under Capital Head a budget of ` 7311 crore was allotted

to the three Services including Coast Guard and MAP

works, out of which the total expenditure carried out by

MES was ` 7314 crore. Under Revenue Head a budget of

` 9368 crore was allotted for all three Services including

Coast Guard. The total expenditure under this head was

` 9323 crore.

###### Important projects under progress

9.8 _Modernisation of Central Ordnance Depots_

_(COD) Agra and Jabalpur: As part of overall_

“Modernisation Drive”, Army Ordnance Depots are

being upgraded with Modern Infrastructure and

Automation. Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS)

approved Modernisation Project of CODs Agra and

Jabalpur on April 11, 2007 for an amount of ` 751.89

crore. The work, originally to be executed by Defence

Research & Development Organisation (DRDO), was

transferred to MES in March 2008. The modernisation

project primarily comprises of construction of PEB

warehouse buildings equipped with integrated storage

and retrieval system, Mechanized Handling Equipment

including allied services and administrative/ Other Than

Married (OTM) buildings.

9.9 _Infrastructure_ _development_ _in_ _Eastern_

_Command: Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS)_

accorded approval for ` 9243.64 crore in 2010 for

infrastructure development in Eastern Sector. Out of

these, works costing ` 7374.70 crore are being executed

by MES for which specially empowered Command Chief

Engineer (CCE) organisations were raised. The scope

of work includes permanent defences and habitat for

troops, communication network and other strategic

infrastructure.


9.10 _Solar Photo Voltaic (SPV) Projects by MES: In_

the first phase MES has been entrusted for provisioning

of 150 Megawatt (MW) of Solar Power Plants across 134

locations of Army, Navy and Air Force in the country

on behalf of Ministry of Defence. Against this, 156 MW

of SPV works are under implementation by the MES.

While projects of 28.26 MW capacity have already been

completed, works up to 104.31 MW capacity are under

various stages of implementation.

9.11 _Married Accommodation Project (MAP) Works:_

In Phase-II a total 69992 Dwelling Units (DUs) at a cost

of ` 13681.90 crore were sanctioned out of which MES

is carrying out works costing ` 3500 crore. 55134 DUs

have been completed and overall 93% progress has

been achieved.

9.12 _Major Initiatives/ Decisions/ Policies: The_

following major initiatives/ decisions/ policies have been

undertaken/ issued which will have great impact on the

functionality and performance of the organisation:

(a) _MES Organisation and Officers Establishment_

_2017-18: Three Additional Director Generals_

(ADGs) have been newly raised/ renamed/

relocated/ disbanded:

(i) ADG (Projects) raised at Chennai

by disbandment of ADG (Ordnance

Factory, Defence Research &

Development Organization),

Secunderabad.

(ii) ADG (North East India (NEI) raised at

Guwahati by suppressing post of ADG

(Arbitration).

(iii) ADG (North) raised at Jammu by

suppressing post of ADG (D&C), Pune.

(b) Revision of Norms of Maintenance of Roads

completed.


-----

(c) New Construction Technique (Engineering,

Procurement & Construction) in the MES

adopted.

(d) In continuing with the task of empowering MES

functionaries with enabling provisions, several

key policy changes are under consideration to

meet contemporary challenges. Implementation

of Green Building Norms with additional 10%

plinth area rates and minimum three star rating

has already been sanctioned. This is a positive

step towards sustainable development of

infrastructure in future. MES is also undertaking

several measures in the field of energy

conservation, use of new and renewable energy

and green technology. In an effort to reduce the

national carbon footprint, 150 Mega Watt Solar

Energy Power projects are being undertaken.

To augment the energy conservation efforts

measures such as Light Emitting Diodes

(LEDs) lighting and GRIHA norms are being

incorporated in all new projects.

9.13 _Achievements/ Milestones_

(a) _National War Memorial and National War_

_Museum: The proposal for construction of_

National War Memorial and National War

Museum for at approximate cost of ` 500 crore

was approved by the Cabinet on 18 December

2015. The works on the National War Memorial

commenced in February 2018. Construction

was completed and the National War Memorial

was dedicated to the Nation by Prime Minister

on February 25, 2019.

(b) _New infrastructure in the North East Sector: In_
order to support and enhance the operational
readiness of Armed Forces against the
emerging challenges, as part of Phase 1 of
Infrastructure Development in North East,
seven Advance Landing Grounds (ALGs)

###### 6


and helipads were constructed on fast track.
Phase 1 was completed by March 31, 2018 at an
approximate cost of ` 1200 crore.

(c) _E-tendering and E-procurement: MES has_

implemented e-tendering and e-procurement

at pan-India level. MES has been awarded

the Best Performance Award by National

Informatics Commission (NIC) for their e-portal

amongst various Central/ State Government

Departments and Public Sector Undertakings.

(d) _New Website for the MES: A new website for the_

MES has been developed and launched by the

Defence Secretary on June 28, 2018. Website is

the platform for all MES units pan India and is

a repository of important policies and circulars,

in addition to publication of Notice Inviting

Tenders by MES Units/ Establishments.

(e) _Light Emitting Diode (LED) Installation:_ Out

of total 86.96 lakh light points LED installation

at 39.13 lakh light points (45%) have been

completed by May 2019. A saving of ` 114.28

crore is expected on completion of 100% LED
installation.

(f) Works at Ordnance Depot Fort Allahabad for
Kumbh Mela-2019 & Ardh Kumbh Mela were
conducted in Sangam area from January
15, 2019 to March 5, 2019. MES conducted
number of tasks including approach to
Akshay Vat, secured passage throughout the
fort which required detailed survey, planning
and coordination with various civil and
military agencies. The work was completed
by January 9, 2019 and inaugurated by
Hon’ble Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh on
January 10, 2019.

(g) Several projects have been completed by MES

during this period which include Cadet Mess


-----

at RIMC, ACC Wing accommodation at Indian

Military Academy, KLP location at Bhaderwah,

KLP Phase III of Ladakh Scouts Regimental

Centre, Anti hijack control infrastructure at Port

Blair etc.

(h) Software Applications ‘Sarvatra e-Admin

Portal’, ‘Dak/ File Management System’ and

‘Library Management System’ were successfully

developed in house and deployed so as to

enhance overall administrative efficiency.

###### ARMED FORCES MEDICAL SERVICES (AFMS)

9.14 AFMS provide dedicated, dependable and

comprehensive health care to defence personnel

and their families. Medical services are also provided

to personnel of para-military organizations, while

posted in the field and other Central Police/

Intelligence organizations and General Reserve

Engineering Force (GREF) Units, operating in the

disturbed and forward areas of the country. The

medical care is also provided to ex-servicemen and

their dependents within the country. During natural

calamities, disasters and operational areas, it also

serves civilian population.

9.15 The AFMS consist of the Medical Services

of the Army, Navy and Air Force and the Directorate

General, Armed Forces Medical Services (DGAFMS).

Each Medical Service is under a Directorate General

Medical Service (DGMS) in the rank of Lt General or

equivalent. The DGAFMS, who heads the Service,

is also medical advisor to the Ministry of Defence

and the Chairman of the Medical Services Advisory

Committee. AFMS include officers of the Army Medical

Corps (AMC), AMC (Non-Tech), the Army Dental

Corps (ADC) and the Military Nursing Services (MNS).

There are 132 Armed Forces Hospitals. The authorized

strength of AMC, ADC, MNS and AMC (NT) is 7268,

735, 5321 and 373 respectively.


9.16 _Important_ _decisions/activities_ _undertaken_

_during the year:_

_(I)_ _Commission in AFMS:_

(a) _Grant of Short Service Commission_

_(SSC) through open market in the Year_

_2018 from Civil Sources: 353 Medical_

Officers (MOs) (Male -214 and Female

– 139) have been granted SSC till date.

(b) _Grant of Short Service Commission/_

_Permanent Commission to Cadets_

_of AFMC, Pune: A total of 107 cadets_

(Permanent Commission-50, Short

Service Commission-57) from AFMC,

Pune have been granted PC/SSC in

AFMS during the year 2018 (Male –

87 and Female – 20).

(c) _Grant of Short Service Commission_

_through Civil PG entry in the year 2018:_

19 MOs (Male – 10 and Female -09) have

been granted SSC during the year 2018.

(d) _Grant of Departmental Permanent_

_Commission_ _to_ _Short_ _Service_

_Commissioned Officers: 41 serving_

Short Service Commissioned officers

(Male – 30 and Female -11) have been

granted Departmental Permanent

Commission during the year 2018.

(e) _Grant of SSC in AMC (NT) to JCOs/Ors:_

12 JCOs/ORs of AMC (NT) have been

granted Short Service Commission

during the year 2018.

(II) Armed Forces Medical College, Pune provides

training to under graduate, post graduate

Medical and Nursing students with assured

career prospects in the Defence Services:


-----

(a) _AFMC_ _Undergraduate_ _Admissions:_

During the year, after due approval from

Ministry of Defence & Medical Council of

India (MCI), undergraduate seats at AFMC

were increased from 135 to 150. 25,662

candidates got registered for admission

to AFMC Based on merit, 1806 candidates

were called for interview. 115 boys and 30

girls were finally selected and admitted

to MBBS course. 05 candidates from

Friendly Foreign Countries were allotted

MBBS seats at AFMC

(b) _PG Admissions: 200 serving officers_

were selected for Post-Graduation

Courses in various disciplines at AFMS

institutions in 2018. Out of these, 179

officers were selected for MD/MS/DMM

and 21 officers for Diplomat of National

Board (DNB) in various specialties

at AFMS teaching institutions. 8

candidates from Friendly Foreign

Countries, Nepal & Bhutan, were also

allotted MD/MS seats.

(III) _Modernization/Infrastructure in AFMS:_

(a) DGAFMS has provided standardization,

provisioning and procurement of

medical stores for modernization of the

entire Armed Forces Medical Services

and Medical units which provides

quantum improvement of diagnostic,

therapeutic and specialized services to

the combatants, their dependents and

Ex-Servicemen.

(b) _An innovative mobile health app by the_

_Indian Air Force (IAF):_

(i) On the occasion of 86[th]

anniversary, the Indian Air Force

###### 8


has launched an innovative

mobile health App named

‘Med-Watch’ in Civil domain

in keeping with the Prime

Minister’s vision of ‘Digital India,

Ayushman Bharat and Mission

Indradhanush’.

(ii) ‘Med-Watch’ is the first mobile

health app in the three Armed

Services launched by Air Chief

Marshal BS Dhanoa PVSM AVSM

YSM VM ADC, Chief of the Air

Staff, on Air Force Day at New

Delhi on October 8, 2018. The

app was also displayed and

showcased to Prime Minister of

India at Air House in the evening.

The app is available on www.

apps.mgov.gov.in.

(c) _E-Vetting of Medical Boards: e-Vetting_

of aircrew upgradation medical boards

is being conducted at Medical Boarding

Centres since October 8, 2018. A total

of 275 medical boards have been

e-vetted till date (October 31, 2018).

By implementing e-vetting procedure

the board gets approved in two days.

This has saved 20 flying days per

aircrew and an overall of 5500 flying

days till May 2019. This one step has

significantly contributed to an early

return of Trained Young Pilots on

Ground (TYPOG) to cockpit duties.

(d) _Procurement of medical equipment:_

The massive drive for bulk procurement

of the essential lifesaving and regular

use of medical equipment across

various Armed Forces hospitals has

been a force multiplier and has had

salutary impact on the patient care


-----

services and all clientele satisfaction

indices.

(e) _Procurement of Medical Ambulance:_

Delivery of Medical Ambulance 4x4,

Quantity 679 & Medical Ambulance

4x2, Quantity 149 through Capital route

and also the Revenue procurement of

Ambulance 2.5 Ton, Quantity (497)

has been completed with vehicles

being released to units as per existing

deficiency. Procurement of Light

Ambulance 4x4 (816) through Revenue

route is under progress.

(IV) _Automation of Armed Forces Medical Stores_

_Depot (AFMSD & Supply Chain Management):_

(a) _Telemedicine:_

I. _Telemedicine Phase I: Radio_

based telemedicine to connect

forward isolated posts to

Regimental Aid Post (RAP)

has been planned with

Defence Bioengineering and

Electrochemical Laboratory

(DEBEL). Training on handling

of telemedicine equipment i.e.

Portable Physiological Vital

Para Monitor (PPVPM) was

conducted successfully and

observed that Battle Field

Nursing Assistants can use the

equipment confidently.

II. _Telemedicine_ _Phase_ _II:_

Headquarter Integrated Defence

Staff (Med) is collaborating

with DEBEL for providing

telemedicine facilities in remote

area connecting 10 RAPs to


150 GH in Northern Command

using Army Intranet. Patient
monitoring system was tested

in field conditions w.e.f. June

19-24, 2018. The equipment was

tested by connecting five Infantry

Battalion RAPs in 25 Infantry

Division (AOR) through Army

Intranet to 150 GH. It involved

real time video interfacing of

personnel deployed in the Infantry

Battalions with specialists at

150 GH. It also included the real

time transmission of critical

medical parameters like Pulse, BP,

Temp, Respiratory rate, Oxygen

saturation of Blood (SPO2) ECG

and data from Digital Stethoscope,

Derma-scope and Auro-scope.

The quality of transmission was

excellent and the utility of the

solution appreciated by one and

all. Trial Report has been perused

by the Chief of Integrated Staff

to Chairman COSC (CISC) and he

has recommended for its use in 3,

4, 33, 14, 15 and 16 Corps in the

Army.

(b) _Indian Space Research Organisation_

_(ISRO) Telemedicine nodes: DECU,_

ISRO, Ahmedabad in collaboration

with HQIDS (Medical) has provided 20

Telemedicine Nodes through Satellite

Communication to Armed Forces

Medical Units. Presently all nodes are

functional and provide Continuous

Medical Education Programs. DECU,

ISRO, Ahmedabad has sanctioned

additional Telemedicine Nodes for

AFMS, which are in the process of

installation. Procurement order has

###### 9


-----

already been placed for establishment

of additional Telemedicine Nodes for

Army, Navy & Air Force under ISRO

telemedicine project by Director DECU,

ISRO, Ahmedabad.

(c) _Common Drug List 2018: Prior to_

2016, two separate lists of drugs,

CDL (Common Drug List) for serving

personnel and EDL (Essential Drug

List) for Ex-servicemen Contributory

Health Scheme (ECHS) beneficiaries

were existing. Hence a Board of

Officers (BOO) was convened by

competent authority after taking into

consideration the inputs from AFMS

procuring agencies, World Health

Organization (WHO) Essential Medical

Lists (EML), National Lists of Essential

Medicine (NLEM) and CDL/EDL of the

other Government Organization and

one Common Drug List 2018 (CDL) has

been formulated by the BOO which has

been duly approved by DGAFMS.

(V) _Foreign Aid provided to Friendly Countries:_

DGAFMS provides humanitarian aid to the

Friendly Foreign Countries as per the demand

received from Ministry of External Affairs

through Ministry of Defence. Medical Stores

amounting INR 16.88 crore were procured for

issue to the following countries:

(i) Tajikistan

(ii) Seychelles

(iii) Common Wealth of Dominica

(iv) Kenya

(v) Maldives

(vi) Kyrgyzstan

(vii) Afghanistan

###### 20


(VI) _Important activities undertaken during the_

_year:_

(a) _New Armed Forces Medical Research_

_Committee (AFMRC) Projects: 165 new_

AFMRC projects were approved during

the 56[th] AFMRC Meeting held at Pune

in February, 2018. Research funds were

allotted to both the new and ongoing

projects to the total of ` 8,35,00,000/-.

(b) 53 AFMRC projects were completed

during the period from October 1, 2017

to September 30, 2018.

(c) The 39[th] `Senior Naval Medical and

Dental Officers Conference was

conducted on October 5, 2018 at

Mumbai, attended by all Senior Medical

and Dental Officers of the Navy and

various issues of medical administration

along with those concerning

advancement and improvement of

medical services were deliberated

upon.

(d) _Ex-Milan 2018: 3 Rapid Action Medical_

Team (RAMT) was deployed at Port

Blair for a multinational Naval exercise

from March 5-12, 2018. Warships

from 20 countries participated in the

exercise.

(e) _Ex-Samvedhna-2018: 3 RAMT was_

deployed at Trivandrum to participate

in Ex-Samvedhna, a multilateral air

exercise (MAE) from March 14-16, 2018.

(f) _Health awareness rally: A health_

awareness car rally was held from

March 14 to April 7, 2017 for spreading

awareness on Organ Donation &


-----

Diabetes Mellitus amongst families and

serving personnel. The participants

were motivated to pledge their organs

for donation. The rally covered 6,500

Km across all commands covering 13

stations of the country.

(g) _Human in Space Program (HSP): Prime_

Minister of India formally announced

the Indian ‘Human in Space Program’

(HSP) from the ramparts of the iconic

Red Fort on August 15, 2018. Institute

of Aerospace Medicine (IAM), Indian Air

Force is the nodal point for Aerospace

Medical consideration and also a point

of interaction with ISRO. A team from

Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre visited

IAM on July 24, 2018. IAM will be

involved in HSP mainly on following

issues:

(a) Astronaut Selection & Training

(b) Human Engineering support to

development of Crew Module

(c) Space Suit

(d) In-flight & Post-flight monitoring

of Astronauts.

(VII) _International Cooperation:_

(a) Sri Lanka College of Military Medicine

hosted “2[nd] Annual Academic Session

at Colombo, Sri Lanka from March 23

-25, 2018. The theme of the session

was “Military Medicine: A disciplinary

Approach to Contemporary Medicine”.

DGAFMS & Sr Col Comdt delivered the

keynote address on the topic ‘Combat

Medical Support : Changing Paradigms

& Evolving Strategies’ during the

conference.


(b) 6[th] Course on Military Medicine Ethics

in Times of Armed Conflict organized

by International Committee of Military

Medicine (ICMM) was held at Spiez,

Switzerland from August 26 - 30, 2018.

(c) 4[th] International Committee of Military

Medicine (ICMM) Pacific Asian Nations

(PAN) Asia Pacific Congress Military

Medicine was held at Tehran, Iran from

October 12-15, 2018. The theme of the

congress was “The Future Horizon of

Military Medicine”.

(d) Israeli Female Combatant Medical

Symposium was held at Israel from

October 23-25, 2018.

(e) The International Committee of Military

Medicine (ICMM) is an international,

intergovernmental, neutral and non
political organization which was

created in 1921 with the Secretariat

General located in Belgium. The

primary mission of the ICMM is to

maintain and strengthen the bonds of

cooperation and knowledge between

the Armed Forces Medical Services of

all Member States. There are currently

117 member nations in the ICMM from

all five continents and India has been

permanent member of the ICMM. The

42[nd] World Congress of the ICMM was

organized by the Armed Forces Medical

Services at New Delhi from November

19-24, 2017 under the aegis of Ministry

of Defence. Director General of Armed

Forces Medical Services (DGFMS) &

Sr Col Comdt was designated as the

Chairman of ICMM till May 2019. A

three member AFMS delegation led

by the DGAFMS attended the Meeting

###### 2


-----

of the International Working Group of

the ICMM at Brussels, Belgium from

October 24 - 26, 2018.

(f) The XXXIV Annual Conference on

Marine Medicine & Allied Sciences was

conducted at INHS Asvini on October 6

    - 7, 2018. Delegates from the following

three countries participated in the

Conference.

(i) Thailand

(ii) Brazil

(iii) Bangladesh

(g) _Defence Cooperation with Maldives:_

Indian AFMS team comprising 2

Medical Officers and 4 paramedics

joined the Maldives National Defence

Forces (MNDF) Medical Services

on September 9, 2012 to assist in

establishment and opertionalisation of

25 bedded Senahiya, MNDF Hospital

at Male. Since then the deputation

of Medical Team is being continued

by deputing Medical Officers and

paramedics on yearly basis.

(h) _Deputation to Saudi Arabia: A Team_

comprising of 7 Medical Officers was

deputed to Saudi Arabia from July 17,

2018 to September 24, 2018 to provide

medical assistance for Haj pilgrimage.

(i) _India Tajikistan Friendship Hospital_

_(ITFH), Tajikistan:_ A 50 bedded

permanent hospitals was established

at Qurghon Teppa, Tajikistan in 2012. 3[rd]

Rotation of the medical team has been

deployed at ITFH upto March 26, 2020.


(j) _Medical Treatment of Armed Forces_

_Personnel_ _of_ _Friendly_ _Foreign_

_Countries: Medical treatment provided_

to the armed forces personnel of the

following friendly foreign countries:

S. Country Sanction given for Treated till
No medical treatment May 2019
in 2018-19

(i) Afghanistan 140 78

(ii) Bangladesh 96 56

(iii) Myanmar 02 02

(k) _3[rd] Cycle of ADMM Plus EWG on Military_

_Medicine (MM) (2017-19): India &_

Myanmar are Co-chair countries for the

3[rd] Cycle of ASEAN Defence Ministers

Meeting Plus Experts’ Working Group

(ADMM Plus EWG) on Military Medicine

(MM) (2017-19). In this connection, India

is hosting major events at Lucknow

under the aegis of DGMS (Army). It is a

matter of pride for Army Medical Corps

that the Field Training Exercise (FTE)

in March 2019 becomes the first ever

standalone FTE on Military Medicine

under the ADMM Plus umbrella and is

being projected as the signature event.

(VIII) _Training_

(a) _Training of non-medical Officers and_

_Sailors: In order to impart knowledge_

of Basic Life Support (BLS) and First

Aid to all Indian Naval personnel, a

policy has been promulgated for BLS

and First Aid training to be conducted

for all non-medical Officers and Sailors

of the Indian Navy. This training

envisages improving combat casualty

|S. No|Country|Sanction given for medical treatment in 2018-19|Treated till May 2019|
|---|---|---|---|
|(i)|Afghanistan|140|78|
|(ii)|Bangladesh|96|56|
|(iii)|Myanmar|02|02|


###### 22


-----

care for all afloat as well as ashore units

of the Indian Navy. The training is to be

conducted annually under the aegis of

respective Command HQs and during

inspections, a minimum of 10% of the

Ship’s Company is to be assessed for

the same.

(b) _Training_ _of_ _Aviation_ _Medicine_

_Specialists in Flying (Pilot Physician_

_Program):_ IAF has now started the

process to revive the ‘Pilot Physician

Programme’. After due approval,

Aviation Medicine Specialists will

undergo flying training similar to ab

initio IAF Pilots and will earn Wings.

Thereafter, as a physician trained as

a pilot he would be able to help solve

complex aero medical issues that

confront aviation. The USAF (US Air

Force) currently has a similar program.

The overall impact of this program will

enhance flight safety.

(IX) _DISASTER RELIEF & UN MISSIONS:_

(a) The Medical Stores provided for various

disasters, UN Missions and other

foreign missions in the year 2018-19 are

given below:

(i) For UN Mission to various
countries (Congo, South
Sudan)

(ii) Expeditions:

a) Indian Army Expedition

to Mt Mamostong Kangri

Ladakh

b) Mt Apsarasas-II

c) Mt Bhagirathi-II


(b) _Rescue Mission at Theni District:_

Station Medical Centre (SMC) Air Force

Station, Sulur was tasked to participate

in a rescue mission involving 30-40

casualties, due to an accidental fire in

the forest of Kurangani hills of Theni

District, Tamil Nadu on March 11, 2018.

A medical team from 5 Base Repair

Depot (5 BRD) Sulur was detailed for

the mission to setup the Base medical

camp at the foot hills of Kurangani

hills. The team provided great support

in loading and unloading of casualties

for speedy evacuation to Madurai

hospital.

(c) _Aid to Civil Authority, Kerala Flood_

_Relief in August 2018_

(i) _Army: Columns moved in aid_

to civil authority, to carry out

relief and rescue operations in

Kerala, with personnel of AMC

embedded. Medical Teams

were deployed for medical

relief Operations. About 4870

patients were provided medical

relief by the teams.

(ii) _Air Force: The Indian Air Force_

launched “Operation Karuna”

for rescue and medical relief in

areas ravaged by devastating

floods on August 18, 2018. 10

Mobile Medical teams were

immediately deployed across

worst affected areas of Kerala.

By the time the last IAF medical

team was withdrawn on

September 14, 2018, over 7300

patients had been treated across

flood ravaged Kerala.

###### 23


-----

(iii) _Navy: ‘Operation Madad’ was_

launched on August 16, 2018

to provide relief to the people

affected by floods in Kerala. All

out efforts were put in to ensure

that the medicines/ consumables

were issued expeditiously as

emergent indent including its

transportation to Kerala in time.

(d) _International Humanitarian Assistant_

_and Disaster Relief (HADR) effort:_

_‘Op Samudra Maitri’: In the wake_

of the devastating earthquake and

subsequent Tsunami that hit Sulawesi

province of Indonesia on the early

morning of September 28, 2018,

‘Operation Samudra Maitri’ was

launched by the Indian Army. The

medical team left on October 2, 2018

0730 hrs. & reached Palu (Indonesia)

on October 5, 2018 at 1610 hrs., via

Chennai. Team established Advance

Dressing Station (ADS) at Balaroa,

Palu (Indonesia) and started managing

earthquake victims.

(X) _Major Achievements_

(a) _Raksha_ _Mantri_ _Trophy_ _for_ _Best_

_Command Hospital: The Raksha Mantri_

Trophy for the best Command Hospital

of the Armed Forces for the year 2017

was presented to Command Hospital

Western Command, Chandimandir by

the Raksha Mantri in the presentation

ceremony on April 23, 2018.

(b) _Medical Camps:_

(i) _Bhadarwah: A medical camp was_

conducted at Bhadarwah from

###### 2


June 9 to 10, 2018, inaugurated

by Dr Jitender Singh, Union

Ministry of State (I/C), North
East Region. About 5388

civilians attended the camp.

(ii) _Dharchula: A medical camp_

was conducted at Dharchula

from September 17 to 18, 2018,

inaugurated by the Raksha

Mantri. 1691 civilians attended

the camp.

(c) _National Mental Health Programme:_

The National Mental Health Programme

the existing infrastructure under

‘Section B’ of NMHP has been approved

by the Government. The Centre of

Excellence in Mental Health, INHS

Asvini has been inaugurated on July

18, 2018 by Director General Medical

Services (Navy). The various academic

programmes are under advanced

stages of approval from the respective

institutions/ regulating bodies.

(d) _Commissioning_ _of_ _Naval_ _Hospital_

_Karanja_ _as_ _INHS_ _Sandhani:_ The

commissioning of Naval Hospital

Karanja as INHS Sandhani was held

on December 24, 2018 with the Flag

Officer Commanding-in-Chief, Western

Naval Command as the Chief Guest.

There are now ten Naval Hospitals.

(e) _Commissioning of NIDS (Mumbai) as_

_INDC Danteshwari: The Commissioning of_

NIDS, Mumbai as INDC Danteshwari was

held on December 12, 2018 with the Chief

of Naval Staff (CNS) as the Chief Guest.

INDC Danteshwari is the first Dental

Centre of the Indian Navy to be accorded

the status of a commissioned unit.


-----

(f) _37[th] Indian Scientific Expedition to_

_Antarctica (ISEA):_ Two Naval Medical

Officers were selected and deputed for

the 37[th] Indian Scientific Expedition to

Antarctica being conducted by NCAOR

(National Centre for Antarctic & Ocean

Research), Goa, under the aegis of

Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) w.e.f.

November 25, 2017 till March, 2019.

(g) _Establishment of Forward Surgical_

_Centre (FSC): FSC was established_

and operationalize at Air Force Station,

Naliya, Indian Air Force. The primary

objective was to assess the capability

of medical services in the Indian Air

Force to establish and operationalize a

basic surgical care facility at a remotely

located Air Force base at a short

notice to provide life and limb saving

surgery under field conditions to cases

that would otherwise require shifting

to a secondary tertiary care hospital

far away from the theatre of war. FSC

was conceived as a pilot project to

augment medical support to some of

the geographically isolated frontline

fighter bases of strategic importance in

the IAF with zero financial outlay.

(h) _Cardiac Catheterization Laboratory (CCL)_

_at Air Force Hospital, Kanpur:_ Single

plane Cardiac Catheterization Laboratory

with rotational angiography on partial

turnkey basis has been successfully

commissioned on January 12, 2018.

###### DIRECTORATE GENERAL DEFENCE ESTATES (DGDE)

9.17 The Directorate General Defence Estates,

New Delhi, has advisory and executive functions in


matters relating to management of Defence lands and

Civic Administration in 62 Cantonments. It presently

functions through six Principal Directorates at Jammu,

Chandigarh, Kolkata, Lucknow, Pune and Jaipur. The

Principal Directorates in turn supervise a number of

field offices, i.e. 38 Defence Estates Offices, 3 Assistant

Defence Estates Offices and 62 Cantonment Boards.

9.18 The Ministry of Defence owns approximately

17.57 lakh acres of land throughout the country managed

by the three Services and other Organizations like DGDE,

Ordnance Factory Board, DRDO, DGQA, CGDA etc. The

Army has the maximum of the land i.e. 14.147 lakh acres

followed by Air Force 1.40 lakh acres and Navy 0.44 lakh

acres. The defence land inside the notified Cantonments

is approximately 1.57 lakh acres and the remaining

around 16.00 lakh lies outside the Cantonments.

9.19 Details of land are maintained in General

Land Register (GLR) prescribed in Cantonment Land

Administration Rules (CLAR), 1937 and details of

defence land situated at outside cantonments in Military

Land Register (MLR) prescribed in Acquisition, Custody,

Relinquishment (ACR) Rules, 1944. Both the registers

are maintained in every DEO Circle. GLR is maintained

in every Cantonment Board Office also for land placed

under the management of Cantonment Boards.

9.20 The Directorate General has undertaken

computerization of land records, survey and demarcation

of all defence lands and digitization of records in order

to strengthen control and management over defence

land. Raksha Bhoomi software has been developed by

DGDE to store electronically the information in GLR and

MLR in respect of areas under all the Defence Estates

Officers and Cantonment Boards.

9.21 About 98.95% and 100% survey work of defence

land has been completed for defence land under DEO/

ADEO Circles and Cantonment Boards respectively. The

second phase of survey has been started.

###### 2


-----

9.22 DGDE also conducts land audit keeping in view

the importance of land as a national resource. The Land

audit reports for the three years period (2011-12 to 2013
14) and the second cycle of land audit for the year 2014
15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 (Vol-I) have been published and

circulated for necessary follow-up action. Land Audit

report in respect of 8 DEO Circles for the year 2016-17

(Vol-II) is under compilation. The third cycle of audit

started in 2017-18. Land Audit in respect of 12 DEO

Circles has been completed and for 13 DEO Circles for

2018-19, the audit is under process. The land audit for all

38 DEO circles will be completed by 2019-20.

9.23 The management of Defence Lands necessarily

warrants proper maintenance of land records. Activities

pertaining to improvement of record rooms (renovations)

in all DEO offices and establishment of AU&RC have been

completed. Also, indexing, scanning and microfilming

of Records are continuous process. The phase-I of the

work comprising 321964 files has been completed in

DEO offices and Cantonment Boards. Phase-II of the

work for 105617 files is in progress, out of which work

is completed for 86092 files. Microfilming of digitized

documents has been done by DEO Secunderabad as a

pilot project. It has been decided to do microfilming of

digitized records of other DEOs in a centralized manner.

9.24 The Defence Estates Department also

undertakes hiring of residential accommodation and

hiring / requisitioning of land for the Armed Forces. In

J&K requisition of immovable property is done under

J&K RAIP Act, 1968.

9.25 Directorate General Defence Estates is also

responsible to control, monitor and supervise the

Civic administration in Cantonment. There are 62

Cantonments in India located in 19 States, including

National Capital Territory of Delhi and are administrated

by Cantonment Boards which are ‘Body Corporate’,

functioning under the provisions of the Cantonments

Act, 2006. Supervision and control over the working of

these bodies is exercised through the General Officers

###### 26


Commanding in Chief and Principal Directors, Defence

Estates at the intermediate level and by the central

Government through Directorate General Defence

Estates at the apex level.

9.26 The resources of the Cantonment Boards are

limited, as the bulk of the property in the Cantonment

is owned by the Government. Boards, however, receive

payment of service charges in respect of Central Government

properties. Grant-in-aid to some extent is provided by the

Central Government to Cantonment Boards.

9.27 The Cantonments situated in the states of

Madhya Pradesh, Telangana, Delhi and Jharkhand started

getting share from the concerned State Governments.

The Government of Karnataka has taken a decision to

share State Govt. revenue with the Cantonment Board

Belgaum w.e.f. 2018-19. Efforts are on to pursue the

matter with remaining State Governments.

9.28 Cantonment Boards run Higher Secondary

Schools and Intermediate/ Junior Colleges and

total number of schools and colleges maintained

by Cantonment Boards is 204, besides 46 “Skill

Development Centres” providing training in tailoring,

embroidery, beautician courses, stenography, sewing,

computer application, automobile repairing, electrical

& electronics and IT applications. The Boards have

also established 36 “Centres for Differently-abled

Children” to address their special needs like medical

examination, counselling, physiotherapy and special

education. Cantonment Boards maintain 88 hospitals

and dispensaries for providing various services to the

general public of Cantonment and nearby areas.

9.29 Cantonment Boards have taken measures like

tree plantation, enforcing ban on polythene bags &

municipal solid waste management etc. for protection

of environment. A public grievances redressal system

called “Samadhan” and an employee’s information

system, called “Suvidha” have also been implemented

in all Cantonments.


-----

(i) Under the Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan (SBA), all

Cantonment Boards have been taking earnest

steps for clean and green Cantonment areas.

All 62 Cantonments have already been certified

by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs

(MoHUA) as ODF. New sewer lines and Sewage

Treatment Plants (STPs ) are being laid/installed

(wherever feasible) and intensive cleaning

along with aggressive awareness campaign is

being launched.

(ii) The Cantonment Boards have been making

rapid strides for switching over to digital

platforms in various aspects of Cantonment

administration. “Samadhan” – an on-line

public grievances redressal system has been

implemented by all Cantonment Boards to

make their administration more responsive to

the public. “Suvidha”- a software to address

the grievances of the staff has also been

installed by the Boards. Now, e-tendering

and e-procurement are implemented by all

Cantonment Boards. Most of the Boards are

already providing e-services to the residents

in taxation, birth/death registration, hospital

management etc.

(iii) During the current financial year, the

Cantonment Boards switch over to LED lighting

and to install roof-top solar panels to tap solar

energy. About 80% of the existing light points

has already been converted into LED lights. In

so far as harnessing solar power is concerned,

a capacity of 1647.5 KW has already been

installed by the Cantonment Boards.

(iv) International Yoga Day was celebrated on June

21, 2018 by all the Cantonment Boards with

great enthusiasm. People of all age-group

including officers, staff, their families as well

as students of Cantonment Board schools and

local residents participated in the event.


###### OFFICE OF THE CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER (CAO)

9.30 The Office of the Chief Administrative Officer

(CAO) provides civilian manpower and infrastructural

necessities to the Services Headquarters and the

Headquarter Offices of Inter-Service Organisations

(ISOs) under the Ministry of Defence. The Chief

Administrative Officer (CAO) also discharges the

functions of Director (Security) and Chief Information

Security Officer (CISO).

9.31 The functions of the CAO’s Office are carried

out by the following nine Divisions:

(a) _Manpower Planning and Recruitment Division:_

This Division is responsible for recruitment

to various categories of the Armed Forces

Headquarter (AFHQ) Cadre/Ex-Cadre posts,

Compassionate Appointment, framing/

amendment of Recruitment Rules for various

grades, re-verification of character and

antecedents of employees working in sensitive

organisations, Cadre Review/Restructuring of

AFHQ Civilian cadres.

During 2018-19, cadre restructuring of 16

cadres was initiated, 35 Recruitment Rules of

AFHQ cadres were revised and total 512 new

incumbents (160 Group ‘B’ & 352 Group ‘C’)

were recruited in AFHQ.

(b) _Personnel & Legal Division: This Division_

is responsible for the Cadre Management

including posting/promotion/ deputation of

the civilian personnel in about 200 grades,

posted in the three Services Headquarters and

27 Inter-Service Organisations besides handling

court cases of the CAO’s Office.

During the year 2018-19, 429 probationers were

removed from probation; promotions to 922

###### 2


-----

employees (Gp A- 78, Gp B- 384, Gp C- 460)

were granted. Also, 260 employees were granted

financial benefit under MACP & NFSG. A total of

398 cases was reviewed under FR 56(j).

(c) _Administration Division: This Division deals_
with all matters pertaining to pay & allowances
and administrative work (including medical,
pension and budget cases) of civilian employees
working in IHQ of MoD(Army)/ISOs as also
implementation of e-governance, electronic
data processing and maintenance of website of
CAO’s Office.

As per Ministry of Personal, Public Grievances &
Pension, Department of Pension & Pensioners
Welfare OM No. 38/37/2016-P& PW(A) dated
May 12, 2017, all cases for revision of pension
of pre 2016 pensioner’s/family pensioners,
whose record were readily available have been
processed.

(d) _Finance and Material Division: This Division_
provides material requirement to the ISOs
which includes procuring and provisioning of
office equipment, stores, furniture, stationery
and IT equipment. During the year 2018-19,
Surveillance and Access Control Management
System (SACMS) were made operational in
National Defence College (NDC) and Sena
Bhawan.

(e) _Quartering Division: This Division deals with_
all matters pertaining to management and
allotment of MoD Pool Married Accommodation
to the service officers posted in IHQ of MoD/
ISOs.

The existing estate management system
has been upgraded and commissioned in
December, 2018 which has facilitated better and
transparent information to the service officers.

###### 28


(f) _Works & Special Project Division:_ This
Division looks after “Works” matters

pertaining to allotment and maintenance of
office accommodation, including hiring of
accommodation due to deficiency in respect of
all constituents of Ministry of Defence. Special
Projects assigned to the Office of JS & CAO
include processing of approvals for construction
of National War memorial & Museum in Delhi,
monitoring of construction of Nau Sena
Bhawan, Thal Sena Bhawan and civil electrical
works associated with Surveillance and Access
Control Management System (SACMS) at Sena
Bhawan and South Block.

National War Memorial at ‘C’ Hexagon of India
Gate was inaugurated and dedicated to the
armed forces on February 25, 2019 by Prime
Minister.

(g) _Departmental Discipline, Coordination and_
_Welfare Division: This Division deals with_
disciplinary cases of AFHQ Civilian employees,
coordination matters relating to implementation
of Official Language policy, welfare activities,
JCM, Women Cell, Sports & Cultural activities,
Departmental Canteens, appointment of AMAs,
Defence Civilian Medical Aid Fund (DCMAF)
etc., and also administration of Ministry of
Defence (Library) and grant from NDF for
purchase of reading material of entertainment
of troops.

88[th] Meeting of OC (JCM) of AFHQ/ISOs was
held to settle service issues of employees of
AFHQ/ISO Cadre. Consequent upon celebration
of Hindi Pakhwara, Rajbhasha Prize Distribution
ceremony was held on December 20, 2018 and
various awards were given to the winners.

Departmental Discipline Section deals with the
disciplinary and vigilance matter of officers/


-----

officials of AFHQ Services. About 85 Disciplinary
cases were handled during the year and a

booklet ‘VIGNETTE’ was released for creating
awareness amongst AFHQ employees about
Discipline and Vigilance matters. During 201819 Ministry of Defence (Library) has added 845
books, subscribed to 124 Journals/Periodicals
and 32 Newspapers.

(h) _Defence Headquarters Training Institute (DHTI):_
DHTI provides training to civilian personnel
posted in the Service Headquarters and Inter
– Service Organisations. DHTI also caters to
specialized training requirement by conducting
classes on Defence Procurement Procedure
(DPP)/Defence Procurement Manual (DPM),
e-procurement, RTI, First Aid & Fire Fighting,
Security Consciousness, Behavioural topics,
Preparation of Cabinet Notes and Parliament
Procedure. Participants include inter-alia
Service Officers & PBOR from the three service
Headquarters and ISOs.

During 2018-19, 97 courses were conducted
by DHTI. Three mid-career Professional
Development Programmes in which participants
visited Civil Service College, London and Asian
Institute of Technology, Thailand, as part of
the course curriculum. In addition, 23 training
programmes are being conducted at field
formations in peripatetic form, catering for
training needs of DGMT, DRDO and NIDEM and
also for probationers of IDES & IIS by providing
faculty assistance. AFHQ Mentoring Programme
(AMP) has also been launched to familiarize
direct recruits of all grades about AFHQ cadre.

9.32 _Security Office:_ The Security Office is
responsible for physical security, surveillance & access
control, prevention of breach of security & fire within the
Defence Headquarters Security Zone comprising of 22
buildings. Security Office issues approximately 90,000


passes of various types annually which include SLIC,
DAC, TP, CHT & Vehicle Stickers etc.

9.33 During the year, the Manual of Security
Instruction which was of 2008 vintage was revised,
modernised & updated.

###### DIRECTORATE OF PUBLIC RELATIONS (DPR)

9.34 Directorate of Public Relations (DPR) is the
nodal agency for disseminating information to the
media and public about important events, programmes,
achievements and policy decisions of the Ministry
of Defence (MoD), the Armed Forces, Inter-Services
Organisations and Defence Public Sector Undertakings
(DPSUs). The Directorate with its headquarters in New
Delhi and 25 regional and branch offices spread across
the country, is responsible for providing support to
media ensuring wide publicity in the print, electronic
and social media. It also facilitates media interaction
with the leadership and senior officials of the Ministry
and the Armed Forces by conducting regular interviews,
press conferences and press tours.

9.35 The Directorate brings out a fortnightly journal,
Sainik Samachar, for the Armed Forces in 13 languages.
Work is in full swing to make Sainik Samachar App
to reach out to more people. Broadcasting Section of
the Directorate produces a 40-minute programme
‘Sainikon Ke Liye’ that is broadcast daily on All India
Radio for Armed Forces personnel. Photo Section of
the Directorate provides photo coverage to important
events related to Defence. The Photo Archives of
the Photo Section of the DPR is now undergoing the
digitisation process.

9. 36 Directorate conducted the Defence
Correspondents’ Course for media persons from
August 26, 2018 to September 22, 2018 to enhance
their knowledge about defence matters. Twenty-eight
journalists including seven women drawn from all over
the country attended the month-long course which was

###### 29


-----

conducted in different establishments of Army, Navy
and Air Force.

9.37 During the year, DPR provided coverage on
different events including inaugural Indo-US Ministerial
2+2 Dialogue in New Delhi between Minister of External
Affairs along with Minister of Defence and their United
States counterparts Secretary of State along with
Secretary of Defence on September 6, 2018; Inauguration
of 10[th] edition of biennial ‘Def Expo’ in Chennai by Prime
Minister which happened from April 11-14, 2018 that for
the first time projected India’s Defence manufacturing
capabilities to the world with tagline ‘India: The Emerging
Defence Manufacturing Hub’; Announcement of set up of
two Defence Production Corridors in Uttar Pradesh and
Tamil Nadu; First-ever circum navigation of the globe
by all-women crew of Indian Navy in an indigenously
built 56-foot Indian Navy Sailing Vessel, ‘INSV Tarini’;
Training of women officers of the Afghan Army and
Air Force on basic military aspects, including physical
training, weapon training, tactics, communication skills
and leadership at Officers’ Training Academy, Chennai
from November 26 to December 22, 2018.

9.38 The Directorate also provided good coverage
of dedication to the nation of National War Memorial
in New Delhi by Prime Minister on February 25,
2019;Inauguration of Aero India 2019 at Air Force station
Yelahankain Bengaluru by Raksha Mantri that was held
between February 20-24, 2019; Successful mid-air
refuelling of Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) ‘Tejas’; Launch
of ‘Mission Raksha Gyan Shakti’ Defence Minister to
generating Intellectual Property in India to achieve the
goal of self-reliance in Defence sector; Inauguration
of Combined Commanders’ Conference at Air Force
Station, Jodhpur and launch of ‘Parakram Parv’ by Prime
Minister on September 28, 2018;Decision of Ministry of
Defence to enhance financial decision-making powers
of the Vice Chiefs of the three Services by five times to

` 500 crores in order to expedite the decision making
process; Dedication to the nation four span of temporary
bridge on the old Ferozepur-Lahore highway over

###### 30


river Satluj River (Hussainiwala Barrage) connecting
Hussainiwala Enclave from Ferozpur by Raksha Mantri

on August 12, 2018; Tenth edition of lndo-Russian joint
military Exercise INDRA, conducted at Sabina Military
station in Russia from November 18 to 28, 2018; Award
of Padma Shrito retired veteran of victorious 1965 war
Sepoy Murlikant Rajaram Petkar (Retd) who later won
Paralympic Gold in 50 metre free style swimming by
President on March 20, 2018.

9.39 The Directorate arranges all media facilities
related to Republic Day Celebrations, including Beating
the Retreat ceremony on Vijay Chowk and brings out
a commentary book for the ‘Parade on Rajpath’. Other
important calendar events such as Independence
Day celebrations at the Red Fort, Defence Minister’s
annual customary message to the Armed Forces on
the eve of Independence Day, Combined Commanders’
Conference, Prime Minister’s NCC Rally and Defence
Investiture Ceremonies at the Rashtrapati Bhawan are
also accorded due publicity.

###### SERVICES SPORTS CONTROL BOARD (SSCB)

9.40 Services Sports Control Board (SSCB) conducts
and co-ordinates various sports activities in the
three Defence Services. Inter-Service championships
comprising of four teams (Army Red, Army Green,
India Navy and Air Force) are conducted under the
aegis of SSCB in 19 Sports disciplines and trials are
conducted in 14 disciplines to select the Services team
for participation in the National Championship/Games/
Military World Championships.

9.41 During the year 2018, SSCB fielded Senior
Men’s teams in the National Championships conducted
by Sports federations/associations. Services team won
the National Championship in many events.

9.42 During the year Services sportsmen represented
India at various International Championships and
won 13 medals (Gold-3, Silver-4 and Bronze-6) in


-----

Commonwealth Games 2018, 69 Medals (Gold-15,
Silver-24 and Bronze-30) in Asian Games, 2018 and

72 Medals (Gold-15, Silver-24 and Bronze-33) in Asian
Paralympics Games.

###### ARMED FORCES FILM & PHOTO DIVISION (AFFPD)

9.43 Armed Forces Film & Photo Division (AFFPD) is
an Inter Services Organization of the Ministry of Defence
entrusted with the responsibility of producing films for
training, documentary and promotional purposes for
the three services.

9.44 In the current year AFFPD has completed and
released five training films for the Army in association
with Army Training Command (ARTRAC).

9.45 Photography has now shifted from negative
to digital format and presently all the photographs are
being exposed digitally and issued in CD/DVD format
and as hard copies (photo prints) as per requirement.

9.46 The Central Defence Film Library (CDFL) of this
Division is responsible for distribution of training films
to various units/ formations/ training establishments/
commands to meet their specific training requirements.
During the current year, 9431 DVDs have been
dispatched/ issued on loan to various units/formations
of Army/ Navy/ Air Force.

9.47 AFFPD has a rich collection of rare films and
photographs of the World War-II, the material inherited
from the British are of great historical value and are
maintained and preserved at the Central Defence Film
Library of this Division.

###### NATIONAL DEFENCE COLLEGE (NDC)

9.48 National Defence College is a premier training
institution of the Ministry of Defence. Selected Armed
Forces Officers of the rank of Brigadier/equivalent


from Indian and Foreign Armed Forces and Officers of
equivalent status from Civil services are nominated for

training at the college. The Course composition is of 100
officers comprising 40 from the Indian Army, 6 from the
Indian Navy, 12 from the Indian Air Force, 17 from Indian
Civil Services and 25 from Friendly Foreign Countries.
The officers undergo an eleven months programme
with focus on national security, covering all dimensions
of domestic, regional and international issues to equip
future policy makers with background necessary to get
a broad understanding of the multifarious economic,
political, military scientific and organisational aspects
that are essential for planning of National Strategy.

9.49 The National Defence College is currently
conducting the 58[th] NDC Course. The mandated six
modules on Socio Political, Economic, International
Security, Global and Technology Issues, Strategic
Neighbourhood and Structures for National Security
and Strategy have since been completed on November
27, 2018.

9.50 During the Course, the Course Participants
have the benefit of interactions with various foreign
delegations and dignitaries of national and international
repute, Heads of State, Ambassadors, Ministers
academicians and Think Tanks. The Vice President
visited the NDC on October 15, 2018. The President
addressed the Course officers and lauded the role being
played by the NDC in preparing strategic leaders to deal
with the complex security environment of the future in
a comprehensive manner.

9.51 The Commandant, NDC also represented the
NDC in the annual meet of Heads of Defence Universities,
Colleges and Institutions of the ASEAN Regional Forum
(ARF) held at Tokyo (Japan) from September 26 to 28,
2018 and at United Arab Emirates National Defence
College Seminar on October 28, 2018.

9.52 The Convocation Ceremonies to award M.Phil
Degree to 55[th] and 56[th] Course participants were held on

###### 3


-----

February 17, 2018 and September 15, 2018 respectively,

graced by the Raksha Mantri and the Lieutenant

Governor of Delhi respectively. The 58[th] NDC Course

Participants graduates on November 30, 2018 and the

ensuing 59[th] NDC Course would commence on January

7, 2019.

###### SCHOOL OF FOREIGN LANGUAGES (SFL)

9.53 The School of Foreign Languages (SFL)

is an eminent foreign language institution under

administrative and functional control of the HQ IDS,

Ministry of Defence and has been teaching in India since

1948. The School imparts training in foreign languages

to personnel of the three Services of the Indian Armed

Forces and CAPFs. It works as a nodal agency for other

Ministries and Departments of the Government of India

such as the Ministry of External Affairs, the Cabinet

Secretariat, Central Police Organisation viz (BSF, CRPF,

ITBP, etc.) in terms of foreign language training and

examination. Presently, following languages are being

taught at SFL by regular faculty. (i) Arabic (ii) Chinese

COURSES Army Navy

COP 7 7

INTER’SHIP 1 47

Language wise participation of students is as follows:

LANGUAGE COP ADOP

Arabic 14 Nil

Chinese 31 Nil

Persian 2 Nil

Russian 27 Nil

Tibetan Nil Nil

Sinhala Nil Nil

Bahasa Indonesia Nil Nil

Burmese Nil Nil

###### 32


(iii) Persian (iv) Russian(v) Sinhala (vi) Tibetan (vii)

Spanish. Courses in other languages are conducted by

Guest Lecturers on requirement basis.

9.54 The School of Foreign Languages conducts

following courses in various languages:

(a) Certificate of Proficiency (COP) (One Year

Course)

(b) Advance Diploma of Proficiency (ADOP) (One

Year Course).

(c) Interpretership (Varies from 16 ½ Months to 23

½ Months course)

(d) Short Term/Refresher course (Depending upon

requirement of user organisation).

9.55 Details of participation in different courses held

during 2018-2019 are tabled below:

|COURSES|Army|Navy|Air Force|CAPFs|Others|Total|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|COP|7|7|-|11|49|74|
|INTER’SHIP|1|47|49|10|3|110|

|LANGUAGE|COP|ADOP|INTER’SHIP|SHORT TERM|TOTAL|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Arabic|14|Nil|11|4|29|
|Chinese|31|Nil|54|Nil|85|
|Persian|2|Nil|7|Nil|9|
|Russian|27|Nil|11|18|56|
|Tibetan|Nil|Nil|8|Nil|8|
|Sinhala|Nil|Nil|21|04|25|
|Bahasa Indonesia|Nil|Nil|Nil|04|4|
|Burmese|Nil|Nil|Nil|11|11|


-----

###### HISTORY DIVISION

9.56 The History Division was established on

October 26, 1953 to compile the histories of the military

operations conducted by the Indian Armed Forces since

independence. Till now, it has compiled and published 19

volumes including the History of Operations in Jammu &

Kashmir 1947-48, Operation Polo, Operation Vijay (Goa),

Military Costumes of India, Stories of Heroism, The India
Pakistan War of 1965: A History, The India-Pakistan

war of 1971: A History and Saga of Valour (Param Vir

Chakra & Ashoka Chakra Winners). The Division has

also reprinted twelve volumes of Official History of the

Indian Armed Forces in the Second World War 1939
45. The histories of operations conducted by the Indian

Armed Forces on UN Peace Keeping Missions have

also been published such as UN Operations in Congo,

History of the custodian force (India) in Korea 1953-54,

Operation Shanti (Indian Troops in Egypt) and Terrific

Responsibility (The Battle for Peace in Indo-China).

9.57 The Division is presently working on two

projects ‘The role of Indian Armed Forces in World

War-I’ and ‘The History of Kargil War.’ The ‘Digitization

of Records’ pertaining to World War-II is in progress.

9.58 The History Division have also provided

valuable inputs and operational records including war

diaries, dispatches etc. of Jammu & Kashmir operations

in 1947-48 to National Archives of India for exhibition

‘on India @ 70; The Jammu & Kashmir Saga’ held in

January 2018 on the occasion of 70 years of Jammu &

Kashmir accession to India.

9.59 The History Division functions as the research,

record and reference office of Ministry of Defence

and the Indian Armed Forces. The Division also runs

a Fellowship scheme under which two Fellowships

are granted for three years to encourage research in

military history. So far twenty-two Research Fellows

have benefitted under the scheme.


9.60 The Heraldic Cell of the Division assists the

three Services Headquarters including Coast Guard

Headquarters and the Ministry of Defence in ceremonial

matters such as naming of new establishments and

acquisitions, designing of crests and badges and coining

of mottoes.

9.61 The Departmental Library houses more than

five thousand titles, including books, periodicals and

foreign publications of military importance.

###### COLLEGE OF DEFENCE MANAGEMENT (CDM)

9.62 CDM is a tri-Service institution which imparts

skills of contemporary management thought,

concepts and practices, that lead to effective decision

making, enlightened leadership and efficient resource

management in a knowledge centric environment

to the senior leadership of the three Services, Para

Military Forces, officers of the Ministry of Defence and

International participants at the Conceptual, Directional

and Functional levels. The Higher Defence Management

Course (HDMC) is conducted over a period of 44

weeks. Besides the HDMC, CDM conducted a number

of Management Development Programmes (MDPs),

Defence Management Course for SAARC Nations

and Senior Defence Management Course (SDMC)

for participants from tri-Services as also participants

from friendly foreign countries through a networked

environment supported by state of the art information

and communication technology.

9.63 From January 1, 2018 to December 31, 2018,

CDM conducted one Higher Defence Management

Course, two Senior Defence Management Course

and Ten Management Development Programmes and

trained 550 Officers of the three Services including BRO,

PMF & Government Organisations apart from imparting

knowledge on Defence Management to 1350 Officers at

various Institutes of Higher Learning including National

Security Council Secretariat through external capsules.

###### 33


-----

###### 3


9.64 Since 2016, CDM is among the top 50 out of 9.67 DSSC was awarded the President’s Colours in

5200 NAAC accredited institutions with a coveted September, 2016 by the Hon’ble President of India in

grading of ‘A+’. The College is a Centre of Excellence recognition of the commendable service rendered as a

in the disciplines of ‘Net Assessment’ and is the only flagship joint training institution.

Accredited Training Organisation (ATO) for Indian

Armed Forces for IPMA Certification in ‘Project 9.68 The College is progressively bracing itself for

training 500 student officers. The strength of the current

Management’. The College is also at the forefront in

Staff Course has been enhanced to 474 including three

imparting ‘Data Analytics & Visualization’ training

officers from the Civil Services/Paramilitary Forces, two

to the Indian Armed Forces. CDM is designated as

from Coastguard and 38 International officers from 26

the lead agency for implementation of National

different nations.

Knowledge Network (NKN) in the Armed Forces

Training Institutes. The green initiatives at CDM include

###### ARMY PURCHASE ORGANIZATION (APO)

creation of Herbal Garden and establishment of an Eco

Club in the campus.

9.69 Army Purchase Organization (AP) deals with

procurement of Rice, Sugar, Pulses, Barley whole,

9.65 The education imparted at CDM in 2018-19

Gram whole, Edible Oil, Meal Ready to Eat (MRE), Fruit

includes Military Officers (Col & Equivalent) from over 21

tinned/dried, Veg Tinned/Dehyd/RTE, Onion, Potato,

countries from Asia, Africa, South America and Pacific

Jam Td, Cashew Kernel, Almond, Raisin Brown, Butter

Islands.

and Desi Ghee, and other items like meat tinned, fish

tinned, coffee, egg etc. to ensure timely supply of these

###### DEFENCE SERVICES STAFF COLLEGE (DSSC)

commodities to Defence Forces.

9.66 Defence Services Staff College (DSSC) in Tamil

9.70 The procurement is being carried out in

Nadu is a premier Tri-Services joint training institution

accordance with DPM-2009 Open Tender Enquiry

in the world training selected officers of the Indian

through CPPP in which Request For Proposal (RFP)

Armed Forces, Civil Services/Paramilitary Forces and

is uploaded on two bid system where Registered/

friendly foreign countries. The Staff College affords

Un-Registered vendors can participate in the bidding

an invigorating environment serving as a Cradle for

process based on the Qualitative Requirements (QRs)

Middle Level Military Leadership, creating excellent staff enshrined in the RFPs.

officers and stellar leaders as the cutting edge of the

armed forces with accentuated levels of professionalism 9.71 Negotiated contracts are concluded with NCDFI

and steadfastly upholding the virtues of ‘Duty, Honour for dairy products and procurement of pulses through

and Valour’. NAFED as per Govt. orders on the subject.




-----

###### chapter
###  10

#### Recruitment and Training


-----

###### RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING
# 10


###### RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING
# 10


10.1 The Armed Forces epitomize the ideals of

service, sacrifice, patriotism and composite culture

of the country. Recruitment to the Armed Forces is

voluntary and open to all citizens of India irrespective

of caste, class, religion and community provided the laid

down physical, medical and educational criteria are met.

10.2 _Selection of Commissioned Officers in the_

_Armed Forces through UPSC: Officers entry in the_

Armed Forces is mainly through UPSC which conducts

the following two All India Competitive Examinations:

(a) _National Defence Academy (NDA) and Naval_

_Academy (NA): The UPSC holds entrance_

Examination twice a year for entry into the

NDA and NA. Candidates on completion of

10+2 examination or while in the 12[th] standard

are eligible to compete. Having cleared UPSC

written examination, eligible candidates

undergo Service Selection Board (SSB)

interview, which lasts for five days. On being

###### 36


medically fit and coming in NDA merit list,

successful candidates join the NDA or NA as

per their option of service exercised at the time

of applying. On completion of the course, they

are sent to the respective Service Academies

for their pre-commissioning training.

(b) _Combined_ _Defence_ _Service_ _Examination_

_(CDSE): CDSE is conducted by the UPSC twice_

a year. University graduates or those in final

year of graduation are eligible to appear in the

examination. Candidates qualifying in written

examination have to undergo SSB interview

and medical tests. Candidates whose names

appear in the merit list undergo basic military

training of 18 months at Indian Military Academy

for Permanent Commission and 11 months at

Officers Training Academy (OTA), Chennai to

become Short Service Commissioned Officers

(SSCOs). SSCOs can serve for a duration of

10 years, extendable to 14 years. However,


-----

they can opt for permanent commission after

completion of 10 years or seek release after

completion of five years of service, which is

considered on case to case basis by Integrated

Headquarters of Ministry of Defence (Army).

###### INDIAN ARMY

10.3 Apart from the UPSC, there are other channels

of entry into Indian Army as under:

(a) _10+2 Technical Entry Scheme (TES): Candidates_

who have qualified 10+2 CBSE/ICSE/State Board

Examination with minimum aggregate of 70%

marks in Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics

are eligible to apply for commission under the

10+2(TES). On being successful in the SSB and

being declared fit by the medical board, they

undergo one year basic military training at the

Officers Training Academy, Gaya and thereafter

undergo three years engineering degree course

in respective streams before getting Permanent

Commission. On being commissioned, they

are further put through one year of post

commissioning training for the Army Service

into which they are commissioned.

(b) _University Entry Scheme (UES): Pre-Final_
year students in the notified engineering
disciplines are eligible to apply for Permanent
Commission in the Technical Arms of the
Army as Commissioned Officers under the
UES. Eligible candidates are selected through
a campus interview by the Screening Teams
deputed by the Integrated Headquarters of
Ministry of Defence (Army). These candidates
are required to appear before SSB and Medical
Board. Successful candidates undergo one year
pre-commission training at the Indian Military
Academy (IMA), Dehradun. Cadets through
this entry are also entitled to one year antedate seniority on commissioning. Selection


for this entry, however, stands temporarily
suspended.

(c) _Technical Graduates Course (TGC): Engineering_

graduates from notified discipline of

engineering, post graduates with minimum

second division aggregate marks in notified

discipline for Army Education Corps and M.Sc. in

Agriculture/Dairy for Military Farm are eligible

to apply for Permanent Commission through

this entry. After the SSB and the Medical Board,

the selected candidates are required to undergo

one year pre-commissioned training at the IMA,

Dehradun. Engineering Graduates through this

entry are also entitled to two years ante-date

seniority on commissioning.

(d) _Short Service Commission (Technical) Entry:_

The Short Service Commission (Technical)

Entry Scheme provides avenue for selection

to eligible technical graduates/ post graduates

into Technical Arms. After SSB and medical

Board, the selected candidates are required

to undergo approximately 49 weeks pre
commission training at OTA, Chennai. On

completion of training, they are inducted as

Short Service Commissioned Officers. Cadets

through this entry are also entitled to one year’s

ante-date seniority on commissioning.

(e) _NCC (Special Entry Scheme):_ University

graduates possessing NCC ‘C’ Certificate with

minimum ‘B’ grade and 50% aggregate marks

in graduation examination are eligible to apply

for Short Service Commission through this

entry. Those studying in third year are allowed

to apply provided they have secured minimum

50% aggregate marks in first two years.

Such candidates will need to secure overall

aggregate of minimum 50 % marks if selected

in interview failing which their candidature

will be cancelled. Candidates must possess

###### 3


-----

graduation degree at the time of joining OTA or

those candidates studying in third year should

be able to produce the degree within 12 weeks

from date of commencement of training at OTA.

Candidates have to undergo approximately 49

weeks pre-commission training at OTA, Chennai.

On completion of training, they are inducted as

Short Service Commissioned Officers.

(f) _Short Service Commission (Judge Advocate_

_General Entry): Law graduates with minimum_

55% aggregate marks in LLB age between 21

to 27 years can apply for Judge Advocate

General Branch. Eligible candidates are called

for direct SSB interview and medical test.

Successful candidates are required to undergo

approximately 49 weeks pre-commission

training at OTA Chennai. On completion of

training, they are inducted as Short Service

Commissioned Officers.

(g) _Short Service Commission Women (SSCW):_

Eligible women candidates are selected in the

Army as Short Service Commission Officers.

Commission is granted in Non-Technical

Graduate, Technical and Post Graduate/

Specialist for a period of ten years, extendable

by additional four years purely on voluntary

basis. The duration of training is 49 weeks at

Officers Training Academy, Chennai. For Short

Service Commission Women (Technical) Entry

passed or final year/semester students of

B.E/B.Tech in notified streams are eligible to

apply. Shortlisted candidates appear for SSB

interview and Medical Test, thereafter. The

applicants for Non-Technical Graduate stream,

however, are required to apply through UPSC

and after written examination, would come up

for SSB interview. A total of 20% allotted seats

from Non-Technical stream have been reserved

for NCC ‘C’ certificate holder women candidates

with minimum ‘B’ grade and 50% aggregate

###### 38


marks in graduation examination. For Judge

Advocate General’s Branch, applications are

invited from Law Graduates with minimum 55%

marks. Widows of Defence Personnel who meet

the laid down eligibility criteria are granted

four years age relaxation and 5% seats of each

course (2.5% each in Tech and Non-Tech) are

reserved for them. Short Service Commission

Women (Tech), NCC entry and Judge Advocate

General Branch are exempted from written

examinations.

(h) _Service Entries: For Junior Commissioned_

Officer & Other Ranks have the following

options to get commissioned as officers

through Service Selection Board:

(i) _Army Cadet College (ACC) Entry:_

Eligible Other Ranks (ORs) in age

group of 20-27 years and minimum

two years of service, having 10+2 pass

qualifications can apply for Regular

Commission through this entry. After

qualifying in written examination

conducted by the Military Training

Directorate, the aspirants are screened

by SSB and the Medical Board.

Successful candidates are trained at

Army Cadet College Wing, Dehradun,

for three years at the end of which

they get a graduation degree. This is

followed by one year pre-commission

training at IMA, Dehradun.

(ii) _Special Commissioned Officers (SCO)_

_Scheme: Under this entry JCOs/NCOs/_

ORs in the age group of 30-35 years,

with a Senior School Certificate Pass

(Class 10+2 pattern) qualification, are

eligible for Permanent commission

after screening by SSB and Medical

Board. They have to undergo pre

-----

commission training of one year

duration at IMA, Dehradun. The rules

for substantive promotion and acting

promotion are the same as for regular

officers. These officers are employed in

units as sub unit Commanders/ Quarter

Master and on various Extra Regimental

Employment appointments up to the

rank of Major. They retire at the age

of 57 years after serving for period

of about 20-25 years as officers. The

scheme not only improves the career

prospects of the existing PBOR but

also helps in making up the deficiency

of the support cadre officers in the

Army.

(iii) _Permanent_ _Commission_ _(Special_

_List) (PC SL): Under this entry, JCOs/_

NCOs/ORs up to 42 years of age, with

atleast 10 years of service and a Senior

Schools Certificate Pass (Class 10+2

pattern) qualification are eligible for

commission after screening by SSB and

Medical Board. They are granted PC(SL)

after successful completion of four

weeks orientation training at the IMA.

10.4 _Automation of processes for Officers entries:_

Online processes which were earlier limited to submission

of online application have since been upgraded.

Candidates can now see the course notifications, submit

application (less UPSC and Service entries), select SSB

dates (including UPSC entries), view merit lists, receive

joining letters, forward queries/feedback and receive

responses as well as updates at every stage of the

selection process, in an online mode.

10.5 _Intake: Intake of candidates for pre-commission_

training as officers during the year 2018-19 is given in

Table No. 10.1.


Table No. 10.1

S. No Academy Entry Induction

1. NDA Army 622

Navy 130

Air Force 131

_Total_ _883_

2. IMA IMA (DE) 194

ACC 132

SCO 40

PC(SL) 21

AEC 07

_Total_ _394_

3. OTA SSC(NT) 111

SSCW (NT) 26

NCC 64

NCCW 09

JAG 15

JAGW 11

_Total_ _236_

4. Tech Entries UES 18

SSC(Tech) 151

SSCW (Tech) 29

10+2 TES 207

TGC 87

_Total_ _492_

_Grand Total_ _2005_

10.6 _Recruitment of Junior Commissioned Officer_

_(JCO) & Other Ranks (ORs): Recruitment in the Army_

is done through eleven Zonal Recruiting Offices, two

Gorkha Recruiting Depots, one Independent Recruiting

Office and 59 Army Recruiting Offices in addition to

48 Regimental Centres which carry out recruitment

through rallies in their respective areas of jurisdiction.

###### 39

|S. No|Academy|Entry|Induction|
|---|---|---|---|
|1.|NDA|Army|622|
|||Navy|130|
|||Air Force|131|
|||Total|883|
|2.|IMA|IMA (DE)|194|
|||ACC|132|
|||SCO|40|
|||PC(SL)|21|
|||AEC|07|
|||Total|394|
|3.|OTA|SSC(NT)|111|
|||SSCW (NT)|26|
|||NCC|64|
|||NCCW|09|
|||JAG|15|
|||JAGW|11|
|||Total|236|
|4.|Tech Entries|UES|18|
|||SSC(Tech)|151|
|||SSCW (Tech)|29|
|||10+2 TES|207|
|||TGC|87|
|||Total|492|
|||Grand Total|2005|


-----

Recruitment of Junior Commissioned Officer & Other

Ranks is carried out through Online Application System

for soldier General Duty, Soldier Tradesman, Soldier

Technical, Soldier Clerk/Store Keeper Trade and Soldier

Nursing Assistant, Havildar Education, Havildar Auto

Cartographer and Religious Teacher JCO (RT JCO), JCO

Catering categories. The current recruitment for Junior

Commissioned Officers and Other Ranks comprises

screening of aspiring candidates at rally site in the

1.6 km run followed by document checking, Physical

Fitness Tests (PFT), Physical Measurement Test (PMT)

and Medical Examination. This is followed by a written

examination for those candidates who have qualified in

all tests. Finally, a merit list is prepared and candidates

in merit are dispatched to respective Regimental/

Training Centres for training. Efforts are made to ensure

each district of the country is covered at least once in a

recruiting year.

10.7 _Revised Recruitment Rallies System: Indian_

Army is one of the biggest recruiters in the country

which recruits almost 60,000 youths into the Army

each year. Previously, recruitment was being carried

out through an ‘Open Rally System’ wherein candidates

could walk in for recruitment without applying for

a rally. The ‘Revised Recruitment System’ has been

introduced wherein a candidate is required to register

online with the overall aim of reducing masses which

turn up for recruitment by a regulated call up system.

Thus connected administrative and discipline issues that

arise due to large crowd have been negated. The revised

Recruitment Rally System is being implemented in the

following phases:

(a) _Phase-I: Replacement of open rally system_

_with call up system: Implementation of On-_

Line Registration for Recruitment of Junior

Commissioned Officers/Other Ranks into the

Indian Army was carried out w.e.f. July 18,

2015 and has been a major success, which

has revolutionized the complete recruiting

process. This initiative has streamlined our

###### 0


recruitment system and is also giving a boost to

Government ‘Digital India’ programme where

candidates from remote areas/rural areas are

using internet to apply for this popular career

option.

(b) _Phase-II: Pilot project for online examination_

_prior to physical and medical tests: Pilot_

project for online examination has recently

been approved by the Ministry of Defence

and Recruiting Directorate is in the process of

implementation of the Pilot Project. This will

be the major achievements once implemented.

Initially the Pilot Project is being implemented

in three zones as under and subsequently will

cover Pan India:

(i) HQ Recruiting Zone, Ambala

(ii) HQ Recruiting Zone, Chennai

(iii) HQ Recruiting Zone, Jaipur

10.8 _Recruitment Rallies:_ A total of 50026

candidates have been recruited for the Recruiting year

2017-18. For the Recruiting year 2018-19, 97 rallies were

conducted.

###### INDIAN NAVY (IN)

10.9 Indian Navy (IN) carries out recruitment of

personnel to effectively man ships, submarines, aircraft

and shore establishments to the optimum levels.

Recruitment in the Navy is carried out on all India

basis. The number of uniformed personnel recruited/

inducted depends on the number of eligible applicants

(men and women) who are able to qualify in the written

test, Services Selection Board (SSB) interview, medical

examination and their relative position in the merit list.

No distinction is made on the basis of gender/religion/

caste/creed, either during recruitment or at any point of

time thereafter.


-----

10.10 _Method of Recruitment: The recruitment_

system of the Navy is well streamlined, transparent,

expeditious and candidate friendly. There are two

modes of induction in the IN, viz. UPSC Entry and Non
UPSC Entry:

(a) _UPSC Entry: The UPSC holds an examination,_

twice a year, for entry into the National Defence

Academy (NDA) and Indian Naval Academy

(INA) as Permanent Commission (PC) entries.

Candidates are eligible to compete on completion

of the 10+2 (PCM) Examination or while in the 12[th]

standard. Thereafter, candidates who qualify the

written exam are sent to the Services Selection

Boards located at Bengaluru and Bhopal. Results

of qualified candidates are forwarded to UPSC for

making the final merit. Medically fit candidates,

who are in the merit, are appointed by ADG(Rtg)/

IHQ of MoD (Navy), as applicable to the entry,

for appointment to NDA/Naval Academy. On

completion of the NDA/INA training, the Naval

Cadets are sent to training ships at Kochi for

Naval sea training. For the Graduate Special Entry

Scheme (GSES), the UPSC holds the Combined

Defence Services Examination (CDSE), twice a

year. Graduates with B Tech degree are eligible

to appear in the examination depending on the

score obtained by qualified candidates in written

exam, they are detailed for SSBs at Bengaluru

and Bhopal. Results of qualified candidates are

forwarded to UPSC for making the final merit.

Medically fit candidates who are in the merit are

selected by IHQ of MoD (Navy) for appointment

in CDSE Entry.

(b) _Non-UPSC Entry: The non-UPSC entries cater_

to both Permanent Commission (PC) and

Short Service Commission (SSC). In this case,

applications are invited and short-listed at IHQ

of MoD (Navy) based on percentage in the

qualifying exam. The short listed candidates are

then sent for SSB interviews. Thereafter, a merit


list, comprising qualified candidates is prepared

as per the availability of vacancies.

(c) _10+2 (Cadet Entry Scheme): The Scheme is a_

Permanent Commission entry for commission

in the Executive, Engineering and Electrical

branches of the Indian Navy. Under the scheme,

candidates with 10+2 (PCM) qualifications, after

selection through the Services Selection Board,

are sent to the Indian Naval Academy for the B

Tech Course. On successful completion of the

course they are granted Permanent Commission

in the Executive, Electrical and Engineering

branches of the Navy.

(d) _University Entry Scheme (UES): The UES_

was re-launched w.e.f. August 5 course as a

Short Service Commission Scheme. Seventh

and Eighth semester Engineering students

are eligible to apply for induction into the

Executive and Technical Branches of the Navy.

The scheme also caters for the induction of

Permanent Commission Executive officers

w.e.f. 2014. Naval selection teams from IHQ

of MoD (Navy) and Command Headquarters

visit AICTE approved engineering colleges,

across the country, to shortlist the candidates.

The shortlisted candidates, based on All India

Merit, are called for interview at the Services

Selection Board. The successful candidates,

thereafter, are put through the medical tests.

Final selection is based on all India merit on the

basis of marks obtained in the SSB interviews

and availability of vacancies.

(e) _Recruitment through NCC: BE/B Tech graduates_

possessing Naval Wing NCC ‘C’ certificate, are

given opportunity in the Navy for induction as

regular commissioned officers. These graduates

are exempted from appearing in the written

exam conducted by the UPSC and are selected

through the SSB interview only. They join the


-----

Indian Naval Academy for Naval Orientation

Course (NOC) along with the CDSE cadets.

10.11 _Women Officers: Women are being inducted_

into the Navy, as Short Service Commission (SSC)

officers in the Executive (Observer, Pilot in Maritime

Reconnaissance stream, Naval Armament Inspectorate

Cadre, Air Traffic Controllers, Law and Logistics),

Education Branch and the Naval Architecture of the

Engineering Branch. In 2019, approval has been accorded

for induction of women Short Service Commission (SSC)

officers in Musician and Sports Specialization.

10.12 _Permanent Commission to SSC Officers:_

The Government has introduced grant of Permanent

Commission prospectively to the Short Service

Commission officers, for both men and women, of

the Executive Branch (Law and Naval Armament

Inspectorate Cadre), Education Branch, Engineering

Branch (Naval Architecture).

10.13 _Opportunity for Widows of Deceased Service_

_Personnel: The widows of deceased service personnel_

who die in harness are granted extension of age relaxation

up to 35 years of age for officers’ entry schemes.

###### Recruitment of Sailors

10.14 _Method of Recruitment: Recruitment into the_

Navy is carried out on all India basis on State-Wise merit

of the ‘eligible recruitable male population’, as per the

number of vacancies available. The number of personnel

recruited from a particular State depends on the number

of eligible applicants who are able to qualify in the

written examination, physical fitness test and medical

examination and their relative position in the merit. There

is no quota of vacancies based on caste/creed or religion.

Advertisements in all leading National & Regional

newspapers and Employment News are published inviting

applications from the eligible volunteers. Publicity

material is also despatched to a large number of schools/

colleges and all Zila Sainik Boards.

###### 2


10.15 _Types of Entries: The various entries, for_

recruitment of sailors, are as follows:

(a) _Artificer Apprentices (AA) - 10+2 (PCM): 10+2/_

equivalent examination with 60% or more

marks in aggregate with Maths & Physics and

at least one of these subjects viz. Chemistry /

Biology/ Computer Science.

(b) _Senior Secondary Recruits (SSR) – 10+2 (PCM):_

Qualified in 10+2/ equivalent examination with

Math & Physics and at least one of these subjects

viz. Chemistry / Biology / Computer Science.

(c) _Matric Entry Recruits (MR): Matric Entry_

Recruits (MR) for recruitment of Chefs,

Stewards, Musicians and Sanitary Hygienists–

Matriculation.

(d) Direct Entry (Outstanding Sportsmen).

10.16 _NCC Certificate Holders: The naval NCC_

‘C’ certificate holders will be called to appear for

written examination irrespective of qualifying cut off

percentage for AA/SSR entry. The NCC candidates are

to be given additional marks for various NCC certificates

and participation in Republic Day camp/contingent

which are added to the marks obtained in the written

examination for preparation of merit list as given in

Table No. 10.2.

Table No. 10.2

|Type of NCC Certificate|Additional Marks Awarded|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
||For Certificates|For Republic Day Contingent/ Camp|Total Additional Marks Possible|
|C|6|4|10|
|B|4||8|
|A|2||6|


-----

###### Publicity for Recruitment

10.17 Measures have been taken to make the youth
of our country more aware of the opportunities in the
Navy, both for officers including women and sailors. The
means of publicity adopted to attract better talent are
as follows:

(a) _Press Advertisements: Advertisements are_
released through the Directorate of Advertising
and Visual Publicity (DAVP) in the Employment
News/ Rozgar Samachar and in newspapers
in different languages for various entries viz,
National Defence Academy, Combined Defence
Services Examination, 10+2 B Tech Cadet
Scheme, Short Service Commission (Technical
and Non-Technical), University Entry Scheme,
Law Graduates, NAI Officers, etc.

(b) _Advertisements in Journals/Magazines: These_
are normally brought out in the journals/
magazines of educational institutions.

(c) _Hoardings: Hoardings are planned to be erected_
at DAVP approved sites to attract youth of the
country towards joining the Navy.

(e) _Printed Publicity: Information folders, leaflets,_

brochures, data cards, posters and blowups, prepared through DAVP and private
professional agencies are widely distributed.

(f) _Exhibition and Fairs: Each year, at the Defence_
Pavilion, at the India International Trade
Fair, New Delhi, a stall is established where
information regarding recruitment in all the
three Armed Forces is provided to visitors. This
is also done in other organized fairs, which are
career oriented and meant for students.

(f) _Distribution of Publicity Material: Every year_
printed publicity material giving information


about Navy and various entries for recruitment
into the Navy is distributed to about 8000

schools all over the country.

(g) _Re-development_ _of_ _Naval_ _Recruitment_
_Website: The redeveloped recruitment website_
(www.joinindiannavy.gov.in) launched in
December 2016 has facilitated implementation
of recruitment management system and
applications for all officer and sailors entries
through online applications only.

###### Key Initiatives

10.18 _Indian Navy Entrance Test (INET): Indian_
Navy has successfully conducted computer-based
recruitment examination namely Indian Navy Entrance
Test (INET) for one of the three sailor entries into
the Navy viz Artificer Apprentice. The first such
examination was conducted successfully on February
25, 2018. A total of 51603 candidates had appeared for
the examination. This was also the largest examination
ever conducted in a single day by the Indian Navy. The
second cycle of INET was conducted in early August
2018 for three days and 1,22,825 candidates appeared
for the examination. This was spread across 165 centres
in 59 different cities. The same has now been extended
to all sailors’ entries. The test was successfully
conducted from February 23 to 28, 2019. Efforts are in
hand to extend the scope for conduct of INET for nonUPSC Graduate Officer entries.

10.19 _MoU with CSC: As a part of Digital India_

initiative, GoI has set up Common Services Centres (CSC)

in all Panchayats across the country. The CSCs across the

country are providing high quality and cost effective

video, voice and data services. These also offer web

enabled e-governance services, including submission

of application forms, in the rural areas. Indian Navy has

concluded an MoU with CSC, through which the Navy

has extended its recruitment to reach all corners of the

country through CSCs. Applicants can take the assistance

###### 3


-----

of any CSC to fill up and submit their online applications

against payment of a nominal service fee. This facility is

very beneficial for applicants in rural areas as also those

without access to computers or internet.

###### Training

10.20 _Ab-Initio Training for Officers: The Indian Naval_

Academy (INA) located at Ezhimala, approximately 280

kilometres North of Kochi, in Kerala, was inaugurated

by the then Prime Minister of India on January 8, 2009.

Spread over 2452 acres of coastal upland, INA has world

class facilities in terms of infrastructure for both academic

pursuits and outdoor activities, including state-of-the
art laboratories, workshops, swimming pool and play

fields. The Academy has modern residential facilities,

an excellent Mess and five well laid-out squadrons, each

with its own comprehensive facilities. The administrative

support to INA is provided by the Base depot ship, INS

Zamorin, which was commissioned in April 5. Built at

a cost of over 721.88 crore, the Academy is designed

to accommodate and train approximately 750 cadets.

The capacity of INA is being enhanced to 1200 cadets in

Phase II, which is likely to be completed by 2020.

10.21 _Indian Naval Academy Course (INAC): The first_

B Tech Course commenced at INA on June 22, 2009.

This was a significant step in the evolution of the Navy

to meet the technical challenges of the 21[st] Century. The

induction of cadets to the Academy is through UPSC

examinations as well as directly by IHQ MoD(Navy)/

DMPR based on the 10+2 merit of candidates. B Tech

curriculum has been drawn up by the Navy, in conjunction

with Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) and the All India

Council for Technical Education (AICTE). The Academic

Curriculum is accredited by AICTE. In addition to

technical training, the Academy provides its cadets with

a healthy mix of humanities and Naval History. This is in

keeping with the Navy’s goal of providing officers with

high-end technical expertise without sacrificing the

proven advantage of liberal education. The curriculum

not only provides adequate academic grounding for


award of a B Tech degree but also caters to the overall

transition of an Officer Cadet to a fine Service Officer

who is always ready to defend his country.

10.22 _B Tech Streams: B Tech training is conducted_

in Applied Electronics and Communication (AEC) for ‘X’

officers, Electronics and Communication Engineering

(ECE) for ‘L’ officers and Mechanical Engineering (ME)

for ‘E’ and ‘NA’ officers. Accordingly, B Tech (AEC), B

Tech (ECE) and B Tech (ME) degrees are awarded by JNU

on completion of the B Tech course. On completion of a

common curriculum in the first three semesters, cadets

are separated into different streams for the remaining

five semesters. In order to facilitate integration of cadets

passing out of NDA, B Tech course for Naval cadets has

been started at NDA from July 2016. The Naval cadets

at NDA shall join INA after completing six semesters of

B Tech (AEC) at NDA. The last two semesters for B Tech

for these cadets shall be conducted at INA.

10.23 _Other Courses: In addition to the flagship_
INAC course, the INA conducts Naval Orientation
Course (NOC), NOC (Ext) and Short Naval Orientation
Course (SNOC) which includes trainees from IN & ICG
including women officers. Commencing December
2015 officer cadets from friendly countries are also
being trained at INA.

###### Glimpses of Training Activities at INA

10.24 _Delegation Visits to INA: Various delegations_

from FFCs have visited INA over the year. During the

visit, the delegations interacted with staff and trainees

and were acquainted with the infrastructure, academic

facilities and training processes at INA. The aim of the

visit was to reinforce the bridges of friendship between

the navies and exchange best practices.

###### Foreign Training

10.25 The Indian Navy, in consonance with the
government’s policy of engaging friendly nations,


-----

has been in the forefront of building ‘Bridges of
Friendship’ with friendly navies. Training is one of the
most important facets of this engagement. Indian
naval personnel are regularly deputed to avail training
courses abroad. The training interactions and availing
of courses abroad have been a regular feature by
the IN especially with countries like Bangladesh,
Singapore, Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia, Philippines,
Sri Lanka, USA, UK, Japan, Germany, Australia, France
and other FFCs.

10.26 The training courses abroad give an opportunity

to the IN personnel to interact with other naval

professionals from across the world who also attend

these courses. In addition, participation in courses in

advanced countries also enables IN personnel to imbibe

established best practices of these navies and expose

our personnel to niche technologies/ latest procedures

with advanced navies. On the other hand, participation

in courses in IOR countries enables fostering of better

relations between personnel and gives an insight into

the thought process and operating philosophy of their

Armed Forces and also increases Navy’s understanding

of the country.

10.27 _Training of Foreign Naval Personnel in India:_

The Indian Navy has been providing training to foreign

personnel for more than four decades, during which it

has trained more than 15,000 foreign personnel from

over 41 Friendly Foreign Countries. The Navy aims to

share and deliver the finest training in order to build

capacity and everlasting relationships with Friendly

Foreign Countries (FFCs). At any given time, there are

between 500-600 international trainees in IN training

establishments.

10.28 Realising this necessity, the Ministry of External

Affairs provides assistance for training of naval personnel

from a large number of countries under the Indian

Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) Scheme I

and II. Under this scheme, the airfare, tuition, boarding

and lodging are fully funded by the Government of India


(except in the case of ITEC II Scheme wherein the parent

country bears the cost of airfare). Further, financial aid

in the form of subsistence allowance is also provided

to meet the living expenses for the entire duration of

the course. In cases where ITEC funding is unavailable,

training is availed under the Self Financing Scheme

(SFS) wherein the entire cost of training is borne by the

trainees’ own government.

10.29 Training is planned on a yearly basis from July 1

to June 30 of the next year and promulgated in the form

of an Annual Training Programme in order to synchronise

the organisational process. In most cases, international

students are accommodated with IN trainees. Indian

Navy also facilitates in case any trainee wishes to stay

under his own arrangements.

10.30 The courses are structured for effective and

efficient utilisation of training infrastructure and

resources. The last few years have witnessed a steady

increase in IN’s commitment to build capacity through

training cooperation. ‘Training Diplomacy’, thus, has

become the corner stone of our foreign cooperation

initiatives. The number of training slots allocated to

foreign trainees since 2009 is as tabulated below:

|Ser|Year|No of Training Slots Allocated|
|---|---|---|
|(a)|2009-10|699|
|(b)|2010-11|792|
|(c)|2011-12|853|
|(d)|2012-13|653|
|(e)|2013-14|917|
|(f)|2014-15|858|
|(g)|2015-16|857|
|(h)|2016-17|1013|
|(j)|2017-18|957|
|(k)|2018-19|1022|


-----

10.31 _Deputation of Indian Navy Mobile Training_

_Teams (MTT): To address the growing training load of_

international training, one of the important measure

being undertaken is the conduct of customised training

courses overseas to meet country-specific requirements.

The customised training courses are undertaken by

specially constituted Mobile Training Teams. So far, IN

has deputed MTTs to Sri Lanka, Oman, Myanmar, Kenya,

Vietnam, Mauritius, Bangladesh and Nigeria. Requests

from certain other FFCs are under consideration. This

endeavour will not only reduce the burden on our own

training infrastructure but also effectively increase

our training footprint across the world. The courses

conducted abroad in 2018 are highlighted below:

(a) _Diving Refresher Course: Personnel from Diving_

School were deputed for training to Mauritius

and Maldives from April 25 to May 15, 2018 and

October 9 to November 3, 2018 respectively.

(b) _Training of MNDF and Mauritian Special Forces:_

Training of MNDF and Mauritian Special Forces

was carried out by MTT.

(c) _Short Term Training Team (STTT) – Oman: A_

STTT comprising one officer and three sailors

from Signal School was deputed to Oman from

July 23 to September 14, 2018 for training Omani

personnel in Communication and Electronic

Warfare. Another STTT comprising one officer

and two sailors from Valsura undertook classes

on Radar Theory for three weeks and a third

STTT of two sailors undertook classes on aerial

photography for two weeks.

(d) _Mobile Training Team – Myanmar: A Mobile_

Training Team, comprising seven officers and

two sailors, was deputed to Myanmar for three

months. Training was imparted on shipyard

management, logistics, Engineering subjects

and English language. In all, about 60 officers

and sailors were trained.

###### 6


###### IN Mobile Training Team

10.32 _Submarine Training for International Students:_

INS Satavahana is carrying out ab-initio submarine

training for a large number of friendly navies of the

region. Short familiarisation courses for Indonesia,

Myanmar, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka and full-fledged

basic submarine course for South Africa and Vietnam

have been undertaken.

###### Training - National Cadet Corps (NCC)

10.33 _Initiatives in Coastal States:_ IHQ MoD (N) has

directed Commands to liaise with NCC authorities

and encourage conduct of NCC camps onboard while

alongside in harbour or embark NCC cadets for short

duration sea sorties on IN ships. In addition to the

above, IHQ MoD(N) had also requested Commands to

conduct periodic interactions with Regional NCC HQs to

deliberate on NCC training related issues.

10.34 _NCC Attachments with IN: Training for the_

Naval NCC has been a priority area for the IN, and the

conduct of camps is being facilitated on regular basis,

which include sailing onboard ships, thereby giving

valuable exposure to the cadets on life at Sea. There

are sea attachments and training camps conducted at

various Commands of the Indian Navy each year. These

camps are for a duration of twelve days each, with one

day of sailing onboard warships. There is a participation

of approximately 240-360 NCC cadets in these camps.

Further, as a culmination of the professional training of

Naval NCC cadets, a ‘Nau Sainik’ camp is scheduled each

year, wherein approximately 590 cadets participate.

This camp also includes sailing onboard warships at sea.

###### All India Nau Sainik Camp

_Instructions for NCC Cadets_

10.35 _MoU with IITs/ Universities and Colleges: Various_

MoUs have been signed with IITs and other educational


-----

institutes of repute for various professional courses to

enhance training standards of naval personnel.

10.36 _Skill Certification Courses: Skill Certification_

courses are being undertaken by Hamla, Valsura, Shivaji,

Dronacharya, Anti Submarine Warfare (ASW) School,

Navigation and Direction (ND) School & Signal School

under Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojna and retiring

sailors are being provided certificates by National Skill

Development Council. Other schools of IN have also

been added for Skill Certification Courses namely School

for Naval Airmen (SFNA), Naval Provost and Regulating

School (NPRS) and School of Naval Oceanology and

Metrology (SNOM).

###### INDIAN AIR FORCE (IAF)

_Recruitment of Officers_

10. 37 _Types of Entries: There are two modes of_

induction in the Indian Air Force as Commissioned

Officers:

(i) _UPSC Entry: This entry is only applicable for_

candidates who want to join the Flying Branch

of the Air Force as Permanent Commissioned

officers. Written exams are held by UPSC twice

in a year.

(a) _NDA Entry: This entry is for candidates_

on completion of 10+2 examination or

while appearing for their 12[th] standard.

(b) _CDSE Entry: This entry is for graduates_

or for those in final year of graduation.

(ii) _Non-UPSC Entry: Non - UPSC entries cater for_

both Short Service Commission and Permanent

Commission in various branches of the Air Force

that is Flying, Ground Duty (Technical Branch)

and Ground Duty (Non-Technical Branches).


(a) _AFCAT Entry: Air Force Common_

Admission Test (AFCAT) is a screening

test for graduates and is a common

entry for all the branches of the IAF

except Permanent Commission in

Flying Branch and Meteorology Branch.

The Online AFCAT is being conducted

twice a year in the month of February

& August. The Online AFCAT is now

being conducted in association with

Centre for Development of Advance

Computing (C-DAC), a Government

agency. The exam was held on February

25, 2018 at 536 centres spread over 98

cities across India. A total of 94,513

candidates appeared for the AFCAT

cycle 01/2018. The second Online

AFCAT for selection of officers was

conducted on August 18 & 19, 2018 at

342 exam centres in 91 cities across the

country. A total of 96,253 appeared in

AFCAT which also included Engineering

Knowledge Test (EKT) for candidates

opting to join the technical branches

of IAF. A Supplementary AFCAT exam

was conducted for candidates affected

by the Kerala Floods on September 22

& 23, 2018 at 15 exam centres located in

four cities across Kerala.

(b) Selection process of IAF has

continuously evolved. This online

system developed in collaboration

with C-DAC has not only enhanced

the reach and access of remote areas

of the country but has taken a giant

leap towards strengthening the “Digital

India” vision of Government of India.

(c) _Meteorology Entry: This entry is for_

post graduates who want to join the

Meteorology branch of the Air Force.


-----

There is no written examination held

for this entry.

(d) _NCC Special Entry: University graduates_

possessing NCC ‘C’ Certificate in Air

Wing are eligible to apply for this entry.

The process of selection is the same

except that these candidates do not

have to appear for a written exam.

(e) _SEC Entry: This is an entry for the_

airmen who are already serving in the

Indian Air Force.

10. 38 _Publicity Efforts_

(a) _Maintenance of Career Website: IAF maintains_

a career website www.careerindianairforce.

cdac.in, which contains all the induction and

selection related information. The website is

used for online registration and conduct of

online examination. Updates are fed on the

website regarding various stages of selection

process i.e. from releasing of advertisement to

final merit list.

(b) _Print Advertisement: Advertisement for all the_

entries is released in Employment News, various

magazines and also as newspaper advertisement

in vernacular language on pan India basis.

(c) _Production of TV Spots: Three new high quality_

one minute TV advertisements have been

produced and launched to create impact on the

target audience. One additional TV Spot ‘Just

a Girl’ portraying socio-economic development

of India and the opportunities provided for

women has been produced and has been

widely appreciated.

(d) _Hoardings: As part of publicity strategy,_

campaigning through outdoor media is also

###### 8


explored. Over a period of time Air Force

has installed as many as 226 IAF Publicity

hoardings. These hoardings are maintained on

regular basis towards achieving the target of

viewership and to gain maximum benefits.

(e) _Interactive Voice Response System (IVRS):_

During the process of induction, a large number

of voice calls on induction queries of repeated

nature are resolved through IVRS connected

through toll free number 1800-11-2448.

(f) _Motivational Talks: Thrust on motivational_

lectures and one to one interaction which is the

most effective method of publicity has been

enhanced for providing guidance to students

of premier and rural educational institutes, NCC

cadets and Sainik Schools. Specific institutions

in geographically displaced regions have been

identified and motivational talks have been

conducted.

(g) _Exhibitions and Fairs: Air Force participates_

in various exhibitions and fairs. Publicity stalls

were set up at various forums such as ‘Youth

Festivals’, ‘Know your Forces’, ‘North East

Calling Event’, ‘Fest ember at NIT Trichy’ etc.

(h) _Induction Publicity Exhibition Vehicle (IPEV):_

IPEV was launched on October 8, 2015 as a

pilot project and has successfully completed

Seven road drives in North, East, Central and

Southern parts of country. By mid May, 2019 the

drive has covered 33,280 km, 535 institutes and

interacted one to one with 1,53,163 students.

10. 39 _Recruitment of Airmen_

(a) As part of modernization of the IAF, new units

are being formed to accommodate the latest

acquisitions. Resorting to proactive measures,

induction has been enhanced to 6850 per


-----

year. Efforts are at hand to further enhance the

induction which shall not only help to overcome

the existing deficiencies but also to effectively

maintain the latest state of art aircrafts and

weapon systems.

(b) Presently, 14 Airmen Selection Centres are

geographically spread out and provide

reasonable access to candidates desirous of

joining IAF as airmen. Recruitment in Indian

Air Force in airmen cadre is on All India Merit

Basis through Scheduled Selection Tests which

is conducted twice in a year. It is open to all

eligible citizens of the country without any

discrimination to caste, creed, religion, region

or community. In addition to Scheduled Test,

Recruitment Rallies are conducted in remote/

low response/border/ insurgency affected/

naxal affected/tribal areas or hilly districts

and island territories of the country to provide

opportunities to youth from these regions to

join national main stream.

(c) Provisional Select Lists (PSLs) of the successful

candidates is published twice a year i.e. April 30

and October 31 each year. Taking forward the Digital

India Initiative of the Government of India, the

first ever Scheduled Test for Airmen Recruitment

(STAR) was conducted successfully through

computer based online tests in collaboration with

Centre for Development of Advanced Computing

(CDAC) Pune. A total of 4,09,169 candidates had

registered for the first online STAR examination

for Airmen. The second Scheduled test for airmen

recruitment (STAR-02/2018) was conducted at

524 Centres in 97 cities across the country from

September 13 to 16, 2018. A total of 5,20,604

candidates had registered for the online STAR

examination. A total of 4,48,989 candidates had

appeared in the online written test. Result of

online written test has been uploaded on C-DAC

website on October 9, 2018.


10. 40 _Training_

(a) _Air Force Academy (AFA), Dundigal: The_

Air Force Academy undertakes the tasks of

training of pilots and ground duty officers.

Since 1971 the Academy has been meeting the

expanding training needs of the IAF and also

the Indian Army, Navy and Indian coast Guard.

A number of officers and cadets from friendly

foreign countries also undertake training at the

Academy.

(b) _Foreign Training: Indian Air Force provides_

training courses to personnel of Friendly Foreign

Countries (FFCs) under various schemes of

Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) / Ministry

of Defence (MoD). These vacancies have been

considerably enhanced in the last three years.

The increase in number of vacancies granted to

trainees from Friendly Foreign Countries (FFCs)

has a positive impact through increased defence

cooperation. IAF has established training teams

in various Friendly Foreign Countries (FFCs) to

impart Flying Training. IAF officers are also being

nominated to attend courses in various FFCs.

(c) _Award of B Tech for Air Wing Cadets at NDA: All_

Air Force NDA cadets would be now undergoing

B Tech curriculum in 3 + 1 year format. After

requisite approval by All India Council for

Technical Education (AICTE), the first batch of

B Tech air wing cadets has commenced training

at NDA from January 2017 and will pass out of

NDA in December 2019. Six semesters of the B

Tech programme would be conducted at NDA

and last two semesters would be conducted

at Flying Training Establishments (FTEs). The

cadets would be awarded a B Tech degree in

Applied Electronics and Communications (AEC)

by JNU. A proposal to introduce Mechanical

Engineering and Electrical Engineering courses

is also being studied.

###### 9


-----

(d) _e-Training: In line with GoI’s Digital India_

initiative, IAF has taken a lead to bring about

a paradigm change in the present training

methodology for ab-initio air warriors.

Towards this, a pilot e-training project was

introduced for 400 ab-initio trainees of Elect

fit trade at Electrical and Instrumentation

Training Institute (E & ITI) at AF Stn Jalahalli,

Bengaluru. Trainees and instructors were

provided with ‘tablets’, integrated through

a wireless network. Users are able to refer to

training material loaded into a central server

at their own place at their own time within

the Wi-Fi coverage area of the unit. The Pilot

Project (Phase I) to implement e-training has

proven to be very successful and is planned to

be implemented at all TEs/TIs.

(e) _Mechanical Transport (MT) Simulator: MT_

simulators have been successfully installed

and commissioned at MTTI for conduct of ab
initio training of Auto Tech tradesmen. A total

of five simulators in the configuration of one

instructor and two pupil stations each has been

installed. The simulators have a six degree

freedom of movement and give a real feel of

motion. Training on simulators will increase the

efficiency of training with added safety and

savings of cost, time and effort.

(f) _Mapping of Air Force Qualifications in terms_

_of National Skill Qualification Levels: IAF_

qualifications have been granted equivalence

with National Skills Qualification Framework

(NSQF) levels and have been uploaded in

National Qualifications Register (NQR) by

National Skill Development Agency (NSDA).

This will motivate personnel to upgrade their

skills thereby boosting professionalism in

IAF and helping the air warriors in gaining

employment after retirement.

###### 0


(g) _Accreditation of GEB and REBs with NABET:_

Directorate of Education, Ground crew

Examining Board (GEB) and Reginal Examining

Boards (REBs) have been accredited as per

international standard, ISO/IEC 17024:2012 by

National Accreditation Board for Education

and Training (NABET), a constituent board of

Quality Council of India (QCI). Accreditation

has established IAF as a professional force

having assessment standards conforming to

international standards enhancing image of IAF

as a highly professional force.

###### INDIAN COAST GUARD (ICG)

10.41 _Recruitment of Officers: The Officers are_

recruited into Coast Guard bi-annually. The vacancies for

Assistant Commandant in Coast Guard are advertised

in Employment News and leading Newspapers in

the month of December/January and June/ July. Five

years relaxation of age for SC/ST and 3 years for OBC

is admissible for recruitment. The Officers are recruited

through Coast Guard Selection Board (CGSB) in the

following streams:

(a) _General Duty:_ Male/ Female candidates

between the age group of 21 - 25 years having

Bachelor’s Degree of a recognized University

with Mathematics and Physics as subject up to

Intermediate or 12[th] standard of 10+2+3 scheme

of education or equivalent are eligible to apply

for officers as General Duty stream.

(b) _General Duty (Pilot/ Navigator): Male/ Female_

candidates between the age group of 21-25

years having Bachelor’s Degree of a recognized

University with Mathematics and Physics as

subjects up to Intermediate or 12[th] standard of

10+2+3 scheme of education or equivalent are

eligible to apply for officers as General Duty

(Pilot / Navigator) stream.


-----

(c) _General Duty (Commercial Pilot License Short_
_Service Entry): Male/ Female candidates_
between age group of 19-25 years having 12[th]
Class or equivalent passed and in possession
current Commercial Pilot License (CPL) issued/
validated by Director General Civil Aviation
on the date of submission of application are
eligible to apply for Officers in CPL Short
Service Entry.

(d) _General Duty (Short Service Appointment_

_Scheme) for Women: Women candidates_

between the age group of 21 - 25 years having

Bachelor’s Degree of a recognized University

with Mathematics and Physics as subjects up to

Intermediate or 12[th] standard of 10+2+3 scheme

of education or equivalent are eligible to apply

for officers as General Duty (Short Service

Appointment Scheme) stream.

(e) _Technical Branch: Male candidates between_

age group of 21-25 years with degree in

Engineering (Naval architecture/ Mechanical/

Marine/Automotive/ Mechtronics/ Industrial &

Production/ Metallurgy/ Design/ Aeronautical/

Aerospace/ Electrical/ Electronics/

Telecommunication/ Instrumentation/

Instrumentation and control/ Electronic &

Communication/ Power Engineering/ Power

Electronics) or equivalent qualification are

eligible to apply for officers in Technical stream.

(f) _Law Branch: Male/Female candidates between_

the age group of 21-30 years having Degree

in Law are eligible to apply for Officer in Law

stream. However, the age is relaxable up to

five years in case of personnel serving in the

Coast Guard Organisation or equivalent rank

in Army or Navy or Air Force and for the

candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes

or Scheduled Tribes, three years for the Other

Backward Classes.


10.42 _Induction of Sub-ordinate Officers as officer:_

Suitable serving Subordinate Officers of the Coast

Guard of the rank of Pradhan Adhikari or Uttam Adhikari

with one year experience and Adhikari with two years

experience are eligible for induction as Officers,

subject to qualifying the Departmental Examination as

prescribed by the Director General Coast Guard.

10.43 _Recruitment of Personnel Below Officers_

_Rank (PBORs): The PBORs are recruited into Coast_

Guard bi-annually. The vacancies for PBORs in Coast

Guard are advertised in Employment News and leading

Newspapers in the month of December/January and

June/July. Five years relaxation of age for SC/ST and 3

years for OBC is admissible for recruitment. The PBORs

are recruited in the following main streams:

(a) _Yantrik:_ Male candidates having passed

matriculation with three years diploma in

Mechanical/ Electrical/Electronic Engineering

and between the age group of 18 - 22 years are

eligible to apply as Yantrik.

(b) _Navik (General Duty): Male candidates having_

passed 12[th] class with Mathematics and Physics

and between age group of 18 - 22 years are

eligible to apply as Navik (General Duty).

(c) _Navik (Domestic Branch): Male candidates_

having passed Matric and between age group

of 18 - 22 years are eligible to apply as Navik

(Domestic Branch)

(d) _Enrolled Followers: Male candidates having_

passed Matric or Industrial Training Institute or

equivalent between age group of 18-25 years

are eligible to apply as Enrolled Followers.

(e) _No interview for ‘B’ & ‘C’ posts: In accordance with_

GoI directives, the interviews for all Group ‘B’ and

‘C’ posts has been discontinued and only skill test

is being conducted for suitability for these posts.


-----

###### OTHER ORGANISATIONS

 Sainik Schools

10.44 The Sainik Schools are established as a joint

venture of the Central and State Governments and are

under the overall governance of Sainik Schools Society,

Ministry of Defence. At present, there are 28 Sainik

Schools located in various parts of the country. There

is a growing demand from many States to open new

Sainik Schools. The states of Andhra Pradesh, Haryana,

Bihar and Karnataka have two Sainik Schools each.

The Memorandum of Agreement has been signed

with respective State Government to set up three new

Sainik Schools in Uttar Pradesh at Mainpuri, Amethi

and Jhansi, one in Rajasthan at Alwar, one each in

Uttarakhand (Rudraprayag), Maharashtra (Chandrapur),

Odisha (Sambalpur) and Telangala (Warangal). Two new

Sainik Schools i.e. Sainik School Jhunjhunu, Rajasthan

and Sainik School East Siang, Arunachal Pradesh

commenced in 2018.

10.45 The objectives of Sainik Schools include

bringing quality Public School education within the

reach of common man, all round development of a

child’s personality in order to prepare him for entry

into National Defence Academy and to remove regional

imbalance in the officers cadre of the Armed Forces.

Approximately one fourth of cadets in each batch of

National Defence Academy is from Sainik Schools. For

the 140 NDA/INA Course which commenced in July

2018 with course strength of 348, 99 Cadets are from

Sainik Schools which is about 28.45% of NDA course

strength.

10.46 Sainik Schools admit boys into classes VI and

IX. Their age should be 10-12 years for classes VI and 13
15 years for class IX as on March 31 of the year in which

admission is sought. Admissions are made strictly as

per the order of merit on the basis of an All India Sainik

School Entrance Examination held in January each year.

OMR based entrance exam commenced w.e.f. 2017-18.

###### 2


10.47 The Sainik Schools Society has taken a number

of measures to achieve academic excellence which has

also resulted in achieving record higher Board and NDA

results. Towards this end every school is conducting

specialised Training/Workshops for the cadets as well

as for the staff to improve their performance.

###### Rashtriya Military Schools (RMS)

10.48 Rashtriya Military Schools are premier and
reputed residential public schools of the country run by
the Ministry of Defence, Government of India under the
aegis of Directorate General of Military Training. These
Schools are located Chail in Himachal Pradesh, Ajmer
and Dholpur in Rajasthan, Belgaum and Bangalore in
Karnataka. These schools are affiliated to CBSE and
the aim of schools is “to impart quality education and
prepare the cadets to join Defence Services through
NDA”.

10.49 Rashtriya Military Schools admit boys through

a Common Entrance Test (CET) and interview. The

CET written examination for Class VI & IX is fully

automated through Optical mark Reader (OMR) based.

The candidates are tested in four subjects i.e. English,

Intelligence Test, Mathematics General Knowledge

and Interview. 70% of the seats is reserved for the

wards of Junior Commissioned Officers (JCOs), Other

Ranks (ORs) of Army and their equivalent in Navy &

Air Force and rest 30% seats is reserved for wards of

Commissioned Officers and civilians. 15% and 7½% of

the seat in each category are reserved for SC and ST

boys respectively. 50 seats (not more than 15 in either

of the school) are separately earmarked for the wards of

person who ‘Killed in Action’ (KIA) category during war

or peace.

###### National Defence Academy (NDA)

10.50 NDA is a premier Tri-Service institution which

trains cadets of all three Services before inducting

them into their respective pre commissioning training


-----

academies. Keeping in mind the shortage of officers in

the Indian Armed Forces and the consequent urgency

for making up the deficiency, the intake capacity of NDA

was recently enhanced from 1800 cadets to 1920 cadets

with the sanction for raising an additional Squadron

at NDA i.e. 16[th] Squadron. The construction work for

building of 16[th] Squadron commenced in 2015 and has

been occupied during Spring Term 2019 with arrival of

141 Course. A total of 31 Cadets from Friendly Foreign

Countries passed out from NDA in 2018 totalling to 843

foreign cadets by May 2019. Three NDA cadets visited

Nanjing China and three Cadets visited Brazilian Military

Academy, RIO in 2018. Cadets from NDA Japan visited

NDA Khadakwasla under Cadet Exchange Programme

with NDA Japan in 2018-19. NDA cadets have displayed

their acumen in various competition in sports, cultural

and academic fronts.

###### Military Institute of Technology (MILIT)

10.51 MILIT is a Tri-Services Training establishment
in 1952 which conducts courses for Indian and
International Military Officers and DRDO Scientists.
The flagship courses conducted at MILIT are TSOC
(Army, Air Force and Navy), TSOC (Air Force), TSOC
(Navy) and NTSC alongwith 18 other courses of varying
durations which primarily deal to military technology.
The institute is located at Girinagar Complex, Pune. It
also provides Adm & Faculty support to DIAT in M-Tech
courses/other courses at DIAT(DU). MILIT has alumni
strength of over 20,000 officers of three Services,
DRDO, DGQA and Defence PSU. The institute has
affiliation with Savitri Phule, Pune University for award
of M.Sc (Mil Tech) degrees to Officers undergoing
DSTSC (Army, Air Force and Navy). The Valedictory
Function of TSOC Courses (Army, Navy & Air Force)
were held on May 18, 2018. 146 officers of the Indian
Armed Forces and 05 officers of a friendly foreign
country (Sri Lanka) passed out upon successful
completion of the Technical Staff Officers Course
(TSOC) and Naval Technical Staff Course (NTSC) from
the portals of the Military Institute of Technology


(MILIT). The institute has affiliation with Savitri Phule,

Pune University for award of M.Sc degrees to Officers

undergoing TSOC and NTSC. The institute has several

labs and facilities for imparting technical education

including functional arms, Armoured fighting vehicles,

aircraft statue models.

###### Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC)

10.52 Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC) was

established in 1922 with the aim to prepare selected

boys to join National Defence Academy (NDA) and

Naval Academy (NAVAC). 25 cadets are admitted in

each term twice a year (January and July) on the basis

of All India Entrance Examination. Selection of boys for

RIMC is through a written examination cum viva voce

conducted through the State Governments. Seats for

respective States are reserved based on population. The

College admits boys in Class VIII.

###### Indian Military Academy (IMA), Dehradun

10.53 Founded in 1932, Indian Military Academy,

Dehradun aims at the fullest development of

intellectual, moral and physical qualities of persons

joining the Army as officers. The various modes of

entry into IMA are:

(a) On graduation from NDA.

(b) On graduation from Army Cadet College, which

is a Wing of the IMA itself.

(c) Direct Entry graduate cadets, who qualify the

Union Public Service Commission Exam and get

through the Service Selection Board.

(d) For Technical Graduate’s Course.(TGC)

10.54 The IMA also imparts training to Gentlemen

Cadets from friendly countries.

###### 3


-----

###### Officers Training Academy (OTA), Chennai

10.55 Established in 1963, the Officers Training School

(OTS) was re-designated as Officers Training Academy

(OTA) from January 1, 1988 on completion of 25 years

of its existence. Its main task, before 1965 was to train

Gentlemen Cadets for grant of Emergency Commission.

From 1965 onwards, the Academy trains cadets for

Short Service Commission.

10.56 With the entry of women officers in the Army

since September, 1992, around 75-80 lady officers now

get commissioned from OTA every year in Army Service

Corps, Judge Advocate General’s Department, Corps of

Engineers, Signals and Electrical, Army Education Corps

and Mechanical Engineers.

10.57 OTA imparts pre-commission training for the

following:

(a) Short Service Commission GCs/LCs (Non

Technical) for Graduates.

(b) Short Service Commission GCs/LCs (Technical)

for Graduates.

(c) Judge Advocate General (JAG) Course for GCs/LCs.

###### Officers Training Academy (OTA), Gaya

10.58 The Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) has

approved setting up of second Officers Training Academy

(OTA) at Gaya, Bihar in December, 2009. Training at

this academy commenced in July 2011. At present 222

cadets are undergoing training at OTA, Gaya. At present

Academy is imparting training to 10+2 Technical Entry

Scheme (TES) and Special Commissioned Officers

Courses (SCO).

###### Army War College, Mhow

10.59 The Army War College, Mhow is the premier

Indian Army institution for all arms training at tactical


and operational levels in an inter services environment

and is the Alma Mater to all officers of the Indian

Army. The college imparts professional military

knowledge in the art of warfare, with special emphasis

on jointmanship and revolution in military affairs, in

an environment conducive to learning. The Army War

College, also imparts leadership training for all officers

of the Indian Army and performs the important function

of encouraging research and evolution of new concepts

and doctrines in the fields of tactics and logistics.

Officers from friendly foreign countries undergoing

various courses alongside Indian Army officers at the

Army War College are oriented with the global and

regional strategic perspective of India and the nuances

of higher defence management.

###### Junior Leaders Wing (JLW), Belgaum

10.60 The Junior Leaders Wing at Belgaum is training

junior Officers, JCOs and NCOs in Sub-Unit Level Tactical

and special Mission Techniques to enable them to carry

out assigned operational mission in varied terrain

under severe stress and strain and be able to command

and administer their Sub-Units effectively in war and

peace. It trains officers and NCOs of Army, Para Military

Forces, Central Police Organisation and friendly foreign

countries in commando type of operations and makes

them capable of either forming part of special mission

groups or leading independent mission in all types of

terrain and operational environment.

###### Junior Leaders Academy (JLA), Bareilly

10.61 JLA, Bareilly, an all arms institute is imparting

leadership and management training to the Junior

Leaders (JCOs and Sr NCOs) of the Indian Army, Para

Military Forces and Friendly Foreign Countries with

a view to facilitating in actualising their potential

for present as well as future roles and conflicts. The

institution is imparting training to 8208 students every

year.


-----

###### High Altitude Warfare School (HAWS), Gulmarg

10.62 The aim of the school is to train selected
personnel in all aspects of high altitude mountain
warfare (MW) and develop techniques for fighting in
such terrains. HAWS conducts two series of courses
viz, MW and Winter Warfare (WW) at Sonamarg and
Gulmarg respectively for officers, JCOs and NCOs.
The training periods broadly run from January to
April (WW series) and May to October (MW series).
Personnel from the school have scaled some to the
highest peaks in the world including Mount Everest,
Mount Kanchenjunga and Mount McKinley in the
USA.

###### Counter Insurgency & Jungle Warfare School (CIJW), Veirangte

10.63 The CIJWS conducts low intensity conflict
operation (LICO) course to train officers, JCOs / NCOs
of Indian Army, Indian Navy, Indian Air Force, central
armed police force, central police organisations and from
friendly foreign countries, for operating successfully in
a dynamic counter insurgency /counter terrorism (CI /
CT) environment. It also imparts pre induction training
for units prior to their induction to insurgency areas
in the North East. It is the nodal agency for evaluation
of new concepts and doctrines in the field of CI / CT
operations.

###### Counter Insurgency Pre Induction Training Battle Schools

10.64 Since the capacity of CIJW school was limited

and on account of peculiar operational situation and

administrative problems of movement of Units, it was

considered necessary to impart training to units at

places closer to their areas of operation. Therefore,

Corps Battle schools from within the resources of the

Army have been established at Kheru, Sarol and Bhalra

for units moving into Northern Command. Besides


training for counter insurgency, these schools especially

in Northern Commands are training units for their role

along the Line of Control (LOC) and in high altitude

areas.

###### Infantry School, Mhow

10.65 The Infantry School is the largest and oldest

military training institution of the Indian Army and

conducts Young Officers, Platoon Weapon, Mortar, Anti

Tank & Guided Missile, Medium Machine Gun & Automatic

Grenade Launcher, Section Commanders, Automatic

Data Processing, Sniper and Battalion Support Weapon

Courses. In addition, it is also conducting Infantry Clerks

Training at Infantry Clerk Training Wing. The institution

is not only training officers, JCOs and ORs of Infantry

but also of other arms and services including personnel

from friendly foreign countries, para military forces and

civil armed police forces.

###### College of Materials Management

10.66 The college owes its lineage to Indian

Army Ordnance Corps (IAOC) School of Instruction

established at Kirkee in October, 1925. The School

was later re-designated as IAOC Training Centre in

February, 1939 and shifted to its present location at

Jabalpur. In January, 1950, the IAOC School became the

Army Ordnance Corps (AOC) School. The AOC School

was renamed as College of Materials Management

(CMM) and affiliated to the University of Jabalpur

(Rani Durgavati Vishwa Vidyalaya) in 1987. The CMM

attained autonomous status in 1990. The College is also

registered as a ‘Government College’ with the University

Grant Commission. It also has the approval of All India

Council of Technical Education (AICTE).

10.67 The College being the premier Category
‘A’ Establishment of the Indian Army makes an
exceptional contribution in imparting effective and
dynamic training to all combatants and civilian of
Army Ordnance Corps, selected personnel of all


-----

arms, services and Para Military Forces enabling them
to discharge logistics and supply chain functions, at
different level across the entire spectrum of conflict,
both in peace and war. The College continues
to empower young leaders and soldiers with
information Technology solutions to manage the
inventory as the Corps competency lies in evolving
processes to ensure availability of inventory’ just in
time’ of requirement. The College also imparts special
logistics training to batches of the Afghan National
Army and all arms Administrative and Logistics
Management Course (ALMC). With a focused
approach considerable improvement has been made
in the training facilities, encouraging brain storming,
generation of innovative ideas and assimilation of best
management techniques. Amongst various initiatives
taken by College, the award of degree of MBA by
Rani Durgawati University has been changed from
Materials Management to Supply Chain Management
with a view to promoting greater acceptance and
utility of the educational qualification acquired by
the officers of Indian Army. The National Assessment
and Accreditation Council (NAAC), an autonomous
body constituted under the UGC Act has awarded
Five Star (Highest) Accreditation to the College. The
College has also accord ISO 9001 : 2015 certificate of
registration with effect from October 14, 2017.

10. 68 The College has been awarded “General Officer

Commanding-In-Chief, Army Training Command Unit

Citation” on Republic Day 2017. This is the first time that

the College has been recognised for its meritorious in all

spheres of Training as well as Administration.

###### School of Artillery, Deolali

10.69 The School of Artillery, Deolali, the academic

centre for various sub-disciplines of the science and

methodology of artillery warfare imparts technical

training to Officers, JCOs and NCOs on artillery

weapons and systems including training of pilots for

Air Observation Post duties. Besides, the review of

###### 6


doctrines, study and trials of artillery equipment, both

India and Foreign, is also carried out.

10.70 Apart from a large number of Officers, JCOs

and NCOs of the Indian Army, the school has also trained

several officers and personnel from Friendly Foreign

Countries during the year.

###### Army Air Defence College, Gopalpur

10.71 The Army Air Defence College (AADC) earlier

functioned as a wing of School of Artillery, Deolali till

October, 1989, when it was moved to Gopalpur before

separation of Air Defence Artillery from the main branch

of Artillery. The college trains personnel of Air Defence

Artillery, others arms and armed forces personnel

Friendly Foreign Countries in Air Defence related

subjects.

10.72 The AADC conducts a number of courses.

Some of the courses are Long Gunnery Staff Course

(Officers), Young Officers Course, Electronic Warfare

Course, Senior Command Air Defence Course, Long

Gunnery Staff Course, Junior Commissioned Officer/

Non Commissioned Officer, Technical Fire Control

Course, Aircraft Recognition Course, Unit Instructor and

Crew Based Training and Automated Data Processing

Course.

###### Army Education Corps (AEC) Training College and Centre, Panchmarhi

10.73 The AEC Training College & Centre, Panchmarhi

is a Defence seat of Excellence in Educational Training

in the Armed Forces. It is also an Autonomous College

affiliated to Barkatullah University, Bhopal with academic

and administrative powers to design, conduct, test and

award its own courses and degree.

10.74 The Department of Map Craft runs a ten week

long Map Reading Instructors Course for AEC Officer

and JCOs/ORs of all Arms and Services of Indian Army,


-----

Para Military Forces personnel and personnel from

Friendly Foreign Countries.

10.75 The 18 week Unit Education Instructor (UEI)

Course trains ORs from all Army and Services of the

Indian Army to be effective instructor in their units.

10.76 The Foreign Language Wing (FLW) of AEC

Training College and Centre, is a premier node of

foreign language training to tri-services including the

personal from Para Mil Forces (PMF) and Friendly

Foreign Countries (FFCs) in languages viz. Chines,

Tibetan, Dzongkha, Burmese, Pushto, Arabic, Sinhala,

Russian and Persian. The 26 weeks long English

Language Course is being conducted for Officers of

Friendly Foreign Countries to teach them English

Communication Skills.

###### Military Music Wing, Panchmarhi

10.77 The Military Music Wing (MMW) was raised in

October, 1950 under the patronage of the then C-in-C

General (later Field Marshal) K.M. Carriappa, OBE as a

part of the AEC Training College & Centre, Panchmarhi.

The Military Music Wing has excelled in maintain the

standard of military music in India through a diverse

range of courses designed to train the musicians. The

MMW is being converted to Joint Services Training

Institute on Military Music, catering the need of Tri
services in Mil Music Courses.

###### Remount and Veterinary Corps Centre and School, Meerut

10.78 The remount Veterinary Corps (RVC) Centre

and College, located in Meerut Cantt aims at training

Officers, JCOs and ORs of all Arms and Services, PMF,

CAPF, IN and FFC on animal management and veterinary

aspects. Eleven courses for Officers and seven for JCOs

and ORs are conducted. The total strength of students

trained is 250.


###### Army Sports Institute (ASI), Pune

10.79 With a view to producing prospective medal

winners at international sporting events, the Army

Sports Institute at Pune has been set up alongwith Army

Sports Nodes in selected disciplines at various places in

the country. Appropriate funds have been earmarked for

state-of-the-art infrastructure and equipment coupled

with food, habitat, foreign exposure and training under

foreign coaches.

10.80 About 213 elite sportsmen of the Army are being

trained in seven disciplines namely Athletics, Archery,

Boxing, Diving, Fencing, Weightlifting and Wrestling.

In addition, around 161 talented young boys in the age

group of 11 to 15 years are also being trained in the Boys

Sports Company in conjunction with Sports Authority of

India (SAI). The sportsmen are trained by experienced

Indian and Foreign coaches and given competition

exposure both in India and abroad. The Sports Medicine

Science Centre (SMC) in the institute is one of its kind in

the country. A large number of athletes and sportsmen

of node are participating in National Camp and at the

same time National Camp are also being planned to be

held in the Node.

###### Army Institute of Physical Training (AIPT), Pune

10.81 Army School of Physical Training (ASPT) was

renamed Army Institute of Physical Training (AIPT) in

2005. It is a premier institution of imparting systematic

and comprehensive instruction to personnel of the

Army regarding the conduct of physical training in units

and sub-units. It also imparts basic training in Sports

and Games with a view to improving the standards in

the Army and complement physical training through

recreation in games and sports. These courses are

attended by Officers, JCOs and ORs of the Army, Para

Military Forces and service personnel from Friendly

Foreign Countries. It is conducting training Courses for

JCOs and ORs in six allied subjects in Boxing, Volleyball,


-----

Basketball, Swimming and Life Saving, Karate and Yoga

Courses.

###### Combat Army Aviator Training School

 (CAATS), Nasik Road

10.82 Combat Army Aviator School (CAATS) raised

at Nashik Road in May 2003 aims to train aviators in

aviation skills and handling of aviation units in various

operations of war, train aviation instructor to develop

Standard Operating Procedure (SOPs) and also to

assist Army Training Command in development of

aviation tactical doctrine in synergy with ground

troops. The courses identified to be run in the school

are Pre-Basic Pilot Course, Basic Army Aviation

Course, Pre Qualified Flying Instructor Course, Aviation

Instructor Helicopter Course, Helicopter Conversion on

Type, Flight Commander Course and New Equipment

Course.

###### Military College of Electronics and Mechanical

 Engineering (MCEME), Secunderabad

10.83 The role of MCEME is to provide technical

education to all ranks of EME, including civilians, in

various disciplines of engineering, weapon systems and

equipment with special reference to their maintenance,

repair and inspection and to provide training and

management and tactics at senior, middle and

supervisory levels. The MCEME is designed to train 1760

personnel (all ranks). It conducts 13 courses for officers

and 61 different courses for JCOs/ORs.

10.84 Computer Based Training Packages (CBTs)

and digitized charts have been developed which

contain exhaustive technical information on the

functioning, repair, maintenance, servicing aspects

and the correct usage of the electrical and electronics

portion of equipment which is being taught at

MCEME.

###### 8


###### Corps of Military Police Centre and School,

 Bangalore

10.85 The role of School is to train officers

and JCOs/ORs on Military Police duties in Law

Enforcements, Investigation, vigilance and Traffic

Management. Four courses for Officers and Nineteen

Courses for JCOs/ORs of CMP Corps and three

tailor made courses on Military Policing cadre for

Afghan National Army & Sri Lanka Army are being

conducted. The total strength of students being

trained in a calendar year is 941.

###### Army Airborne Training School (AATS), Agra

10.86 The Army Airborne Training School (AATS)

was previously designated as Army Air Transport

Support School (AATS). In response to the need to

concentrate all Airborne Training under one single

agency, the Army Air Transport Support School was

re-designated as Army Airborne School with effect

from January 15, 1992.

###### Military College of Telecommunication

 Engineering (MCTE), Mhow

10.87 MCTE, Mhow trains Signal Officers in Combat

Communication Engineering, Computer technology,

Regimental Signal Communications and Cryptology.

Besides the five Training Faculties and Wings, the

College has a Department of Administration to

provide administrative and logistics support to the

staff and the students, a Conceptual Studies Cell

to evolve communication doctrines and produce

training material, a modern and well- stocked library

and an in-house printing press. Trainees are provided

with an opportunity to study and train in a formal

setting so as to equip them with the requisite skills,

knowledge and abilities for current as well as future

tasks.


-----

###### Military Intelligence Training School and Depot, (MINTSD), Pune

10.88 The Military Intelligence Training School and

Depot (MINTSD) is a premier establishment responsible

for imparting training on intelligence Acquisition,

Counter Intelligence and Security aspects to all ranks of

the Indian Army, Navy, Air Force and Para Military Forces

and personnel of Friendly Foreign Countries. Civilian

Officers of the Department of Revenue Intelligence are

also trained at this establishment. The School has the

capacity to impart training to 90 officers and 1390 junior

Commissioned Officers/Non Commissioned Officers of

all the arms at a time. The school trains approximately

over 350 Officers and 1100 Junior Commissioned

Officers every year.

###### Electrical and Mechanical Engineering School (EME), Vadodara

10.89 The EME School conducts post graduate

level courses for officers and diploma certificate level

courses for JCOS/ORs. A number of foreign officers and

JCOs/ORs from Friendly Foreign Countries have been

attending various courses conducted at EME School.

###### Institute of Military Law, Kamptee

10.90 The Institute of Military Law was established
at Shimla. In 1989, the institute was shifted to
Kamptee. The charter of duties of the School
includes a comprehensive system of the legal
education for officers of all arms and services of the
Army. The school undertakes wide-ranging research,
development and dissemination work in the field of
Military and allied laws.

###### Armoured Corps Centre and School (ACC&S), Ahmednagar

10.91 In 1948, the Training Wings, the Recruits

Training Centre and Armoured Corps Depot and


Records were shifted to Ahmednagar where the

Fighting Vehicles Schools were already functioning and

they were all amalgamated to form the Armoured Corps

Centre and School and Armoured Corps Records. It has

six wings namely School of Armoured Welfare, School

of Technical Training Basic Training Regiment, Driving

and Maintenance Regiment, Automotive Regiment

and Armament and Electronics Regiment for specified

training in these disciplines.

###### Foreign Training

10.92 _Training for Friendly Foreign Countries in_

_India: With significant increase in scope and reach of_

India’s foreign training cooperation, there has been

a distinct rise in requests from countries across the

world to engage with the Indian Army, reflecting

upon the Indian Army’s professionalism and training

standards. Demands for subscription to courses from

the Friendly Foreign Countries have been continuously

increasing. In training year, 2018-19 a total of 2813

vacancies in 238 different courses have been offered

to 56 Friendly Foreign Countries. There has been an

increase of offer of more than 300 vacancies in the

last five years.

10.93 _Tailor-Made / Group Training: Tailor-made_

courses/ Group Training for capability building and

professional enhancement in selected fields are being

conducted to address training needs / aspirations of

Friendly Foreign Countries in the neighbourhood and

for countries which are of strategic importance to

India. In current training year, 49 such courses to train

1153 trainees have been planned from Afghanistan, Sri

Lanka, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Nigeria, Myanmar and

Bangladesh.

10.94 _Training of Indian Army Abroad: Subscriptions_

of courses abroad is also an important facet of our

foreign training endeavours with a aim to enhance

military learning, technical advancement and defence

###### 9


-----

###### 60


cooperation through training interaction with Friendly **Army Rowing Node (ARN), Pune**

Foreign Countries. The number of personnel undergoing

courses abroad has increased from 58 in 2013-14 to 78 in 10.97 ARN has a world class rowing channel of 2.2 km

the present financial year. It is aimed to subscribe more length, only channel of its kind in the world. Currently

number of courses in niche domains in future. around 80 top oarsmen of the Army are being trained

in the node. Army rowers have done the country proud

10.95 _Training Visits / Exchanges by Personnel from_

in various international competitions including Asian

_Friendly Foreign Countries: Visit of delegations to /_

Games and Olympics.

from Indian Army training establishments and exchange

programmes with many Friendly Foreign Countries have **Army Yachting Node (AYN), Mumbai**

been conducted as part of our defence engagement

policy. A total of 14 inbound visits of 137 personnel from 10.98 Army sailors trained at AYN have dominated

14 Friendly Foreign Countries and 16 outbound visits of the national circuit and won scores of medals at

164 personnel to 16 friendly foreign countries have been international level to include Asian Games and have also

progressed / planned in this year.

participated in Olympics. Currently about 60 sailors of

the Army are training in various classes of boats at AYN,

###### Army Marksmanship Unit (AMU), Mhow Mumbai.

10.96 Shooting has been the forte of the Army. **Army Equestrian Node (AEN), Meerut**

Currently, around 85 ace shooters of the Army are under

training in AMU. Two Olympic Silver medals have been 10.99 AEN has world class training infrastructure

won by Shooters during Athens Olympics 2004 and for show-jumping, dressage and Eventing. The Army

London Olympics 2012. In addition, one Gold and one Equestrian Team has done the country proud by

Bronze medal have been won by Sub Jitu Rai in ISSF winning international medals at continental level

World Cup 2017. (Asian Games).




-----

###### chapter
###  11

#### RESETTLEMENT AND WELFARE OF EX-SERVICEMEN


-----

###### RESETTLEMENT AND WELFARE OF EX-SERVICEMEN
# 11


###### RESETTLEMENT AND WELFARE OF EX-SERVICEMEN
# 11


11.1 The Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare

(DESW) formulates various policies and programmes

for the welfare and resettlement of Ex-Servicemen

(ESM) in the country. The Department has two Divisions

viz. Resettlement and Pension and it has 3 attached

offices namely, Kendriya Sainik Board Secretariat (KSB

Secretariat), Directorate General (Resettlement) (DGR)

and Central Organisation, Ex-Servicemen Contributory

Health Scheme, (CO, ECHS). KSB Secretariat is

responsible for the welfare of Ex-Servicemen and their

dependents and also for the administration of welfare

funds. KSB Sectt. is assisted in its task by 32 Rajya

Sainik Boards (RSBs) and 398 Zila Sainik Boards (ZSBs),

which are under the administrative control of respective

State Governments/Union Territory Administrations.

The office of Directorate General of Resettlement

implements various Policies/ Schemes/ Programmes

for pre and post retirement training, re-employment

and self-employment etc. of ESM. The DGR is assisted in

its task by 5 Directorates of Resettlement Zones(DRZs)

at each of the 5 Commands. CO, ECHS is responsible

for healthcare and medical needs of Ex-Servicemen and

their dependents.

###### Welfare

11.2 KSB Secretariat is the apex body of the

Government of India responsible for implementing

Central Government policies for rehabilitation and

welfare of war-widows/disabled soldiers, ex-servicemen

and their dependents. The welfare schemes are

implemented through RSBs located in State capitals

and ZSBs located at District level. The establishment

expenses of RSBs/ZSBs are shared by the Central and

###### 62


tate Governments/UT Administrations. Funding pattern

is 75:25 in respect of special category states, namely,

Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jammu and Kashmir,

Meghalaya, Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura,

Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand, and 60:40 in the

case of other States/UTs. The Central share provided

to the states/UTs towards establishment/maintenance

of RSBs/ZSBs is reimbursed from the Defence Services

Estimate (DSE) budget allocated to KSB Secretariat for

this purpose. A sum of ` 36.52 crore has been disbursed

as Central share up to March 31, 2019.

11.3 In order to provide suitable and affordable

accommodation to Ex-Servicemen during their short

visits to the State Capital/District HQs for settlement

of their pension cases and other matters like availing

facilities of CSD Canteen, hospitals etc. KSB Secretariat

shares 50% cost of construction of Sainik Rest House

(SRHs) out of DSE. The SRHs are required to be

maintained by State Governments/UT Administrations

from their own resources/funds. The CSRH would help

in resolving boarding/lodging problems of ESM and

their widows visiting Delhi.

###### Armed Force Flag Day

11.4 Armed Forces Flag Day is commemorated

on 7[th] December every year across the country to

commemorate the sacrifices made by the armed

forces personnel for the country. On this day, token

flags are pinned and voluntary contributions collected

from public for welfare/ rehabilitation of war-widows/

disabled ESM and their dependents. Armed Forces Flag

Day was celebrated on December 7, 2018. During the


-----

period from December 1 to 7, 2018 various activities e.g.

telecast of T.V. spots, messages from Celebrities/ icons,

use of print / social media for creating awareness about

the significance of the Flag Day were undertaken.

_Officials of KSB Secretariat with President of India on_
_December 7, 2018 for Flag Day Ceremony_

_Officials of KSB Secretariat with Prime Minister on_
_December7, 2018 for Flag Day Ceremony_

###### Armed Force Flag Day Fund

11.5 Apart from the DSE Budget, Armed Forces Flag

Day Fund (AFFDF) is the major source of funding for

welfare and rehabilitation of war widows, ESM and their

dependents. Out of the interest earned on the AFFDF

Corpus, 7.5% is ploughed back into the corpus and

balance is used to fund the welfare and rehabilitation

schemes for ESM/dependents. A sum of ` 29.16 crore

has been collected upto March 31, 2019. The Fund is


administered by KSB Secretariat under the aegis of its

Management Committee headed by Raksha Mantri and

Executive Committee headed by Secretary, Department

of Ex-servicemen Welfare.

###### Raksha Mantri Ex-Servicemen Welfare Fund (RMEWF) Schemes

11.6 Financial assistance under RMEWF is provided

for identified personal needs e.g. Penury Grant, Children

Education and Marriage Grants, Medical Grant etc. of

Ex-Servicemen/ their dependents. During the financial

year 2018-19 (till March 31, 2019) financial assistance

of ` 64.53 crore has been released in favour of the Ex
Servicemen/ their dependents under RMEWF.

###### Army Battle Casualties Welfare Fund

11.7 Army Battle Casualties Welfare Fund

(ABCWF) has been set up in Ministry of Defence, D/o

Ex-Servicemen Welfare following a large number of

requests to Raksha Mantri from members of general

public who offered to provide monetary assistance to

the families of battle casualties especially after Siachen

incident in February 2016 in which 10 soldiers were

buried in an avalanche. The fund has been created

under The Charitable Endowments Act, 1890. Deputy

Secretary has been appointed the Custodian/Treasurer

of the Fund by Raksha Mantri.

The management and administration of the Fund will be

overseen by a Managing Committee headed by Raksha

Mantri.

Financial assistance of ` 2.00 lakh is provided to the

army battle casualties which are fatal, 60% and above

disability and battle causalities invalided out due to

disability and ` 1.00 lakh to disability less than 60%.

This will be in addition to financial assistance from Army

Groups Insurance, ex-gratia and assistance from Army

Welfare Fund.

###### 63


-----

###### Prime Minister’s Scholarship Scheme (PMSS)

11.8 To support higher technical/professional

education of dependent wards/ widows of ex
servicemen and Ex Indian Coast Guard personnel, the

scheme was introduced in 2006. 5500 scholarships are

awarded annually under this scheme to the wards and

widows of ex-servicemen. The scheme is funded out of

National Defence Fund administered by Prime Minister’s

Office. The amount of scholarships is ` 2,000/- for boys

and ` 2,250/- for girls per month and paid annually. An

amount of ` 39.50 crore has been disbursed to 15287

beneficiaries w.e.f. January 1, 2018 to March 31, 2019.

###### Other Welfare Schemes of AFFDF

11.9 _Financial Assistance for Serious Diseases:_

Financial assistance up to 90% and 75% of total

expenditure subject to maximum ` 1.25 lakh (for heart

ailments, joint replacement etc.) and ` 0.75 lakh per year

(for treatment of cancer and dialysis) is provided to non
pensioners Personnel Below Officer Ranks (PBORs) and

officers including their dependents, respectively. This

scheme is also applicable for the Indian ESM residing

in Nepal till ECHS becomes operational in the country.

An amount of ` 10.8 lakh has been disbursed during the

financial year 2018-19 (till March 31, 2019).

11.10 _Financial Assistance for Purchase of Modified_

_Scooter: Financial assistance of_ ` 57,500/- is provided

for procurement of modified scooter for ESM with

50% or more disability who became disabled after

retirement from service. An amount of ` 7.81 lakh has

been disbursed during the financial year 2018-19 (till

March 31, 2019).

11.11 _Grant to War Memorial Hostels (WMHs): War_

Memorial Hostels are being run by the respective

Regimental Centre of the Indian Army for welfare of

the wards of ex-servicemen / war widows. Under this

scheme a grant of ` 1350/- per month per child is

provided to the wards of war widows/war disabled.

###### 6


` 31.28 lakh has been disbursed upto March 31, 2019

under the scheme.

11.12 _Grants to Paraplegic Rehabilitation Centres_

_(PRCs): In addition to ` 30,000/- per annum per inmate,_

annual grant or ` 20.00 lakh (enhanced to ` 1.00 crore

w.e.f. April 2017 in respect of PRC Kirkee) and ` 10.00

lakh to PRC Mohali is provided for upkeep/maintenance.

These centres are being run as autonomous organizations

for rehabilitation of paraplegic/tetraplegic ESM. ` 150.67

lakh has been disbursed upto March 31, 2019.

11.13 _Reservation_ _of_ _Seats_ _in_ _Medical/Dental_

_Colleges: KSB Secretariat is allotted MBBS & BDS seats_

by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare as the

Government of India Nominee for wards of ESM. A total

20 seats were allotted and disbursed for the Academic

Year 2018-19.

11.14 _Zonal Meetings: The following zonal meetings_

were conducted during the current financial year:

(a) 3[rd] West Zone Meeting of Directors, DSW

comprising States/UTs of Goa, Gujarat,

Maharashtra and Rajasthanwas held on

November 5, 2018 at Jaipur, Rajasthan under

the chairpersonship of Secretary, ESW. The

meeting was hosted by RSB Rajasthan.

(b) 3[rd] North East Zone Meeting of Directors, DSW

was held on November 26, 2018 at Guwahati,

Assam under the chairpersonship of Secretary,

ESW. The North East Zone comprises States of

Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya,

Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura. The

meeting was hosted by RSB Assam.

11.15 _Swachhata Pakhwada: Swachhata Pakhwada_

was observed during the period December 1 to 15,

2018. All staff members took the pledge of Swachh

Bharat Abhiyan on December 1, 2018. During the period,

apart from SAP, a workshop was also organized to


-----

share suggestions/innovative ideas and to review our

swachhata activities and a poster/ slogan competition

was also invited to involve all staff and officers in

the programme. Two subject matter specialists from

Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation participated.

_Workshop on Swachh Bharat Abhiyan at Manekshaw_
_Centre, Delhi Cantt_

11.16 _Swachhata Hi Sewa Campaign (SHS)-2018:_

“Swachhata Hi Sewa” Campaign 2018 for 15 days was

organized from September 15 to October 2, 2018 by

Kendriya Sainik Board with assistance of RSBs/ZSBs.

11.17 Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB) Secretariat and

Rajya Sainik Board (RSB) provided administrative

backup to Zila Sainik Boards (ZSB) to sensitize Ex
Servicemen (ESM) community and to organize and

monitor the events in a chosen village with help of local

administration with an aim to adopt one village per ZSB,

all over the country and make them model village on the

parameter of “Swachhata Hi Sewa” Campaign. A total

393 village was addressed in process, to be made model

village on the parameter of “Swachhata Hi Sewa”.

_Cleanliness drive carried out by RSB Assam under_
_“Swachhata Hi Sewa“Campaign-2018_


11.18 _International Yoga Day:_ 4[th] International Yoga

Day was observed on June 21, 2018. A large number

of officers and ex-servicemen participated in the yoga

session organized at the Sainik Rest House, Naraina,

Delhi for ESM/dependents. Lectures on the benefits of

yoga were delivered by an expert.

_4[th] International Day of Yoga organized at CSRH,_
_Naraina, Delhi_

11.19 _Formation of New Zila Sainik Board Established_

_in the states/UT: Government of India, Ministry of_

Defence has sanctioned establishment of new Zila

Sainik Board Office in the following states:

(i) Mizoram - 2 Zila Sainik Board Office at Kolasib

and Champhai,

(ii) Jharkhand - 1 Zila Sainik Board Office at

Medinagar,

(iii) Jammu & Kashmir - 4 Zila Sainik Board Office at

Kupwara, RS Pura, Akhnoor and Reasi

(iv) Gujarat - 1 Zila Sainik Board Office at Panchmahal

(Godhra)

(v) Uttar Pradesh - 3 Zila Sainik Board Office at

Shamli, Hapur and Amethi.

(vi) West Bengal - 1 Zila Sainik Board Office at

Cooch Behar

###### 6


-----

11.20 _Direct_ _Benefit_ _Transfer_ _Bharat_ _Mission:_

Development of Management Information System

(MIS) for integration of Direct Bharat Mission website

with Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB) website has been

completed. The MPR (Monthly Progress Report) of KSB

beneficiaries is fetched automatically from website of

KSB by DBT Bharat Mission.

11.21 _Swachhata Ability Run: 3[rd] Edition of Swachhata_

Ability Run was organized in Rajasthan by Maj DP Singh

with help of Kendriya Sainik Board and Rajya Sainik

Board, Rajasthan at Kota, Nimbahera, Udaipur, Jodhpur,

Ajmer and Jaipur.

11.22 _Ex-servicemen Rally at National Stadium on_

_February 25, 2019: Prime Minister dedicated the National_

War Memorial of India to the nation on February 25,

2019, to honour and to pay tribute to our soldiers who

lost their lives in the line of duty.

On this occasion the Prime Minister addressed

approximately 9000-10000 ex-servicemen, Veer

Naris, Next of Kins (NoKs), Gallantry award winners at

the Major Dhyan Chand National Stadium, New Delhi

assuring them of Government’s commitment to stand

by them always.

###### Resettlement

11.23 The main thrust of the Directorate General

Resettlement (DGR) is on resettlement, rehabilitation

and welfare of ESM. Nearly 60,000 armed forces

personnel retire or are released from active service every

year, most of them being in the comparatively younger

age bracket of 35 to 45 years and need a second career

to support their families. These personnel constitute

a valuable, disciplined, well-trained, dedicated and

talented pool available for nation building. Resettlement

is sought to be achieved through the following:

- Upgrading their skills by imparting necessary

training to prepare them to take on new

###### 66


assignments/jobs and assisting ESM in finding

re-employment.

- Constant endeavor to provide employment

opportunities in Government/ quasi

Government/ public sector organizations.

- Pro-active action to facilitate re-employment of

ESM in the Corporate Sector.

- Providing jobs through schemes for self
employment.

- Assistance in entrepreneurial ventures.

###### Training Programmes

11.24 Training Directorate of DGR is responsible

for planning and conduct of Resettlement Training

Courses to facilitate smooth transition of retired/retiring

personnel towards second career. From August 2016,

DGR is conducting resettlement courses only in the

institutes of Central Government/State Government,

institutes run by Regulatory Bodies/institutes aligned

with Regulatory Bodies and all courses conducted

by DGR are minimum National Skill Qualification

Framework (NSQF) Level-5 compliant (except when a

change of field is involved for the individual, where it

would be Level-4).

11.25 _Officers’ Training: All Officers’ Training Courses_

envisaged for 2016-17 were revised and are now being

conducted at Government Institutes/Autonomous

Institutes of Government. The duration of the courses

is from 2 weeks to maximum of 6 months. The fee

for officers’ courses is shared by Government and the

individual officers in the ratio of 60:40.

11.26 _Junior Commissioned Officers (JCOs)/Other_

_Ranks (ORs) & Equivalent Training:_ DGR conducts

Diploma/Certificate Courses for JCOs/ORs and

equivalent for a maximum duration upto one year. These


-----

courses are conducted at accredited institutes only and

100% of the course fee is paid by the Government.

These courses are conducted at the institutes which are

located in Military Stations. To ensure proper assessment

and certification, from August 2016 onwards, only

those courses by Government Institutes/Universities/

Institutes run by or aligned to Regulatory Bodies/

Institutes recognized by National Skill Development

Corporation of India (NSDC) with minimum NSQF

Level-4 are being conducted by DGR.

11.27 The details of training imparted during the year

2018 (from January 1, 2018 to March 31, 2019) are as

under:

(a) Officers at Institutes : 660

(b) JCOs/ORs at Institutes : 8721

(c) Total : 9381

_Resettlement Training Courses under_
_progress at Institutes_

###### Employment Opportunities

11.28 _Employment_ _Opportunities_ _in_ _Central_

_Government for ESM: Central Government has provided_

reservations in Government jobs for ESM towards their

resettlement in civil life to the following extent:

(a) 10% of the vacancies in the posts up to the

level of the Assistant Commandant in all Para
Military Forces.


(b) 10% of the vacancies in Group ‘C’ Direct

Recruitment posts and 20% of the vacancies in

Group ‘D’ Direct Recruitment posts in Central

Government Departments.

(c) 14.5% vacancies in Group ‘C’ posts and 24.5%

vacancies in Group ‘D’ posts (including 4.5% for

disabled ESM/dependents of servicemen killed

in action) are reserved in Central Public Sector

Undertakings.

(d) 14.5% vacancies in Group ‘C’ posts and 24.5%
vacancies in Group ‘D’ posts (including
4.5% for disabled ESM/dependents of
servicemen killed in action) are reserved in
Public Sector Banks.

(e) 100% in Defence Security Corps.

DGR is the nodal agency for compiling the data
and monitoring the implementation of these
reservations.

11.29 _Registration for Employment: DGR is primarily_

responsible for assisting Defence Officers, JCOs/ORs

to settle down by providing adequate employment

opportunities after their retirement. Officers are

registered in DGR, subject to fulfilling conditions, for

further empanelment to various schemes of DGR like

General Employment (Jobs in Government/PSUs/

Corporates), Security Agency Scheme, CNG Scheme,

Company Owned Company Operated (COCO) Scheme,

Petrol Pump Management and Coal Transportation

Company etc. Statistics of personnel sponsored for

permanent/contractual jobs through DGR and RSB

except self-employment schemes is as under:

(a) Through DGR : 13788 (from January 1,
2018 to March 31, 2019)

(b) Through RSB/ : 16121 (as on December
ZSB 31, 2018)

###### 6


-----

11.30 _Security Agency Scheme: The aim of the_

scheme is to facilitate some kind of earning by the

ESM through ESM (Officer) till he gets a job and also to

keep ESM occupied and contribute positively towards

society. Many Government Offices, PSUs, PSEs, Banks,

Corporates and Educational Institutes etc. are seeking

security cover from DGR empanelled security agencies.

The number of ESM employed during the year 2018

(from January 1, 2018 to March 31, 2019) under the

scheme are 38447 and a total of 687 Security Agencies

have been empanelled.

###### Schemes for Self Employment

11.31 _Employment opportunities through DGR:_
DGR runs schemes for officers and JCOs/ORs and
their equivalents and widows for their employment
and welfare as second career. The major schemes
and employment generated through them are
given below:

(a) _Coal_ _Transportation_ _Scheme_ _and_ _Tipper_

_Attachment: This scheme is administered_

based on an Memorandum of Understanding

(MoU) signed between Coal India Ltd. (CIL)

and DGR. Under the scheme, the ESM (Officer)

forms an ESM Company consisting of 3 ESM

(Officers) and registered under Companies Act.

The company engages in transportation and

loading of coal to provide services to all the

subsidiaries of CIL. During the year 2018 (from

January 1, 2018 to March 31, 2019), 100 Officers,

291 JCOs/ORs and 134 Widows/Disabled

ESM/dependents have been benefited by this

scheme.

(b) _Mother Dairy Milk Booth and Fruit and_

_Vegetable (Safal) Shop: Mother Dairy India Pvt._

Ltd. provides ready built and fully equipped

milk shops/booths to ESM (JCOs/ORs) while

its fruit and vegetable shops (Safal) are open

for ESM and their dependent sons in the NCR.

###### 68


During the year 2018 (from January 1, 2018 to

March 31, 2019), 451 ESM have been benefited

from Mother Dairy and Safal Scheme.

_Milk Booth run by ESM_

_Safal Outlet Run by ESM_

(c) _Management of CNG Station by ESM (Officer)_

_in NCR:_ Based on requirements projected by

IGL, DGR has been sponsoring names of retired

officers upto the rank of Brigadier/Equivalent

to IGL to manage these CNG pumps in NCR.

The selection process out of this panel is the

sole prerogative of IGL. The scope of scheme

has been extended to cover entire NCR to

include Faridabad and Gurugram. During the

year 2018 (from January 1, 2018 to March 31,

2019), 40 ESM (Officers) have benefited from

this scheme.


-----

_CNG Station in Delhi run by ESM (Officers)_

(d) _Allotment of Army Surplus Class V ‘B’ Vehicles:_

Ex-servicemen and widows of Defence

personnel, who died while in service, are eligible

to apply for allotment of Army surplus class V

‘B’ vehicles. During the year 2018 (from January

1, 2018 to March 31, 2019), a total of 11 ESM were

registered with DGR.

(e) _Issue of DGR Eligibility Certificate for Allotment_

_of LPG/Retail Outlet (Petrol/Diesel) against_

_8%Reservation Quota: As per the existing_

government policy on allotment of Oil Product

Agency to ESM/widows/dependents of Armed

Forces Personnel, Ministry of Petroleum &

Natural Gas (MoP & NG) has a reserved quota

of 8% for distributorship of LPG agency and

Retail Outlets (Petrol & Diesel). The office of

DGR issues required eligibility certificate to

the entitled ESM/widow/dependent which is

required to be submitted in original to the oil

company at the time of selection. The final

selection is done through draw of lots by the oil

company. During the year 2018 (from January

1, 2018 to March 31, 2019), a total of 264 DGR

Eligibility Certificates were issued to ESM/

widows/dependents of the Armed Forces.

(f) _Management of Company Owned Company_

_Operated Retail Outlets: As per the policy_

of MoP & NG, Company Owned Company

Operated (COCO) Retail Outlets are made


available for Management by retired defence

officers & JCOs on contractual basis for a

maximum period of three years. The scheme is

operational Pan India. Officers are required to

be sponsored by the office of DGR and JCOs

through their respective RSBs. During the year

2018 (from January 1, 2018 to March 31, 2019),

a total of 24 Officers were sponsored by the

office of DGR against requisitions received from

Oil Marketing Companies.

11.32 With effect from August 1, 2018, following

changes have been made in the DGR run self
employment schemes:

(a) Entry to DGR schemes to be based upon the

following priorities:

_Priority-I Officers who retire after completion of_

their full tenure of service including SSC officers

who have served their full term. This will include

medically boarded out officers who are fit to

undertake DGR Schemes.

_Priority-II Officers who have sought Pre Mature_

Retirement (PMR).

Note: The sponsorship between Priority-I and

Priority-II will be in the ratio of 80:20.

(b) _Exit Policy- The benefits of DGR schemes will_

be extended to officers for a period of 5 years or

60 years of age whichever is earlier except for

‘Coal Loading & Transportation Scheme’, where

a company must run for 5 years irrespective

of the age of directors. This is so because the

scheme is not viable if run for a lesser duration.

(c) _Age of Registration for DGR- Maximum age for_

seeking any benefit from DGR to be 59 years i.e.

ESM must not be more than 59 Years old at the

time he applies for resettlement.

###### 69


-----

(d) _Running of Coal Loading and Transportation_
_Scheme - The scheme will be allotted for a_
period of 5 years. This may be extended by
another 4 years in case no waiting list exists.

11.33 _DGR Ex-Servicemen Job Fairs: Based on the_
MOU signed between DGR and the Confederation of
Indian Industry (CII) in August 2014, DGR ex-servicemen


Job Fairs are being organized Pan India with the support
of all the three Service headquarters. These events

have been a huge success and managed to achieve its
desired objective in providing such a simple, direct, no
cost platform for employment of ESM in the corporate
sector. A total of 7DGR Ex-Servicemen Job Fairs have
been organized during the period January 1, 2018 to
March 31, 2019 as per details given below:

|Location|Date|Participation|Col4|Job vacancies (approx)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Corporate Employers|ESM||
|Secunderabad|January 20, 2018|35|1552|1493|
|Kochi|March 8, 2018|32|1400|765|
|Chandigarh|June 26, 2018|30|1307|525|
|Mumbai|October 24, 2018|35|1095|1874|
|Chennai|November 14, 2018|49|1056|6025|
|Nagpur|November 29, 2018|36|567|3280|
|Pune|December 6, 2018|49|1037|709|
|Bangalore|December 28, 2018|30|1286|938|
|Kolkata|February 27, 2019|17|1924|3180|
|Goa|March 15, 2019|23|402|398|


_DGR ESM Job Fair at Kolkata under the aegis of HQ Bengal Sub Area_


###### 0


-----

11.34 _Publicity and Awareness Campaign: To ensure_

maximized and timely publicity of Employment

Seminars, advertisements were issued in various

Newspapers (Hindi, Regional languages and English)

as well as the Employment News for the Seminars held

at Hyderabad, Kochi, Chandigarh, Mumbai, Chennai,

Nagpur and Pune. In addition, advertisement was

placed on PAN India basis in various newspapers for

ESM employability. The purpose was to showcase

the potentialities of the ESM before the Corporate

World and the environment in general. Additionally,

issue of Sainik Punarvas Patrika (Bi-lingual Magazine),

containing valuable information for the retiring and the

retired soldiers is under publication, covering details

of a host of activities undertaken by DGR towards the

effective resettlement of ESM. Information Brochures

and Leaflets containing details of schemes towards

ESM resettlement were also got printed and the printed

publicity material was distributed for maximum publicity

and information. Besides this, effective publicity of DGR

activities towards the resettlement of ESM was done

through ‘Twitter’ and official websites of the Services.

_DGR Publicity Stall on Veterans Day 2018(January 14,_
_2018) at Manekshaw Centre, Delhi Cantt_

###### Health Care

11.35 Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme

(ECHS) was launched with effect from April 1, 2003. The

Scheme was further expanded in October 2010. ECHS

aims to provide quality healthcare to ESM and their

dependents through a network of ECHS Polyclinics,

Service medical facilities and civil empanelled/


Government hospitals spread across the country. The

scheme has been structured on the lines of Central

Government Health Scheme (CGHS) and is financed by

the Government of India. Endeavour is to ensure cashless

treatment as far as possible by utilising the empanelled

hospitals for the veterans and their dependents.

11.36 Policy framework for the Scheme is laid down

by the Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare (DESW).

Executive control of the same is also exercised by the

DESW. The Scheme at the Polyclinic level is managed

through personnel recruited on contract basis while

at the Regional Centre and Central Organisation

headquarter levels the existing infrastructure of

the Armed Forces is utilized so as to minimize the

administrative expenditure.

11.37 ECHS Polyclinics are designed to provide ‘Out

Patient Care’ that includes consultations, essential

investigation and provision of medicines. Specialized

consultations, investigations and ‘In Patient Care’

(Hospitalisation) is provided through spare capacity

available in Service hospitals, all Government hospitals and

also through civil medical facilities empanelled with ECHS.

###### ECHS Network

11.38 _Central Organisation: At the apex level is the_

Central Organisation, ECHS located in Delhi. It is an

attached office under the DESW and is headed by a

serving Major General.

11.39 _Regional Centres: There are a total of 30_

Regional Centres spread across the country. The Regional

Centres function under the Central Organization, ECHS.

These Regional Centres oversee operationalisation and

functioning of ECHS Polyclinics placed under them,

empanelment of civil hospitals with ECHS and also

Online Billing.

11.40 _Polyclinics: A total of 433 ECHS Polyclinics_

including six Polyclinics in Nepal have been sanctioned


-----

by the Government out of 427 ECHS Polyclinics in

India, 427 have been operationalised as on date.

These Polyclinics are fully manned by hired trained

professionals with certain vacancies reserved for ESM.

The Station Headquarters are responsible for ensuring

smooth functioning of the Polyclinics as also for timely

acquisition of land and construction of ECHS Polyclinic

buildings.

###### Present Status

11.41 _ECHS Membership: The total beneficiaries of_

the Scheme are approximately more than 52 lakh.

11.42 _Polyclinics and Civil Empanelled Medical_

_Facilities: A total of 231 additional medical facilities_

have been enlisted with ECHS in last one year (since

January 2018). Now the Scheme has more than 2000

civil hospitals empanelled with it, for providing cashless

treatment to ECHS beneficiaries. The reach now has

been extended to Kashmir Valley as well. In case of

emergency, members are permitted to avail medical

treatment at non-empanelled hospital on payment.

Their medical treatment bills are reimbursed at approved

(CGHS) rates.

11.43 _Budget:_ The budget allotted to ECHS

for FY 2018-19 is through the Ministry of Defence

(Miscellaneous). Budget allotment to ECHS has grown

over a period of time. The allotment for FY 2018-19 till

date has been ` 3233.76 crore.

###### Achievements during the last one year

11.44 _Fixed Medical Allowance (FMA): Department_

of Ex-Servicemen Welfare has approved Fixed Medical

Allowance (FMA) on November 1, 2018 for all those

beneficiaries hailing from districts where there are no

ECHS Polyclinics / Service Hospitals / Upgraded MI

Rooms. ECHS Polyclinics and Service Hospitals cover 353

Districts out of 718 Districts in the country with a chain

of 427 Polyclinics. In addition to one time contribution,

###### 2


forfeiture of FMA is a mandatory requirement to avail

ECHS benefits. 365 Districts in the country neither have

an ECHS Polyclinic nor a service hospital resulting in

ECHS beneficiaries of these Districts being practically

unable to avail ECHS benefits despite forfeiting FMA @

` 1,000/- per month. This FMA entitlement will be in lieu

of OPD treatment. ECHS beneficiaries will continue to be

eligible for IPD treatment despite opting for FMA. The

financial benefit will reach lakh of ECHS beneficiaries

ushering a new era of health care.

11.45 _ECHS Gets a New Polyclinic at Indore:_

Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare has approved a

new Type ‘D’ Polyclinic at Indore on September 28, 2018.

The same was inaugurated on March 1, 2019 by Speaker

of Lok Sabha and is operational ever since. Indore is the

largest town of the state of Madhya Pradesh. There are

approximately 6000 ESM needing medical health care

through ECHS in this growing town. This has taken the

number of sanctioned Polyclinics to 427. The Polyclinic

will have provisions of consultation & treatment by

Medical Officer and Dental Officer besides provision

of Lab tests. All ESM beneficiaries will get to utilize the

empanelled facilities in a more user friendly manner.

11.46 _Adoption of Persons with Disability (PWD)_

_Act – 2016: Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare_

has accorded approval for adoption of PWD Act –

2016 in place of PWD Act – 1995 on September 18,

2018. Provisions of PWD Act 1995 applicable to ECHS

so far provided life time treatment to unmarried sons

suffering from seven disabilities viz Blindness, Low

Vision, Leprosy Cured, Hearing Impairment, Locomotor

Disability, Mental Retardation & Mental Illness. Under

the revised provisions, unmarried sons suffering from

Blindness, Low Vision, Leprosy Cured Persons, Hearing

Impairment (Deaf and Hard of Hearing), Locomotor

Disability, Dwarfism, Intellectual Disability, Mental

Illness, Autism Spectrum Disorder, Cerebral Palsy,

Muscular Dystrophy, Chronic Neurological Conditions,

Specific Learning Disabilities, Multiple Sclerosis, Speech

and Language Disability, Thalassemia, Hemophilia,


-----

Sickle Cell Disease, Multiple Disabilities including Deaf,

Blindness, Acid Attach Victim & Parkinson’s Disease

(Covering 21 Disabilities / Ailments) will be provided life

time treatment.

11.47 _Travelling_ _Allowance_ _by_ _ECHS_ _Patients:_

Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare has accorded

approval on August 7, 2018 for claiming travelling

allowance by ECHS patients when they have to move

out for treatment in empanelled hospital when such

facility is not available in concerned station. They can

travel by any means of transport though their claim

will be limited to their entitlement. ECHS patients are

permitted to claim travel allowance as entitled for the

rank at the time of retirement for rail journeys / travel by

Government Transport. Air Travel has been authorized

in Medical Emergencies on certification of Medical

Officer and OIC Polyclinic. Patients were facing difficulty

in claiming their travel entitlement when travelling in

own transport / using private transport. In a significant

move to assist all ECHS patients, MoD (DoESW) allows

travelling allowance by all modes of transport including

sea & river streamer while limiting the same to entitled

class of travel when treatment is not available in the

concerned station. The approval will meet the aspirations

of large number of veterans for their legitimate claims.

11.48 _Exemption of ECHS Contribution under Section_

_80 D of IT Act 1961: In the exercise of the powers conferred_

by Clause (a) of Sub Section (2) of Section 80D of the

Income Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), the Government has

notified the Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme

of the Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare, Ministry

of Defence, for the purposes of the said clause for the

assessment year 2019-20 and subsequent assessment

years.

11.49 _New ECHS Smart Card: New Smart Card has_

been launched on January 14, 2018 on Veteran’s Day by

Raksha Rajya Mantri. First New Smart Card was handed

over on July 12, 2018 at Central Organisation ECHS. As of

now more than 48% beneficiaries have already applied


online for new ECHS Smart Card. Till now 6,50,000

Smart cards have been prepared and dispatched to

concerned Station Headquarters.

11.50 _SMS Based Intimation of Re-Imbursement_

_Claims for Faster Settlement: Department of Ex-_

Servicemen Welfare has sanctioned a system for

intimating the beneficiary regarding progress of their

re-imbursement claims at various stages through SMS.

This new system will not only keep the beneficiary

updated about progress of their claims but will also

apprise them of observation, if any, on their claims and

will also guide them about the action required to be

taken for speedy clearance of claims. This facility will

go a long way in improving transparency, accountability

and shall enhance ESM satisfaction level by faster

settlement of individual re-imbursement claims.

11.51 _Free Eye Referral: Interaction held with eye_

clinics in Delhi-NCR on June 6, 2018. 12 Eye clinics

have agreed to offer free consultation and no referrals

are required. This will reduce the congestion at PCs

substantially besides reducing the difficulty of ECHS

patients. Five eye clinics have agreed in Lucknow.

Option has been given to all eye clinics in the country.

11.52 _Pilot Project for increased Working Hours in_

_ECHS Polyclinics: All ECHS PCs have been functioning_

for eight hours from 0800hr to 1600hr or as per laid

down timing based on weather, season and geographic

conditions. There are some Polyclinics witnessing

increased footfalls besides certain veterans requesting

medical attention after work hours specially in the

evenings. In an attempt to enhance user satisfaction,

pilot project has been launched for enhanced working

hours in two Polyclinics in Delhi-NCR. Polyclinics at Base

Hospital Delhi Cantt and Noida are functioning w.e.f.

0800hour to 2000 hour everyday except Sundays and

holidays w.e.f. August 1, 2018.

11.53 _Delegation of Powers to MD ECHS for_

_Employment of Persons: Department of Ex-Servicemen_

###### 3


-----

Welfare accorded approval for delegation of powers

to MD ECHS for employment of persons of following

trades based on functional requirements to run ECHS

establishments in lieu of vacancies with equivalent

emoluments on April 23, 2018:

(i) IT Technician.

(ii) Data Entry Operator.

(iii) Receptionist.

(iv) Clerks.

(v) Storekeeper.

With this delegation, it has become feasible to assist

Polyclinics and formations more as far as provision of

manpower is concerned.

11.54 _Re-location of two ECHS Polyclinics now at_

_Tenga and Tawang in Arunachal Pradesh: Department_

of Ex-Servicemen Welfare has approved on May 7,

2018re-location of two ECHS Polyclinics at Tenga and

Tawang in Arunachal Pradesh. Both these Polyclinics

were inaugurated on October 16, 2018 by RRM and are

operational ever since. These two Polyclinics will meet

the aspirations of veterans & their dependents in these

areas of Arunachal Pradesh.

11.55 _Referral to empanelled Hospitals. Department_

of Ex-Servicemen Welfare has issued instructions on

August 2, 2018 that name of hospital not to be entered

in referral and patient is free to go to any hospital.

11.56 _Ayurvedic, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani,_

_Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH): Only allopathic_

system of treatment was allowed in ECHS so far. There

were rising aspirations on part of ECHS beneficiaries to

get ‘AYUSH’ treatment. Department of Ex-Servicemen

Welfare has now authorized ‘AYUSH’ treatment

for all ECHS beneficiaries. In the current approved

authorization, treatment in Government AYUSH hospital


is permitted on reimbursement basis at full rates

including medicines prescribed. Permission can be

taken from OIC Polyclinic/ Director Regional Centre/

CO ECHS as decided by the patient. Only one system of

treatment is allowed at any point of time.

11.57 _Setting up of two additional Regional Centres_

_at Yol Shimla (HP) and Bhubaneswar (Odisha): DoESW_

has approved two additional Regional Centers at

Yol Shimla (HP) for Himachal Pradesh and other at

Bhubaneswar for Odisha vide Government of India,

Ministry of Defence letter dated January 8, 2019. All ESM

beneficiaries will get to utilize the empanelled facilities

in a more user friendly manner.

11.58 _Full payment in non-empanelled hospital_

_in emergency cases: DoESW has sanctioned full_

reimbursement in emergency cases in non empanelled

Hospitals under specific conditions as per Government

of India, Ministry of Defence ID dated January 15, 2019.

11.59 _Enhanced_ _Pay_ _of_ _Specialists_ _(Medical_

_Specialists, Gynecologist and Radiologist) in ECHS:_

DoESW has enhanced Pay of Specialists in ECHS to `

one lakh per month vide letter dated January 24, 2019.

11.60 _Reimbursement of Not Available medicines: To_

facilitate availability of medicines to ECHS Beneficiary

reimbursement of Not Available medicines has been

approved by DoESW on January 30, 2019.

11.61 _ECHS Facilities to Assam Rifles: ECHS facilities_

to Assam Rifles pensioners and their dependents

residing in India and Nepal has been sanctioned vide

Ministry of Defence, Department of Ex-Servicemen

Welfare letter dated February 5. 2019.

11.62 _ECHS facilities extended to World War-II_

_Veterans, ECOs, SSCOs and pre mature retirees: DoESW_

has extended ECHS facilities to World War II Veterans,

ECOs, SSCOs and pre-mature retirees vide ID dated

March 7, 2019.


-----

11.63 _ECHS Toll-Free Helpline: ECHS Toll free_

helpline 1800-114-115 has been made available for all

ECHS members for resolving queries on Membership,

Treatment and Employment. The service is available

from Monday to Friday on all working days from 0900
1700 hours. All information regarding ECHS, including

list of empanelled facilities, forms for membership and

latest policies etc. are available on www.echs.gov.in.

###### Pension Reforms

11.64 _Inclusion of Line of Actual Control (LAC) for the_

_purpose of Liberalised Family pension: Vide Government_

order dated March 7, 2018, following amendments have

been carried out under Category-D of Para 1 clause (iii)

of Ministry’s letter dated February 3, 2011:

“Accidental death/injury sustained due to natural

calamities such as flood, avalanches, landslides, cyclone,

fire and lightening or drowning in river while performing

operational duties/movement in action against enemy

forces and armed hostilities in operational area to

include deployment on International Border or Line of

Control or Line of Actual Control.”

11.65 _Enhancement of ex-gratia ad-hoc allowance:_

Vide Government order dated April 9, 2018, it has been

decided to sanction enhancement, on compassionate

grounds, ex-gratia ad-hoc allowance to the following

category of pensioners/family pensioners from

` 3500/- per month to ` 9000/- per month with effect

from January 1, 2016.

(a) Armed Forces pensioners/family pensioner

migrated from Pakistan.

(b) Burma Army pensioners/family pensioner who

are Indian Nationals and drawing their pension

in India.

(c) Burma Army pensioners of Nepalese origin

who are drawing pension in Indian and Indian

Embassy, Pension Paying Offices in Nepal.


11.66 _Revision of Non-Practicing Allowance (NPA):_

Vide Government Order dated May 24, 2018, it has

been decided that all kind of pension/family pension

in respect of Medical Officers of Armed Forces who

retired/died during January 1, 2016 to June 30, 2017

and were drawing NPA at old rates on the date of

retirement/death, shall be further revised w.e.f. July 1,

2017 by adding NPA @ 20% to the basic pay on the date

of retirement.

11.67 _Sanction of Liberalized Family Pension in_

_cases of Central Ammunition Depot, Pulgaon: Vide_

Government Order dated May 31, 2018, it has been

decided that as an exception, Military Personnel who

died/disabled/injured in the ammunition accidents at

Central Ammunition Depot(CAD), Pulgaon on May 31,

2016, shall be eligible for Battle Casualties status for

compensation/pension/gratuity as is admissible in

terms of Ministry of Defence letter dated January 31,

2001.

11.68 _Orders for delinking of qualifying service in the_

_cases of PSU absorbee: Vide Government Order dated_

June 20, 2018, it has been decided that while determining

the revised pension of those Defence pensioners who

had drawn lump sum payment on absorption in Public

Sector Undertaking/Autonomous Bodies after expiry of

commutation period of 15 years from the date of payment

of 100% lump sum amount, with effect from January 1,

2006, the pension /family pension shall also be revised in

accordance with the provisions contained in the Ministry

of Defence letter dated September 30, 2016.

11.69 _Concordance Tables for notional pay fixation:_

Based on the past instructions on fixation of pay in

various pay commissions, concordance tables for

fixation of notional pay for Armed Forces personnel who

retired/died in various ranks during the 4[th], 5[th] and 6[th]

Pay Commission periods (including 3[rd] Pay Commission

for Sailors only) have been issued vide Government

Order dated October 17, 2018 to facilitate fixation of

notional pay or pre-2016 pensioners/family pensioners.


-----

###### 6


11.70 _Minimum ceiling for certain category of casualty_ personnel, shall be subject to a minimum of

_pensionary awards: Government Order dated January_ ` 18,000/- per month.

29, 2019 regarding implementation of Government

decision on the recommendations of the 7[th ]Central Pay (d) The amount of liberalized family pension,

Commission (CPC) on provisions regulating Casualty admissible to the child/children of Armed

Pensionary Awards for Defence Forces pensioners/ Forces personnel, shall be subject to a minimum

family pensioners was issued wherein it has been

of ` 18,000/- per month.

decided that following minimum ceiling shall be applied

to the under mentioned casualty pensionary awards:

The provisions of this letter shall take effect from

January 1, 2016.

(a) The Disability/Liberalized Disability/War

Injury pension (i.e. total of service element

11.71 _Pension revision in respect of Hony Lt. &_

plus disability/liberalized disability/ war injury

_Hony Capt.: Vide MoD Order dated January 17, 2013,_

element as the case may be), shall be subject to

it was decided that the notional pay in the revised

minimum of ` 18,000/- per month irrespective

pay structure for post-January 1, 2006 Hony Lt./Capt

of degree of disability of the personnel.

shall be worked out by adding pay in the revised Pay

Band corresponding to the fixed pay of 5[th] CPC plus

(b) In cases of disability pension where permanent

the Grade Pay and Military Service Pay introduced

disability is not less than 60%, the disability

under 6[th] CPC revised pay structure w.e.f. September

pension (i.e. total of service element plus

24, 2012. Vide Government letter dated February

disability element) shall not be less than 60% of

6, 2019, it has been decided that the aforesaid

the reckonable emoluments as defined in above

mentioned orders, subject to a minimum of provisions of Government letter dated January 17,

` 18,000/- per month. 2013 has now been made applicable to the post-

2006 Hony Lt./Capt, w.e.f. January 1, 2006 or date of

(c) The amount of special family pension, discharge/invalidment whichever is later instead of

admissible to the families of Armed Forces September 24, 2012.




-----

###### chapter
###  12

#### COOPERATION BETWEEN ARMED FORCES AND CIVIL AUTHORITIES


-----

###### COOPERATION BETWEEN ARMED FORCES AND CIVIL AUTHORITIES
# 12


###### COOPERATION BETWEEN ARMED FORCES AND CIVIL AUTHORITIES
# 12


12.1 Apart from the main responsibility of defending

the borders of the country, the Armed Forces render

timely assistance to civil authorities for the maintenance

of law and order and/ or essential services as also in

rescue and relief operations during natural calamities.

The details of assistance provided by the Armed

Forces during the period are given in the succeeding

paragraphs.

###### INDIAN ARMY

12.2 _Operation Sadbhavna and Samaritan: Army_
has undertaken a large number of Military civic
action programmes sponsored and funded by the
Government of India aimed at “Winning Hearts and
Minds” of the people in areas affected by terrorism
and insurgency in Jammu & Kashmir and North
Eastern States under Operation SADBHAVANA and
Operation SAMARITAN.

12.3 The focus of Operation Sadbhavana in these

regions has been towards development of core social

indices of Quality Education, Women Empowerment,

Community and Infrastructural Development, Health

and Veterinary Care, Development of Gujjar/Bakarwals

and Nation Building. In addition, basic needs like Water

Supply Schemes, Electrification and Animal Husbandry

have also been given due importance. A brief of the

initiatives undertaken by Army are:

(a) _Army Goodwill Schools: Army is currently_

running 45 Goodwill Schools with over 14000

students and over 17000 alumni community.

The initiative also generates employment for

###### 8


751 teachers and 256 non-teaching staff. 1388

students have also been sponsored for higher

education programmes.

(b) _Sports Events: During the previous year, over_

3000 village, tehsils and district level event

attracting over 45,000 locals have also been

organized. Several youth from the State have

represented and won laurels at various national

and international sporting events in the year

gone by.

(c) _Cultural Exchanges: To promote cross cultural_

exchange of youth and Nation building, some

projects were also undertaken by conducting

National Integration Tours (NIT) comprising

students and elders to other parts of the

country. Approximately 45-50 NITs, each

comprising 25-30 participants, are conducted

every year. Till now, 15000 participants from

both J&K and North Eastern States have had an

opportunity to visit various parts of the country

and meet eminent personalities.

(d) _Border Area Development: A number of_

developmental works of smaller/ minor

scope have been started under the aegis of

Panchayati Raj Institutions and other Central/

State Government Statutory bodies. These

works were regulated by MoD Guidelines on

‘Security Considerations for Construction

Activities/ other activities in Border Area’. The

Guidelines were relaxed with an addendum

issued on November 27, 2018. This now


-----

permits developmental works of small nature

like construction, repair and maintenance of

internal village roads/ streets, village ponds,

government buildings like schools, Hospitals,

Electrifications etc. to facilitate faster

development in border areas.

12.4 During the year, Indian Army was requisitioned

24 times in which 82 Army Columns including 21

Engineer Task Forces (ETF) and 14 Medical Teams were

deployed in Aid to Civil Authorities. Details of assistance

provided in few of the important instances are given in

succeeding paragraphs.

###### Flood Relief Operations

12.5 _Kerala: Kerala State witnessed very heavy_

rainfall with effect from August 9, 2018 due to

which gates of major dams had to be opened in 14

out of 15 districts. The state was very badly affected

by floods. The details of assistance provided are as

under:

(a) _Flood Relief Columns: 10 Flood Relief Columns_

& One Special Force Team carried out rescue

operations, construction of bridges, restoration

of connectivity and provision of medical aid in

affected districts of Kerala from August 9 to 24,

2018.

(b) _Engineer Task Force: Eight Engineer Task_

Forces & Four BAUT Teams were deployed and

worked round the clock in the rescue & relief

operation.

(c) _Medical Assistance: Medical assistance was also_

provided by 12 Quick Reaction Medical Teams

and one Advance Dressing Station.

(d) Details of activities are as under:

|Ser No|Assistance Provided|Summary (Numbers)|
|---|---|---|
|(i)|Rescue of Civilians|13452|
|(ii)|Restoration of connectivity|49 locations|
|(iii)|Construction of Temp Bridges|18|
|(iv)|Provision of Relief Material|14 Tons|
|(v)|Medical Aid|7803|
|(vi)|MsRE|1200 Packets|
|(vii)|Life Jackets|300|


_Rescue & Relief Operations in Kerala Floods_

12.6 _Manipur (Thoubal & Imphal East Districts): Six_

Army/ Assam Rifle Columns including one ETF were

deployed for flood relief operations at various places in

Thoubal & Imphal East districts on June 15, 2018. 300

Civilians were evacuated.

###### 9


-----

12.7 _Tripura (Unakoti District):_ Five Army/ Assam

Rifle columns were deployed on June 13, 2018 for

flood relief operations at Fatikroi and Kailashahar. 800

Civilians were rescued and 1700 civilians were provided

food and water.

12.8 _Karnataka: One Army Column, One Engineer_

Task Force and One Quick Reaction Medical Team were

deployed in districts of Karnataka for Rescue and Relief

operations on August 20, 2018. Following assistance

were provided:

(a) Civilians rescued/ evacuated - 504

(b) Bridge / Crossing Construction - 02

(c) Dead bodies recovered - 02

(d) Medical Aid provided - 49

###### Rescue & Relief Operations

12.9 _Himachal_ _Pradesh:_ Rescue and relief

operation was undertaken by Indian Army in Himachal

Pradesh with effect from September 25 to 30, 2018.

Indian Army was actively involved in assisting the

Government of Himachal Pradesh at all affected

locations Army detachments operating from Rumtse,

Pang, Sarchu, Patsio & Tandi undertook rescue &

relief operations in which 125 civilians including

31 Bhutanese, 38 Napalese & Indian tourists were

evacuated from Bhartapur to Sarchu. 22 civilians

including two Australian Nationals were rescued and

brought to Sarchu from near by areas. A vehicle foot

patrol launched from Patsio to Suraj Tal evacuated

95 civilians. High alitude warm clothing, shelters,

hot meals, medical aid and satellite communication

facility were provided to needy civilians.

12.10 _Uttar Pradesh: 11 bogies of a goods train_

derailed near Baghaoli station in Hardoi district of

Uttar Pradesh. The derailment took place on December

###### 80


22, 2018. Lucknow-Delhi rail route via Moradabad

was temporarily blocked. Assistance was provided in

terms of two columns with heavy recovery, material

handling crane and dozer for clearing of railway track.

Derailed bogies were cleared off the railway track and

Railway traffic was restored on both the tracks by

December 25, 2018.

12.11 _Sikkim: Approximate 400 tourist vehicles and_

total 2946 civilians were stranded at various locations

i.e Mile 17, Mile 13 due to heavy snowfall and closure

of road on December 28, 2018. 2656 civilians stranded

between Changgu Lake and 17 Mile were rescued.

Medical relief was provided to 490 civilians. 290 civilian

who were stranded between 17 Mile and 13 Mile were

also rescued.

###### Assistance during Festivals

12.12 _Construction_ _of_ _Temporary_ _Foot_ _Bridge_

_at Mysore, Karnataka: A Temporary foot bridge at_

Thrivenisangam in Mysore district was constructed to

facilitate move of devotees (approximate 10 lakh) on the

occasion of 11[th ]Kumbh Mela Mahotsav which was held

from February 17 to 19, 2019.


-----

12.13 _Kumbh Mela 2019: Kumbh Mela - 2019 was_

conducted at Prayagraj, in Uttar Pradesh from January 15

to March 4, 2019. On the request of the State Government

for smooth conduct of Kumbh Mela 2019, two TA

companies, Diving detachment and Special Forces

Team, one Bomb Disposal team, Engineer resources

(Establishment of Baut Assault Universal Type (BAUT)

camp and provision of BAUTs/ OBMs, construction of

two helipads, maintenance of Pontoon Bridge Sets) and

medical cover (Advance Dressing Stations in addition to

two Quick Reaction Medical Teams with Ambulances)

were provided.

###### INDIAN NAVY

12.14 The Indian Navy (IN) continues to provide

assistance to civil authorities for various rescue and

relief operations during natural calamities. These

include assistance to the local populace during floods,

evacuation operations from overseas, diving assistance

at various places, Search and Rescue, etc. The details of

assistance provided by Indian Navy during the year are

enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.

12.15 _Training and Support for State Coastal Security_

_Forces: Indian Navy has been actively involved in the_

marine orientation training of Central Industrial Security

Force (CISF) and Border Security Force (BSF) personnel.

This training is conducted at INS Chilka, which is the

premier training establishment for newly joined sailors


of the Indian Navy. The training is conducted for

approximately 240 CISF personnel in batches of 60

every year. CISF deploys these personnel for protection

of ports and installations near the coast. In addition, a

Marine Orientation capsule for the BSF personnel and

comprehensive 35 week training for 60 personnel of

Marine Task Force (Gujarat) is also conducted by the

Indian Navy.

12.16 _Training of Coastal Police Personnel: In_

pursuance of the need for maritime training of Coastal

Police personnel, the first batch of personnel was

trained in January 2018. Another batch was trained

from July 23 - August 21, 2018.. The latest batch of

training was undertaken from October 22 – November

20, 2018.

_Conduct of Training for Coastal Police of Kerala_

12.17 _Hyperbaric Oxygen Treatment: At Andaman_

and Nicobar Command, the Command Diving Unit

(CDU) has been at the forefront of providing Hyperbaric

Oxygen Treatment (HBOT) and other diving related

ailments. CDU has successfully rendered HBOT to

Foreign as well as Indian nationals. The benign effort

by the divers has resulted in saving the life of civilians.

These efforts have also ensured that the A&N Islands

are viewed as a safe diving destination by the global

community of recreational divers.

###### 8


-----

12.18 _Annual_ _Joint_ _Humanitarian_ _Assistance_

_& Disaster Relief (HADR) Exercise: Based on the_

directives of Prime Minister during the CCC–2016, a

multi-agency HADR exercise was conducted by IN at

Kochi from April 5-8, 2018 and included an exhibition

that was inaugurated by the Chief Minister of Kerala.

The HADR exercise was an ideal opportunity to

provide the local populace an insight into the role and

functions of relief agencies and various technological

advancements achieved in the field. The large scale

national event projected the dynamic capabilities and

swift mobilization of the Armed Forces, NDRF, Fire and

Rescue Services and other relief agencies over a period

of four days. The exercise was also witnessed by two

observers each from Bangladesh, Maldives, Mauritius,

Myanmar, Seychelles and Sri Lanka.

_Inauguration of Exhibition by Chief Minister of Kerala_

_HADR Exercise_

###### 82


12.19 _Op ‘Madad’: Op ‘Madad’ was conducted from_

August9-24, 2018 to provide SAR and relief assistance

in the flood affected areas of Kerala. A total of 16843

civilians were evacuated by IN helicopters and diving

teams. IN operated a total of three Relief Camps during

Op Madad at Naval Base (Kochi), at CUSAT in South

Kalamassery and at Aluva; 330 tons of relief materiel

was provided. On receipt of a request to operate civil

aircraft from Garuda, the airfield was made available

for civil flights within 24 hrs after certification from

DGCA. IN also contributed 8.92 crore towards Kerala CM

Relief Fund. During OP Madad, a pregnant lady due for

delivery was rescued by Air evacuation from top of a

Madrasa in Kondotty area; delivery was conducted at

INHS Sanjivani.

_Operation Madad_


-----

12.20 _Flood Relief at Kodagu: During the severe_

flood at Kodagu in South Karnataka in August 2018,

an emergency response team from Karnataka Naval

Area was deployed for disaster relief operations, based

on request from State administration. 67 personnel,

including two pregnant ladies were rescued from

isolated locations, who were stranded due to floods and

landslides.

12.21 _Rescue Operations for Stranded Miners in_

_Meghalaya: In an unfortunate incident which occurred in_

the state of Meghalaya on December 13, 2018, 15 miners/

labourers were trapped in a coal mine. The Indian Navy

deployed a team of divers along with sophisticated

equipment including underwater ROVs for Search and

Rescue of these trapped miners w.e.f. December 28,

2018 till early March 2019. Despite unfavourable diving

conditions, lack of information and blueprint of mines

(rat holes underneath), poor underwater visibility, high

turbidity of water, inaccessibility of rat holes, the Naval

team actively engaged in conducting Search & Rescue

(SAR) operations. The team recovered one dead body,

located second body and identified probable locations

of other bodies of the miners underwater.

_Rescue efforts at Meghalaya_

12.22 _Cyclone ‘Titli’: Based on assistance sought by_

the State Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Odisha,

IN provided HADR and SAR assistance including air


dropping of 3000 food packets and 5500 kgs of relief

material at various locations, in coordination with the

State administration.

_Cyclone ‘Titli’_

12.23 _Cyclone ‘Gaja’:_ Cyclone ‘Gaja’ hit Tamil Nadu

coast, near Nagapattinam, on November 18, 2018.

Four ships, with relief material embarked, were sailed

out immediately from Chennai. The relief material

was distributed at Nagapattinam, Karaikal and

Rameshwaram. Helicopter and Dornier aircraft sorties,

were flown to ascertain the damage in the area and to

coordinate relief efforts.

_Cyclone ‘Gaja’_

12.24 _Cyclone Phethai:_ In the aftermath of Cyclone

Phethai on December 17, 2018, Indian Navy was

called for assistance. IN Ship Shakti was sailed out

###### 83


-----

with HADR stores and an embarked helicopter to

Kakinada. Additional diving teams and medical teams

were dispatched to Kakinada for necessary assistance.

Assistance was also provided to search and locate three

fishing boats. Oil Rig Olinda Star was reported damaged

and had dangerously tilted due to cyclone ‘Phethai’

on December 21, 2018. IN helicopter was pressed into

service immediately. The aircraft carried out personnel

transfer on Olinda Star. On completion of the required

work to render the oil rig safe, the team was de-inducted

from the oil rig safely.

_Cyclone ‘Phethai’_

12.25 _Mission ‘Nistar’: The Andaman & Nicobar_

Command was requested by civil administration

for evacuation of tourists from Swaraj Dweep and

Shaheed Dweep. The evacuation was warranted due to

suspension of civil ferries due to extreme rough weather

in the region. IN ships Bitra and Battimalv were deployed

at very short notice and evacuation of 386 tourists from

Shaheed Dweep was undertaken.

_Mission ‘Nistar’_

###### 8


###### indian COAST GUARD

_Aid to civil authorities_

12.26 _Safe Evacuation of Stranded Passengers from_

_Diglipur: On June 13, 2018, Coast Guard ferried 77_

stranded residents including 3 female and 5 children

were ferried to Smith Island and Gandhinagar.

12.27 _Assistance to civil authority - Kerala Flood:_
In response to the Kerala Floods in August 2018,
Indian Coast Guard (ICG) launched a large scale
Disaster Response & Relief Operation code named
‘Op Rahat’ with Thirty six Disaster Response Teams
(DRTs). ICG mobilised 8 ships, 4 Dorniers and 3
Helicopters during the Operation. A total number
of 3548 persons were evacuated/ airlifted and more
than 180.6 tonnes of relief material was brought
from New Mangalore and Mumbai and distributed/
air dropped in the affected areas of Kerala. The
ICG relief operation also included setting up of
Community kitchen and Medical Camps.

12.28 _ICG_ _efforts_ _towards_ _cyclone_ _‘Gaja’:_

Consequent to formation of low pressure in North

Andaman sea in November 2018, Indian Coast

Guard initiated series of pre-emptive measures

from November 9, 2018 onwards to ensure safety

of fishermen operating at sea wherein 18 ships were

deployed off coastal areas of Tamil Nadu, Andhra

Pradesh, Pudducherry, Maharashtra, Goa, Karnataka,

Kerala and Lakshadweep & Minicoy. Transmission

of warnings by International Safety Net (ISN) and

NAVTEX were commenced since November 9-10,

2018 for the Bay of Bengal and Arabian sea which

resulted in safe returns of 946 fishing boats. ICG ships

also mobilized relief materials in coordination with

State/UT Administration and around 40 Tonnes of

fresh water was distributed through tankers by Coast

Guard Station Karaikal. Special Community Interaction

programmes were also conducted at 11 places.


-----

12.29 _Safe Evacuation of Stranded Passengers from_
_Neil and Havelock Islands at Andaman & Nicobar (A&N)_
_Islands:_ On December 15, 2018, Coast Guard Regional
HQs (A&N) received a request from A&N Administration
seeking assistance for evacuation of stranded
passengers from Neil and Havelock Islands due to
ceasing of ferry service due to inclement weather. On
receipt of message, 5 Coast Guard Ships were deployed
and a total of 707 passengers were evacuated from both
islands.

_Evacuation of the stranded_

###### Indian AIR FORCE

12.30 _Airlift of mortal remains: A C-17 aircraft was_
tasked to airlift 38 mortal remains from Baghdad, Iraq
to Amritsar India from April 1-2, 2018. Aircraft flew 3
sorties and 14 hrs. Minister of State for External Affairs
accompanied the mortal remains from Baghdad.

12.31 _Fire_ _Fighting_ _Operations:_ Fire fighting
operations using Bambi Buckets were carried out at
Kodaikanal on March 11-12, 2018, at Katra, Pathankot,
Kasuali and Malviya Nagar, New Delhi from May 2328, 2018. Helicopters flew a total of 57:30 hours in 71
sorties and dumping 102 KL of water. Malviya Nagar fire
fighting operation was the first such operation carried
out to combat urban fire.

12.32 _Flood relief ops: Flood relief operations were_
carried out in Tripura from June 14-19, 2018, in Nagaland


from August 3-20, 2018, in Karnataka from August 16-22,
2018 and in Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh between

July to September 2018. Various transport aircraft and
helicopters participated in the relief operations. A total
of 138 sorties were flown airlifting 280 passengers and
75 Tonnes of relief material.

12.33 _Aerial Fire Fighting - Indian Merchant Vessel:_
On June 17, 2018, MLH was utilised for Fire Fighting and
subsequent recovery effort of a Merchant Vessel off the
coast in Sunderban area. The ship was destroyed by
fire accident. A total of 14 sorties were flown releasing
15,000 litres of water towards the Fire Fighting and
recovery effort.

12.34 _Airlift of Para Military Forces: Transport aircraft_
of IAF provided airlift to Centre Reserve Police Force
(CRPF) and Border Security Force (BSF) personnel at
various occasions to control the law and order situation.
Total of 24 sorties have been flown and 2297 personnel
alongwith approximately 81 tonnes of load has been
airlifted to Srinagar (J&K), Assam and Chennai, Tamil
Nadu to tackle law & order situation.

12.35 _Flash Floods Maharashtra:_ On July 7, 2018,
helicopters undertook rescue of five stranded civilians
near Chinchoti waterfall in Palghar, Maharashtra.

12.36 _Relief Operations towards landslides: Helicopter_

effort was provided for airlifting of food and other

essential supplies and rescue of stranded civilians, after

the region was cut off due to heavy rains and lack of road

connectivity due to landslides, at following locations:

(a) At Pithoragarh, Uttarakhand from July 6 to
September 9, 2018 wherein 32 sorties were
flown and total of 28.45 tonnes of relief material
was airlifted.

(b) In Sikkim from September 15-17, 2018 wherein
43 sorties were flown and 423 civilians were
airlifted.

###### 8


-----

###### 86


(c) In Himachal Pradesh from September 23-29, 12.29 _Op Samudra Maitri: Indonesia was struck with_
2018. Total 141 sorties were carried out and 363 an earthquake of magnitude of 7.5 on Richter scale on

civilians were rescued. September 28, 2018. The most severely affected area

was Palu which saw over 1230 deaths and about two

12.37 _Flood relief in Kerala: IAF launched rescue and_ lakh people were rendered homeless. The airfield at
relief operations after the devastating floods in August Palu was also partially damaged with only approx 5500
2018. A total of 47 aircraft (05xC-17, 03xIL-76, 05xC- ft of runway available for operation. IAF was tasked
130 and 10xAn-32 and 24 heptrs) were pressed into the to airlift approx 40 Tonnes of relief material and one
rescue and relief operations in Kerala. Towards this, IAF field hospital to Indonesia. On October 3, 2018, one
aircraft airlifted 4209 passengers and 1554 tonnes of C-17 airlifted approximately 38 Tonnes of relief material
load and flew 1121 sorties and 1404 hrs. including tents, gensets and medicines to Makassar,

Indonesia. One C-130J airlifted field hospital of Indian

12.38 _Kailash Mansarovar Yatra: Helicopters effort_ Army along with medical team on October 3, 2018 to
was organised towards Kailash Mansarovar Yatra from Balikpapan, Indonesia. The field hospital and medical
June 18 to September 26, 2018. Total 193 sorties was team was de-inducted from Indonesia on October 20,
flown and 1876 pilgrims were airlifted. 2018 in C-130J.




-----

###### chapter
###  13

#### NATIONAL CADET CORPS


-----

# 13

13.1 The National Cadet Corps (NCC) was established

by virtue of the NCC Act, 1948. It has completed 70 years

of existence. The NCC strives to provide the youth of the

country opportunities for all round development with

a sense of commitment, dedication, self-discipline and

moral values so that they become responsible citizens

of tomorrow. The motto of NCC is “Unity and Discipline”.

13.2 The Government of India in 2010 had

sanctioned increase in NCC cadet strength by 2 lakh

from 13 lakh to 15 lakh. This expansion is planned in five

phases of 40,000 cadets per phase. The 4[th] Phase of

the expansion sanctioned on August 2, 2017 is presently

under implementation. The sanctioned strength as

on date is 14.20 lakh (upto Phase three) and the total

number of NCC Units are 814.

13.3 Wing-wise distribution of enrolled cadet

strength as on September 30, 2018 is as under:

Wing Boys Girls Total %

_Army_ 794779 391526 1186305 89.25%

_Navy_ 58949 14717 73666 5.54%

_Air_ 52010 17221 69231 5.21%

_Total_ 905738 423464 1329202 100%

13.4 As on date NCC covers a total of 17374

institutions which includes 12545 schools and 4829

colleges across the country.

###### Main Activities and Important happenings

13.5 New Raisings in the 4[th] Phase of 2 lakh Cadet

Expansion Programme: One NCC Group HQ, eight NCC

###### 88


###### NATIONAL CADET CORPS

# 13


Army Units, two NCC Naval Units and one NCC Air

Unit have been sanctioned by Government of India on

August 2, 2017 for raising in the 4[th] Phase. The raisings

are currently underway. This will increase the number of

NCC Units to 825 and the cadet strength to 14, 60,000.

The details of the 4[th] Phase are as under:

NCC Units/ 4[th] Phase
Estt.

Gp HQ Gp HQ Koraput (Odisha)

Army Units 4 Haryana Girls Bn NCC, Nuh
(Girls)

Army Unit 6 Andhra Pradesh Bn NCC, Anantpur

7 Bengal Bn NCC, Balurghat

5 Kerala Bn NCC, Wayanad

5 Karnataka Bn NCC, Chikkaballapur

1 Chhattisgarh Bn NCC, Korba

2 Arunachal Pradesh Bn NCC,Tawang

2 Mizoram Bn NCC,Lunglei

Naval Units 1 Lakshadweep Naval Unit NCC,
Kavaratti

5 Odisha Naval Unit NCC, Paradip

Air Unit 2 Odisha Air Sqn NCC, Jharsuguda

13.6 _Institutional Training: The aim of this training_

is to expose the youth to a regimental way of life and

to instill in them discipline, orderliness and personality

development. All enrolled cadets go through the

Institutional Training in their respective schools/colleges

as per specified syllabi for each wing of NCC. Notable

|Wing|Boys|Girls|Total|%|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Army|794779|391526|1186305|89.25%|
|Navy|58949|14717|73666|5.54%|
|Air|52010|17221|69231|5.21%|
|Total|905738|423464|1329202|100%|

|NCC Units/ Estt.|4th Phase|
|---|---|
|Gp HQ|Gp HQ Koraput (Odisha)|
|Army Units (Girls)|4 Haryana Girls Bn NCC, Nuh|
|Army Unit|6 Andhra Pradesh Bn NCC, Anantpur|
||7 Bengal Bn NCC, Balurghat|
||5 Kerala Bn NCC, Wayanad|
||5 Karnataka Bn NCC, Chikkaballapur|
||1 Chhattisgarh Bn NCC, Korba|
||2 Arunachal Pradesh Bn NCC,Tawang|
||2 Mizoram Bn NCC,Lunglei|
|Naval Units|1 Lakshadweep Naval Unit NCC, Kavaratti|
||5 Odisha Naval Unit NCC, Paradip|
|Air Unit|2 Odisha Air Sqn NCC, Jharsuguda|


-----

improvements during the period included the following:

(a) Institutional training includes basic military

training to the cadets as part of the curriculum

and prepares them to join the Armed Forces.

(b) As part of an internal review cum updation

of Training Material existing in the training

environment, new Handbooks have been issued

for use at Associate NCC Officers (ANOs) &

Cadets levels for all three Service Wings and

uploaded on NCC Web Page.

(c) Institutional training conducted at colleges

and schools is the mainstay of NCC training

and is conducted by ANO and Armed Forces

personnel. The syllabus comprises Common

Subjects and Service Subjects in the ratio

70:30. Emphasis is on practical training. Case

study method of instruction, wherever possible,

is made to facilitate active participation and

better assimilation.

13.7 _Camp Training: Recently exhaustive Camp_

instructions have been formulated in the form of

a Manual and disseminated in the environment for

implementation at Unit/ Group levels. Camp training

is the practical manifestation of institutional training.

The cadets are exposed to the excitement of camp life

where they apply the theoretical knowledge that they

had gained in Institutional Training. It is mandatory for

Junior Division/ Wing cadets to attend at least one camp

and Senior Division/ Wing cadets to attend a minimum

of two camps during the period of their enrolment. Only

Second year JD/JW cadets and Second/ Third year

SD/SW cadets will attend camps including Centrally

Organised Camps (COCs) as per authorization. The

various types of camps conducted by the NCC are as

follows:

(a) _Annual Training Camps (ATC): Annual Training_

Camps are planned and conducted at State


Directorate level so as to ensure that a minimum

of 50% of Junior Division/ Wing (JD/JW) cadets

and 66% of Senior Division/ Wing (SD/SW)

cadets attend at least one camp per year. These

camps are of 10 days duration. They comprise

basically of ATCs at NCC unit levels and CATCs

(combined ATCs) at NCC Group levels.

(b) _Centrally Organised Camps (COCs): These_

camps are of an all India nature and are planned

at DGNCC in consultation with nominated

Directorates. Selected cadets, as per vacancy

allotted to each Directorate attend these.

Duration is of 12 days. COCs are of following

types:

(i) _Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat (EBSB):_

Based on recent directions of Prime

Minister, EBSB is being conducted

to foster National Integration and

increase awareness about heritage

and culture of different sister States

on a reciprocal basis. A total of 35

EBSB Camps are conducted every year

having approximately 20,400 cadets

from all States and Union Territories.

All States have been paired into “two

States buddy pair system” for better

cultural exchange.

(ii) _Vayu Sainik Camp (VSC): Every year an_

All India Vayu Sainik Camp for Air Wing

SD/SW cadets is organized for a period

of 12 days. 600 SD/SW cadets from

all parts of the country participated in

this camp. This year, VSC was planned

from October 11 – 22, 2018 at Jodhpur

conducted by Rajasthan Directorate.

(iii) _Nau Sainik Camp (NSC): NSC of 12 days_

duration is organized once in a year

to train Naval cadets in Naval wing

###### 89


-----

activities. 386 SD & 204 SW cadets of

Naval wing from all parts of the country

participate in the camp. This year NSC

camp was conducted at Naval Base

Karwar from October 14-22, 2018.

(iv) _Thal Sainik Camps (TSC): One TSC_

each is conducted at Parade Ground,

Delhi Cantt every year for boys and

girls. Total 1360 cadets (680 Boys &

680 Girls) from all parts of the country

participated in the camp during

September 17 – 28, 2018.

(v) _Leadership_ _Camps:_ These camps

are conducted on All India basis. Six

Advance Leadership Camps (ALC),

including two SSB Screening Capsules,

are organised every year. Every year

1800 Cadets attend these camps.

Focus is on personality development

leadership skills and orientation for

induction into Armed Forces.

(vi) _Rock Climbing Training Camps (RCTC):_

Eight RCTC are held every year to

expose the cadets to the basics of rock

climbing and to inculcate the spirit of

adventure. Four of these camps are

held at Gwalior in Madhya Pradesh and

another four camps are conducted by

NCC Directorate Uttarakhand in Pauri.

Every year 1080 cadets attend these

camps.

(vii) _Republic Day Camp (RDC): Republic_

Day Camp is conducted at Army Parade

Ground, Delhi Cantt from January 1 to

29, every year. The Camp is attended

by approximately 2070 cadets from

all over India and approximately 100
120 cadets of friendly foreign countries


with whom NCC has an ongoing Youth

Exchange Programme. Inter Directorate

competitions in training, cultural

competitions and National Integration

awareness programmes are conducted

during the month long camp. Two NCC

marching contingents and two NCC

bands participate in the Republic Day

Parade on Rajpath on January 26 every

year. Important dignitaries visit this

camp.

(viii) _Prime Minister’s Rally: The Prime_

Minister’s Rally, the most prestigious

event of the NCC Republic Day Camp

is held on January 28 every year.

Contingents from all the 17 State NCC

Directorates participate in the March

Past. Cadets participate during this

rally wherein they display their skills in

various activities, like parasailing, band

display, slithering and a simulated Army

action. Fly past by NCC aircraft is also

conducted during the PM’s Rally. The

PM’s Rally culminates with award of

Prime Minister’s Banner to the winning

Directorate by the Prime Minister.

13.8 _Flying Training: Flying Training is being_

conducted in NCC with a view to giving an air experience

to the Air Wing NCC cadets (SD/SW). At present flying

facilities are provided at 50 NCC Air Sqn across the all

States of the country. 110 New Virus SW 80 aircrafts are

under induction and will be operational by October 2019.

13.9 _Yachting Special Training Camps: Cadets of_

Naval Wing are also trained and exposed to the basic

skills of Kayaking during Special Yachting Camps.

INWTC Goa has been made as Nodal Centre for these

training activities since 2018. Intention is to train them

on advance Yachting and is also provide them the

requisite certification advantage benefit.


###### 90


-----

13.10 _Attachment Training: NCC cadets derive_

immense value by attachment to Armed Forces Units.

Guidelines for each service specific training and

instructions for programme during attachment have

been laid down in the Training Directive. Details of

Attachment training conducted every year are as under:

(a) Army Units. 440 officers and 20,000 cadets

including 560 SW cadets attend the attachment

training annually with regular Army Units for

12 days.

(b) 120 Senior Division cadets undergo attachment

training at Indian Military Academy, Dehradun

and 48 SW cadets to Officers Training Academy,

Chennai.

(c) 1000 SW cadets are attached with various

Military Hospital for 12 days.

(d) 100 Air Wing NCC Cadets (66SD and 34 SW)

undergo attachment training with Air Force

Academy, Dundigal. This training is conducted

twice in a year for 13 days each in June and

December respectively.

(e) Every year 18 ANOs and 200 Cadets of the Air

Wing are attached to various Air Force Stations

for a period of 14 days.

(f) 170 SW and 25 SD cadets of Naval Wing

undergo attachment training with the Indian

Naval Academy, Ezhimala. This training is

conducted for 12 days in December every year.

(g) A total of 295 SD Cadets undergo Sea Training

and Sea attachment of 12 days each onboard

naval ships at Vizag, Mumbai & Kochi. Cadets

are imparted intensive naval training in various

naval subjects.

(h) _Naval Academy Attachment Training: Annual_

Training Camp for 170 SW cadets was conducted


from January 9 – 20, 2019 at Kozhikode this

year.

(i) _Technical NCC Camp for Naval Wing: 103 SD_

and 43 SW Cadets from Engineering Colleges at

Chennai attended the Annual Technical Camp

from June 27 to July 9, 2018. The cadets were

taken to Naval Engineering Establishments

at INS Valsura, Shivaji and Naval Dockyard at

Mumbai on study tour.

(j) _Foreign Cruises: Over Seas Deployment (OSD) of_

1[st] Training Sqn based at Kochi onboard IN Ships

is conducted twice in a year to various foreign

ports. This year two OSD were conducted. A

total of 20 SD cadets and 02 supervisory staff

each visited Port Louis (Mauritius), Port Victoria

(Seychelles) and Dar-Es-Salaam (Tanzania)

from February 14 to April 3, 2018 and Lumut

(Malaysia), Changi (Singapore) and Belawan

(Indonesia) from September 10 to October 18,

2018.

###### Training of Trainers

13.11 _Officers Training Academy (OTA), Kamptee:_

NCC OTA was established on March 1, 1957 and formally

inaugurated on March 6, 1957 by the then Deputy

Defence Minister. Imparting training to ANOs, JCOs and

NCOs (maximum 500 at a time) posted to NCC is the

principal task of this Academy. SSB Capsules are also

conducted for potentially selected approximately 155

NCC Cadets for induction into Armed Forces each year.

13.12 _Officers Training Academy (OTA) Gwalior: The_

Girls wing for pre-commission training for Lady ANOs

which was shifted to Gwalior in April, 1965 is presently

known as OTA. Gwalior is a premier women officer

training institution. The courses are conducted for the

lady ANOs, GCIs and WTLO’s. SSB Capsules are also

conducted for potentially selected approximately 100

NCC Cadets for induction into Armed Forces each year.

###### 9


-----

13.13 Following trainers are trained in these two

institutes each year in a programmed manner:

(a) ANOs – 775

(b) Refresher Course for ANOs – 550

(c) PI Staff Orientation for JCOs/ NCOs – 5000

###### Adventure and Sports Activities

13.14 _Adventure Activities: The aim of adventure_

activities is to inculcate a spirit of adventure, explorative

inquisitiveness, develop stamina, endurance, self
confidence, team spirit Espirit-de-corps amongst

the cadets. NCC cadets are given the opportunity to

participate in a host of adventure activities including

Mountain Treks and Expeditions, Trekking, Parasailing,

Sailing, Scuba Diving, Kayaking, Camel safari etc.

Adventure based activities enable cadets to hone

leadership skills and enhance their character qualities.

Cadets with potential are given opportunities to

participate in expeditions requiring higher degree of

expertise and proficiency.

(a) _Mountaineering Expeditions: NCC has been_

conducting two mountaineering expeditions

every year, one each for the girl and boy cadets.

20 SW/SD cadets participate in each expedition.

First ever Mt Everest Expedition of NCC Cadets

(Boys) scaled the world’s highest peak in two

batches on May 19 and 20, 2013 and first ever Mt

Everest Expedition of NCC Cadets (Girls) scaled

the world’s highest peak in two batches on May

21 and 22, 2016. This year NCC Girls cadets have

already scaled Mt Deo-Tibba (6001m) Peak in

Himachal region in September, 2018 and Boys

cadet have scaled Mt Saifee (6167m) Peak in

Garhwal Himalayan during May-July, 2018.

(b) _Mountaineering Courses: 354 Cadets vacancies_

of Basic, Advance, Adventure, Method of

###### 92


Instructions (MOI) and Search & Rescue are

subscribed by NCC from the following Institutes

every year and the course fees are funded by

Central and State Governments on sharing

basis:

(i) Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of

Mountaineering and Allied Sports,

Manali.

(ii) Nehru Institute of Mountaineering

(NIM), Uttarkashi.

(iii) Himalayan Institute of Mountaineering

(HMI), Darjeeling.

(iv) Jawahar Institute of Mountaineering &

Winter Sports, Pahalgam (J&K).

(c) _All India Trekking Expedition: A total of 25 All_

India Treks are conducted by 15 Directorates in

a training year with strength of each Trek being

500 cadets. Total participation of cadets is

approximately 12,000 cadets.

(d) _Camel Safari: Camel Safari is conducted by_

Rajasthan Directorate in the deserts of Jaisalmer

for a period of 12 days in mid November every

year. 20 Indian cadets participate along with

the foreign cadets.

(e) _Para Basic Course: The course is conducted_

every year during September and November

at PTS Agra (two courses per year). 40 Senior

Division Boy and 40 Senior Wing Girl cadets are

trained for a period of 24 days in two batches

at PTS Agra under the aegis of Army Airborne

Training School, Agra.

(f) _Para-sailing: 84 new parasails are under process of_

procurement by Logistic Directorate. Parasailing

Instructors are trained at respective nodes


-----

nominated by the State Directorates. During

Prime Minister Rally, Parasailing demonstration

is held as an important event. Delhi Directorate

is responsible for the Para Sailing demonstration

during Prime Minister Rally.

(g) _Slithering: This activity is conducted regularly_

at the Directorate level. Of this, 25 SD and 25

SW cadets are selected for participating in

the slithering demonstration during PM’s Rally

every year. In this rally 25 Senior Division Boy

and 25 Senior Wing Girl cadets slither down

from MI 17 helicopter and 2 Advanced Light

Helicopter (ALH).

(h) _Sailing expedition:_ Each NCC Directorate

undertakes a minimum of one sailing expedition

for a period of 10 to 12 days covering a total

distance of 400 to 500 kms. 40 to 60 cadets

from each Directorate participate in the event.

During Sailing Expedition, the cadets get

practical exposure in Boat Pulling and Sailing.

They face and overcome the hazards of change

in weather conditions and changing mode

of Rivers/Sea. During this expedition, cadets

also undertake social agendas and Clean ship/

Swachhta Abhiyan in remote coastal villages.

(i) _Sea sorties: Cadets are put on board Naval_

Ships for sea experience.

(j) _Scuba Diving: A total number of 142 cadets_

participated in Scuba Diving Camps with

assistance from the Naval Diving Teams of

Indian Navy. This year, Kerala and Lakshadweep,

Maharashtra and TNP&AN Directorates

conducted Scuba Diving Camps.

(k) _Sailing Regatta: Sailing Regatta is conducted_

every year at INS Chilka in Odisha. A total of

102 (51 SD and 51 SW) cadets participate in this

competition over a period of 8 days.


13.15 _Sports: NCC Cadets from all NCC Directorates_

actively participate in various sports activities at the

National level. Some of the major sporting activities

conducted during the year are as follows:

(a) _Zonal Shooting Coaching Capsule: Firing_

being one of the core training activities of

NCC, shooting discipline enjoys special place

in NCC sporting activities. Every year DG NCC

shooting team participates in various national

level shooting events. To facilitate talent hunt,

grooming of young shooters and to hone skill

of shooting, every year 10 days of Coaching

Camp is conducted, zone wise at designated

Nodes.

(b) _GV_ _Mavlankar_ _Shooting_ _Championship_

_(AIGVMSC): Total 55 Selected NCC cadets_

participated in 28[th] All India GV Mavlankar

Shooting Championship Competition, 2018,

organized by NRAI in the month of September/

October. NCC shooting team won 9 Medals

(3 Gold, 5 Silver and 1 Bronze).

(c) _National Shooting Championship Competition_

_(NSCC) (2018): NCC shooters took part in the_

National Shooting Championship and won two

Bronze medals.

(d) _Jawaharlal Nehru Hockey Cup Tournament:_

Junior Boys team (U-17) Odisha Directorate

reached the final in the tournament.

(e) _Subroto_ _Cup_ _Football_ _Tournament:_ This

year, U-14, Sub Junior Boys team of Odisha

Directorate reached the final.

(f) _(R&V) Equestrian Events: NCC cadets of_
Remount & Veterinary units participate in
various National level equestrian competitions
every year and have won many medals till
date.

###### 93


-----

13.16 _Youth Exchange Programme (YEP): The Youth_
Exchange Programme, presently are being carried out

with eleven friendly countries including Bangladesh,
Bhutan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Maldives, Nepal,
Russia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Turkmenistan and Vietnam,
so as to heighten awareness among participants and
appreciate each other’s socio-economic, cultural
realities and act as goodwill ambassadors to project our
Nation’s image abroad. YEP has successfully conducted
with eleven friendly countries including exchange of 158
Indian NCC cadets and 158 foreign cadets.

13.17 _Social Service and Community Development_
_(SSCD) Programmes: The social service and community_
development activities include Swachh Bharat Abhiyan,
Tree Plantation, Anti-Drug Rally, Cancer Awareness,
Disaster Relief, Blood Donation, Beti Bachao Beti
Padhao, AIDS Awareness, Care for the Blind, Traffic
Control and other similar relevant contemporary social
issues.

13.18 _SSCD - Present Status: Currently based on_
Training Directive, ‘Swachh Bharat Mission’ & ‘Awareness
on Digital Payment’ have been laid down as focal areas.
Other than this, activities like Gender Equality, Anti
Drug/ Tobacco Awareness, Water Conservation Drive,
Tree Plantation Drive, Immunization Drive and Blood
Donation are being carried out on a routine basis.
Guidelines as part of SSCD Action Plan have also been
disseminated.

13.19 _Social_ _Service_ _&_ _Voluntary_ _Community_
_Development Achievements: The aim of Social Service_
and Community Development Programmes is to
sensitise the youth to the problems faced by society
and help them to contribute positively towards solving
them. The various Social Service and Community
Development activities in which the cadets took part
enthusiastically this year are:

(a) _Environment Protection Project: Drives to_
generate awareness about ill effects of using

###### 9


plastic was conducted by all Directorates
during the year, wherein NCC cadets actively

participated in Tree Plantation drives/ door
to door campaigns/interaction with local
residents to spread awareness. Over 1.55 lakh
saplings were planted.

(b) _AIDS Awareness Programme: A total of 20,000_
cadets participated actively in the AIDS
Awareness Programme throughout the country
during the year. NCC organized a number of
rallies to spread awareness on HIV/AIDS.

(c) _Cancer Awareness Programme: NCC cadets_
actively participated in Cancer Awareness
Programme organized in various cities. Cancer
Care India (CACI) and NCC have joined hands to
launch Cancer Awareness Programmes (CAPS)
throughout the country. Every year during TSC/
VSC/NSC a Cancer Awareness Competition is
also organised.

(d) _Anti Drugs/Tobacco Programme: As part of_
National Drive approximately 78,000 cadets
participated in various anti drugs activities on
June 26.

(e) _Mission_ _INDRADHANUSH:_ _Immunization:_
To assist in the national goal of immunizing
children in the affected districts pan India NCC
cadets have ensured this year at least 61,500
children have been immunized.

(f) _International_ _Yoga_ _Day_ _(IYD18):_ The
performance of Yoga by more than 7 lakh
cadets on international Day of Yoga conducted
in 6811 venues pan India, including Leh in the
North, Dwarka in the West, Tezu (Arunachal
Pradesh) in the East, Nagarcoil (Kanyakumari)
in the South and in the Islands of Andaman &
Nicobar and Lakshadweep was a phenomenal
achievement.


-----

(g) _Swachh Bharat Abhiyan: A massive focus is_

laid each year on Swachhta based programmes

throughout the different states. Following

volunteer mass participation by NCC was

achieved pan India:

(i) From September 15 – October 2,

2018 over 10.5 lakh cadets took part

voluntarily in various cleanliness drives,

part of Swachhta Hi Sewa fortnight.

(ii) From December 1 – 15, 2018 over 7.72

lakh cadets took part in Swachhta

Pakhwada.

(h) _Digital Literacy (e-payment): Based on the_

Prime Minister directions NCC has joined the

National Digital Literacy Campaign on large

scale and has till date indirectly ensured public

awareness of one crore population pan India.

(i) _Blood Donation: A total of approximately_

1,15,000 Blood Units were donated by NCC

Cadets pan India in various Camps and

Programmes.


(j) _Disaster Relief: 45,000 NCC cadets were_

actively involved in assisting the civil

administration in relief operations during the

Kerala and Karnataka floods.

(k) _Water Conservation: As a part of youth_

synergy actions approximately 97,000

cadets participated in various kind of water

conservation programmes, rallies and efforts

including Water Day Celebration pan India.

(l) _Beti Bachao Beti Padhao: As part of awareness_

programmes based on concept of Beti Bachao

Beti Padhao at least 37,000 cadets participated

pan India.

(m) _Adoption of Villages/Slum Areas: This has_

been laid down as a Focus Area. Every Unit and

Group HQs are adopting villages / slum areas in

different parts of the country to assist the State

administration in carrying out improvement of

civic amenities in these villages to ensure all

round and inclusive growth. This also provides

an opportunity to NCC cadets to identify

themselves with different sections of society

and people living in villages.





###### 9


-----

-----

###### chapter
###  14

#### DEFENCE COOPERATION WITH  FOREIGN COUNTRIES


-----

# 14

14.1 Defence cooperation between India and various
friendly countries received further impetus during the
year with various bilateral and multilateral high level
visits and exchanges. The whole gamut of issues of
defence cooperation were taken forward in a structured
manner with various countries. There were 12 Defence
Ministerial level visits to India during the year, while
Raksha Mantri visited 13 countries. The following are
major highlights of defence cooperation between India
and other foreign countries during the period.

###### Argentina

14.2 An MoU on Defence Cooperation was signed
with Argentina on February 18, 2019 in New Delhi
to create an institutional cooperation arrangement
between both the countries.

###### Australia

14.3 Chief of Royal Australian Navy led delegation
visited India from January 19-20, 2018. The 7[th] Indian
Air Force (IAF) and Royal Australian Air Force
(RAAF) Air Staff Talks were held at New Delhi from
September 5-7, 2018. The 12[th] Indian Navy (IN) and
Royal Australian Navy (RAN) Staff Talks were held at
New Delhi from September 10-11, 2018. Joint Army
Exercise ‘AUSTRAHIND’ was held in India from August
23 – September 5, 2018. A delegation led by Defence
Secretary attended India-Australia Foreign and
Defence Secretaries’ 2+2 Dialogue, held at Australia
from October 10-11, 2018. The 6[th] India-Australia Army
to Army Staff Talks (AAST) were held at New Delhi
from October 25–27, 2018. Joint India-Australia Naval
Exercise ‘KAKADU’ was conducted in 2018. A delegation

###### 98


###### DEFENCE COOPERATION WITH FOREIGN COUNTRIES

# 14


led by Chief of Air Force, Royal Australian Air Force
visited India from February 4-7, 2019. A delegation
led by Additional Secretary visited Australia to attend
the 6[th] India-Australia Defence Policy Talks (DPT) from
March 13-15, 2019.

###### Bangladesh

14.4 The inaugural Annual Defence Dialogue
(ADD) with Bangladesh was held on May 7-8, 2018 in
New Delhi. An MoU on Academic Exchange and Cooperation between the Army Public Schools of India
and Cantonment Public and English Medium Schools
and Colleges of Bangladesh Army was signed on May 8,
2018. A delegation led by Naval Chief visited Bangladesh
from June 25-28, 2018. Annual Staff Talks between Air
Force, Navy and Army of the two countries were held
during July 22-24, August 8-10, and November 1-3,
2018 respectively. A delegation led by Chief of Air Staff,
Bangladesh Air Force visited India from October 1319, 2018. A delegation led by Chief of Air Staff, visited
Bangladesh from February 11-14, 2019. Joint IndiaBangladesh Naval Exercise ‘CORPAT’ was conducted
in 2018. Joint Army Exercise ‘SAMPRITI’ was held in
Bangladesh from March 2-15, 2019.

###### Brazil

14.5 A delegation led by Chief of Air Staff visited
Brazil from June 4-7, 2018. Additional Secretary led
delegation visited Brazil from February 11-15, 2019 to
hold 6[th] India-Brazil Joint Defence Committee (JDC)
meeting, and to further the engagement between
Defence industries, Training Centers and Military
facilities of both countries.


-----

###### Cambodia

14.6 A delegation led by Raksha Mantri visited

Cambodia on June 11, 2018 for holding bilateral meeting

with the Defence Minister of Cambodia to enhance

bilateral defence cooperation.

###### China

14.7 A delegation led by Raksha Mantri visited

Beijing to attend Shanghai Cooperation Organisation

(SCO) Defence Ministers’ meeting from April 22-25,

2018. The 4[th] India-China Working Group meeting was

held in New Delhi from June 7-8, 2018. A delegation

led by the State Councilor and Defence Minister of

China visited India from August 21-24, 2018 to hold a

delegation level talk with Raksha Mantri. The 9[th] India
China Annual Defence and Security Dialogue was held

in Beijing from November 12-14, 2018.

###### Egypt

14.8 The 7[th] Joint Defence Committee (JDC) meeting

was held in Egypt on January 22-23, 2018. Raksha Mantri

visited Egypt to discuss bilateral defence cooperation

issues on September 20-22, 2018. The 8[th] meeting of the

JDC was held at New Delhi on December 26, 2018.

###### France

14.9 India and France continued to build on their

robust and mutually beneficially partnership in defence

cooperation. Visit of French Defence Minister to India

and signing of an Agreement regarding Provision of

Reciprocal Logistics Support between Indian and French

Armed Forces was a significant achievement. Raksha

Mantri led delegation also visited France from October

11-12, 2018. Joint India-France Naval Exercise ‘VARUNA’

was conducted in 2018. A delegation led by the France’s

Chief of the Naval Staff visited India from January 6-7,

2019.


###### Germany

14.10 A delegation led by the Chief of the German
Navy visited India from October 15-18, 2018. Defence
Cooperation with Germany increased significantly this
year, with the visit of Raksha Mantri led delegation to
Germany from February 12-13, 2019. India-Germany 9[th]
High Defence Committee (HDC) meeting co-chaired
by Defence Secretary was held on February 28, 2019 in
New Delhi.

###### Indonesia

14.11 Minister of Defence of Indonesia visited India on
January 19, 2018 and held bilateral Ministerial dialogue
with Raksha Mantri. 7[th] Army to Army Staff Talks were
held in Bali, Indonesia on January 24, 2018. Prime
Minister visited Indonesia from May 29-30, 2018 during
which an Agreement concerning cooperation in the field
of Defence was signed. A delegation led by Indonesian
Secretary General of Ministry of Defence attended
the 6[th] India-Indonesia Joint Defence Cooperation
Committee (JDCC) meeting held on August 9, 2018 in
India. 9[th] Navy to Navy Staff Talks between India and
Indonesia were held at New Delhi on August 28, 2018.
Raksha Mantri visited Indonesia for a bilateral meeting
with Defence Minister of Indonesia on October 23, 2018.
2[nd] Air to Air Staff Talks between India and Indonesia
were held in Jakarta from November 20-23, 2018. Joint
Army Exercise ‘GARUDA SHAKTI’ was held in Indonesia
form March 7-18, 2018.

###### Israel

14.12 A delegation led by Chief of Air Staff visited
Israel from May 22-24, 2018. The 14[th] Joint Working
Group meeting with Israel was held at New Delhi from
July 2-3, 2018. Annual Staff talks between Army, Navy
and Air Forces of the two countries were held on March
26-28, June 18-20 and October 15-18, 2018 respectively.
A delegation led by the Commander of Israel Air Force
visited India from March 10-14, 2019.

###### 99


-----

###### Italy

14.13 Defence Cooperation with Italy gained strength

with the resumption of Joint Defence Committee (JDC)

dialogue after a gap of more than 8 years. The 9[th] JDC

was held in Rome from May 14-15, 2018, co-chaired by

Defence Secretary. The engagement on Services side

has also gained momentum through talks with Italian

Forces on October 11-12, 2018.

###### Japan

14.14 A delegation led by the Chief of Joint Staff,

Japan Self-Defence Forces visited India from March 5-7,

2018. The 2[nd] Air-to-Air Staff Talks with Japan were held

in Japan from June 5-6, 2018. The 6[th] Defence Policy

Dialogue (DPD) with Japan, co-chaired by Defence

Secretary, was held on June 18, 2018 at New Delhi,

followed by India-Japan 2+2 Dialogue held on June 19,

2018, wherein the Foreign Secretary and the Defence

Secretary led the Indian delegation. Defence Minister of

Japan led delegation visited India to attend 4[th] India
Japan Annual Defence Minister’s Dialogue on August

20, 2018. India-Japan Joint Army Exercise ‘FTX JAPAN’

was held in India from November 1-14, 2018.


###### Jordan

14.15 A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)
between India and Jordan on Defence Cooperation was
signed on March 1, 2018 during the visit of the King of
Jordan to India.

###### Kazakhstan

14.16 5[th] meeting of India-Kazakhstan Joint Working
Group on Defence and Military Technical Cooperation
was held in Astana from May 31 - June 1, 2018. An MoU
and Technical Agreement between India and Kazakhstan
concerning arrangements for joint deployment of the
Kazakh Peacekeeping contingent as part of Indian
Battalion in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) was signed on August 21, 2018. A delegation
led by Raksha Mantri visited Kazakhstan from October
3-4, 2018 for holding bilateral meetings with the Defence
Minister of Kazakhstan.

###### Kenya

14.17 Defence Secretary led delegation visited
Kenya for bilateral discussion in January 2018. Kenyan
Cabinet Secretary (Minister) for Defence visited India


_Bilateral meeting with Kazakhstan_


###### 200


-----

during June 17-22, 2018. A delegation from Kenya led by
Assistant Chief of Defence Forces, visited India to attend
the 1[st] meeting of Joint Defence Cooperation Committee
between India and Kenya on February 18, 2019.

###### Madagascar

14.18 The defence relations with Madagascar were
initiated by the visit of Joint Secretary ((Planning
and International Cooperation)) led delegation to
Madagascar for bilateral discussions in January 2018. A
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between India
and Madagascar on Cooperation in the field of Defence
was signed on March 14, 2018 in Madagascar.

###### Malaysia

14.19 8[th] Indian Air Force (IAF) – Royal Malaysian Air
Force (RMAF) Air Staff Talks with Malaysia were held
in Kuala Lumpur from February 14-16, 2018. Joint Army
Exercise ‘HARIMAU SHAKTI’ was held in Malaysia from
April 30 – May 13, 2018. 7[th] Navy to Navy Staff Talks
between India and Malaysia were held in India from July
4-7, 2018. A delegation led by Chief of the Air Staff visited
Malaysia from September 6-7, 2018. A delegation led by
Defence Secretary visited Kuala Lumpur from November
21-22, 2018 for attending the 11[th] Malaysia-India Defence
Cooperation Meeting (MIDCOM). During the meeting,
an MoU between Malaysia and India on United Nations
Peacekeeping Cooperation was also signed.

###### Maldives

14.20 Joint MNDF-Indian Navy Marine Commandos
Exercise ‘Ekatha’ was held in April-May 2018. Joint
Coast Guard Exercises ‘DOSTI’ was conducted with
Maldives on November 25-29, 2018. Joint Army
Exercise ‘Ekuverin’ was conducted in Maldives from
December 15-28, 2018. The 3[rd] Joint Staff Talks
between India and Maldives were held from June 2627, 2018 in Male. Defence Minister of Maldives visited
India from January 23-30, 2019. During the visit, the
second India-Maldives Defence Cooperation Dialogue


(DCD), co-chaired by our Defence Secretary and Chief
of Defence Forces of Maldives, was held on January
24, 2019 in New Delhi.

###### Mongolia

14.21 Defence Minister of Mongolia visited India from March

6-10, 2018 and had a bilateral meeting with Raksha Mantri on

March 8, 2018. Joint Army Exercise ‘NOMADIC ELEPHANT’

was held in Mongolia from September 10-21, 2018.

###### Myanmar

14.22 India’s defence cooperation with Myanmar
enhanced significantly in 2018. 3[rd] India-Myanmar Air
Staff Talks (AST) were held in New Delhi from August
7-9, 2018. A delegation led by Chief of the Air Staff
visited Myanmar from September 3-4, 2018. A delegation
led by Deputy Commander-in-Chief, Myanmar Defence
Services & Commander-in-Chief (Army) (Myanmar Army
Chief) visited India from September 17-20, 2018. 7[th] IndiaMyanmar Navy Staff Talks were held at New Delhi from
October 10-12, 2018. Joint India-Myanmar Naval Exercise
‘IMCOR’ and ‘IN-MN BILAT’ was conducted in 2018. IndiaMyanmar Joint Army Exercise (IMBAX) was held in India
January 14-19, 2019. 4[th] India-Myanmar Army to Army
Staff Talks were held in Myanmar from March 13-15, 2019.

###### Nigeria

14.23 A delegation led by Chief of the Naval Staff,
Nigerian Navy visited India from July 16-19, 2018. The
Permanent Secretary of Nigerian MoD visited India to
attend the 5[th] Joint Defence Cooperation Committee
(JDCC) meeting from January 17-18, 2019.

###### Oman

14.24 The 8[th] India-Oman Air Staff talks were held
in New Delhi from February 20-22, 2018. Omani
delegation led by Minister responsible for Defence
Affairs, visited India in September 2018. The 2[nd] Navy
to Navy Staff Talks between India and Oman were held

###### 20


-----

from September 18-19, 2018 at New Delhi. A delegation
led by Defence Secretary visited Oman to attend the
10[th] meeting of India-Oman joint Military Cooperation
Committee (JMCC) held in Muscat on November 28,
2018. Joint Army Exercise ‘AL NAGAH’ was held in Oman
from March 12-26, 2019.

###### Rwanda

14.25 An agreement between India and Rwanda on
cooperation in Defence Fields of Capacity Building,
Defence Industry, Science and Technology was signed
at Kigali on July 23, 2018.

###### Republic of Korea (RoK)

14.26 A delegation led by the Minister of National
Defence, RoK visited India on August 10, 2018 and had a
bilateral meeting with Raksha Mantri. 1[st] India-RoK Army
to Army Staff Talks were held in Seoul from August 2931, 2018. 1[st] IN-RoK Navy Staff Talks were held at Seoul
on September 13, 2018.

###### Russia

14.27 Russia continues to remain the most important
supplier of defence equipment to India. Raksha Mantri
visited Russia from April 3-5, 2018 to attend the 7[th]
Moscow Conference on International Security. Joint
Army and Air Force Exercise ‘SCO Ex PEACE MSN’ was
held in Russian from August 16-29, 2018. Joint Air Force
Exercise ‘EX AVIAINDRA’ was held from September
17-28, 2018 and again from December 10-21, 2018.
Joint India-Russia Naval Exercise ‘INDRA NAVY’ was
conducted in 2018. The 3[rd] Staff Talks between Indian
Navy and Russian Federation Navy were held in Russia
from September 26-28, 2018. A delegation led by Chief
of Army Staff visited Russia from October 2-5, 2018.
4[th] Staff Talks were held between General Staff of the
Armed Forces of Russian Federation and HQ IDS from
October 31 - November 1, 2018 in India. India-Russia Joint
Army Exercise ‘INDRA’ was held in India from November
18-28, 2018. The 18[th] India Russia Inter-Governmental

###### 202


Commission on Military Technical Cooperation meeting
was co-chaired by Raksha Mantri and Russian Defence
Minister on December 13, 2018, in New Delhi when an
Agreement on establishing the Indian-Russian Inter
governmental Commission on Military and MilitaryTechnical Cooperation was also signed. A delegation led
by Land Forces Commander, Russian Federation met
Defence Secretary on March 14, 2019 in New Delhi.

###### Saudi Arabia

14.28 A delegation led by the CNS, Chairman, Chiefs
of Staff Committee, visited Saudi Arabia from February
5-7, 2018. The 4[th] meeting of JCDC was held in Saudi
Arabia during January 2-3, 2019.

###### Singapore

14.29 Defence cooperation with Singapore has seen
a significant augmentation, especially at the politicostrategic level in 2018. 12[th] India-Singapore Defence
Policy Dialogue (DPD) was held on May 1, 2018 in India
under the co-chairmanship of Defence Secretary and
Permanent Secretary (Defence), Singapore. The 11[th]
meeting of India-Singapore Defence Working Group
(DWG) was held on September 27, 2018 at New Delhi.
Defence Minister of Singapore visited India during
November 19-20, 2018 to attend the 3[rd] meeting of
India-Singapore Defence Ministers’ Dialogue (DMD) and
the Singapore-India Maritime Bilateral Exercise 2018
(SIMBEX 18) at Vizag. The 10[th] India-Singapore Air Staff
Talks were held at New Delhi from January 11-12, 2018,
and 13[th] Navy Staff Talks with Singapore were held at
Singapore from April 12-14, 2018. Joint Army Exercise
‘BOLD KURUKSHETRA’ was held in India from March
27 – April 14, 2019.

###### Spain

14.30 Defence cooperation between India and
Spain has been cordial. Two sides conducted a very
constructive and fruitful 3[rd] Joint Working Group (JWG)
meeting in New Delhi on November 26, 2018.


-----

###### Sri Lanka

14.31 The 5[th] India-Sri Lanka Annual Defence Dialogue

(ADD) was held on January 9, 2018 in New Delhi. Annual

staff talks between Air Force, Navy and Army of the

two countries were held on January 16-18, February

7-9 and March 20-22, 2018 respectively. A delegation

led by Commander of Sri Lanka Army visited India

from September 17-19, 2018. Joint India-Sri Lanka Naval

Exercise ‘SLINEX’ was conducted in 2018. A delegation

led by Commander, Sri Lankan Navy visited India from

March 30 - April 2, 2019.

###### Sweden

14.32 A delegation led by the Chief of Staff, Swedish

Air Force visited India from September 26-29, 2018.

A delegation led by Raksha Mantri visited Sweden

from February 13-14, 2019 when a bilateral Agreement

on Exchange and Mutual Protection of Classified

Information for Cooperation in the Defence Area was

also signed.

###### Tajikistan

14.33 Tajik Defence Minister visited India from

February 6-9, 2018 and held bilateral meetings. A

delegation led by Defence Secretary visited Tajikistan

from July 26-28, 2018 to attend the 7[th] Joint Working

Group meeting.


###### Thailand

14.34 2[nd] India–Thailand Army to Army Staff Talks

were held in Thailand from July 11-13 2018. 9[th] Air–to
Air Staff Talks were held from August 7-9, 2018 at New

Delhi. An Indian delegation led by Raksha Mantri visited

Thailand from August 27-28, 2018 for holding bilateral

meeting with the Defence Minister of Thailand. Joint

Air Force Exercise ‘EX SIAM BHARAT’ was held from

September 3-14, 2018. A delegation led by Commander
in-Chief, Royal Thai Navy visited India from December 18
20, 2018. Joint India-Thailand Naval Exercise ‘CORPAT’

was conducted in 2018. 11[th] Indian Navy-Royal Thai Navy

Staff Talks and 15[th] Indo-Thai JWG-EoS Meeting were

held at Bangkok from March 12-14, 2019. A delegation

led by Deputy Permanent Secretary for Defence,

Thailand visited India on March 7, 2019 to attend the 7[th]

meeting of India-Thailand Defence Dialogue, co-chaired

by Additional Secretary.

###### Ukraine

14.35 1[st] Joint Working Group (JWG) meeting

between India and Ukraine was held in Kyiv from June

3-5, 2018.

###### United Arab Emirates (UAE)

14.36 1[st] bilateral Naval Exercise ‘Gulf Star 1’ was

held from March 17-22, 2018 off UAE coast. MoS for

Defence Affairs of the UAE visited India in October 2018

to discuss bilateral defence cooperation issues with

Raksha Mantri. The UAE delegation also attended DEF

EXPO 2018. Joint India-UAE Naval Exercise ‘BILAT’ was

conducted in 2018.

###### Uganda

14.37 An MoU between India and Uganda on

Cooperation in the field of Defence was signed at

Kampala on July 24, 2018.

###### 203


-----

###### 20


###### United Kingdom Uzbekistan

14.38 A delegation led by Chief of the General Staff, 11.40 Uzbek Defence Minister visited India from

September 4-6, 2018 and held various bilateral meetings.

UK visited India from February 12-15, 2018. A delegation

The President of Uzbekistan visited India and an MoU on

led by our Chief of Air Staff visited UK from July 10-15,

cooperation in the field of Military Education between

2018 for attending 100[th] anniversary celebration of the

the Ministry of Defence of India and the Ministry of

Royal Air Force. The 19[th] India-UK Defence Consultative

Defence of Uzbekistan was signed on October 1, 2018.

Group (DCG) meeting, co-chaired by Defence Secretary,

The 1[st] India-Uzbekistan Joint Working Group (JWG)

was held in New Delhi on September 27, 2018. Joint India- meeting on Defence Cooperation was held on February

UK Naval Exercise ‘KONKAN’ was conducted in 2018. A 27, 2019 in New Delhi. A delegation led by Defence

delegation led by Defence Secretary visited London to Secretary visited Uzbekistan from March 25-29, 2019.

attend the 20[th] India-UK Defence Consultative Group

(DCG) meeting from March 7-9, 2019. **Vietnam**

11.41 Inaugural Indian Air Force-Vietnamese People’s

###### USA

Air Force & Air Defence Air Staff Talks were held at
New Delhi from March 7-9, 2018. Raksha Mantri visited

14.39 The year 2018 was a significant and productive

Vietnam for a bilateral visit from June 12-15, 2018. 11[th]

year for India-US defence cooperation. Chief of Staff of

India-Vietnam Security Dialogue, co-chaired by Defence

the United States Air Force led delegation visited India Secretary, was held at New Delhi on August 1, 2018. A

from January 31 - February 4, 2018. A delegation led delegation led by Chief of Army Staff visited Vietnam

by our Chief of Naval Staff visited USA from March 19- from November 22-24, 2018. A delegation led by

Commander-in-Chief, Vietnam People’s Navy visited

22, 2018. The inaugural 2+2 Dialogue between Foreign

India from December 5-8, 2018. 3[rd] Indian Navy-Vietnam

and Defence Ministers of India and US was held in India

People’s Navy Staff Talks were held from December 26-

on September 6, 2018, during which Communications,

28, 2018 in Vietnam.

Compatibility and Security Agreement (COMCASA) was

signed by Raksha Mantri and US Secretary of Defense.

###### ASEAN DEFENCE MINISTERS MEETING

A delegation led by Chief of the Naval Staff visited US

###### (ADMM) - PLUS

for participating in the 23[rd] International Seapower

Symposium (ISS-23) from September 18-21, 2018.

14.42 The ADMM-Plus is a significant milestone in the

Another Army Joint Exercise ‘VAJRAPRAHAR’ was held in

evolving security architecture in the Asia Pacific and its

India from November 19 – December 2, 2018. Joint India-

meeting is held annually. It is supported by ASEAN Defence

US Naval Exercise ‘MALABAR’ was conducted in 2018. Senior Officials’ Meeting (ADSOM) and seven Expert

Raksha Mantri paid a visit to USA for bilateral meetings Working Groups (EWGs) in various areas of cooperation.

with US Secretary of Defence and visited US defence Each EWG is co-chaired by an ASEAN member and

a non-ASEAN country for a period of three years by

establishments during December 3-6, 2018. During these

rotation. For the cycle 2017-2019, India and Myanmar

interactions, substantial progress was made on a range

co-chaired EWG on Military Medicine. The 5[th] meeting of

of issues including Military-to-Military exchanges and

ADMM-Plus, held at Singapore from October 19-21, 2018

new exercises, establishment of Mini 2+2 dialogue, R&D

was attended by a delegation led by Raksha Mantri.

and defence industry cooperation. A 2+2 forum at Joint

On the sidelines of ADMM-Plus meeting, Raksha Mantri

Secretary level between India and USA was also instituted held bilateral talks with Defence Ministers of Singapore,

and held in New Delhi on January 11, 2019. USA, Malaysia, Philippines, Australia and Vietnam.


-----

###### chapter
###  15

##### Ceremonial and other activities


-----

# 15

15.1 The Ministry of Defence encourages and

promotes both academic and adventure activities

through autonomous institutions which are provided

regular financial assistance. These institutions are:

(i) The Institute for Defense Studies and Analyses

(IDSA), New Delhi.

(ii) Nehru Institute of Mountaineering (NIM),

Uttarkashi.

(iii) Himalayan Mountaineering Institute (HMI),

Darjeeling.

(iv) Jawahar Institute of Mountaineering and Winter

Sports (JIM & WS) at Pahalgam.

(v) National Institute of Mountaineering and Allied

Sports (NIMAS) at Dirang.

15.2 The important activities of these institutions

during the period are enumerated in the succeeding

paragraphs.

###### INSTITUTE FOR DEFENCE STUDIES AND ANALYSES (IDSA)

15.3 The Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses

(IDSA) is a registered body under the Registration of

Societies Act III of 1860 (Punjab Amendment Act 1957)

as amended from time to time. It was established

in November 1965. The Institute is a non-partisan,

autonomous body dedicated to objective research

and policy-relevant studies on all aspects of defence

###### 206


###### CEREMONIAL AND OTHER 
 ACTIVITIES

# 15


and security. Its mission is to promote national and

international security through the generation and

dissemination of knowledge on defence and security
related issues.

15.4 IDSA is fully funded by the Ministry of Defence.

The scholars at IDSA are drawn from academia, the

defence forces and the civil services. The research

faculty of 48 scholars including 8 Serving Officers on

study leave is organised under 13 Centres. The Institute

also hosted 3 Visiting Fellows from foreign countries

under its Visiting Fellowship Programme and 5 Interns

under its Internship Programme during the year, which

has improved outreach of the Institute as well as

enhanced its visibility across the globe.

15.5 The research centres at IDSA are engaged

in studies on all regional and global developments

influencing India’s security and foreign policy. With

India engaging vigorously with the region and the

World, IDSA’s interaction with the wider strategic

community at the national and international level has

increased substantially. It is carrying out research on

many contemporary subjects such as climate change,

energy and water security, cyber and space security.

The Institute is continuously focussing on emergence of

new challenges and India’s response to such challenges.

In view of India’s emphasis on improving its relations

with the immediate neighbourhood, IDSA has a team

of scholars working on the South Asian region. India’s

relations with the ASEAN, African and Latin American

countries as well as the security environment in these

continents are continuously monitored. Special attention

is paid to defence reforms, including procurement


-----

policies and procedures, defence diplomacy and

security dialogues initiated by the Government.

15.6 During the year, a number of eminent visitors

and delegations from abroad were hosted at the

IDSA. Research teams from prominent think-tanks and

government departments were also engaged. IDSA’s

website www.idsa.in continues to remain a source of

information on a wide range of security and defence

issues for researchers, students and public. Social media

tools like YouTube, Facebook and Twitter etc. have also

been used extensively to enhance IDSA’s outreach.

15.7 IDSA remains committed to research on policy

relevant studies which contribute to national and

international security. Scholars from IDSA enhance their

understanding as well as reach through interaction with

policy makers on a continuous basis. IDSA pursued

research projects on behalf of various government

departments. It expanded its training programmes

to include officers from larger number of government

departments primarily to share its research findings

on important subjects aligned to defence and security

and update their knowledge on a wide gamut of issues

having bearing on their professional field.

15.8 Various events like International conferences/

seminars, workshops/ panel & roundtable discussions,

talks, bilateral interactions and training programmes

etc., were organized by IDSA during the year. Some of

these are indicated below:

(a) _International_ _Conferences/_ _Seminars:_

International conferences were organized

by IDSA throughout the year of which the

important ones are”

      - _August 28-29, 2018: IDSA jointly_

organised a conference with Institute

for Policy, Advocacy, and Governance

(IPAG), Dhaka, Bangladesh, on Digital

Age & Cyber Space: Maximizing


Benefits, Minimizing Risks, Unleashing

Creativity. It was inaugurated by CEO,

NITI Aayog, Government of India.

      - _September 5-6, 2018: 3[rd] West Asia_

Conference, titled Changing Security

Paradigm in West Asia: Regional

and International Responses was

inaugurated by Minister of State for

External Affairs, Government of India.

      - _December 18-19: IDSA hosted its 11[th]_

South Asian Conference titled “Non
Traditional Security Challenges in South

Asia: An Agenda for Cooperation”.

      - _March 26-28, 2019:_ IDSA hosted its

annual flagship event, the 20[th] Asian

Security Conference which focussed

on “Multipolarism in Asia: Issues and

Challenges”. The event was attended

by 31 participants from 19 countries.

Minister of State (Independent Charge)

Housing and Urban Affairs, Government

of India, delivered a special address on

“The Role of Infrastructure in India’s

Growth and Emergence in Asia”.

(b) _Workshop/ Panel Discussion: The institute_

organised several workshops/ panel discussions

during the year, including:

      - _May 10, 2018: One day workshop on_

‘Major Powers and Korean Peninsula:

Policies, Politics and Perspectives’ was

organized by IDSA.

      - _September_ _11,_ _2018:_ IDSA in

collaboration with International

Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)

organised one day seminar on ‘Possible

Human Cost of Cyber Warfare’.

###### 20


-----

_IDSA – BIMSTEC Workshop December 5-7, 2018_



      - _December 5-6, 2018: A workshop on_

“Cyber Security Cooperation” was

organised jointly by IDSA and BIMSTEC.

      - _December 7, 2018: IDSA and Japan_

Foundation organized India-Japan

‘Cooperation in Indo-pacific and

Beyond 2025: Corridors, Connectivity

and Contours’.

(c) _Limited Interactions: The limited interaction_

undertaken by the institute included:

      - _December 5, 2018: Interaction on_

‘Evolving Contours of Dialogue with

Taliban’ with Former Deputy Foreign

Minister of Afghanistan.

      - _January 11, 2019:_ Interaction on

‘European Union Policy on Iran’ with

Non Resident Fellow, Carnegie Europe

      - _January 15, 2019: The United Nations_

Under-Secretary General and High

Representative for Disarmament

Affairs on “Weapons and Technology,

including issues related to Weapon of

Mass Destruction.”

###### 208


(d) _Talks: The talks interactions undertaken by the_

institute included:

      - _April 9, 2018: ‘Emerging Technologies_

in the Future and their Impact on

Warfighting’ by Scientist ‘G’ and

Director (Admin and SQR- System

Analysis, Quality and Reliability),

Defence Research and Development

Organisation (DRDO).

      - _April 13, 2018: ‘Using China’s Pre-1949_

Official/Authoritative Documents to

Examine PRC’s Claim of Sovereignty

over Tibet’ by Chair Professor at the

City University of Hong Kong.

      - _May 10, 2018: ‘Uncharted Waters for_

the Myanmar Dual State’ by Director of

Tampadipa Institute, Yangon.

      - _May 14, 2018: ‘China’s Military after_

the Re-organisation’ by Major General,

Dean of Army War College, Mhow.

      - _June 7, 2018: ‘Prime Ministers’ visit_

to Indonesia and the Emerging

Cooperation between India and


-----

Indonesia’ by former professor of

Jawaharlal Nehru University.

- _June 13, 2018: ‘China’s Maritime Silk_

Route and Shifting World Order: An

American Perspective’ by Associate

Professor at the College of International

Security Affairs (CISA), National

Defense University, Washington, D.C.

- _June 29, 2018: ‘Problematic Sovereignty_

on China’s Periphery: Cases of Tibet and

Taiwan’ by Lecturer in Chinese Politics

at the University of Southampton.

- _July 4, 2018: ‘Domestic Politics in_

Bangladesh and Future of Bilateral

Relations’ by India’s High Commissioner

to Bangladesh.

- _July 5, 2018: ‘Current State of India-_

Bangladesh Relations and its Future’

by His Excellency, Bangladesh’s High

Commissioner to India.

- _July 24, 2018: ‘The Rise of China as_

a World-Class Military Technological

Power - Geo-Strategic and Geo
Economic Implications’ by Director

of UC Institute on Global Conflict and

Cooperation (IGCC).

- _July 26, 2018: ‘Defence Planning_

Committee: An Overview’ by Lieutenant

General, Chief of Integrated Defence

Staff to the Chairman Chiefs of Staff

Committee (CISC).

- _August 14, 2018: ‘National Military_

Culture and Civil-Military Relations’ by

Air Marshal (Retd.).



      - _August 24, 2018: ‘India’s Maritime_

Security Challenges’ by Admiral, the

Chief of the Naval Staff.

      - _September_ _20,_ _2018:_ ‘Counter
Insurgency in India and the Kautilyan

Upayas’ by Lecturer at South Asia

Institute of Heidelberg University.

      - _September 20, 2018: ‘Traces of Indian_

Culture in Vietnam’ by President of

Indian-Vietnam Solidarity Committee.

      - _October_ _30,_ _2018:_ ‘Information

Manipulation: A Challenge for our

Democracies’ by Director, Institute for

Strategic Studies (IRSEM).

      - _November 28, 2018: Chief of the Army_

Staff, delivered the 9[th] Annual Y. B.

Chavan Memorial Lecture. The title of

his presentation was “Addressing the

Challenges of Hybrid Conflict in the 21[st]

Century”.

      - _February 12, 2019: Assistant Professor at_

the Faculty of International relations, Asia

University, Tokyo, shared his perspective

on ‘Japan’s Nuclear Disarmament and

Non-proliferation Policy.’

      - _February 15, 2019:_ Chairman of

National Security Advisory Board

delivered lecture on ‘Restructuring

India’s National Security Apparatus’.

(e) _Track II Bilateral Interaction: The Track-II/Bilateral_

interaction undertaken by the Institute included:

      - _May_ _16,_ _2018:_ Interaction with

Diplomatic Academy Vietnam (DAV),

Vietnam on ‘Strategic Issues’.

###### 209


-----

      - _June 11, 2018: Interaction on ‘India-_

China relations in the post-Wuhan

meeting, new regional security

dimension and economic cooperation’

with China Institute for Contemporary

International Relations (CICIR), Beijing.

(f) _Roundtable Discussions/ Book Discussions:_

The institute organized several round table

discussions during the year, including:

      - _April 3, 2018: ‘United States Policy_

in Indo-Pacific, China’s Belt and

Road Initiative and India-Taiwan

Cooperation’.

      - _April 11, 2018:_ ‘India’s Regional and

Global role and Israel’s Engagement in

the West Asia and South Asian Region’.

      - _April 27-28, 2018: ‘Prime Minister meeting_

with Chinese President in Wuhan’.

      - _May 11, 2018: ‘The Nuclear Policy of_

India and strengthening it in the Future’.

      - _May 16, 2018: ‘Role of Nigeria on_

African Security issue and Defence

cooperation with India’.

      - _May_ _22,_ _2018:_ ‘India-Uzbekistan

relations in Economic and Cultural

Relations’.

      - _June 14, 2018: ‘Current Situation in_

Kashmir and the Future Prospects’.

      - _June_ _26,_ _2018:_ ‘UK Defence

Procurement Organisations Evolution’.

      - _July 6, 2018: ‘New Afghan Peace_

Initiatives: Can the Domestic and

###### 2 0


Regional Dimensions be Synchronized?’

- _July 18, 2018:_ ‘Pakistan National

Assembly Elections 2018: Issues and

Challenges’.

- _August 13, 2018: ‘Development in_

Maldives on upcoming Presidential

Elections in September 2018’.

- _August 17, 2018:_ ‘Post Elections

Pakistan: Emerging Political Trends and

Implications’.

- _September 27, 2018: ‘India-Uzbekistan_

bilateral relations’.

- _October_ _31,_ _2018:_ ‘Contemporary

Maritime Scene in the Indian Ocean and

Sri Lanka’s Perceptions’.

- _November 12, 2018: ‘India and Republic_

of Korea in Asia and Beyond.’

- _December 4, 2018: ‘US-India, India-_

China, India-Pakistan, India-Israel and

India-Iran Relations’

- _December 17, 2018: ‘China Belt and_

Road Initiative, Indo-Pacific, India Act

East Policy and India-Korean Relations.’

- _January 8, 2019:_ ‘India Vietnam

Relations’

- _January 24, 2019: ‘Globally Assertive_

China: Challenges for India, including

for its Tibet policy’.

- _January_ _31,_ _2019:_ ‘Australia-India

Relations.’


-----

      - _February 6, 2019: ‘Security Situation in_
South Asia, China and other Regional
Security issues.’

      - _February 14, 2019: ‘In Their Own Words:_
Understanding Lashkar-e-Tayyaba’

      - _March 8, 2019: ‘States of Emergence,_
States of Knowledge: A Comparative
Sociology of International Relations in
China and India’

      - _March 13, 2019: ‘India and US relations_
and the evolving strategic competition
with China’

      - _March 19, 2019: ‘India’s Eastward_
Engagement: From Antiquity to Act
East Policy’

(g) _Special_ _Interactions:_ Following special
interaction undertaken by the Institute included:

      - _May 9, 2018: With China Institute for_
Strategic Studies (CIISS) on ‘IndiaChina Relations and Regional Security’.

      - _June 19, 2018: With Ministry of Defence,_
Japan on ‘India-Japan Security
Cooperation and Regional Security
Issues’.

      - _August 14, 2018: With Tanzania Centre_
for Foreign Relations (CFR).

      - _October 24, 2018: With Stimson Centre,_
Washington, D.C. on ‘India-China
Relations, Security Developments in
South Asia and Indo-Pacific’.

      - _October 24, 2018: With British Foreign_
Office, London on ‘South Asian
Regional Developments’.


(h) _Seminars (Scholars/Visiting Fellows):_ The

following seminars (Scholars/Visiting Fellows)

have been organized by the Institute:

      - _January 17, 2019: Abhay K. Singh_

and Shruti Pandalai presented a joint

paper on ‘Deconstructing the Indo
Pacific: Implications for India and the

Region’.

(i) _Training/Orientation Programmes: Following_

training programmes have been organized by

the Institute:

      - _April 23-27, 2018: ‘Strategic Orientation_

Module for National Technical Research

Organisation (NTRO)’.

      - _June 18-22, 2018:_ ‘Defence and

Security Module Training for DIG,

Border Security’.

      - _September 24 – October 5, 2018:_

‘Defence and Security Module Level-I

orientation programme for BSF

Commandants’.

      - _October_ _15-26,_ _2018:_ ‘Defence

Management Course for Ordnance

Factories Board Officers (OFB)’.

      - _November 26-30, 2018: Capsule Course_

on International Relations for National

Technical Research Organisation

(NTRO).

      - _January 28 - February 8, 2019:_

Orientation programme for Indian Air

Force Officers.

      - _March 22, 2019: MoD-Industry Meeting_

on Defence Offsets.

###### 2


-----

###### MOUNTAINEERING INSTITUTES

15.9 The Ministry of Defence jointly with the

concerned State Governments administers four

Mountaineering Institutes, namely (i) Himalayan

Mountaineering Institute (HMI), Darjeeling in West

Bengal; (ii) Nehru Institute of Mountaineering (NIM),

Uttarkashi in Uttarakhand; (iii) Jawahar Institute of

Mountaineering & Winter Sports (JIM & WS), Pahalgam

in J&K and (iv) National Institute of Mountaineering and

Allied Sports (NIMAS), Dirang in Arunachal Pradesh.

These Institutes are being run as Registered Societies

and have been conferred the status of autonomous

bodies. The institute are governed by separate Executive

Councils. Raksha Mantri is President, the Chief Minister of

the respective State acts as Vice-President of Executive

Councils. Other members elected by the General Body

of each Institute, nominees from amongst donors and/

or persons who are likely to promote the cause of the

mountaineering and representatives of Central and

State Governments.

15.10 These Institutes provide an impetus to

mountaineering as a sport, give boost to mountaineering

discipline and inculcate the spirit of adventure in youth.

The broad objectives of the Mountaineering Institutes

are:

(a) to impart theoretical knowledge and practical


training in mountaineering and rock climbing

techniques;

(b) to awaken interest in and love for mountains

and exploration among the youth;

(c) to encourage and provide training in Winter

Sports; and

(d) to generate a sense of preservation of

environment and ecology in the Himalayan

region through nature workshops.

15.11 These Institutes conduct courses in the Basic

and Advanced Mountaineering, Method of Instruction

(MOI), Advance course, Search & Rescue (S&R) and

Special Course. Trainees to these courses come from

all parts of the country and also comprise personnel

from Army, Air Force, Navy, Indo-Tibetan Border Police

(ITBP), Border Security Force (BSF) and National Cadet

Corps (NCC). Foreigners are also permitted to join

these courses. The syllabi, duration, grading, age limit

of participant and other details for admission to courses

are available on the website of these Institutes.

15.12 The courses being conducted are almost

uniform at all the Institutes. The regular courses and

special conducted by the Institutes and number of

trainees participated in these courses from April 2018 to

December 2017 are given in Table No. 15.1.


Table No. 15.1

|Institute|Basic Course|Col3|Advanced Course|Col5|Adventure Course|Col7|MOI Course|Col9|S&R Course|Col11|Special Courses|Col13|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||No. of Courses|No. of Trainees|No. of Courses|No. of Trainees|No. of Courses|No. of Trainees|No. of Courses|No. of Trainees|No. of Courses|No. of Trainees|No. of Courses|No. of Trainees|
|HMI|07|533|03|146|06|256|02|32|-|-|24|658|
|NIM|05|436|03|126|05|258|01|34|01|67|16|730|
|JIM & WS|09|520|03|122|03|141|01|24|-|-|10|294|
|NIMAS|16|391|05|64|13|476|01|05|01|08|10|161|


###### 2 2


-----

15.13 Mount Everest expedition was conducted by

NIMAS in the year 2018. Total eight climbers including

Director of the Institute from NIMAS scaled the highest

peak of the world without a single casualty or cold

injury.

###### CEREMONIALS, HONOURS AND AWARDS

15.14 The responsibility for organising National

functions like the Republic Day Parade, Beating the

Retreat Ceremony, Martyr’s Day and the Independence

Day rests with Ministry of Defence. The Ministry also

organises the Defence Investiture Ceremonies for

presentation of Gallantry and Distinguished Service

Awards at Rashtrapati Bhawan in association with

the President’s Secretariat. The Ceremonial functions

organised during 2018-2019 are detailed in the following

paragraphs.

15.15 _Independence Day Flag Hoisting Ceremony:_

The celebration of the Independence Day began with

singing of patriotic songs in different Indian languages

by the school children’s choir at Red Fort. The three

Services and Delhi Police presented the Guard of

Honour to the Prime Minister. Thereafter, the Prime

Minister unfurled the National Flag on the Ramparts

of the Red Fort to the accompaniment of the National

Anthem played by the Services Band. Twenty one

gun salute was presented on the occasion. After the

Prime Minister’s address to the nation, the ceremony

concluded with the singing of National Anthem by

school children and the NCC cadets followed by

release of balloons. Later during the day, the President

laid a wreath at the Amar Jawan Jyoti at India Gate to

pay homage to those who sacrificed their lives for the

freedom of the motherland.

15.16 The Gallantry Awards announced on the

eve of the Independence Day-2018 are given in

Table No. 15.2.


Table No. 15.2

Award Number of Posthumous
Awards

Kirti Chakra 01 01

Shaurya Chakra 20 03

Sena Medal (G) (including 96 08
bar to Sena Medal)

Nao Sena Medal (G) 11 
Vayu Sena Medal (G) 03 
15.17 _Vijay Diwas: Vijay Diwas was celebrated on_

December 16, 2018. On the occasion, the Raksha Mantri

laid a wreath at the Amar Jawan Jyoti at India Gate.

15.18 _Amar Jawan Jyoti Ceremony, 2019: The Prime_

Minister laid a wreath at the Amar Jawan Jyoti at India Gate

in the morning of January 26, 2019. A two minute silence

was observed for paying homage to those who laid down

their lives in safeguarding the integrity of the nation.

15.19 _Republic Day Parade, 2019: The unfurling of_

the National Flag at Rajpath marked the beginning

of Republic Day Parade. The President’s Body Guards

presented the National Salute followed by the National

Anthem played by the Service Bands and a 21 gun salute.

The President of South Africa was the Chief Guest on

the occasion.

15.20 In addition, various mechanised columns,

marching contingents and bands of the three services,

DRDO, Para Military Forces, Delhi Police, NCC, NSS etc.

were part of the parade.

15.21 Twenty Six children were conferred with Pradhan

Mantri Rashtriya Bal Puraskar. Award winning children,

seated in decorated Army Jeeps, participated in the

Parade. INA veterans were also part of the Parade this

year. Tableaux of States, Central Ministries/ Departments

###### 2 3

|Award|Number of Awards|Posthumous|
|---|---|---|
|Kirti Chakra|01|01|
|Shaurya Chakra|20|03|
|Sena Medal (G) (including bar to Sena Medal)|96|08|
|Nao Sena Medal (G)|11|-|
|Vayu Sena Medal (G)|03|-|


-----

and cultural items presented by school children were the

other attractions of the parade. 22 tableaux and 4 school

children items were part of the parade. This year, in view

of commemoration of 150[th] year of birth anniversary of

Mahatma Gandhi, overarching theme of tableaux and

school children items was having ‘Gandhi’ connect. The

parade concluded with a motorcycle display by Indian

Army-Signals-Dare Devils followed by an impressive Fly

Past by Indian Air Force.

15.22 The Gallantry and distinguished service awards

announced on the Republic Day, 2019 are given in Table No. 15.3.

Table No. 15.3

Name of the award Total Posthumous

Gallantry Awards

Ashok Chakra 01 01

Kirti Chakra 04 03

Shaurya Chakra 11 01

Bar to Sena Medal/Nao 06 Sena Medal/Vayu Sena
Medal (Gallantry)

Sena Medal/Nao Sena 112 08
Medal/Vayu Sena Medal
(Gallantry)

Distinguished Awards

Param Vishisht Seva 28 
Medal

Uttam Yudh Seva Medal 03 
Ati Vishisht Seva Medal 51 
Bar to Yudh Seva Medal 01 
Yudh Seva Medal 09 
Bar to Sena Medal/ Nao 05 Sena Medal/Vayu Sena
Medal (Devotion to duty)

Sena Medal/Nao Sena 58
Medal/Vayu Sena Medal
(Devotion to duty)

Bar to Vishisht Seva 02 Medal

Vishisht Seva Medal 120 
###### 2


15.23 _Beating the Retreat Ceremony, 2019:_ ‘Beating

Retreat’ is a centuries old military tradition practised

by the troops at the time of disengaging from battle

at sunset. The Beating the Retreat Ceremony denotes

departure of the troops assembled at Delhi for

participating in the Republic Day Celebrations. The

ceremony was organised at Vijay Chowk on January 29,

2019, which brought down the curtain on the Republic

Day festivities. Bands of the three Services along with

State and Central Armed Police Force (CAPF) Band

participated in this Ceremony. The conclusion of the

ceremony coincided with illumination of the Rashtrapati

Bhawan, North Block, South Block, Parliament House

and India Gate.

15.24 _Martyrs’ Day Ceremony, 2019: On January 30,_

2019, the President laid a wreath at Mahatma Gandhi’s

samadhi at Rajghat. The Vice President, the Prime

Minister, the Raksha Mantri, the Raksha Rajya Mantri

and other dignitaries also paid floral tributes. This was

followed by observance of two minutes’ silence at 1100

hours to pay homage to those who sacrificed their lives

in India’s struggle for freedom.

15.25 _National War Memorial: On February 25, 2019,_

National War Memorial constructed opposite India Gate

to pay homage to all the Martyrs of Armed Forces of

India who have made supreme sacrifices in various

conflicts/operations including Humanitarian Assistance

operations, was dedicated to the Nation by the Prime

Minister.

###### OFFFICIAL LANGUAGE DIVISION

15.26 The Official Language Division is functioning

in the Ministry of Defence for implementation of the

official language policy of the Union Government.

This Division provides assistance and guidance to the

officers and employees of the Ministry of Defence

(Secretariat), the three Services Headquarters, all

Inter-Service Organizations and Defence Undertakings

for proper implementation of the provisions of the

|Name of the award|Total|Posthumous|
|---|---|---|
|Gallantry Awards|||
|Ashok Chakra|01|01|
|Kirti Chakra|04|03|
|Shaurya Chakra|11|01|
|Bar to Sena Medal/Nao Sena Medal/Vayu Sena Medal (Gallantry)|06|-|
|Sena Medal/Nao Sena Medal/Vayu Sena Medal (Gallantry)|112|08|
|Distinguished Awards|||
|Param Vishisht Seva Medal|28|-|
|Uttam Yudh Seva Medal|03|-|
|Ati Vishisht Seva Medal|51|-|
|Bar to Yudh Seva Medal|01|-|
|Yudh Seva Medal|09|-|
|Bar to Sena Medal/ Nao Sena Medal/Vayu Sena Medal (Devotion to duty)|05|-|
|Sena Medal/Nao Sena Medal/Vayu Sena Medal (Devotion to duty)|58||
|Bar to Vishisht Seva Medal|02|-|
|Vishisht Seva Medal|120|-|


-----

Official Language Act and rules made thereunder and

the directions/ orders issued by the nodal Department

viz. Department of Official Language, Ministry of Home

Affairs in this regard from time to time. There are two

separate Hindi Advisory Committees constituted under

the chairmanship of Raksha Mantri in the Ministry

to advise the Ministry on matters relating to the

progressive use of Hindi and official purposes. The work

relating to official language implementation comprises

achieving of targets of Annual Programme prescribed

by the Department of Official Language every year for

the progressive use of Hindi in official work, imparting

training of Hindi Language, Hindi typing and Hindi

Stenography to the officers and staff working in the

Ministry and organizing Hindi workshops for the staff

to enable them to work in Hindi without any hesitation.

The work relating to monitoring includes carrying out

official language inspections of subordinate offices,

defence undertakings and sections of the Ministry,

organizing quarterly meetings of both the Official

Language Implementation Committees (OLICs) of

the Ministry, taking part in the meetings of OLICs of

the three Services Headquarters and Inter-Service

Organizations located at New Delhi by senior officers

of the Division as representative of the Ministry and

reviewing the quarterly progress reports received from

the above offices for taking remedial measures.

15.27 _Annual Programme: Annual Programme for_

the year 2018-19 issued by the Department of Official

Language was circulated to all defence organizations for

achieving targets laid down therein. Emphasis is being

laid on enhancing the original correspondence in Hindi,

issuing all communications falling under Section 3(3) of

Official Language Act in bilingual form, conducting Hindi

workshops regularly and getting the officers/ employees

trained in Hindi under the Hindi Teaching Scheme. In the

quarterly meetings of the departmental OLICs, progress

made in this regard is being reviewed regularly.

15.28 _Translation Work: Substantial materials for_

translation received from various offices and sections


of the Ministry were disposed of during the year which

included MP/ VIP references, communications issued

from Raksha Mantri/ Raksha Rajya Mantri offices,

Cabinet Notes, CAG audit paras, documents submitted

to Standing Committee on Defence and Consultative

Committee, Annual Report of the Ministry, Parliament

Questions and Agreements etc.

15.29 _Meeting of Hindi Advisory Committees: There_

are two Hindi Advisory Committee in the Ministry,

one for the Department of Defence, Department of

Ex-Servicemen Welfare and Department of Research

and Development and other for the Department of

Production. The tenure of both Committees has expired

and process of reconstitution is in progress.

15.30 _Hindi Pakhwara: Hindi ‘Pakhwara’ (fortnight)_

was held in the Ministry from September 14 to 28,

2018 for encouraging the officers/ employees to use

Hindi in their day-to-day official work. A number of

competitions were organized during the period, which

included Hindi noting and drafting, Hindi typing, Hindi

stenography and essay writing competitions etc. A large

number of officers/ employees participated in the above

competitions.

15.31 _Inspections of Parliamentary Committee on_

_Official Language: During the year, the Committee of_

Parliament on Official Language did several inspections

of offices of various defence organizations and

subordinate offices of the Ministry of Defence. The

Ministry assisted them by reviewing their questionnaires

and suggesting amendments wherever required.

Assurances given by the offices at the time of their

inspection are being fulfilled as per directions and

requirements of the Committee.

###### WELFARE OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES

15.32 The representation of Persons With Disabilities

(PWD) in Group ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ posts in Ministry of

Defence (Department of Defence) and in attached

###### 2


-----

and Subordinate Offices under Department of Defence 15.5 respectively.
Production is presented in Table No. 15.4 and Table No.

Table No. 15.4
Annual Statement showing the representation of the Persons With Disabilities in services (As on January 1, 2018)

Representation of Visually handicapped (VH)/ Number of Appointments made during the calendar year 2017
Hearing Handicapped (HH)/ Orthopedically

By Direct Recruitment By Promotion By Deputation

Handicapped (OH) (As on 1.1.2018)

Groups Total VH HH OH Total VH HH OH Total VH HH OH Total VH HH OH
Employees

A 4226 1 4 24 157 0 0 5 59 0 0 0 9   -   -   
B 29115 31 50 307 449 7 6 8 1244 9 2 12 0   -   -   
C 206690 520 673 1596 5768 62 57 67 4298 13 12 36 180    -    -    (Excluding
Safai
Karmchari)

C 11121 234 181 538 402 13 6 5 20 0 0 0 82     -     -     (Safai
Karamchari)

Total 251152 786 908 2465 6776 82 69 85 5621 22 14 48 271    -    -    
Table No. 15.5
Annual Statement showing the representation of the Persons With Disabilities in service in Attached and
Subordinate Offices under Department of Defence Production
(As on 1[st] January 2019)

Representation of Visually Number of Appointments made during the calendar year 2018
Handicapped (VH)/ Hearing
Handicapped (HH)/
Orthopedically Handicapped By Direct Recruitment By Promotion By Deputation

Groups

(OH)

(As on 1.1.2010)

Total
VH HH OH Total VH HH OH Total VH HH OH Total VH HH OH
Employees

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17)

A 2413 1 6 33 49 0 0 0 41 0 0 0 1 0 0 0

B 29194 23 43 304 233 2 1 3 2705 0 0 4 0 0 0 0

C
(Excluding

57962 158 217 1150 801 21 13 29 8366 5 11 37 2 0 0 0

Safai
Karmchari)

C
(Safai 85 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Karmchari)

Total 89654 182 266 1487 1084 23 14 32 11112 5 11 41 3 0 0 0

###### 2 6

|Representation of Visually handicapped (VH)/ Hearing Handicapped (HH)/ Orthopedically Handicapped (OH) (As on 1.1.2018)|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Number of Appointments made during the calendar year 2017|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|Col11|Col12|Col13|Col14|Col15|Col16|Col17|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||By Direct Recruitment||||By Promotion||||By Deputation||||
|Groups|Total Employees|VH|HH|OH|Total|VH|HH|OH|Total|VH|HH|OH|Total|VH|HH|OH|
|A|4226|1|4|24|157|0|0|5|59|0|0|0|9|-|-|-|
|B|29115|31|50|307|449|7|6|8|1244|9|2|12|0|-|-|-|
|C (Excluding Safai Karmchari)|206690|520|673|1596|5768|62|57|67|4298|13|12|36|180|-|-|-|
|C (Safai Karamchari)|11121|234|181|538|402|13|6|5|20|0|0|0|82|-|-|-|
|Total|251152|786|908|2465|6776|82|69|85|5621|22|14|48|271|-|-|-|

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|(As on 1st January 2019)|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|Col11|Col12|Col13|Col14|Col15|Col16|Col17|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Groups|Representation of Visually Handicapped (VH)/ Hearing Handicapped (HH)/ Orthopedically Handicapped (OH) (As on 1.1.2010)||||Number of Appointments made during the calendar year 2018||||||||||||
||||||By Direct Recruitment||||By Promotion||||By Deputation||||
||Total Employees|VH|HH|OH|Total|VH|HH|OH|Total|VH|HH|OH|Total|VH|HH|OH|
|(1)|(2)|(3)|(4)|(5)|(6)|(7)|(8)|(9)|(10)|(11)|(12)|(13)|(14)|(15)|(16)|(17)|
|A|2413|1|6|33|49|0|0|0|41|0|0|0|1|0|0|0|
|B|29194|23|43|304|233|2|1|3|2705|0|0|4|0|0|0|0|
|C (Excluding Safai Karmchari)|57962|158|217|1150|801|21|13|29|8366|5|11|37|2|0|0|0|
|C (Safai Karmchari)|85|0|0|0|1|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|
|Total|89654|182|266|1487|1084|23|14|32|11112|5|11|41|3|0|0|0|


-----

15.33 _Department_ _of_ _Defence_ _Production:_ All

Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) under the

Ministry of Defence have been following the provisions

of the Persons With Disabilities (Equal opportunities,

Protection of Rights and Full participation) Act 1995

in order to enable persons with disabilities to avail

the benefits of reservation. Several concessions and

relaxations, in addition to those prescribed by the

Governments, are also extended to persons with

disabilities.

15.34 _Defence_ _Research_ _and_ _Development_

_Organisation: DRDO is committed to implement the_

Government policies and instructions relating to the

welfare of Persons With Disabilities. The 3 percent

reservation in the recruitment and promotion is being

provided to the persons with disabilities as per the

Government instructions.


###### Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare

15.35 _Special Medical Care for disabled Soldiers: A_

number of soldiers become disabled during action or

due to accident and other causes and are invalidated out

from service. These Ex-Servicemen (ESM) are provided

special medical care and training to become self-reliant.

The care and rehabilitation of such personnel are

undertaken in specialized institutions, viz. Paraplegic

Rehabilitation Centres at Mohali and Kirkee which are

supported financially by Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB)

Secretariat out of Armed Forces Flag Day Fund.

15.36 _Prosthesis Centres: 53 Prosthesis Centres of_

Endolite and Ottobock Companies across 40 Cities have

been approved on November 3, 2016 for empanelment

under Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme to

provide latest prosthesis treatment to disabled ESMs.





###### 2


-----

-----

###### chapter
###  16

#### ACTIVITIES OF VIGILANCE UNITS


-----

# 16

16.1 The Vigilance Division in the Ministry of Defence

has been entrusted with the task of dealing with

complaints regarding corrupt practices, misconduct and

irregularities in respect of employees of the Ministry of

Defence and various units under it. It serves as a nodal

point for interaction on behalf of the Ministry of Defence

with the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), Central

Vigilance Commission (CVC) etc. on vigilance related

issues and complaints. The Vigilance Division, inter-alia,

initiates measures with a view to combating corruption

and reviewing procedures.

16.2 For administrative convenience, Vigilance

Wing of the Department of Defence also looks after

the vigilance work of Department of Ex-Servicemen

Welfare (DESW) and Department of Defence

Research and Development (DRDO). However, the

Department of Defence Production (DDP) has a

separate Vigilance Wing.

16.3 In accordance with the directives of the

Central Vigilance Commission, all Departments/

Organizations/Units viz. Navy, Air Force, DRDO,

DGBR, E-in-C’s Branch, DGDE, CAO & DGAFMS

etc. under Ministry of Defence, observed Vigilance

Awareness Week from October 29 to November 3,

2018 with the theme “Eradicate Corruption – Build

New India” and wide range of activities like Integrity

Pledge, workshops, distribution of pamphlets, display

of banners/posters, debates, lectures, essay/poster

making competitions, quiz programmes etc. were

organized to spread vigilance awareness among their

staff.

###### 220


###### ACTIVITIES OF VIGILANCE
 UNITS

# 16


###### DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE

16.4 In keeping with the need to ensure transparency,

fair play, accountability and integrity, efforts are being made

continuously in the Ministry of Defence for sensitization of

all the stakeholders against corrupt practices.

16.5 The Chief Vigilance Officer (CVO) maintains

liaison with all concerned offices to ensure timely

completion of various reports/ cases/ tasks relating to

vigilance work.

16.6 The Ministry keeps a close watch over vigilance

cases pending at different stages including cases

pending in the concerned Wings/Divisions so that such

cases are disposed of in a time bound manner. The

status of pendency is monitored by the CVO at regular

intervals. Regular meetings are held by CVO with the

officers of vigilance cells of various organizations under

Department of Defence, DRDO etc. to monitor the

pendency. The Ministry has also appointed two panels

of Independent External Monitors (IEMs) to look into

the complaints of vendors on tenders/ contracts issued

by the different organizations of the Ministry. These

include capital and revenue procurements by Ministry of

Defence and projects under Military Engineering Service

(MES), Directorate General of Border Roads (DGBR),

DRDO (Works) and unclassified projects of Directorate

General Naval Projects.

16.7 In order to have efficient disposal of disciplinary

cases in the Ministry, a separate Chief Vigilance Officer

has been appointed, specifically to handle cases of MES

and BRO.


-----

16.8 During this period a total of 23 complaints (13

from CVC + 10 Non CVC) and 1 Chief Technical Examiner

(CTE) case having 24 CTE cases including 5 ongoing cases

having 159 paras were processed. Out of these, 123 paras

were settled in consultation with CVC/CTE. Clarifications

have been sought from the concerned organizations for

settling the remaining paras. 7 complaints were closed

in consultation with CVC/CVO. 33 cases for Sanctions

for prosecution were processed out of which 7 sanctions

were conveyed and 26 were denied. Total 17 disciplinary

cases of CVC jurisdiction were finalized during the year,

out of which ‘Major Penalty’ was imposed in 11 cases,

‘Minor Penalty’ was imposed in 1 case, in 3 cases, the

charged officers were exonerated and in remaining 2

cases, charges were dropped.

###### DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE PRODUCTION

16.9 _Ordnance Factory Board (OFB)_

(a) _Preventive Vigilance: Major thrust has been_

on adoption of measures for improvement of

systems and procedures. Taking advantage of

leveraging of technology, OFB/ Vigilance is

continuously analyzing online data received

from the factories countrywide and has

started red-flagging areas of concern such as

processing of Tenders and Source development,

acceptance of material and clearance of

Material Inward Slip, bill processing time, timely

Payment to Vendors etc. 163 Preventive checks

and 361 APR checks have been done during

the year 2018-19. Rotational Transfer Policy has

been fully implemented.

(b) _Surveillance and Detection: 7 CTC Type_

inspections have been conducted and

anomalies detected in purchase of medicines at

OF Hospitals during the year.

(c) _System Improvements: System improvements_

were suggested to management on a series of


findings from investigations in procurement of

Plant & Machineries.

(d) _Training: Workshop on Preventive Vigilance_

were held by Zonal Vigilance Directors on

selected topics like specifications framing,

estimate preparation and tendering procedure.

Pre-bid Conference and Techno-Commercial

Evaluation were taken up in the workshop in

December, 2018.

(e) _Vigilance Awareness Week: Interview of CVO/_

OFB in connection with Vigilance Awareness

Week 2018 was aired on Doordarshan, Kolkata.

Vigilance workshops by Deputy Secretary

(Vig)/DDP organized by OFB/Vigilance on

vigilance awareness in different zones of OFB/

Vigilance during the year. Interactive meeting

on vigilance awareness in factories were

conducted by CVO/OFB.

16.10 _Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited_

_(GRSE)_

(a) _Preventive Vigilance: Following preventive_

measures were implemented:

(i) Implementation of Bill Tracking System for

monitoring of Bill Payments to vendors.

(ii) Implementation of Standard Operating

procedures for pre indenting for

procurement of Equipment /

machineries/tools/systems through

Capital Budget.

(iii) Surprise inspections and verification of

files were carried out.

(b) _Rotational transfer: Sensitive posts were_

identified & action initiated in a phased manner

for rotation of officers.

###### 22


-----

(c) _System_ _Improvements:_ Suggestions for

system improvements have been made to the

management on various issues.

(d) _Vigilance Awareness Week: Following activities_

were under-taken during Vigilance Awareness

Week – (i) Activities for public in general

through display of banners at prominent places

with the message to participate in the fight

against corruption and to log in CVC website

for e-integrity pledge. (ii) Competition and

Integrity e-Pledge taking in school and college

students (iii) Sending bulk e-mail to vendors

to participate in the fight against corruption

(iv) Display of Banners and Anti-Corruption

themes in various Units and taking of Integrity

Pledge by employees, conducting workshops

and sensitizing programmes for employees

(v) Sri Jayanta Kar, Director (Vigilance) of

OFB presented his valuable comments in the

seminar organised on October 30, 2018.

16.11 _Hindustan Shipyard Limited (HSL)_

(a) _Preventive Vigilance: Eleven surprise checks_

were conducted by the vigilance department at

Canteen, Welding department, General Stores,

Bond stores, Finance department, Disposal

yard, periodic inspection of EMDs, DDSR

Purchase dept., diesel storage tank and housing

estate. Four structured meetings between CVO

& CMD were held during the year.

(b) _CTE Type Inspections: Three CTE type inspections_

were conducted and reports forwarded to

management suggesting system improvements

on – repair and renovation of New A,B,C

type quarters in HSL Colony, replacement of

firefighting sea water pipeline & Oxygen pipeline

in SRC & wet Basin and award & execution of

purchase order-Modular Accommodation for

Normal Refit of INS Kesari etc.

###### 222


(c) _New Initiatives: Various files were randomly_

verified prior to price bid opening i.e. Renewal of

Dredge pipes on DCI Dredger XV, rehabilitation

of N type quarters in HSL colony, upkeep and

maintenance works in HSL Colony. Removal/

repairs/ installation and trials of refrigeration

plant of EKM class submarine, supply of PUF

slabs required for MFV Blue Marlin, renovation

of works to J&C (OAD) work shop, supply and

filling of PUF of shapes in cubes / cuboids in

Buoyant chambers inside the vessel BPTII.

(d) _Vigilance awareness week: Vigilance awareness_

week was observed from October 29 to

November 3, 2018 and the Integrity Pledge was

administered to the employees. Competitions

on the theme – “Eradicate Corruption-Build A

New India, Essay writing, Slogan Writing, Online

Quiz etc. Painting and Elocution competitions

were held for Schools/College Students and

students administered Integrity Pledge. A

vendor meet was conducted at Commercial

department and mass Integrity Pledge was

administered by the vendors. A seminar was

conducted on the theme “Eradicate Corruption
Build A New India” and Shri. RA Chandrasekhar,

IPS, Joint Director, SIB, Vijayawada delivered a

key note lecture on the theme.

16.12 _Mazagaon Dock Shipbuilders Limited (MDL)_

(a) _Preventive Vigilance: Six programs for vigilance_

awareness were held wherein 109 executives

& 80 Non executives officials participated. 10

Spot checks/Inspections were also conducted

as a part of preventive vigilance.

(b) _CTE Type Examinations: Two CTE type_

examinations were carried out by the MDL/

Vigilance during the year and overall systemic

improvements were suggested.


-----

(c) _Vigilance Awareness Week: Integrity pledge_

was administered to MDL employees. Vigilance

in-house journal ‘SUCHARITA” Vol. XXI was

released. Essay/Debate competition was

organised in 3 colleges & 3 schools. Gram

Sabha was held at Village Anandwan, District
Chandrapur (Maharashtra). An eminent speaker

Shri Prateek Goswami, IRSS, Chief Materials

Manager, Central Railway, Mumbai, delivered

a talk on Procurement. Vendors meet was also

organized.

(d) _Rotational Transfers Policy: 44 executives/_

officials holding sensitive posts for more than

three years were transferred under Rotational

Transfers Policy.

(e) _Structured Meeting between CMD & CVO:_

2 Structured Meeting between CMD & CVO

were held during the year.

16.13 _Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)_

(a) _Preventive Vigilance: Brain-storming session_

on prevailing Supply Chain Management of the

Company was held and extensive study of the

same was made by important functionaries/

stake holders like Material Management,

Finance, Human Resource, Service Contracts,

Work Contracts etc, and suggestions for

improving present system were submitted to

the Management. As a result, 16 amendments

in Purchase Manual were issued which will

improve the procurement process. 39 sessions

were conducted to sensitize HAL employees

about vigilance matters and workshops were

held across the divisions on Vigilance related

topics for curbing corruption.

(b) _Publication: Two volumes of in-house Vigilance_

Magazine “Marg Darshan” were published during

the year. Articles from eminent personalities


and Executives of the Organization on the

theme “My Vision - Corruption Free India” were

published.

(c) _System_ _Improvements:_ Based on the

recommendations of HAL/Vigilance, 19 system

improvements have been issued by the

Management for in the areas of Civil Contracts,

Material held with subcontractors, Finalization

of RRs, Check on RTGS payments, Land Matters

etc.

(d) _Vigilance_ _Awareness_ _Week:_ Vigilance

Awareness Week was conducted laying impetus

on the theme “Public Participation in Promoting

Integrity and Eradicating Corruption”. Apart

from conducting in-house events, stress was

also laid on reaching the public through Gram

Sabhas, Walkathon, competitions for students

in schools & colleges, vendors, other public

places, etc. to spread awareness about role

and responsibility of public in eradication of

corruption. Apart from the employees of HAL,

4,925 persons of public in general also took the

Integrity pledge.

16.14 _Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI)_

(a) _Preventive Vigilance: As a part of preventive_

vigilance – High value procurement files and

low tender response files have been scrutinised.

Nine Investigation reports were submitted

by HAL/Vigilance on procurement and

recruitment which resulted in issuance of three

system improvements. Regular Inspections

and surprise checks have been carried out in

all the sensitive areas. All tenders above ` 40

lakh have been brought under the purview of

Integrity Pact.

(b) _Vigilance_ _Awareness_ _Week:_ Vigilance

Awareness Week was focussing on CVC theme

###### 223


-----

of “Eradicate Corruption- Build a New India” and

students of schools and colleges were involved.

Sixth issue of in-house vigilance magazine

“JAGRUTI” was published and released.

(c) _System_ _Improvements:_ Ten systemic
improvements/ advisories were issued to
the Management which resulted in following
actions taken by management: (i) Introduction
of ‘Online system for issuing Vigilance
Clearance’ (ii) Online system for submission
of Annual Property Returns (iii) Amendment
in Whistle Blower Policy – 2015 (iv) Job
Rotation Policy for Executives working in
sensitive posts has been framed and approved
(v) Improvement in e-Procurement percentage
in exempted categories (vi) A new clause has
been incorporated in all Open tenders to avoid
submission of quotations by group companies.

16.15 _Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL)_

(a) _Preventive Vigilance: The thrust during the year_

was on Preventive Vigilance. A number of regular

inspections, surprise checks and CTE Type

inspections were carried out in various areas with

the aim of intervening in time to preclude lapses

/ violations of instructions and guidelines of CVC

if any. Systemic improvements so as to streamline

systems and procedures were also taken up at

periodic intervals. Emphasis was laid on ensuring

transparency through effective use of website,

e-tendering & on-line Vendor registration. Certain

class of items have been earmarked for purchase

through GEM Portal. All contracts/order above

threshold value of ` 2 crore are covered under

integrity pact and are being strictly monitored by

IEM on a quarterly basis.

(b) _Training: Orientation programmes, lecture and_

Presentations on Vigilance awareness matters

is being given to newly inducted Executives,

###### 22


Management trainees, supervisors/Ministerial

staff as well as CISF Personnel.

(c) _Vigilance_ _Awareness_ _Week:_ Vigilance

Awareness Week was observed from October

29 to November 3, 2018, the theme being

“Eradicate Corruption-Build a New India”. More

than 250 Personnel took e-pledge. Apart from

conducting In-house events, stress was also

laid on reaching out to the students in schools

and colleges with special emphasis on covering

rural areas within the State of GOA. Vendor

Grievance Redressal Camp, for as well as Vendor

Development Program for increasing Vendor

base was held during the week. Screening of

CVC documentaries and Sensitization Programs

on corruption and its evil effects, were held for

GSL employees and newly inducted Central

Industrial Security Force (CISF) personnel. A

talk followed by an interactive session Special

Secretary (Home), Government of Goa, was

held during the week.

(d) _System Improvements: Filing online Annual_

Property Return by Executive and supervisors

is followed by scrutiny and surprise inspection.

Vigilance status of Board level executives and

senior officials are updated on SOLVE portal in

line with Govt. directives on the subject. Thumb

based electronic attendance recording system

has been made mandatory in all tenders for

all labour oriented contracts. Material Tracking

System for materials moved out from Factory

premises has been made available to maintain

Vigil on the subject.

16.16 _Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML)_

(a) _Preventive Vigilance: As a part of Preventive_

Vigilance, all tenders above ` 1 crore have been

brought under the purview of Integrity Pact.

345 surprise checks, 516 Periodical checks. 531


-----

Purchase Order checks, 685 reimbursement

claims, 237 Annual Property Return (APR)

checks and 7 CTE type inspections, 8 System

Studies have been carried out during the year.

Additional CCTV Cameras at Sensitive areas

and Display of Vigilance Boards at Prominent

Locations were positioned across all BEML

Complexes/Divisions.

(b) _System Improvements: The following salient_

System Improvements and Best Practices were

recommended to Management - (i) Linking

of material master with the Vendor Master on

Supplier Relationship Management (SRM). SRM

Platform for automatic selection of vendors

while creating Tender enquiry. (iii) SRM Version

7 to be linked to SAP for Purchase Requisition.

(iv) Receipt of Tender fee & EMD through

SRM and Auto return of EMD through SRM.

(v) Adoptation of e-Procurement for Defence

items.(vi) Appointment of a full-fledged Estate

Officer with adequate staffs dedicated to

Supervise & Manage all Land/Building facilities

of the Company. (vii) Vendor Payment Tracking

enabled on SRM Portal through which vendors

can track status of payment for the supplies/

services made online. (viii) SAP has to be

customized for Auto-deduction of LD (Liquidity

Damages) and manual entry of LD amount

should be stopped

(c) _Training: Vigilance Manual was published_

during August 2017. Amendments have been

made in Vigilance Manual regarding Vigilance

Record Retention and Vigilance Clearance in

BEML, same has been updated on Vigilance

Portal of BEML Website during 2018. Conducted

Induction Training Program on Vigilance

Awareness for new incumbents- Management

trainees (Finance) in BEML. Also, training

classes were conducted regarding Vigilance

Awareness among Officers & Employees


(d) _Rotational Policy: Keeping in view the changing_

business scenario, after Risk Assessment

Exercise, the Sensitive Areas list was reviewed

and fresh areas were notified as Sensitive to

effect Job Rotation Policy.

(e) _Vigilance_ _Awareness_ _Week:_ Vigilance

Awareness Week was observed with the theme

“Eradicate Corruption- Build a New India”.

Integrity Pledge was administered to the

Students & Staff at Schools & Colleges. Vendors

Meet organised wherein, vendors from all over

India were invited. 2 km Walkathon – “Vigithon”

was organised. About 300 employees from

BEML, HAL, and BEL etc. participated in

the Vigithon. Awareness Gram Sabhas were

conducted at villages for taking online Integrity

Pledge by general Public. At KGF, the student

leader of the Integrity Club provided the

activities conducted under “Integrity Club”.

16.17 _Bharat Electricals Limited (BEL)_

(a) _Preventive Vigilance: File Lifecycle Management_

(FLM) on SAP platform has been implemented

across all the units. Four Vigilance Officers of

BEL received Excellence Award on September

10, 2018 during the VSC-Bengaluru Function.

1309 Regular inspections & 708 Surprise

inspections were carried out across nine units

of BEL during the year. 1395 POs / Contracts

were reviewed. CTE Type Intensive Examination

was completed for 57 contracts. Based on the

observations made, system improvements have

been suggested to management.

(b) _Rotational Transfer Policy: 131 employees due_

for Job rotation were identified during the year

and 100% job rotation has been achieved.

(c) _Vigilance Training / Seminars: 2 day programme_

on “Contract Law and Contract writing” was

###### 22


-----

organised. Under the aegis of Vigilance Study

Circle -Bengaluru, CII and ICAI, a program on

“Nation Building Ideas” was organized at BEL

Kalakshetra, Bengaluru.

Eminent speakers from Academia, Public Sector

and Private Sector were invited to deliver talks

on various topics covering mainly Public Sector,

Private Sector, Banking, Government Policies

etc. Seminar covered various subjects and in
depth discussions of Micro and Macro Economic

aspects, Direct and Indirect Tax aspects, Role of

Public, Private & Banking Sectors, Inter linkages

in procurements, Business between Public

Sector and Private Sector, Effect of Make in

India program etc.

(d) _Vigilance_ _Awareness_ _week:_ During the

Vigilance Awareness Week special talks by the

eminent speakers were arranged across BEL.

e-Pledge was facilitated in BEL-Intranet and

Internet apart from taking the e-pledge on CVC

website. Outreach programs were conducted at

various schools/colleges. Vigithon, Walkathon

& Cyclothon events were organized. Grama

Sabha was held at Yettaganahalli Village,

Bangalore Rural District.

16.18 _Directorate General of Quality Assurance_

_(DGQA)_

(a) _Preventive Vigilance: As a part of preventive_

vigilance, surprise checks have been conducted

at Units/ Establishments level. In addition a

sensitization workshops also organized by this

office in field establishments across the country.

(b) _System Improvement Study: Study on System_

Improvement was ordered on the subjects

“Updation of technical documentation by the

AHSP” and “Aligning the departmental technical

specification with the national/ International

###### 226


specifications” during the year 2018-19 to find out

the areas prone to or susceptible to corruption

and give suggestions/ recommendations on

measures to be adopted to prevent any scope

of corruption in DGQA. The study has been

carried out by the nominated officers with

a host of suggestions/ recommendations to

ameliorate the ills in corruption prone areas. The

selective recommendations will be circulated

within Organization for necessary follow up.

(c) _Vigilance Awareness Week: Vigilance Awareness_

Week was observed in all Units/ Establishments

as well as at HQ/ DGQA Tech Directorates/ Adm

Directorates. Slogans, Speeches, Quiz Contest

and Various Competitions and Debates aiming

at vigilance awareness were organized. Conduct

of Workshops/ Sensitization programmes,

Distribution of pamphlets/ Banners, etc.

were publicize during the event of Vigilance

Awareness Week. Prizes were also awarded

to the participants. Lectures/Speeches were

also delivered by the HOEs covering aspects of

honesty, integrity and encouraging employees

to support the cause of eradicating corruption.

16.19 _Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality_

_Assurance (DGAQA)_

(a) _Preventive Vigilance: The Inspection Notes_

issued by Field Establishments of DGAQA are

constantly monitored at HQrs as a proactive

and preventive measure. An officer of SAG

level at HQ and sufficiently senior level officers

at Fes i.e 2[nd] or 3[rd] in hierarchy are monitoring

vigilance related matters.

(b) _Rotational Transfer Policy: As per CVC_

instructions, Field Establishments and offices

in HQrs were identified as sensitive and the

officers holding such postings are rotated every

two/three years to avoid developing of vested


-----

interest. MSQAA & SSQAG Hyderabad was also

advised to carry out similar exercise at their

end.

(c) _Vigilance Awareness week: With a view to_

inculcate vigilance awareness, banners with

appropriate slogans were displayed and in
house talks were organized during the Vigilance

Awareness Week celebrated from October 29

to November 3, 2018.

16.20 _Action Taken by Department of Defence_

_Production: In order to enhance the level of transparency_

in various activities of Defence PSUs and Ordnance

Factory Board, Actionable Points were identified and

circulated to all the DPSUs and OFB for necessary action

which includes Inter Organisation Audit, covering 90%

contracts under Integrity Pact, efforts made and results

achieved for vendor development, The Proportion of

Limited/ Single Tenders to be reduced through, 90%

of procurements (by value) through e-Procurement,


Rotational transfer of staff holding sensitive posts,

Conduct CTE type Inspections by the CVOs, Monitoring

of Public Procurement (Preference to make in India) etc.

Performance of Defence PSUs and OFB against these

parameters is assessed Quarterly in the Department.

16.21 During the Year 2018, the DDP/ Vigilance has

undertaken following Vigilance actions in respect of

Group ‘A’ officers of OFB/ DGQA and Board Level

officers of DPSUs under the punitive vigilance:

|Sl. No.|Action Taken|Number of Officers involved|
|---|---|---|
|(i)|Major Penalty imposed|10|
|(ii)|Minor Penalty imposed|4|
|(iii)|Major Penalty Charge Sheet issued|12|
|(iv)|Minor Penalty Charge Sheet issued|3|





###### 22


-----

-----

###### chapter
###  17

#### Empowerment and welfare 
 of women


-----

# 17

17.1 The role of women has been increasing steadily

in the field of national defence. Women are employed

in Defence Production Units, Defence Research &

Development Laboratories and in the Armed Forces.

With the induction of women in various branches of the

Armed Forces like flying, logistics and law, a larger role

is envisaged for them.

###### INDIAN ARMY

17.2 _Women Officers in the Army:_ Women officers

have been serving in the Armed Forces for about 80

years and have served with competence and distinction.

They were inducted in the Military Nursing Service in 1927

and in the Medical Officers cadre in 1943. In the Armed

Forces Medical Services, there are both Permanent and

Short Service Commission Officers (SSCOs).

17.3 In 1992, in a significant step to open more

branches for employment of women officers, they were

granted commission in Army Service Corps (ASO), Army

Ordnance Corps (AOC), Army Education Corps (AEC)

and Judge Advocate General (JAG) Department. This

Short Service Commission was granted only for 5 years

initially. The tenure of engagement was further increased

to 10 years in August 1996 as also other branches namely

Corps of Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (EME),

Intelligence Corps (IC) were opened for employment.

In 2004, the service tenure was further extended to a

total of 14 years. In 2007, Army Air Defence (AAD) and

in 2011 Army Aviation were also opened for inducting

Women Officers. In 2010, provision of Permanent

Commission was made for Women Officers in JAG and

AEC. As regards promotions, earlier, Women Officers

###### 230


###### EMPOWERMENT AND  WELFARE OF WOMEN

# 17


were eligible for only one promotion, viz. to the rank of

Captain on completion of 5 years of reckonable service.

However, they are now granted time-scale substantive

promotions to the rank of Captain, Major and Lt Col

after 2, 6 and 13 years of reckonable service respectively

at par with the promotions available to the Permanent

Commission Officers. In addition, with a view to ensuring

gender equality, the training period of Women Officers

in the Army in Short Service Commission has also been

increased from 24 weeks to 49 weeks, at per with male

Short Service Commissioned Officers.

17.4 Keeping in view the role and responsibility of

the Armed Forces in defending the nation and protecting

the territorial integrity of the country, the future policy

on induction and employment of women in Army has

been enunciated in February, 2019 as under:

(i) Women Officers may continue to be inducted

as Short Service Commission Officers (SSCOs)

in Arms/ Services where they are presently

being inducted, with no change in their tenure

of Short Service Commission.

(ii) Women officers will be considered for grant

of Permanent Commission in the eight Arms/

Services in the Indian Army viz Signals,

Engineers, Army Aviation, Army Air Defence,

Electronics and Mechanical Engineers (EME),

Army Service Corps, Army Ordnance Corps and

Intelligence Corps in addition to the existing

two streams of Judge Advocate General

(JAG) and Army Education Corps (AEC). Thus,

women officers will be considered for grant of


-----

Permanent Commission in all the ten streams in

which they are currently being commissioned

as SSC officers.

(iii) On completion of three years of commissioned

service and before completion of four years of

commissioned service, they will be required

to exercise option for grant of Permanent

Commission and their choices for specialization.

(iv) Women SSCOs will be considered for grant

of Permanent Commission based on the

availability of vacancies and subject to

willingness, suitability, performance, medical

fitness and competitive merit. On grant

of Permanent Commission, these women

officers will be employed in various staff

appointments only as per their qualification,

professional experience, specialization if any

and organizational requirement.

17.5 _Child Care Leave (CCL): While earlier LTC could_

not be availed during Child Care Leave, now with the

amendment to the extant provision by the Government

of India, Women Officers of Defence Forces can now

avail LTC alongwith CCL leave Station/HQs with the

permission of leave sanctioning authority and travel

abroad on CCL.

###### INDIAN NAVY

17.6 _Women Officers:_ Women are being inducted into

the Navy as Short Service Commission (SSC) officers in

the Executive (Observer, ATC, Law & Logistic), Education

Branch and the Naval Architecture of the Engineering

Branch. In March 2016, approval of MoD was accorded

for induction of women Short Service Commission

(SSC) officers as Pilots in Maritime Reconnaissance

(MR) stream and in the Naval Armament Inspectorate

(NAI) cadre. In 2019, approval has been accorded for

induction of women Short Service Commission (SSC)

officers in Musician and Sports Specialisation.


17.7 _Permanent Commission to SSC Officers:_

The Government has introduced grant of Permanent

Commission prospectively to the Short Service

Commission Officers, for both men and women, of the

Executive Branch (Law Cadre), Education Branch and

Engineering Branch (Naval Architecture) w.e.f. 2008.

17.8 The Indian Navy is committed to the welfare,

well-being and dignity of the women. It is a constant

endeavour of Indian Navy to provide maximum support

to women employees and women family members

in order to maintain high morale and motivation at

all times. IN has taken concerted efforts to ensure

empowerment of women employees and their active

participation in activities/ work at respective units. The

following measures have been implemented to ensure

women empowerment and safe working environment

for women employees:

(a) Creation of positive environment by giving

freedom for women at workplace and equal

status with men which enables development of

women by realising their full potential.

(b) Equal participation/ involvement of women

employees in decision making or activities of

the unit/ establishment at all levels.

(c) Sensitisation of all employees to acquire equal

rights with men and congenial atmosphere at

workplace.

(d) Elimination of violence/ all forms of harassment

of women employees, whether physical or

mental, at workplace.

17.9 _Vishaka_ _and_ _Nirbhaya_ _Acts:_ “Visakha

Guidelines” and “The Sexual Harassment of Women at

Workplace (Preventive, Prohibition and Redressal) Act,

2013” have been implemented at IHQ MoD (Navy), all

Commands and outlying units. Committees have been

constituted at the three Commands to inquire into

###### 23


-----

complaints of sexual harassment of women employees

at workplace. The main aim is to prohibit/ eliminate

any sort of harassment/ violence against women

employees at workplace. Suitable Women Officers have

been nominated as the chairman of Internal Complaint

Committee (ICC) cell of all units.

17.10 _Naval Wives Welfare Association (NWWA):_ In

order to encourage building self-confidence amongst

women and to boost morale of naval ladies, a large

number of activities are organised by naval wives on a

voluntary basis. The Naval Wives Welfare Association

(NWWA) provides an opportunity to undertake

genuine welfare and educational activities through its

innumerable welfare programmes. Examples of such

activities include running of play schools for children,

reaching out to people outside the community, running

of schools for special children, care for senior citizens

and patients with chronic diseases, rehabilitation of

naval widows, helping in resolution of family disharmony

through professional counselling and guidance, conduct

of vocational training classes for women towards

other skill development and economic empowerment.

NWWA also provides opportunities to the naval families

to develop and showcase their talents in the field of

social, cultural and sports activities through vocal and

instrumental music, dance, drama, health activities,

yoga and organised games and sports.

17.11 _Navika Sagar Parikrama:_ INSV Tarini returned

to India on May 21, 2018, on completion of the first

Indian all-women circumnavigation of the globe. This is

the first-ever Indian circumnavigation of the globe by

an all-women crew. The expedition titled ‘Navika Sagar

Parikrama’, is in consonance with the National policy

to empower women to attain their full potential. It also

depicted ‘Nari Shakti’ on the world platform and helped

discard the societal attitudes and mindset towards

women in India by raising visibility of their participation

in challenging environs. Also, the indigenously-built

56-foot sailing vessel, INSV Tarini showcased the

‘Make in India’ initiative on the International forum.

###### 232


Further, in order to apprise the school children about

the experiences of the voyage, the all women crew of

INSV Tarini has visited various schools and education

institutions across the country since July 2018.

_All Women Crew of INSV Tarini_

17.12 _Astitva Samman Award:_ The NWWA was

awarded the 4[th] Women Astitva Samman 2019 on

February 15, 2019 at New Delhi. The Astitva Samman

award was instituted in 2016 by PHD Chamber of

Commerce and Industry in recognition for promoting

women empowerment in an organisation, NGO or

corporate. PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry,

established in 1905, is a proactive National Apex

Chamber working at the grass-root level with strong

national and International linkages.

_Astitva Samman Award_


-----

###### Welfare Activities

17.13 _Revised Spouse Co-location Policy:_ It has been

the endeavor to post spouses serving in the Armed

Forces at the same station so far as feasible, subject

to Service exigencies. To outline clear modalities and

conditions for spouse co-location, which meet individual

aspirations, as also organisational goals, policy on

Spouse co-location has been revised and provisions

have been aligned with those in the Indian Army, IAF

and DoP&T guidelines.

17.14 _Naval Regimental System (NRS):_ In keeping

with the traditional camaraderie and brotherhood

that is prevalent in the Defence Services, Naval

Regimental System (NRS) was established in January

2011 to institutionalise the support system and provide

proactive and extended support to Widows/ Next

of Kin (NoK) of deceased sailors. Under this system

seven Command Regimental System Officers (CRSOs)

and their teams reach out to every family after the

demise of a naval colleague, immaterial of whether

the individual was in harness or retired and ensure

that their welfare and accrual of all entitled dues reach

them in time. Regimental State Units (RSUs), which

have their footprint on ground, reach out to the widows

and educate them on related welfare issues e.g. family

pension, I card, canteen cards, ECHS memberships, etc.

17.15 _Reaching_ _out_ _to_ _Widows_ _and_ _Retired_

_Community:_ To facilitate early resolution of issues

impinging on their well being the following have been

instituted:

(a) ‘Directorate of Ex-Serviceman Affairs Toll

Free Help Line’, which provides round the

clock coverage through its Integrated Voice

Recording (IVR) Facility.

(b) ‘Commodore Bureau of Sailors (CABS) Toll Free

Help Line’ to resolve pension related issues.


(c) Dissemination of important issues through IRFC

website.

(d) Publication of quarterly e-newsletter covering

latest policies/ developmental issue related to

welfare of veterans.

(e) Interaction with Directorate of Ex-Serviceman

Affairs through e-mails.

17.16 _Widows’ Hostel at Delhi:_ A plot measuring

2050.39 Sqm was acquired by the Navy from DDA for

construction of a hostel for widows of naval personnel.

Construction of the hostel is completed. It has 34

dwelling units with all amenities including parking.

Obtaining of occupancy certificate from MCD is in

progress.

17.17 _International Women’s Day: To commemorate_

International Women’s Day various events were

organised at various units of IN:

(a) NWWA (Tamil Nadu) in association with FICCI

(Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce

and Industry) conducted an event onboard IN

ship Sumitra on March 9, 2018 to honour the

valour of women in uniform on the occasion of

International Women’s Day.

(b) A day-long workshop was organised for all

women employees at Naval Dockyard (Vzg).

The programme included talks on women

empowerment, women’s rights, talks on

health issues and social issues delivered

by eminent personalities and faculty from

respective disciplines. Besides, events such

as cultural programme by employees, games,

competitions, etc. were also organised for

women employees as part of the celebrations.

17.18 _All Women Expedition to Mt Deo Tibba: An_

all women Naval Mountaineering Expedition to Mt

###### 233


-----

Deo Tibba was successfully conducted from May 28 to

June 10, 2018. Mt Deo Tibba is the second highest peak

(6001 M) in the Pir-Panjal range of Himachal Pradesh.

The expedition has laid foundation for all women

mountaineering team to scale many more challenging

peaks in the near future.

_All Women Expedition to Mt Deo Tibba_

17.19 _Health Clinic – Ladies:_ Various health clinics

were conducted under the aegis of Arogya Wing of

NWWA across various IN units throughout the year. The

events were aimed to sensitise wives of naval personnel

on the merits of positive women’s health and to promote

optimal health and well-being.

###### INDIAN AIR FORCE

17.20 _Induction of Women Pilots in the Fighter_

_Stream:_ The Indian Air Force (IAF) has been at the

vanguard of providing greater opportunities to women,

and has pioneered the entry of women as officers in the

flying and ground duty branches. Since 1993 women are

being inducted as Short Service Commissioned officers

in all branches and streams of the IAF except the fighter

stream. The IAF has recently revised Short Service

Commission (SSC) scheme to induct women into the

fighter stream on an experimental basis for a period of

five years. The first batch of three women officers has

been commissioned into the fighter stream in 2016. The

three women fighter pilots have gradually moved up the

training ladder and have graduated to frontline fighter

flying in the IAF.

###### 23


###### INDIAN COAST GUARD

17.21 Indian Coast Guard (ICG) has been inducting

women officers since 1997 as permanent appointee

Assistant Commandant in General Duty (GD) and

Aviation Cadre (Pilots) since 1998. Till date 122 women

officers are on the active rolls of the service consisting

of permanent entry women officers in General Duty,

aviation and Law cadre and as Short Service Appointee

(SSA) in General Duty and aviation cadre. The strength

of women officers in ICG approximates to about 10% of

the total strength.

17.22 The service has taken proactive steps towards

empowerment and welfare of women officers. Their

experience, talent and dedication have been effectively

utilized in areas where their competence is fully

harnessed like Pilots, Observers and aviation support

services. They are also employed in equally responsible

task in coastal security mechanism. The women officers

are also posted in remotely located stations at par with

the male officers. In addition, Command appointments

in Coast Guard store depots are held by women officers.

17.23 Continuing the pioneering efforts for women

empowerment, ICG has been posting women officers as

ACV operators onboard frontline ACV Squardrons. This

is in addition to leadership roles being shouldered by

women officers as Officer-in-Charge of Store Depots

which are the hubs for operational logistics in ICG.

###### DEFENCE RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION (DRDO)

17.24 DRDO as an employer is committed for

creating a healthy, safe work environment that enables

employees to work free from unwelcome, offensive

and discriminatory behaviour, which enable them to

deliver their best at work without fear of prejudice,

gender bias and sexual harassment. It is ensured that

women employees are accorded equal opportunities

for enhancement of their skills and knowledge and


-----

fulfillment of their potential. This has resulted in many

women scientists having top positions in DRDO and

achieving organizational objectives.

17.25 Every year DRDO commemorate International

Women’s Day at national level across the country. A

one day national level workshop on “DRDO Initiative of

Women Augmenting Services (DIWAS)” was hosted by

DIHAR at Leh-Ladakh, Jammu & Kashmir where women

scientists, technologists, officers and staff from different

laboratories/establishments of DRDO from all over the

country participated.

###### DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE PRODUCTION (DDP)

17.26 _Ordnance Factory Board (OFB):_ Ordnance

Factory Board has already issued instruction for Sexual

Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention,

Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013 to all Ordnance

Factories (OFs)/Units for immediate circulation of the

above Act, through factory order/daily order for wide

publicity. Women employees are not deployed at odd

hours duty shift. All basic amenities like proper working

area, separate toilets, restrooms have been provided to

women employees in all OFs/Units. Training facilities are

being provided to women employees at par with their

male counterparts. Such training includes refresher

course/induction training.

17.27 _Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. (HAL):_ The strength

of women employees in HAL was 2348 as on December

31, 2018. HAL is a Corporate Life Member of the Women

in Public Sector (WIPS) Forum and opportunities to

participate in the programmes / activities of the WIPS

Forum are extended to women employees. All statutory

welfare amenities have been extended to women

employees. Exclusive Training & Learning Programmes

viz. Women Empowerment Program; Emerging Women

Leadership; Women on Board etc., are being conducted

by HAL. Equal Opportunities are provided to Women

Employees at all levels for advancement in their career.


Nominations of Women Employees were forwarded

for various Awards / Recognitions. Internal Complaints

Committees have been constituted in Divisions / Offices

as per the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace

(Prevention, Prohibition & Redressal) Act, 2013.

17.28 _Bharat Electronics Ltd.(BEL): BEL has around_

2049 women employees. Gender diversity is appreciated

and acknowledged for women empowerment at all

levels and forums. Fair opportunities are provided

in recruitment, career progression, learning and

development, welfare measures etc. Women have

assumed leadership positions in critical roles (GM &

Director) in BEL and play a vital role in business growth.

According to the provisions of the Sexual Harassment

of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and

Redressal) Act, 2013, “Internal Complaints Committee”

has been constituted and functions with a Senior Women

Officer as its Presiding Officer at all Units. Awareness

programmes are being conducted for employees to

make them aware of their duties and privileges.

17.29 _BEML Ltd: BEML is an equal opportunity_

employer, thereby creating a conducive environment

of work for female employees / executives across the

organization. In selection, recruitment, promotions,

career development, equal opportunity is provided to

all the women employees/executives in the Company.

Also the women executives are given equal opportunity

in decision making and enjoy equal administrative and

financial powers as per the Delegation of Powers of the

Company. Further, all the applicable statutory provisions

under the Factories Act, Maternity Benefit Act, etc., are

being complied both in letter and spirit.

17.30 In addition to the above, in terms of Sexual

Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention,

Prohibition and Redressal) Act 2013 with a view to

provides protection against sexual harassment of

women at workplace and for prevention and redressal

of complaints of Sexual Harassment and for matters

connected therewith or incidental thereto, the Internal

###### 23


-----

Complaints Committee (ICC) has been constituted. The

total strength of women Employees/Officers (as on

March 31, 2019) is:

 Women Officers - 136

 Women Employees - 130

17.31 Certain special initiatives which are extended/

continuing to be extended to women employees/

executives are as follows:

 The Company has constituted Women Cells in

all the Production Units including Corporate

Office to address the issue connected to

Women Employees / Executives.

 All women employees irrespective of their wage

group get 12 days of casual leave as against 7

days of casual leave to the male employees in

wage group A to D.

 Creche allowance of ` 200/- per month is paid

to women employees/executives having a child

below the age of 5 years.

 A dedicated intranet mail-id has been provided

to facilitate free exchange of ideas & views

among women employees / executives of the

Company.

 WIPS committee formed to enhance

professionalism and competence of working

women.

 All women employees have been provided

with Maternity Benefit of 26 weeks in line with

Maternity Benefit (Amendment) Act 2017.

17.32 _Bharat Dynamics Ltd. (BDL): There are 326_

women employees working in BDL as on March 31,

2019 which constitutes 10.63 % of the total workforce.

###### 236


The Company amended its Standing Orders, CDA rules

and incorporated a chapter on “Prohibition of Sexual

Harassment of Women Employees at Work Place”. A

“Complaints Committee” headed by a senior woman

officer has been constituted to enquire into complaints.

Women employees (Executives & Non-Executives) are

nominated in Trade Union and Officer’s Association.

Company provides necessary facilities for participation

in WIPS.

17.33 _Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd_

_(GRSE): In GRSE, the strength of women employee is 105_

which is around 5% of the total strength in the Company.

For women employee and executives, GRSE has

created a conducive environment to work. International

Women’s day was celebrated by GRSE on March 12,

2019, wherein, around 100 lady employees participated

in the programme that was attended by two eminent

speakers Dr. Reena Ramachandran, former CMD, HOCL

Ltd. & founder President, WIPS Apex and Smt. Simi Suri,

Behavioral Expert who addressed the gathering. GRSE

has also been conferred with the Recognition of WIPS

Activities Award in 2017 & 2018 consecutively

17.34 _Goa Shipyard Ltd. (GSL): Women at GSL are_

given at par opportunities with their men counterparts.

Regular awareness and training programs are organized

for them. An ‘Internal Complaints Committee’ for

prevention of sexual harassment at workplace and

redressal of complaints has been constituted.

17.35 _Hindustan Shipyard Ltd (HSL): A “Gender_

Budgeting & Women in Public Sector Cell” has been

constituted with five women officers for effective

implementation of general development program for

women employees such as training, advancement of

skills and provision of welfare amenities at work place

etc. and also to enhance the effectiveness of women

employees in their career management and overall

personality development. There are presently 54 women

employees on permanent rolls of the yard.


-----

17.36 _Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders Ltd. (MDL): With_

a view to empowering women employees, MDL has

undertaken following initiatives exclusively for women

employees. There are around 100 Women employees

(executives and staff) members in the Forum of Women

in Public Sector (WIPS). WIPS carries out various

women empowering activities viz. National & Regional

Meet - WIPS, Celebration of International Women

Day and Donation and Visit to Old Age Home near

Mazagon. Women employees were imparted trainings

on Sexual Harassment at Work Place by POS, Life

Skills Management, Management Soft Skills, Workshop

of competency and skill building and provided

Apprenticeship for skill enhancement in various trades

to 97 girl Apprentices during Financial Year 2018-19.

17.37 _Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI):_

MIDHANI has extended all facilities as per the statutes

for the welfare of all its women employees. Women

employees of MIDHANI belonging to Executive,

Supervisory and Non Executive cadre are involved

in all areas of operation of the Company right from

Material procurement, Production, Maintenance,

Dispatches to support services such as Civil, Finance,

HR, Marketing etc. At present there are 81 women

employees collectively working at par with men towards

achieving the Company goals. There is no gender based

bias or restrictions on career advancement of women

employees.

17.38 _Directorate General of Quality Assurance_

_(DGQA):_ All opportunities and benefits as per the

guidelines and policies issued by the Government of

India and other statutory authorities from time to time

with regard to women empowerment and welfare are

being implemented.


###### DEPARTMENT OF EX-SERVICEMEN WELFARE (DESW)

17.39 Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare deals

with the rehabilitation and welfare of about 32 lakh

Ex-servicemen including widows of Armed Forces

personnel and their dependent family members.

Financial assistance is being provided to the girls

and women under various schemes. Kendriya Sainik

Board (KSB) Secretariat provides financial assistance

for education, marriage of daughters of ESM and re
marriage of widows.

17.40 Education Scholarship for professional degree

courses is provided to girls under Prime Minister’s

Scholarship Scheme (PMSS). 5500 number of

scholarships under PMSS is divided equally between

boys and girls. The amount of scholarships is ` 2,000/
for boys and ` 2,250/- for girls per month and is paid

annually.

17.41 Formation of Internal Complaints Committee

for matter related to Sexual Harassment of Women at

Workplace has been implemented in Kendriya Sainik

Board (KSB) Secretariat.

17.42 Widows of ESM are eligible for Resettlement

Training under Directorate General of Resettlement

(DGR). A number of DGR Employment Schemes like

Coal Tipper Scheme, Oil Product Agencies, Safal Booths

etc. are given priority to certain categories of widows of

ESM.

17.43 War widows are exempted from payment of

contribution under Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health

Scheme.





###### 23


-----

-----

###### chapter
###  18

##### INITIATIVES TOWARDS SIMPLIFICATION, DECENTRALIZATION AND ENHANCING THE EASE OF DOING BUSINESS


-----

# 18

18.1 Equipping the Armed Forces with state-of-the
art weapon systems and equipment, and promoting

self-reliance in defence sector by giving a boost to

domestic manufacturing are two sides of the same

coin. Several path-breaking initiatives were taken by

the Ministry during the period towards simplification,

rationalization, and decentralization of decision
making and streamlining of procedure, which resulted

in enhancement of the ease of doing business and

replacement of red tape by the red carpet. This chapter

provides an overview of such measures.

###### Delegation of Financial powers and Decentralisation of Decision – making

_Delegation of powers to undertake works of Perimeter_

_Security:_

18.2 Following certain incidents of breach of

security of military stations, a decision was taken in

2017 to delegate substantial financial powers to the

Armed Forces to expedite the decision making process.

In order to undertake expeditious strengthening of the

perimeter infrastructure and access control mechanisms

covering military bases/ aviation bases of six Army

Commands with an estimated expenditure of ` 1487.27

crore, financial powers were delegated to the Vice

Chief and Army Commanders to execute this work in a

specified time frame. For round-the-clock surveillance,

detection and delay of any unwanted intrusion through

the perimeter, the Air Force has embarked upon a multi

sensor based technology intensive Integrated Perimeter

Security System (IPSS) for 23 sensitive and high risk

bases. Full powers have been delegated to the Vice

###### 2 0


###### INITIATIVES TOWARDS SIMPLIFICATION, DECENTRALIZATION

 AND ENHANCING THE EASE OF DOING BUSINESS

# 18


Chief of Air Staff (VCAS) to undertake the project on

priority.

_Financial Empowerment the Tri-Services Command in_

_Andaman and Nicobar Islands_

18.3 The Andaman and Nicobar Command (ANC) is

the first and only Tri-service theater command of the

Indian Armed Forces. It was created in 2001 to safeguard

India’s strategic interests in Southeast Asia and the

Strait of Malacca by increasing rapid deployment of

military assets in the region. It provides logistical and

administrative support to naval ships which are sent

on deployment to East Asia and the Pacific Ocean.

The ANC has great operational significance and is a

remote area far away from the mainland. In order to

strengthen the authority of the Commander-in-Chief

Andaman & Nicobar (CINCAN) and to ensure that it

becomes a truly integrated unit of all the armed forces,

the Central Government, in exercise of powers under

the Army Rules, 1954, issued notification declaring

that Officers of the Navy and Air Force will exercise

command over persons subject to the Army Act, who

are attached to or are serving in Air Force Units or Naval

Ships or Establishments, or Army Units commanded

by such Officers; or Unified Service Organizations or

Establishments, including the Andaman and Nicobar

command, comprising members of the Army, Navy and

Air Force or any two of them. A similar notification has

also been issued by the Air Force. Further, to empower

the Command with greater financial autonomy, the

financial powers of the CINCAN under the Integrated

Defence Staffs Schedule of Powers were substantially

enhanced in August 2018.


-----

_Delegation of powers for Capital Acquisition by Services_

18.4 Keeping in view the need for efficient and

expeditious processing of capital acquisition cases

to meet the requirements of the three Services under

enhanced delegated financial powers, Ministry of

Defence also enhanced existing delegation of financial

powers for sanction of Capital Acquisition proposals

covered under the Services Capital Annual Acquisition

Plan as follows:

(i) Upto ` 300 crore Service Headquarters

[To be exercised by
VCOAS, VCNS, DCAS,
CISC and DG(CG)].

(ii) Above ` 300 crore and Defence Secretary
upto ` 500 crore

(iii) Above ` 500 crore and Raksha Mantri
upto ` 2000 crore

(iv) *Above ` 2000 crore and Finance Minister
upto ` 3000 crore

(v) - Beyond ` 3000 crore CCS

- There is no change in the existing financial powers of

Finance Minister and CCS.

_Delegation of Powers to Change Sub-vendors Under_

_Offset Contracts_

18.5 A decision has been taken that Secretary (DP)

will be the Competent Authority for disposal of requests

permitting change/ addition/ deletion of Tier-1 sub
vendors for the following:

(a) In respect of offset contracts which are governed

by the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP)

2011 onwards where Tier-1 sub-vendors are

permitted to discharge offset obligations on

behalf of the main/ prime vendor; and


(b) In respect of the signed offset contracts

wherever Tier-1 sub-vendors or Programme

Partners, as applicable, had been permitted to

the contracts but governed by DPP 2006 and

2008.

###### Simplification, Streamlining and Rationalising of Capital Acquisition

_Streamlining of Defence Procurement Procedure_

18.6 The Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP)

2016 promulgated by Ministry of Defence in April, 2016

was primarily focused on boosting the ‘Make in India’

initiative of the Government of India by promoting

indigenous design, development and manufacturing

of defence equipment, platforms and systems. The

experience of the last two years coupled with interactions

with the industry and other stakeholders revealed the

need to further refine and simplify the processes for

enhancing efficiency and reducing timelines. In June

2017, NITI Aayog had proposed ‘Business Process

Re-engineering (BPR) in Capital Acquisition’, aimed at

simplifying the procedure and reducing timelines for

processing cases. Consequently, MoD implemented

reforms in Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP)

through ‘Business Process Re-engineering’.

_Phase-I amendments are as follows:_

(a) Authority for retraction of RFP.

(b) Vetting of draft Contract document concurrently

with CNC.

(c) Standard composition of CNC in delegated

power cases.

(d) Technical Oversight Committee (TOC) not to be

mandatory for cases valued above ` 300 crore.

(e) TEC Report to be approved by SHQ.

###### 2

|(i)|Upto ` 300 crore|Service Headquarters [To be exercised by VCOAS, VCNS, DCAS, CISC and DG(CG)].|
|---|---|---|
|(ii)|Above ` 300 crore and upto ` 500 crore|Defence Secretary|
|(iii)|Above ` 500 crore and upto ` 2000 crore|Raksha Mantri|
|(iv)|*Above ` 2000 crore and upto ` 3000 crore|Finance Minister|
|(v)|* Beyond ` 3000 crore|CCS|


-----

(f) Approval of grace period upto 45 days to

vendor(s) for producing equipment for trials

within SHQ and beyond 45 days by DG(Acq).

(g) Issue of Commercial RFP before trials in Design

& Development cases.

(h) Inclusion of beneficiary bank details for Bank

Guarantee in RFP.

(i) Change in approving authority from RM to

DG(Acq) w.r.t following issues:

(i) Extension in time for Bid.

(ii) Submission in response to RFP.

(iii) Permission for FET validations to be

carried out abroad.

(iv) Delay in Signing of Contract while

Concluding Contract with the Shipyard.

(j) Confirmation of Bank Guarantee (BG) provided

by a foreign bank and issuance of BG by Private

Sector banks authorised by Ministry of Finance.

(k) Incorporation of Arbitration and Conciliation

(Amendment) Bill 2018.

(l) Commencement of AoN validity from date

of issue of Minutes of Meeting of concerned

Categorisation Committee.

(m) Incorporation of GST in Price Bid format and

Evaluation Criteria.

_Phase-II amendments are as follows:_

(a) Amendment to Repeat Order clauses.

(b) Reassessment of AoN cost on receipt of DPRs

in Make cases.

###### 2 2


(c) Incorporation of Denial Clause in RFP and

Standard Contract Document.

(d) Conduct of Benchmarking on receipt of Trial

Report by SHQ.

(e) Reckoning date of ERV for Option Clause to be

the last date of submission of Commercial Bids

in original case.

(f) Inclusion of details of Independent Monitors

(IMs) in RFP.

(g) Amendments to bring clarity on imposition

of LD & constituting of POVs in Contract

Amendment cases.

(h) Doing away with BG for Essential Parameters

‘B’ (EPB) in case EPB are trial evaluated during

FET.

(i) Amendment to Para 5(c) of Appx A of Chapter

II (Defining Attributes of Buy and Make

Category) in view of promulgation of Strategic

Partnership Model.

(j) Amendment to Para 5(a)(ii) of Appendix F to

Schedule-I of Chapter IV by deleting the term

“of the ship” from the first sentence.

(k) Amendment to incorporate applicability of

latest legislation or change or amendment

or enforcement of any Act or Law, Rules or

Regulations.

18.7 _Phase III & Phase IV BPR Amendments to_

_DPP-2016: As a part of BPR, Phase III and Phase IV_

amendments to DPP 2016 are as follows:

(a) Revision of Evaluation criteria and price bid

format (L1 determination).


-----

(b) Permitting LC payments through all banks

authorized for government transactions by RBI.

(c) Date of delivery to be reckoned from date of

release of advance payment.

(d) Provisional acceptance of vendors letter of

application to their government for export

license in lieu of export license for release of

advance payment in Buy (Global).

(e) Exclusion of cost of Buyer Nominated

Equipment (BNE) sourced from single vendor

while determining L1 vendor.

(f) Amendment to Integrity Pact Bank Guarantee

(IPBG) amount.

(g) Amendments to Fast Track Procedure:

(i) BG from Private/ PSU Banks.

(ii) TEC acceptance within SHQ.

(iii) Constitution of CNC based on report

of Empowered Committee not

empowered to negotiate and conclude

contract.

(iv) Revision of Constitution and Time Limit

of Oversight Committee to facilitate

scrutiny from procedural angle.

(h) Amplification/ Amendment to Para 72 of

Chapter II, DPP 2016 with a view to minimise a

AoN extensions and obtain competitive prices:

(i) Validity of AoN.

(ii) Conduct of User trials post receipt of

Commercial Bids.


(i) Approval of extension upto 15 days for

submission of Technical Oversight Committee

(TOC) report by DG(Acq).

(j) Exemption of CNC from furnishing reasonability

of cost certificate for DPSU equipment already

priced by committee constituted under orders

of RM.

(k) Amendment to undertaking from vendor on

never being debarred in the past.

(l) Estimated cost of Proposal in AoN to include all

taxes & Duties.

(m) Alignment of Period of payment of Guaranteed

sum of bank in Pre-Contract Integrity Pact

(PCIP) and Integrity Pact Bank Guarantee

(IPBG).

(n) Incorporating full form of additional

abbreviations.

(o) Amendment to Increase Effectiveness of LD

clause.

(p) Approval of ab-initio single vendor cases by

AoN according authority.

(q) Incorporation of Revised Delegated Financial

Powers of SHQ and Defence Secretary.

Accordingly, in continuation of its efforts to streamline

defence procurement procedures and to reduce

timelines so as to ensure timely delivery of equipment

to the Armed Forces, various measures to simplify the

defence procurement procedure have been undertaken.

Consequent to this exercise, measures identified on

account of Business Process Re-engineering in Defence

Capital procurements have been considered by the

Defence Procurement Board and the Defence Acquisition

Council (DAC) from time to time. After due deliberations

###### 2 3


-----

and approval of DAC, the following major amendments

have been incorporated in DPP-2016 under Phase-I, II

and III of BPR exercise:

_Promulgation of Make-II Procedure_

18.8 The ‘Make’ procedure for indigenous design,

development and manufacture of defence equipment/

weapon systems, was simplified in 2016 and

promulgated as Chapter – III of DPP-2016. In February

2018 a new sub-category ‘Make-II (Industry Funded)’

was introduced under this procedure with primary focus

upon development of equipment/ system/ platform or

their upgrades or their sub-systems/ sub-assembly/

assemblies/ components with focus on import

substitution. For more details please refer to para 18.13.

18.9 As per the existing provisions, projects under

the Make-II sub-category, with estimated cost of

prototype development phase not exceeding ` 3 crore,

will be earmarked for MSMEs. However, if no MSME

expresses interest for a Make-II program of less than

` 3 crore, the same may be opened up for all.

18.10 DAC, in May, 2017, approved Chapter VII

of DPP 2016 on Strategic Partnership Model, titled

‘Revitalising Defence Industrial Ecosystem through

Strategic Partnerships’, which was notified by MoD on

May 31, 2017. Subsequently, Naval acquisition cases for

P75 (I), Naval Utility Helicopters (NUH) and Naval Multi

Role Helicopters (NMRH) have been initiated under

this category. However, certain procedural limitations

were observed during the implementation of SP Model.

Accordingly, DAC on July 30, 2018, approved following:

(a) Incorporation of the following guidelines in

Chapter VII of DPP 2016:

(i) Procurement Process for cases under

Strategic Partnership (SP) Model as

Appendix C to Chapter VII of DPP 16.

###### 2


(ii) Composition and Terms of Reference

for Empowered Project Committee

(EPC) as Appendix D to Chapter VII of

DPP 16.

(b) Guidelines for issuance of EoI for Naval Utility

Helicopter Project.

(c) Constitution of Empowered Project Committee

for Procurement of NUH without awaiting

Minutes of the Meeting.

###### Enhancing the Ease of Doing Business and Promoting ‘Make in India’

18.11 As part of its effort to promote ‘Make in India’

in defence and aerospace in the country, Department of

Defence Production has taken several steps to promote

greater ease in doing business with the defence

establishment. Some of the important initiatives taken

in this regard are as follows.

18.12 Defence Investor Cell: A Defence Investor

Cell (DIC) was set up by the Department of Defence

Production in January 2018 to provide help, support

and guidance to defence industry, particularly MSMEs.

Access to DIC is available without physical interface

through online portal https://defenceinvestorcell.gov.

in/. During the year 2018-19, the DIC received 398

requests for help and out of these 394 were addressed/

closed. The average time taken for response was less

than 2 days while the average time for closure was less

than 7 days.

The number of requests received in DIC in each quarter

of 2018-19 is as below:

|April-June 2018|July- September 2018|October- December 2018|January- March 2019|
|---|---|---|---|
|83|142|77|96|


-----

Further, Department of Defence Production (DDP)

has taken over 20 major and minor reforms and policy

initiatives during 2018-19 to enhance ease-of-doing

business in defence and aerospace. These include:

_Revised ‘Make-II’ Procedure_

18.13 In February 2018, Ministry of Defence had

approved ‘Revised Make-II’ procedure as a sub-category

for procurement of defence goods from private industry.

The Revised Make-II procedure had several industry

friendly provisions including no limit on vendors

who could participate in prototype development, no

retraction of RFP once issued, reduced time line for

contract finalization, hand-holding support from Project

Management Team etc. 35 projects were given approval
in-principle under Make-II during 2018-19 offering the

design and development to private industry.

Looking at the success of Revised Make-II procedure,

Ministry of Defence has approved, in February 2019, a

‘Make-II’ for OFB. Further, similar framework has also

been advised to Defence PSUs for suitable consideration

and adoption. Salient features of the simplified

procedure are as follows:

 Inviting suggestions for project from the

industry, start-ups and individuals, especially

in respect of items which are currently being

imported;

 Approval of project by a collegiate comprising

DRDO, HQ (IDS), DoD under a Committee

chaired by Secretary (DP);

 Hosting of Expression of Interest (EoI) in

respect of approved projects on MoD websites;

 No limit on number of industry players who

may show interest and offer a prototype;

 An RFP. RFP once issued, will not be retraced.

The winning bidder is assured of an order;


 Service HQrs to constitute a Project Facilitation

Team to facilitate the process;

 Case to be progressed even if only one entity

has offered an innovative solution;

 Industry which develops the project will

retain the title, ownership and IPR (except for

specified reasons like national security);

 Normally no negotiations in multi-vendor

contracts.

The simplified ‘Make-II’ procedure will reduce the
total time from in-principle approval to placing of
order by half. The time taken to complete the whole
process is estimated to come down from 103 weeks
to 69 weeks.

_Suo-moto Scheme_

18.14 The suo-moto scheme as a special mode of

Revised Make-II was approved in June 2018 thereby

enabling industry to suo-moto propose products/

equipment that they think can be used by Indian

forces. This is the first time that a formal mechanism for

receiving suo-moto proposals from industry has been

devised. Suo-moto proposals by industry can be made

online to any of the three Services, Army, Navy, Air

Force. Each Service has appointed a senior officer as a

Nodal Officer to look into these suo-moto proposals. The

first suo-moto proposal was given approval in principle

in August 2018. During 2018-19, 5 suo-moto proposals

have been granted approval-in-principle opening a new

chapter in defence industry collaboration.

_Additional Option of Testing by Third Parties_

18.15 Director General of Quality Assurance (DGQA),

Department of Defence Production has approved Third

Party Inspection as an additional option for testing

of various items vide reference dated May 30, 2018.

###### 2


-----

According to this scheme, qualified third party testing

agencies will be empanelled by DGQA and Users

(Services: Army, Navy, Air Force, OFB, DPSUs, DRDO,

Industry) will have the option to offer some of the stores

being procured to these agencies for testing.

HAL and DGAQA have, in February 2019, jointly

identified and empanelled 5 Third Party Testing

agencies for testing aero-components needed by HAL.

The empanelment of Third Party Testing agencies

will provide an additional option for testing aero
components in the country and enhance ease of doing

business to nearly 5000 or so HAL vendors.

_Streamlining of Defence Licensing Requirements_

18.16 Working closely with MHA and Department for

Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT), DDP

had streamlined the defence licensing requirements

under the Arms Act, 1959 and the Industrial

(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. Ambiguities

regarding which items are covered under Arms Act were

clarified. Moreover, license requirements for several

components was pruned down, thereby making it easier

for industry to invest in those components. DPIIT’s Press

Note 1(2019) Series dated January 1, 2019 and MHA

notification dated December 14, 2018 refer to these

simplifications.

_Implementation of ‘Make in India’ Order_

18.17 DDP has notified notified 111 items (upto

March 31, 2019) under Public Procurement Order

2017 notified by Department for Promotion of

Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT). The Defence

PSUs and OFB are required to give preference to

domestic manufacturers while procuring these items

in accordance with the said policy. This is expected

to provide greater opportunities to domestic

industry catering to these organizations and reduce

dependence on imports.

###### 2 6


18.18 _Other Measures_

 OFB has removed ex-ante capacity verification

for registering vendors vide its reference

dated February 12, 2019. This addresses a

long standing demand of the industry in this

regard.

 During 2017-18, DDP had notified 275 items

which were previously exclusively sourced

from OFB, for sourcing from open industry. As

a further step towards ease of doing business

to enable industry to access defence markets,

135 items have been placed on Government

eMarketplace during the year. This has greatly

facilitated vendors to supply these items to

Indian forces.

 To ensure that MSMEs supplying material

to Defence PSUs get timely payment, all

nine Defence PSUs have implemented Trade

Receivables electronic Discounting System

(TReDS) during the year 2018-19.

 To reduce delays and red tape, it has been

decided that all design documents, required to

be shared with MSMEs/ vendors for developing

a defence/ aerospace related component/

item, will be shared online along with the RFP.

Necessary instructions have been issued by

OFB on February 13, 2019.

 OFB has been advised to hold monthly meetings

at all its 41 factories, with its vendors, on the

last Wednesday of every month to resolve any

issues which the vendors may have. Besides,

quarterly meetings are to be held at OFB HQ

level to discuss issues which are not resolved

at GM level during the factory level meetings.

These meetings have been held regularly since

August 2018.


-----

 Public sector testing facilities are being

made available to industry for testing their

products.

 Bookings and payments by exhibitors for Aero

India 2019 were made entirely online enabling

exhibitors to complete full process without

any physical interaction. Similarly, gate passes

for Aero India 2019, for officials and general

public were also sold online. This introduced

much greater transparency and ease in doing

business.

 OFB Procurement Manual was revised in

September 2018 thereby introducing several

provisions which greatly enhance ease of doing

business of MSMEs supplying goods to OFB.

_Promoting Defence Trade_

18.19 Several steps have also been taken during the

period to promote ease of doing business with respect

to export of defence and aerospace items. These

include:

 An end-to-end online portal (http://

defenceexim.gov.in/) has been developed

and made functional since October 2018 to

receive and process all applications for export

authorisations under List 6 of SCOMET list for

which permissions are granted by DDP. This has

resulted in transparency, efficiency and faster

authorisations.

 DDP worked with Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)

based on which notification dated November 1,

2018 was issued by MHA, delegating powers

to issue export permission under the Arms Act

to DDP. As a result, a potential exporter needs

export permission only from DDP as against

both DDP and MHA in the past.


 Export authorizations granted by DDP have

now been provided for extended period beyond

2 years upto the period of contract.

 Repeat export of same item and same

destination to be given NOC.

 Export authorisations for parts/ components of

munitions for civil use to be granted within 15

days.

 The process for import and re-export for repair/

rework has been simplified.

 DDP has approved a new scheme for defence

exports in October 2018, under which a defence

related industry can be tested and certified, in

terms of the scheme, as supplying equipment/

goods fit for Indian military use, if they were

technically qualified during the procurement

process, thereby facilitating their export.

Additionally, the scheme also allows for testing

and certification of potential defence exports

as per the SQRs of the destination country.

 A senior official of Department of Defense, USA

has been notified to facilitate exports by Indian

defence industry to the USA.

18.20 _Defence Export NOC: A revised SOP for_

processing export authorization applications of

SCOMET Category 6 was promulgated on November 1,

2018. Following amendments have been incorporated:

(a) Customised End User Certificate (EUC) format

for parts and components.

(b) Validity of Export Authorisation.

(c) Procedure for importing and re-exporting of

items for repair and rework under warranty

obligation.

###### 2


-----

18.21 _SOP for Scheme for Promotion of Defence_

_Export: A scheme for promotion of Defence Export was_

promulgated on October 4, 2018. The aim of the scheme

is to provide access to Government test labs to Indian

industry and certify them in order to enhance their

product marketability. To ensure ease of implementation

of the scheme, a SOP has also been promulgated by

MoD on March 6, 2019.


18.22 _Defence Import NOC: Directorate General of_

Foreign Trade (DGFT), in May 2018, delegated powers to

DDP for grant, renew or suspension of import license for

certain defence items. In exercise of these powers, DDP

has been processing import applications. Two import

applications have been processed by IN since September

2018. In addition, DDP is formulating an SOP for processing

import applications akin to Export NOC application

processing in order to streamline the procedure.





###### 2 8


-----

###### MATTERS DEALT WITH BY THE DEPARTMENTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE


###### A. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE  (RakshaVibhag)

1. Defence of India and every part thereof,

including preparation for defence and all such

acts as may be conducive in times of war to

its prosecution and after its termination to

effective demobilization.

2. The Armed Forces of the Union, namely, the

Army, the Navy and the Air Force.

3. Integrated Headquarters of the Ministry of

Defence comprising Army Headquarters, Naval

Headquarters, Air Headquarters and Defence

Staff Headquarters.

4. The Reserves of the Army, Navy and Air Force.

5. The Territorial Army.

6. The National Cadet Corps.

7. Works relating to Army, Navy and Air Force.

8. Remounts, Veterinary and Farms Organisation.

9. Canteen Stores Department.

10. Civilian Services paid from Defence Estimates.


### APPENDIX-I

11. Hydrographic Surveys and preparation of

navigational charts.

12. Formation of Cantonments, delimitation/

excision of Cantonment areas, local self
government in such areas, the constitution

and powers within such areas of Cantonment

Boards and authorities and the regulation of

housing accommodation (including the control

of rents) in such areas.

13. Acquisition, requisitioning, custody and

relinquishment of land and property for defence

purposes. Eviction of unauthorized occupants

from defence land and property.

14. Defence Accounts Department.

15. Purchase of food stuffs for military requirements

and their disposal, excluding those entrusted to

Department of Food and Public Distribution.

16. All matters relating to Coast Guard Organisation,

including:

(i) Surveillance of maritime zones against

oil spills;

(ii) Combating oil spills in various maritime

zones, except in the waters of ports

and within 500 metres of off-shore

###### 2 9


-----

exploration and production platforms,

coastal refineries and associated

facilities such as Single Buoy Mooring

(SBM), Crude Oil Terminal (COT) and

pipelines;

(iii) Central Co-ordinating Agency for

Combating of Oil Pollution in the

coastal and marine environment of

various maritime zones;

(iv) Implementation of National

Contingency Plan for oil spill disaster;

and

(v) Undertaking oil spill prevention and

control, inspection of ships and offshore

platforms in the country, except within

the limits of ports as empowered by

the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958(44 of

1958).

17. Matters relating to diving and related activities

in the country.

18. Procurement exclusive to the Defence Services.

19. All matters relating to Border Road Development

Board and Border Road Organisation.

###### B. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE PRODUCTION  (Raksha Utpadan Vibhag)

1. Ordnance Factory Board and Ordnance

Factories.

2. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited.

3. Bharat Electronics Limited.

4. Mazagon Docks Limited.

###### 2 0


5. Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers

Limited.

6. Goa Shipyard Limited.

7. Bharat Dynamics Limited.

8. Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited.

9. Defence Quality Assurance Organizations,

including Directorate General of Quality

Assurance and Directorate General of

Aeronautical Quality Assurance.

10. Standardisation of defence equipment and

stores including Directorate of Standardisation.

11. BEML Limited.

12. Hindustan Shipyard Limited.

13. Development of aeronautics industry and

co-ordination among users other than those

concerned with the Ministry of Civil Aviation

and the Department of Space.

14. Indigenisation, development and production

and defence equipment and participation of the

private sector in the manufacture of defence

equipment.

15. Defence exports and international cooperation

in defence production.

###### C. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT  (Raksha Anusandhan Tatha Vikas Vibhag)

1. Apprising, assessing and advising Raksha

Mantri on the influence on National Security

of emerging developments in Science and

Technology.


-----

2. Rendering advice to Raksha Mantri and to the

three services and inter-services organizations

on all scientific aspects of weapons; weapons

platforms; military operations; surveillance;

support and logistics in all likely threats of

conflict.

3. To function, with the concurrence of the Ministry

of External Affairs, as the nodal co-ordinating

agency of the Ministry of Defence on all matters

relating to Instruments of Accord with foreign

Governments relating to the acquisition of

technologies whose export to India is the

subject of national security related controls of

foreign Governments.

4. Formulation and execution of programmes of

scientific research and design, development,

test and evaluation, in fields of relevance to

national security.

5. Direction and Administration of agencies,

laboratories, establishments, ranges, facilities,

programmes and projects of the Department.

6. Aeronautical Development Agency.

7. All matters relating to certification of the

design air worthiness of military aircrafts, their

equipment and stores.

8. All matters relating to the protection and

transfer of technology generated by the

activities of the Department.

9. Scientific analysis support and participation in

the acquisition and evaluation proceedings of

all weapon systems and related technologies

proposed to be acquired by the Ministry of

Defence.

10. To render advice on the technological and

intellectual property aspects of the import of


technology by production units and enterprises

manufacturing, or proposing to manufacture,

equipment and stores for the Armed Services.

11. To deal with reference made under section 35

of the Patents Act, 1970(39 of 1970).

12. Financial and other material assistance to

individuals, institutions and bodies corporate,

for study and for the training of manpower on

aspects of Science and Technology that bear on

national Security.

13. In consultation with the Ministry of External

Affairs, international relations in matters

connected with the role of Science and

Technology in national security, including :

(i) matters relating to relations with

Research Organizations of other

countries and with Inter-governmental

agencies, particularly those which

concern themselves, inter alia, with the

scientific and technological aspects of

national security.

(ii) Arrangements with Universities,

educational and research-oriented

institutions or bodies corporate abroad

to provide for foreign scholarships and

the training of Indian scientists and

technologists under the administrative

control of the Department.

14. Execution of works and purchase of lands

debitable to the budget of the Department.

15. All matters relating to personnel under the

control of the Department.

16. Acquisition of all types of stores, equipment

and services debitable to the budget of the

Department.

###### 2


-----

17. Financial sanctions relating to the Department.

18. Any other activity assigned to, and accepted

by the Department through understandings

or arrangements with any other Ministry,

Department, Agency of the Government of

India whose activities have a bearing on the

scientific and technological aspects of national

security.

###### D. DEPARTMENT OF EX-SERVICEMEN WELFARE (Poorva Senani Kalyan Vibhag).

1. Matters relating to Armed Forces Veterans (Ex
Servicemen), including pensioners.

2. Armed Forces Veterans (Ex-Servicemen)

Contributory Health Scheme.

3. Matters relating to Directorate General of

Resettlement and Kendriya Sainik Board.

4. Administration of :

a) the Pension Regulations for the Army

1961(Parts I and II);

b) the Pension Regulations for the Air

Force, 1961 (Part I and II);

c) the Navy (Pension) Regulations 1964;

and

d) the Entitlement Rules to Casualty

Pensionary Awards to the Armed

Forces Personnel, 1982.

###### E. DEFENCE (FINANCE) DIVISION (Raksha Vitta Vibhag)

1. To examine all Defence matters having a

financial bearing.

###### 2 2


2. To render financial advice to the various

functionaries of Ministry of Defence and the

Services Headquarters.

3. To act as integrated Finance Division of Ministry

of Defence.

4. To assist in the formulation and implementation

of all schemes/ proposals involving expenditure.

5. To assist in the formulation and implementation

of Defence Plans.

6. To prepare Defence budget and other estimates

for the Defence Services, Civil Estimates of

Ministry of Defence, estimates in respect of

Defence Pensions and to monitor the progress

of the scheme against the budget.

7. To exercise post-budget vigilance to ensure

that there are neither considerable shortfalls in

expenditure nor unforeseen excesses.

8. To advise heads of branches of the Armed

Forces Headquarters in the discharge of their

financial responsibility.

9. To function as the accounting authority for the

Defence Services.

10. To prepare the Appropriation Accounts for the

Defence Services.

11. To discharge the responsibility for payments

and internal audit of Defence expenditure

through the Controller General of Defence

Accounts.


-----

### APPENDIX-II

###### MINISTERS, CHIEFS OF STAFF AND SECRETARIES WHO WERE IN POSITION FROM JANUARY 1, 2018 ONWARDS

 RAKSHA MANTRI

Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman From September 3, 2017 to May 30, 2019

Shri Raj Nath Singh From May 31, 2019 onwards

###### RAKSHA RAJYA MANTRI

Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre From July 5, 2016 to May 30, 2019

Shri Shripad Yesso Naik From May 31, 2019 onwards

###### DEFENCE SECRETARY CHIEF OF ARMY STAFF

Shri Sanjay Mitra General Bipin Rawat,

From May 25, 2017 onwards UYSM, AVSM, YSM, SM, VSM

 From January 1, 2017 onwards

###### SECRETARY DEFENCE PRODUCTION CHIEF OF NAVAL STAFF

Dr. Ajay Kumar Admiral Sunil Lanba,

From December 1, 2017 onwards PVSM, AVSM, ADC

 From June 1, 2016 to May 31, 2019

 Admiral Karambir Singh,

 PVSM, AVSM

 From May 31, 2019 onwards

###### SECRETARY EX-SERVICEMEN WELFARE CHIEF OF AIR STAFF

Ms. Sanjeevanee Kutty Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa,

From July 31, 2017 onwards PVSM, AVSM, YSM, VM, ADC

 From January 1, 2017 onwards

###### 2 3


###### MINISTERS, CHIEFS OF STAFF AND SECRETARIES WHO WERE IN POSITION FROM JANUARY 1, 2018 ONWARDS


-----

###### SECRETARY (DR&D)

Dr. S. Christopher, Distinguished Scientist

From May 29, 2015 to May 28, 2018

Shri G. Satheesh Reddy, Distinguished Scientist

From August 27, 2018 onwards

###### FINANCIAL ADVISER (DEFENCE SERVICE)/ SECRETARY (Defence Finance)

Shri S.K. Kohli

From October 1, 2016 to August 31, 2018

Smt. Madhulika P Sukul

From September 1, 2018 to December 21, 2018

Ms. Gargi Kaul,

From December 21, 2018 onwards



###### 2


-----

###### Report No. 8 of 2018 Executive Summary


This Report contains the results of audit of the

transactions for the year ended March 2017 pertaining to

Ordnance Factories Organisation under the Department

of Defence Production, Ministry of Defence. The Report

is divided into three Chapters. Chapter I contains the

profile and performance of the Ordnance Factory Board

for the year 2016-17. Chapter II contains audit observation

on “Quality Management in Ordnance Factories dealing

with Ammunition and Explosives”. Chapter III contains

three long paragraphs and two audit paragraphs on

other issues.

The significant audit findings as brought out in the

Report are summarised as follow:

###### Performance of Ordnance Factory Board

Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) functioning under the

administrative control of the Department of Defence

Production of the Ministry of Defence, is engaged in the

production of range of arms, ammunition, equipment,

clothing etc. primarily for the Armed Forces of the

country. There are 41 Ordnance Factories divided under

five operating group under the OFB.

The OFB received budgetary grant of ` 16,758
crore and ` 715 crore in 2016-17 to meet its revenue
expenditure and capital expenditure against
which ` 16,403 crore and ` 717 crore were spent
respectively.


### APPENDIX-III

During 2016-17, the Cost of Production at these factories
was ` 20,037 crore which showed 10 percent increase
over the last year. While Stores and Labour account for
56 percent and 11 percent of the Cost of Production,
overhead (Indirect Cost) contributed 31 percent of the
cost of production. Major elements of Overheads are
supervision charges and indirect labour costs which
together contributed 62 to 65 percent of total Overhead
cost during 2012-13 to 2016-17.

In 2016-17, OFB supplied materials of ` 20,876 crore
(12 percent increase from the last year) to its different
indentors. Indian Army is the major indentor for the
products of Ordnances Factories, accounting for
nearly 80 percent of the total issues. While supplies
to Defence indentors are required to be on cost
basis. OFB earned a profit of ` 434 crore against
issues to the Armed Forces. OFB also earned a profit
of ` 142 crore in supply of products to other factories
as inputs for final products. The profit charged on
Inter Factory Demand (IFD) issues is unnecessary
as it resulted in avoidable inflation of the Cost of
Production. Further, export by OFB during 2016-17
was very meagre.

Army places demand on OFB for supply of the items
and subsequently, OFB fixes production targets to the
Factories to fulfill the demand of Army. A significant
quantity of Army’s demand for some principal
ammunition items remained outstanding as of March
31, 2017, thus affecting adversely their operational

###### 2


-----

preparedness. The Factories achieved the targets only

for 43 percent of items in 2016-17.

OFB held inventory of ` 14,758 crore representing 69

percent of the Cost of Production in 2016-17 WIP (Work
in-Progress: unfinished items lying at the shop floor),

constituting almost 30 percent of the total inventory, is

an area of concern in Ordnance Factories. Production

order to manufacture an item is to be closed within six

months. The main reason for high holding of WIP is that

a large number of production order, the oldest being

from the year 2008-2009, remained outstanding of

March 2017 of which 23 percent pertained to more that

one year.

Ministry identified (April 2017) 143 items as non-crore

items under production with OFB and decided that

Army can procure these non-core items from trade

without getting no objection certificate (NOC) from

OFB. On the other hand, OFB can participate in such

tenders of Army and get orders on competitive basis.

Annual Accounts of the OFB are being maintained in

two formats: traditional and commercial format. The

introduction of commercial accounting system is a step

towards facilitating commercially competitive decisions

in an evolving environment in defence production with

the entry of private sector. Commercial Accounts are

intended to clearly bring out the financial health of each

Factory and OFB as a whole.

 (Chapter I)

###### Quality Management in Ordnance Factories dealing with Ammunition and Explosives

Quality of ordance and ammunition is essential to

ensure their reliability and accuracy in usage as well as

safety and satisfaction of Users. Quality management

is ensured in a multi-tiered framework comprising

Quality Control (QC) by Ordnance Factories and

Quality Assurance (surveillance through samples and

###### 2 6


final inspection) by the Directorate General of Quality

Assurance (DGQA) before issue to the Armed Forces.

Audit covered the performance of the Ordnance Factory

Board (OFB), Controllerate of Quality Assurance (CQA)

(Ammunition), Kirkee and five Ordnance Factories along

with attached Senior Quality Assurance Establishments

(SQAEs) for 2013-14 to 2016-17 in managing quality

control and assurance activities for five large caliber

ammunitions (155mm ERFB BB and BT, 130mm FVC and

RVC and 125mm HEAT) and their major components viz

empty shell body, fuze, primer and propellant.

###### Quality checks on Input Materials

Against stipulated time of 15 days for inspection of

input materials after their receipt in the Factory, only 36

percent input materials were inspected within 15 days

mainly due to documentation gap and dependence on

outside laboratories. Certain critical checks were not

carried out or carried out not to the extent prescribed

prior to acceptance of the input materials. This had

adverse impact on the quality of finished products in

final inspections leading to their return for rectification

(RFR) and rejection.

###### Quality Control and Quality Assurance of Manufacturing Process

Inadequate compliance to the process schedule as well

as inadequate documentation of the checks conduced

resulted in recurred return for rectification (RFR)/

rejections on the same grounds. There were rejections

worth ` 146 crore in respect of three out of five types of

ammunitions selected in audit.

The proofing activities at Central Proof Establishment

(CPE), Itarsi took more than one month in respect of

26 percent of the cases. Further, shortage of equipment

had adverse impact on the conduct of tests at Factory

Quality Control sections and SQAEs.


-----

The Network Quality Database Management System

was planned to be implemented by March 2012 for

sharing of quality related data/documents among the

stakeholders. Its implementation was far behind the

schedule because of non-uniformity of the modules,

uploading of incomplete and inconsistent data and

flows in data integrity.

###### User’s Feedback and other Structures for Quality Improvement

There were abnormal delays in defect investigation of

accidents/failure reported by Users. In 65 percent of the

cases where investigation were closed during 2013-17,

it took more than prescribed time of 210 days and up

to 3727 days for closure of the report. Controllerate of

Quality Assurance (CQA) (Ammunition) attributed the

delay to delayed receipt of reports/samples from the

Users, facilitation of checks by OFs and actions involving

multiple agencies located at different places.

Quarterly Review Meetings on defect investigation and

other quality issues amongst DGQA, Army and OFB

were not found effective because no accountability was

fixed despite having recurrent delays.

At the Factory level, Joint Investigation of rejection by

OFs and SQAE was also a prolonged process. In some

cases, it took an average 616 days for completion and

many cases remained inconclusive despite delays of

three to 62 months.

Ministry had set up (April 2008) Alteration Committee

(AC) in the Factories, chaired by the General Manager

with representatives from DGQA, CQA, Factory, Users

and DRDO to identify areas for product improvement

including those changes identified after defect

investigation. It was observed that functioning of

the Alteration Committee was not effective as the

matters referred to the Committees did not find timely

resolution.


###### Quality Policy

There was no documented comprehensive quality

policy laid down by the Ministry as of May 2017. Instead,

piecemeal orders/instructions were issued by the

Ministry and Ordnance Factory Board. In the absence of

an overarching quality policy, existing quality structure

lacked coherence and did not establish synergy needed

for optimum distribution of responsibility and authority

among the stakeholders in Defence Production.

SQAE’s deep involvement in the process of manufacture

would compromise its independence in final inspection,

remove the autonomy of the manufacturer, diffusing

responsibility and could lead to potential conflict of

interest.

 (Chapter II)

###### Production of Parachutes in Ordnance Factories

Ordnance Parachute Factory Kanpur (OPF)

manufactures various parachutes for the Armed Forces.

Users’ requirement of parachutes is of significant

importance because of their strategic use in man

carrying supply drop emergency escape of pilots from

aircraft for aborted take-off and to reduce landing run

length to aircraft etc.

Audit was conducted at OPF and OFB for the period

from 2012-13 to 2016-17 on production of 11 selected

parachutes for the Army and Air Force to ascertain

whether OFB supplied quality parachutes to the Users

in time and as per their requirements. The results of

audit are briefed as under:

There were deficiencies in production planning like

delays of two to five months in holding target fixation

meetings, non-identification of item-wise production

capacity and production constraints/capacity shortage

not projected in the meetings for fixing realistic targets.

###### 2


-----

The targets were routinely revised downwards mid
year due to OPEs inability to manufacture as per the

target because of non-availability of quality metal

components/fabrics and scarcity of vendors.

Out of 49 instances analysed, OPF achieved production

target only in five instances during 2012-13 to 2016-17. The

shortfall occurred mainly due to delayed procurement

and receipt of input materials, limited vendor base and

delay in resolving drawing/specification issues. As a

result, there were significant outstanding orders in the

range of 31 to 95 percent for nine parachute items as

of March/April 2017. The Users also had deficiencies in

respect of seven parachute items to the extent of 33 to

100 percent against their authorised holdings. Critical

shortage of the required parachutes adversely affected

operational preparedness of the Army and Air Force.

There were deficiencies in inspection of input materials

by the Way of acceptance of materials by the Waiver

Board (formed without mandate of the Ministry) with

deviations from specified parameters. Some of the

parameters were not tested before acceptance of

materials leading to various defects/flaws in the fabric

of finished parachutes. Because of quality problems,

significant quantity of finished parachutes was returned

for rectification (RFR). Recurrently, Quality Assurance

agencies accepted Air Force parachutes with deviation.

No Alteration Committee was formed at OPF. Instead,

Configuration Control Board and Waiver Board were set

up, without any mandate of the Ministry, for clearance of

input materials and finished parachutes with deviation.

Bulk production of two types of Heavy Drop (HD)

parachutes, developed in 2000 and 2009 for Army and

Navy could not be commenced due to delayed receipt of

drawing/specification, delayed supply of pilot lot by OPF

for validation trial and production constraints at sister

factory for HD platform system. Army’s requirement of

Combat Free Fall parachute, developed in 2006, was

not fulfilled due to life threatening defects observed in

###### 2 8


validation trials and non-resolving the quality problems

by OPF and ADRDE.

 (Paragraph 3.1)

###### Production of Pinaka Rockets in Ordnance Factories

Pinaka is a multi-barrel rocket launcher system

developed by Armament Research & Development

Establishment (ARDE), for the Indian Army with a range

of 38 km. Production of Pinaka rockets by Ordnance

Factories commenced in 2007-08, however, against the

Army’s indent of ‘aa’ rockets to be supplied by March

2012. OFB supplied only ‘JJ’ rockets till March 2014.

Army further placed (October 2013) a five-year-roll-on

indent on OFB for supply of rockets in the period from

2014-15 to 2018-19, As per the indent, OFB was required

to supply ‘ff’ rockets to Army till March 2017, but OFB

could supply only ‘hh’ rockets (March 2017).

Audit found that ARDE was yet to finalise the technical

document of Pinaka Rocket and transfer the Authority

Holding Sealed Particular (AHSP) role to the inspection

agency i.e. Controllerate of Quality Assurance

(Armament). Further, critical quality problems like

excessive short-ranging, bursting of rockets, burning

chunks of propellant, etc. were observed during proof

firing of Pinaka rockets between March 2011 and July

2016. ARDE stopped production of Pinaka rockets from

July 2016 and subsequently Failure Analysis Board

(FAB) were constituted twice (July 2016 and April 2017),

However, FAB,s in their reports, failed to pinpoint the

exact problem in manufacture of Pinaka rockets.

Thus, even after completion of ten years and issue of

‘ii’ rockets to Army till March 2017, production of the

Pinaka rockets has not yet been fully stabilized. Due to

stoppage of production and supply to Army, ten lots of

finished Pinaka rockets valuing ` 217 crore, unfinished

Pinaka rockets and its components valuing ` 71.36


-----

crore and stores valuing ` 189.75 crore were lying at OF

Chanda, as of July 2017. The fate of unused inventory

relating to Pinaka is dependent on the further directives

from ARDE.

 (Paragraph 3.2)

###### Stores-in-Transit between Ordnance Factories

Stores-in-transit (SIT) arise due to non-preparation

of receipt vouchers by a factory in respect of stores

received from sister factories. In OF Organisation. SIT

increased from ` 682 crore (March 2013) to ` 944 crore

(March 2017) which was 15 percent of cost of production

of Inter Factory Demand (IFD) items (` 6212 crore).

Audit conducted at six factories having maximum SIT

(consisting about 49 percent of total SIT as on March 31,

2017) revealed that non-observance of stipulated norms

and timeline for inspection and accounting of stores

received from sister factories resulted in accumulation

of SIT. Main deficiencies leading to SIT were:

- Significant delays in preparation of Material

Inward Slip and also in inspection of stores’

- Non-completion of inspection of stores received

from sister factories;

- Decision pending on stores rejected in

inspection;

- Decision pending on stores rejected in

inspection;

- Quantity short received or not properly covered

in IFD;

- Non-linking of vouchers by the Accounts Office

of the Consignee factories; and

- Fictitious holding of items under SIT due to

error in linking/posting in the accounts.


Accumulation of SIT is one of the contributing factors for

shortfall in production against annual targets. There was

no mechanism for periodical inter-factory reconciliation

and physical verification of SIT. Monitoring at the factory

level was not effective for time-bound clearance of SIT,

with oldest SIT pending since 2005-06 in the selected

factories.

 (Paragraph 3.3)

###### Non-commissioning of Nitro Glycerine Plant at Ordnance Factory, Itarsi

Ordnance Factory, Itarsi concluded (April 2008) a

contract with a foreign firm for supply and commissioning

of Nitro Glycerine (NG) plant on turnkey basis within

20 months. Though the NG plant was delivered by

February 2010, the same was yet to be commenced

due to various defects observed in pre-commissioning

trials. Audit observed that despite inordinate delay

in commissioning of new NG Plant by the contractor,

Ordnance Factory, Itarsi failed to reject the plant and

enforce the contractor to replace the plant at the cost

of the contractor as per contractual provision. This

had resulted in an idle investment of ` 34.43 crore and

consequential loss of factory’s production capability of

Nitro Glycerine, more so when the existing NG Plant had

already outlived its life and was facing acute shortage

of spares.

 (Paragraph 3.4)

###### Blocking of funds of ` 14.30 crore due to non- utilisation of Boiler House

Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) concluded (March 2009)

a contract with M/s Israel Military Industries (IMI), Israel

for supply of manufacturing plant of Bi-Modular Charge

Sysem (BMCS) for Ordnance Factory Nalanda. However,

the contract was put on hold by the Ministry of Defence

in June 2009 due to illegal gratification by M/s IMI Israel

and the contract was finally cancelled in March 2012.

Audit observed that despite Ministry’s decision to put

###### 2 9


-----

on hold the BMCS plant and subsequent cancellation

of contract, the Ordnance Factory Nalanda went

ahead with construction of Boiler House, intended to

generate stream for BMCS plant as per IMI specification.

Construction was completed in Novembers 2012 and

since then Boiler House remained idle, resulting in

blocking of funds to the tune of ` 1430 crore.

 (Paragraph 3.5)

###### Report No. 9 of 2018 (Navy and Coast Guard)

 OVERVIEW

The total expenditure of the Defence Services,

excluding Defence Pensions, during the year 2016-17

was ` 2,30,933 crore. Of this, the Indian Navy spent

` 37,466 crore while Coast Guard spent ` 4,242 crore,

which constituted approximately 16 per cent and two

per cent respectively of the total Defence Expenditure.

The major portion of the expenditure of the Indian

Navy is capital in nature, constituting almost 53 per

cent of the total expenditure. The expenditure of

Coast Guard was distributed between Capital and

Revenue Heads amounting to ` 2469 crore and ` 1773

core respectively.

This report contains major findings arising from the test

audit of transactions of the Indian Navy and the Indian

Coast Guard. Some of the major findings included in the

Report are discussed below.

I. Induction and exploitation of ‘A’, a Long Range

Maritime Reconnaissance Anti –Submarine

Warfare aircraft

The Ministry while evaluating the bids for conclusion of

contract for the acquisition of ‘AA’ Long Range Maritime

Reconnaissance Anti – Submarine Warfare (LRMRASW)

aircraft enhanced the financial bid of M/s EADS CASA,

Spain to cater for 20 years product support cost while

ignoring this element in respect of M/s Boeing, USA. The

###### 260


contract was concluded with M/s Boeing, USA in January

2009 at MUSD 2,137.54. At a later date, M/s Boeing, USA

offered the product support under a separate negotiable

contract and consequently the deduced ranking of M/s

Boeing, USA as L-1 turned out to be incorrect.

The Ministry concluded (January 2009) an Offset

contract for MUSD 641.26 (being 30 per cent of the

main contract value) with M/s Boeing, USA. The Offset

obligations to tune of MUSD 641.26, to be fulfilled within

seven years (August 2016), had not been fulfilled till

date. M/s Boeing, USA had claimed Offset credits on

mere placement of purchase orders defeating the very

purpose of Offset obligations.

II. Training of officers in Indian Navy

Each officer trainee of the Indian Navy undergoes

training depending upon the scheme of his or her entry

and the branch allocated to the trainee. Indian Navy has

29 training schools/establishments, imparting training

to officers. The efficacy and productivity of the Indian

Naval Training organisation have a direct bearing on

combat readiness and operational effectiveness of Naval

platforms/Systems and are crucial enabler to achieve

the desired results in combat. The delay in completion

of Naval Academy Project, Ezhimala and non-availability

of training aids/equipment for new induction platforms

have adverse impact on the training being imparted

to officers of Indian Navy. No facility exists for training

crew on the aspects of Damage Control (DC) and Fire

Fighting (FF) of a submarine. Limited practical training

is imparted through attachment to the Indian Navy’s

DC and FF facilities, which is based on ships layout.

The mechanism for feedback management and training

evaluation is weak. The results of internal assessments

of Training Establishments and Weighted Input Output

Analysis have brought out various deficiencies in the

training imparted.

 (Paragraph 2.2)


-----

III. Procurement and utilisation of steel for the

refits of Naval ships a Eastern Naval Command

SNM class of Minesweepers based at ENC,

Visakhapatnam are built by using non-magnetic U3

steel and their renewals are carried out during refits by

ND (V). Non-adoption of scientific approach for working

out the requirements coupled with non-consideration of

stock position led to excess procurements of U3 steel

plates valuing ` 86 crore, the utilisation of which looks

remote. Preservation of U3 steel plates was not being

done as per the approved procedures. There were

lapses in accounting procedures being followed at the

Naval Dockyard, Visakhapatnam.

 (Paragraph 2.3)

The critical role equipment offered by M/s Boeing,

USA were not fully meeting the needs of the Indian

Navy. Owing to capability limitations of radars installed

onboard, the aircraft is not able to achieve the envisaged

coverage area requirements. The NSQRs appended to the

RFP (December 2005) had envisaged the procurement

of torpedoes and ‘X’ Bombs as the ammunition for Anti
Submarine Warfare (ASW). The Ministry had already

intimated (November 2008) the CCS that the weapon

integration of LRMRASW (‘A’) aircraft would, inter alia,

include the procurement of ‘XX’ ‘X’ Bombs. However,

the contract for procurement of ‘X’ Bombs had not yet

been concluded. Reasons for non-procurement of ‘X’

Bombs (September 2017) were yet to be intimated by

Indian Navy. Thus, in the absence of ‘X’ Bombs, the ASW

capability of the aircraft could only be partially fulfilled.

One of the primary roles of ‘A’ aircraft is Anti-Submarine

Warfare performed by the acoustic system on board ‘A’

in association with sonobuoys, which not only provides

capability to detect and track submarines accurately

but also helps in garnering volumes of acoustic data.

The procurement (March 2017) of low range sonobuoys

(‘P’, ‘Q’ and ‘R’) for meeting the requirement of Indian

Navy for three years, instead of one year’s requirement

projected by INS ‘L’ coupled with non-procurement


of advanced version sonobuoys with longer range, as

recommended by INTEG, adversely impacted ASW

surveillance capability of the ‘A’ fleet, in view of the

range limitations of ‘P’, ‘Q’ sonobuoys.

There were delays in construction of infrastructure

facilities for ‘A’ squadron. Lack of monitoring by the Apex

steering committee as per the prescribed periodicity

impacted the implementation of the Offset obligations

by M/s Boeing, USA, timely procurement of ammunition

and receipt of fully functional sensors.

 (Paragraph 2.1)

IV. Non-accrual of intended benefits through

nomination of a DPSU shipyard

Ministry concluded a contract (November 2012) with

M/s Hindustan Shipyard Limited on nomination basis

for construction of six 10 Ton Bollard Pull Tugs based

on recommendations of Group of Ministers to ensure

sufficient orders to the shipyard. The contractual

violation by the shipyard to outsource the work to

a private shipyard defeated the very purpose of

nomination. Further, due to slow progress, none of the

six tugs under the contract has been delivered.

 (Paragraph 2.4)

V. Extra expenditure in procurement of Boost

Gas Turbines

Boost Gas Turbines (BGT) comprises of the main

propulsion plant of ships and is employed onboard for

high speed evolution. IHQ MoD (Navy) floated (April 2011)

a Request for Proposal (RFP) containing both Option

and Repeat Order clauses to the original equipment

manufacturer (OEM) M/s Zorya Mashproekt, Ukraine

for procurement of eight BGTs. Indian Navy failed to

negotiate the inclusion of Option/Repeat Order clause

in the contract (October 2013) for the procurement of

eight BGTs despite availability of these clauses in the

RFP. This resulted in extra expenditure of ` 7.04 crore in

###### 26


-----

subsequent procurement of four BGTs in March 2015, as

the benefits of price advantage accruable under these

clauses could not be gained.

 (Paragraph 2.5)

VI. Deficient contract management in procurement
of Naval spares

IHQ MoD(Navy) concluded 11 contracts worth ` 80.80
crore with M/s Rosoboronservice (India) Ltd, Mumbai
{M/s ROS (I) Mumbai}, for procurement of spares of
various systems for deliveries between August 2011 and
June 2014. The contracts, inter alia, made it mandatory
on the firm to submit a Performance Guarantee by way
of Bank Guarantee (PBGs), within 30 days of receipt
of the confirmed order. The PBGs were required to be
valid up to 60 days beyond the warranty period. The
total value of PBGs to be lodged by the firm in respect
of these contracts was to the tune of ` 8.08 crore
(i.e. @ 10 per cent of the contract value). M/s ROS (I)
expressed (January 2014) their inability to honour these
11 contracts, owing to major fluctuations in foreign
exchange (FE) rates since year 2012-13, coupled with
the fact that these contracts did not have any provision
of exchange rate variation (ERV). Subsequently,
competent financial authority (CFA) approved short
closure of these contracts. ERV clause was not included
in the contract with M/s ROS (I), being a non-defence
public sector undertaking (DPSU) Indian firm and the
payment was to be made in Indian currency. The Firm
had lodged PBG in respect of only one contract (` 1.59
crore), which has also expired. Thus, deficient contract
management resulted in non-recovery of ` 8.08 crore
from M/s Rosoboronservice (India) Ltd, Mumbai for
defaulting on 11 contracts.

 (Paragraph 2.6)

VII. Inordinate delay in completion of Sewage
Treatment Plant

Integrated Headquarters Ministry of Defence (Navy)
sanctioned (October 2009) the “Provision of Central

###### 262


Sewage Scheme at Karanja” at ` 13.40 crore to be
completed within 156 weeks from the date of release
of work. Chief Engineer (Navy) Mumbai concluded
(December 2010) a contract with M/s Hari Om
Projects Pvt Ltd. At ` 8.86 crore for works relating to
site clearance/excavation, sewage disposal line, water
supply, electrification and building /structures together
with supply of electro-mechanical equipment including
standby generating sets. Later, CE (N) concluded (July
2013) another contract with M/s Fontus Water Pvt. Ltd.
At ` 5.99 crore for the Sewage Treatment Plant (STP)
including all electrical and mechanical equipment and
its connected civil works. The infrastructure work,
contracted in December 2010 was to be completed by
June 23, 2012 and the work relating to STP, contracted
in July 2013, was to be completed by January 25, 2015.

Audit noticed that 85 per cent of work amounting to

` 4.93 crore was completed (April 2013) against the
infrastructure contract (December 2010) and the
balance work was kept suspended pending completion
of work for the STP. Further, the progress of work
relating to STP was only 44.5 per cent (July 2017). Lack
of synchronisation in execution of infrastructure work
for the STP resulted in idling of an investment of ` 4.39
crore for the last four years.

 (Paragraph 2.7)

VIII. Unnecessary procurement of Air Conditioning
and Refrigeration Plants

Material Organisation, Visakhapatnam placed (March
2015) a purchase order (PO) for air conditioning (AC)
and refrigeration plants for Indian Naval Ship (INS)
Mahish at ` 3.18 crore. IHQ MoD (Navy) had directed HQ
ANC on March 5, 2015 to maintain the status quo as INS
Mahish was scheduled for Essential Repair and Dry Dock
(ERDD) by July 1, 2016, which was to be followed by
its decommissioning. However, HQ ANC communicated
the decision to MO(V) only on April 1, 2015 i.e. after
placement of PO on March 30, 2015. MO(V) also did not
take any action to cancel the PO.


-----

Resultantly procurement of equipment worth ` 3.18

crore, received in June 2015, was rendered infructuous

as the ship (i.e. INS Mahish) for which the plants were

required, was decommissioned in November, 2016.

 (Paragraph 2.8)

IX. Over provisioning of Ferro Steel plus Weld

Electrodes

In spite of a balance of 13,610 Kgs ferro steel plus weld

electrodes (electrodes) having shelf life of one year only,

Material Organisation, Visakhapatnam procured another

11,200 Kgs electrodes at ` 2.78 crore, which was far in

excess of their annual requirement. Despite extension

of two years in shelf life, these electrodes remained

unutilised for over four year since their receipt.

 (Paragraph 2.9)

X. Creation of infrastructural facilities in Indian

Coast Guard

The Indian Coast Guard (ICG) operational capabilities

are reflected in a wide range of ships, aircraft and

associated equipment which are required for the Coast

Guard to perform its tasks and respond successfully

to unforeseen and emergent situations. Adequacy of

infrastructure is pivotal for effective usage/exploitation

of ICG assets. ICG continues to be plagued with

deficiencies of operational infrastructure, which has

an adverse impact in the efficacy of ICG operations.

Coast Guard Development Plan (CGDP) 2012-17

envisaged setting up of two Coast Guard Air Stations

(CGAS) and seven Coast Guard Air Enclaves (CGAE),

for effectively carrying out operations. At the end of

plan period, despite Government sanction, ICG could

not commission these Air Units even after a lapse of

51 to 95 months from the date of sanction. Failure to

establish the CGAS and CGAEs is indicative of the fact

that necessary ground realties and local constraints

had not been taken into account by the ICG while

deciding to set up the CGAS and CGAEs at these


stations. Inadequacy of berthing facilities and jetties

is a cause of concern, as Coast Guard is dependent

on various Port Trusts for these assets. The shortages

ranged from 27.80 to 76.50 per cent in terms of

available length of jetties. Consequently, Ships had

to remain on anchorage on many occasions and ICG

was constrained to reduce /rebase/shift the vessels

and provide the required surveillance cover from other

stations. At Mumbai, parking of Air Cushion Vehicles

(ACVs) in sunlight led to premature degradation. ACVs

meant for basing at Puducherry were actually operated

from Mandapam. Making good the deficiencies of the

berthing facilities to synchronise with the basing of the

ships as per the basing plan of CGHQ, has not been

done effectively.

 (Paragraph 3.1)

###### Report No. 13 of 2018 (Defence Services) Army

 Executive Summary

This Report contains the results of audit of the

transactions for the year ended March 2017 and

performance reviews of projects/ schemes of Ministry

of Defence pertaining to Army, Department of Defence,

Defence Research & Development Organization, Military

Engineer Services and Border Road Organization. The

report is divided into six Chapters. Chapter I contains

the profile of the audited entities, audit methodology,

financial aspects, recoveries/ savings and adjustment at

the instance of audit etc. Chapter II contains three audit

paragraphs on Ministry of Defence; Chapter III contains

five audit paragraphs on Army; Chapter IV contains three

audit paragraphs and one long paragraph on Works and

Military Engineer Services; Chapter V contains one audit

paragraph on Border Roads Organisation and Chapter

VI contains five audit paragraphs on Defence Research

& Development organization. The Significant audit

findings as brought out in the Report are summarized

as follows:

###### 263


-----

###### Chapter I: Introduction

Financial aspects and Budgetary Management

For the financial year 2016-17, the number of Demands

for Grants in respect of the Ministry of Defence has been

reduced from eight to four. Two Demands for Grants

(No. 20 and 21) are included under Civil Grants and two

(No. 22 and 23) under Defence Service Estimates (DSE),

as follows:

(i) Civil Grants: Demand No. 20- MoD

(Miscellaneous) and Demand No. 21
MoD(Pensions);

(ii) Defence Services Estimates (DSE):

Demand No.22- Defence Services
Revenue and Demand No.23- Capital

Outlay on Defence Services.

- There has been persistent excess expenditure

under Grant 21 for the last five years. During FY

2016-17 also there was an excess of ` 2,199.84

crore under this Grant. An amount of ` 8,984.78

crore of Pension Payments lying in Public Sector

Bank(PSB) Suspense as of March 31, 2017 as per

the Finance Accounts for 2016-17 also remained

to be booked in FY 2016-17.

- As regards Grant (No. 22 & 23) of Defence

Services, share of Revenue expenditure has

been increasing over the five years period

primarily due to hike in manpower cost of the

Armed Forces. The total expenditure on Pay &

Allowances registered an increase of 49.64 per

cent over the period from 2012-13 to 2016-17.

- The above affected the allocation towards

Stores, Works and Modernization. Share of

combined expenditure on Stores. Works and

Capital expenditure decreased from 59.13 to

53.02 per cent during 2012-13 to 2016-17.

###### 26


Recoveries/ Savings & Adjustment in Accounts at the
instance of Audit

Based on Audit observations, audited entities recovered

` 13.95 crore on account of irregular/ excess payment
of allowances, sundry charges, training charges, LTC
claims, water and electricity charges and savings on
account of cancelled irregular works sanctions and
indents of ` 10.38 crore and adjusted annual accounts to
the extent of ` 19.17 crore having a net effect of ` 43.50
crore during 2016-17.

###### Chapter-II: Ministry of Defence

Loss due to delay in opening of Letter of Credit

Ministry of Defence (MoD) signed a contract (November
2012) with M/s Rosoboronexport (ROE), Russia for
supply of ‘A’ Missiles at a cost of US$ 232,570,000.
Payment up to 85 per cent had to be made through an
irrevocable revolving Letter of Credit (LC), to be opened
for an initial amount of US$ 59,305,350, within 45
days of receipt of notification from the supplier about
readiness for delivery, with grace period of 30 days. In
case of delay in opening of LC, MoD had to pay LD at the
rate of 0.07 per cent for each day of delay.

MoD opened the LC after a delay of 81 days. It calculated
the LD at US$ 9,884,225, basing the calculation on the
entire amount of payment to be made through the LC
i.e. US$ 197,684,500 and not on the initial amount of
LC i.e. US$ 59,305,350. The supplier also delayed the
supply for which it had to pay US$ 10,238,661.68 as
LD to MoD. The net amount was worked out as US$
354,436.68, which was recovered by MoD in July 2017.
If the initial amount of LC i.e. US$ 59,305,350 was taken
into account the LD payable by MoD would be US$
2,965,267.5 only. MoD should obtain legal opinion on the
amount to be reckoned for calculation of LD and raise a
supplementary claim on the supplier, if need be, as the
difference at the prevailing exchange rate be ` 46.16 crore.

 (Paragraph 2.1)


-----

Undue benefit to a foreign firm due to non-levy of

liquidated damages in the procurement of 23 MM

Cartridges

Ministry of Defence (MoD) has signed in October 2005

a protocol with M/s Rosoboronexport (ROE), Russia

for supply of armament and military equipment. The

protocol states that the liquidated damages (LD)

cannot be levied by deduction from the payments to be

remitted to the party who has violated the conditions of

the contract.

We observed that under the MoD’s contract (2006)

with ROE, for procurement of 23 MM Cartridges, the

supplier was liable to pay LD for late delivery. As the

supplies were not completed by the stipulated time MoD

signed a Supplement for extension of validity without

incorporating the LD provisions. When MoD claimed

LD of US$ 1,123,875, it was refuted by the firm stating

that the Supplement did not mention of LD. Thus, the

omission on the part of the MoD to clearly incorporate

the condition of LD in the Supplement, resulted in a

disputed claims of US$ 1,123,875 (` 4.56 crore) that was

pending for over 10 years.

 (Paragraph 2.2)

###### ` 7.48 crore pending for recovery on account of Old

Grant Bungalow being unauthorisedly used as hotel

We noticed that the occupant of an Old Grant Bungalow

(OGB) in Ranikhet was operating a hotel in the premises

since 1995, without paying the applicable rent. The

occupant had applied to Cantonment Board, Ranikhet

in 1995 seeking permission to start a Museum-cum
Guest house in the bungalow, on which no decision

was taken. In October 2009, the Defence Estate Officer

(DEO) Bareilly sent notice to the occupant and in

January, 2010, requested Area HQ for resumption of

the bungalow but Area HQ wrote back that the onus of

taking action rested with the DEO. The DEO had neither

computed nor demanded from the occupant ` 7.48


crore due from September 1995 to June 2017. Only in

July 2017 proceeding were being initiated for eviction

and recovery of damages of ` 7.48 crore.

 (Paragraph 2.3)

###### Chapter III: Army (Avoidable expenditure)

Director General Armed Forces Medical Services

(DGAFMS) had a Rate Contract (RC) with M/s MSD

Pharmaceutical for supply of a life saving drug

Caspofungin which was due to expire in May 2014. The

Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) for a new contract was

issued on May 25, 2014, just six days before expiry of old

RC. While the technical bids, opened in February 2015,

were undergoing evaluation, the DGAFMS on April 13,

2015 purchased 1,628 vials of Caspofungin at the old RC

rate of ` 9,842.50 per vial, at a total cost of ` 160.24 lakh.

The price bids opened on May 15, 2015 showed that

another bidder viz. BDR Pharmaceuticals had quoted

` 4,141.20 per vial MSD which was much less than `

9,842.50 per vial quoted by MSD Pharmaceuticals.

Subsequently, a market survey by DGAFMS revealed

that the drug had been procured at ` 4,300 in October

2014 by a hospital in Hyderabad. Failure of DGAFMS to

ascertain the prevailing market price resulted in extra

avoidable expenditure of ` 92.82 lakh as the second rate

contract was finalized with BDR Pharmaceuticals at `

4,141.20.

 (Paragraph 3.1)

Unauthorized provision of Operations cum sand model

room

As per Scales of Accommodation (SOA) for Defence

Services-2009, the headquarters of the field formations

are authorized for specialized accommodation which,

inter-alia, includes Operations room, Sand Model room,

Central Library cum museum etc. The SOA, however,

do not provide for separate Operations room if the

formation headquarter is already having an underground

###### 26


-----

Operations room. The Corps Headquarters at ‘D’

Cantonment at ‘C’ was already having underground

Operations cum sand model room complex and a

library. Despite this, Headquarters Northern Command

in March 2011 sanctioned Operations cum sand model

room along with conference hall and library for the

Corps Headquarters at an estimated cost of ` 3.01 crore.

Operations cum sand model room and library was

constructed at a cost of ` 2.95 crore and central air –

conditioning at a cost of ` 1.15 crore was also provided

by the Chief Engineer without the approval of the

competent authority.

 (Paragraph 3.2)

Delay in development and failure in meeting the user
requirements of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) were introduced in
the Indian Army in 1998 through the import of Searcher
Mark-I from Israel. It was envisaged to procure UAVs
being indigenously developed by Defence Research and
Develpoment Organisation (DRDO) viz. ‘E’ numbers of
‘AA’ UAVs in 11[th] Plan and ‘F’ numbers of ‘BB’ UAVs in
12[th] Plan beside acquisition of ‘G’ numbers of ‘CC’ UAVs
through import. We noticed that through ‘H’ numbers of
‘CC’ UAVs were procured through import, indigenous UAVs
viz. ‘AA’ and ‘BB’ could not be inducted in Indian Army
due to inordinate delay in their development by DRDO.

Despite incurring an expenditure of ` 79.75 crore
in procurement of four Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
(UAVs) named ‘AA’ through limited series production,
UAVs developed by DRDO failed to meet the users’
requirements.

Further, the Development of ‘BB’UAV was sanctioned in
February 2011 at a total cost of ` 1540.74 crore. Delay in
development of ‘BB’ with multiple issues including the
airframe, engine, payload and Line Replaceable Units
(LRUs) affected the aerial surveillance capability of
Indian Army.

 (Paragraph 3.3)

###### 266


Delay in production of electronically upgraded

155mm/45 Calibre Gun Systems “DHANUSH”

Artillery units of Indian Army hold 155mm/ 39 Calibre

(towed) guns which were procured through a contract

concluded in 1986 with M/s AB Bofors, Sweden. The

contract also provided for Transfer of Technology (ToT)

for upkeep & overhaul of the guns and for indigenous

production of the guns. However, owing to corruption

charges a ban was imposed in 1989 by the MoD on

dealing with OEM for ten years. Thereafter, the Army

pursued procurement of new guns off higher (45/52)

Calibre through open global tenders.

The Ordnance Factory Board (OFB), in 2011, offered to

produce the gun based on ToT of 1986 with mechanical

upgrade up to 45 calibre integrated with modern

electronic sub-system which gives it a capability of auto
alignment and fixation resulting in faster engagement

of targets. The development undertaken by OFB in 2011

was yet to completely clear the user trials resulting in

continued deficiency of modern artillery gun in Army.

 (Paragraphs 3.4)

Failure of Auxiliary Power Unit Engines of Artillery Gun

The 155 mm (towed) artillery gun presently held in

Artillery units is powered by Auxiliary Power Unit (APU)

manufactured by M/s Mercedes Benz. As the engine

was no longer being manufactured by the OEM, an

indigenous engine manufactured by M/s Force Motors

Limited was identified in 2002.

Audit could not ascertain as to how, despite not

conducting firing of the gun fitted with new engine

in desert and high altitude terrain as per requisite

parameters and pending the issue of indigenization of

23 items by the vendor.

Director General of Quality Assurance (DGQA) approved

the fitment of engine manufactured by M/s Force


-----

Motors Ltd. in April 2010. Subsequent to supply of ‘L’

numbers of APU engines in September 2015 at a cost of

` 18.60 crore, Artillery units raised defect reports with

respect to defective self – starter engine overheating, oil

leakage, etc. within the warranty period. Further, based

on the high failure rate in field firing in extreme and hot

weather (May 2016), the vendor agreed to provide a

retro-modification kit. Artillery Directorate was not able

to provide Audit the position regarding total number of

defective engines held and status of repair indicating

absence of internal controls.

 (Paragraph 3.5)

###### Chapter IV: Works and Military Engineer Services

Unfruitful expenditure on Baffle Range

Defence Work Procedure (DWP) - 2007 stipulates that

Revised Administrative Approval (RAA) will be essential

before tender if there is change in the scope of work due

to any reason, irrespective of whether the cost is within

the tolerance limit of 10 per cent or not.

MoD, in March 2011, sanctioned for construction of a

Baffle Range at Indian Military Academy (IMA), Dehradun

for firing training. The work was awarded in December

2012 for ` 8.66 crore for completion by February 2015.

The tender included drawing for staggered fashion

boundary wall but the quantities of the materials for the

wall, originally based on straight boundary wall, were

erroneously not amended. Within a day of conclusion

of the contract, the process for RAA was initiated to

incorporate deviations. Thereafter the matter remained

under correspondence between various authorities and

the work was held up for want of approval of the RAA

and the assets created were lying unused as of July

2017. As of March 2017, the physical progress of the work

was 91 percent and expenditure of ` 7.60 crore had been

incurred.

 (Paragraph 4.1)


Loss of ` 56.17 lakh besides avoidable liability of

###### ` 9.27 crore

Ministry of Defence (Ministry) accorded a sanction

in March 2003 for construction of accommodation

for Infantry Battalion at Suratgarh at a cost at

a cost of ` 4.86 crore. The main scope of work

catered for construction of total 36 structures

which included living accommodation, officer mess,

storage accommodation, garages etc. However, poor

workmanship and inadequate monitoring during

execution of work at Suratgarh led to construction of

unsafe and substandard buildings thereby warranting

their demolition and subsequent reconstruction/

rehabilitation at total estimated cost of ` 9.83 crore just

after seven years of construction.

 (Paragraph 4.2)

Delay in provisioning of air-conditioners denied the

ready availability of Missiles to a field formation

Storage accommodation for Missile constructed at a cost

of ` 2.20 crore in 2008 could not be put up to the desired

use due to non-availability of air conditioners. Despite

the user requirement, the initiative for provisioning of

air conditioners was inordinately delayed and thereby

the Field Formation was functioning without holding of

Missiles in its Armoury. Given the mountainous terrain,

hostile weather conditions and the fact that the area

remains cut off from the mainland for more than six

months in a year, stocking of the critical ammunition

like Missiles at a distant location under inhospitable

geographical conditions impairs the operational

readiness of the field formation.

 (Paragraph 4.3)

Engineer Stores of Engineer Origin-Follow up Audit

Engineer Regiments provide critical mobility support

to the armed forces both in war and peace times. Our

review, however, indicates persistence of some chronic

###### 26


-----

issues which, if not addressed, will continue to pose

serious challenge to this critical support system for the

armed forces. Some of these issues are shortages of

stores and spares across the categories, accentuated

by delays and inefficiencies in the procurement system

that results in an unduly long procurement cycle and

consequently the inability to spend the allocated funds.

Lack of an automated system created bottlenecks in

the two-way flow of information across different parts

of the organization and led to inadequate control and

monitoring. This resulted in delays in registration of

demands for stores and their eventual issue, uneven

distribution of stores, and also infructuous expenditure

in purchases of unwarranted spares. The delay in

initiation/ approval of PRCs and the inability to

finalize the purchase proposals in time aggravated the

availability of plants and spares.

Non-formulation of five year perspective roll-on plans

for repairs and delays in finalization of annual targets

delayed provisioning of stores and spares. The non
compliance with the overhaul policy led to a situation

where the equipment and plants were pressed into

service without the scheduled overhauls, potentially

impacting their optimum performance.

In order to address some of the issue mentioned above,

MoD should inter alia:

- Consider on-boarding the ESD onto its

Computerised Inventory Control Project

being rolled out in the Directorate General of

Ordnance Services, which deals with inventory

management of ordnance stores.

- Strictly enforce the existing provisions for mid
life overhaul of plants and equipment in order

to ensure that their performance is optimal.

- Streamline the purchase process to make it

accountable and result-oriented.

###### 268



- Fix the periodicity of the meetings of the

purchase committee and make it mandatory for

the members to attend it.

 (Paragraph 4.4)

###### Chapter V: Border Roads Organisation

Unfruitful expenditure

Non-adherence to laid down Technical Instructions of

Director General of Border Roads (DGBR) regarding

work of realignment/construction of roads led to

foreclosure of work resulting in unfruitful expenditure of

` 15.58 crore in two cases given below:

As per the technical instructions, the hill roads should

be constructed much ahead of the construction of

permanent bridges. Two sanctions were accorded in

2011 by Director General Border Roads (DGBR) for

improvement of a road and construction of a bridge on

‘Y-Z’ road in State ‘V’ to facilitate movement of artillery

gun carrying vehicle. The bridge work commenced in

May 2012 without completing the work of improving the

zigs & curves on this road. Border Roads Organization

(BRO) in October 2015 initiated foreclosure of the bridge

work after expenditure of ` 2.27 crore on the ground

that it was not required in view of the approval of new

alignment of the connecting road, thus, an expenditure

of ` 2.27 crore became infructuous.

Sanction was accorded in December, 2010 for

construction of a Double Lane for re-alignment of a 7

km stretch on National Highway 31 A to avoid major

trouble at Mile 27 with problem of sinking area. No

consultant/geologist, however, was involved in joint

survey before commencement of the work. The work

commenced in January, 2012 but during May-August

2013, a large number of slides/ slips took place resulting

in huge damages of the executed works. In December,

2014, DGBR proposed to re-survey the alignment &

appoint a consultant alongwith a geologist to prepare


-----

a Revised Details Project Report. As of October 2015,

the physical progress of the work was 9.36 percent

with expenditure of ` 9.13 crore, In addition, ` 1.14 crore

had been paid for compensatory afforestation and

` 2.77 crore for land use for the road. In August, 2015,

DGBR recommended termination of contract. Thus,

expenditure of ` 13.31 crore did not serve the intended

purpose.

 (Paragraph 5.1)

###### Chapter VI: Defence Research and Development Organization

Loss due to inadequate terms of insurance for imported

equipment

Instruments Research & Development Establishment

(IRDE), placed a supply order on a foreign firm in

August 2012 for purchase of an imported polishing

machine at a cost of ` 19.68 crore and contracted M/s

Balmer Lawrie for shipment of the equipment from

England to India. The insurance policy purchased

by Balmer Lawrie from Oriental Insurance Company

covered the risk of deferred unpacking upto 30 days.

The consignment was opened after nearly 3 months

and the machine was found beyond economic repairs.

The Insurance Surveyor rejected the claim stating that

the policy included insurance cover for 30 days period

for deferred unpacking only. Action had been initiated

to recover the damages from Balmer Lawrie but there

was no outcome as of February 2018.

It is recommended that the Procurement Manual

procedure should be suitably amended to incorporate

clear responsibility for ensuring that high value

equipment is covered by an appropriate insurance

policy, for monitoring the factors that are critical for

insurance claims and for ensuring that those factors are

monitored at the appropriate level.

 (Paragraph 6.1)


Avoidable Procurement of stores valuing ` 6.09 crore

for stockpiling

As per general principles of purchase in the Purchase

Management Manual, 2006 of Defence Research &

Development Organizing (DRDO), all expenditure on

purchases will only be need based and stores should

not be procured to stockpile in anticipation of future

requirements. In two cases, Combat Vehicle Research

& Development Establishment procured stores valuing

` 6.09 crore for stockpiling citing future utilization. The

stores are still held in stock. The stockpiling not only

resulted in blocking of government money, but its future

utilization is also uncertain.

 (Paragraph 6.2)

Unfruitful expenditure of ` 13.78 crore in taking up a

project without complete test facilities

Defence Research & Development Organization (DRDO)

takes up various types of projects for research and

development. Test and Evaluation is a continuous

process during the development of a system. The

availability test facilities is, therefore, of paramount

importance for taking up a project.

Research and Development Establishment (Engineers)

[R&DE(E)], took up project for Aircraft Arrester

Gear (AAG) required to arrest fighter aircrafts 6-40

Ton capacity. The project was closed after incurring

expenditure ` 11.88 crore, without testing the AAG for

its capability, as the adequate testing facilities were

not available within the Country, a fact known R&DE(E)

even before taking up the project. Thereafter, it also

constructs part test facility at a cost of ` 1.90 crore,

despite knowing that the facility was inadequate to test

the AAG at full load capacity and such testing was also

hazardous for safety of personnel and infrastructure in

the surrounding area. As the AAG could not be tested for

40 Ton load capacity, Centre for Military Airworthiness &

Certification (CEMILAC) did not certify the AAG system

###### 269


-----

for use by the Indian Air Force. Resultantly, the entire

expenditure of ` 13.78 crore proved unfruitful.

 (Paragraph 6.3)

Infructuous expenditure of ` 2.31 crore

The Defence Exhibition Organization (DEO) hired

2249.33 sqft of space in Hotel Ashok, New Delhi, in order

to shift out of the India Trade Promotion Organization

(ITPO) premises at Pragati Maidan. However, after

signing the lease agreement in November, 2015, DEO

continued to be stationed at old premises due to delay

in creating office infrastructure at Hotel Ashok and

finally shifted in October 2016. DEO paid rent of ` 2.31

crore to Hotel Ashok till September, 2016 (15 months)

without occupying the premises.

 (Paragraph 6.4)

Unwarranted expenditure of ` 14.43 crore on

procurement of stores

Purchase Management Manual - 2006 stipulates that in

purchasing materials for Government use, the officers/

staff will observe adequate vigilance as a safeguard

against infructuous expenditure from public funds and

exercise prudence. To ensure this, all expenditure on

purchases will only be need –based having immediate

use.

In February, 2014, Director General(Artillery) intimated

Research Centre Imarat (RCI) that ‘N’ missile, which was

under development by RCI, was not recommended for

induction into service. Despite this, RCI placed six supply

orders between March, 2014 and July 2015 for stores

valuing 14.43 crore, which were received by January

2016. As users had not shown interest in ‘N’ missile, the

project was closed in December 2015. The stores were

transferred to RCI inventory/other projects and are since

lying unused as of October 2017.

 (Paragraph 6.5)

###### 2 0


###### Report No. 14 of 2018 (Air Force)

The total expenditure of the Defence Services during

the year 2016-17 was ` 2,30,933 crore. Of this, the

Indian Air Force (IAF) spent ` 55,643 crore which was

24.09 percent of the total expenditure on the Defence

Services. The major portion of expenditure of IAF was

Capital in nature, constituting 55 percent of their total

expenditure.

This Report relates to matters arising from the audit of

the financial transaction of Indian Air Force (IAF) and

relevant records relating to IAF in the Ministry of Defence

(MoD), Defence Accounts Department, Military Engineer

Services (MES), Defence Public Sector Undertakings

and Defence Research and Development Organisation

(DRDO) and its laboratories dedicated primarily to

IAF. An amount of ` 85.49 crore was recovered after

having been pointed out by Audit. Highlights of findings

included in the Report are as under:

I. Development of Indigenous Airborne Early

Warning and Control System (AEW&CS)

The project for indigenous development of AEW&C

System was approved in 2004 at a cost of ` 1,800 crore

to be completed by 2011. Besides, non-achievement of

certain operational requirements specified by IAF, there

was time overrun of 70 percent. Selection of Embraer as

platform created design constraints and caused delay.

The achievement of indigenisation was only about 48

percent of project cost. The project conceived in 2002

is yet to be fully realised leaving gaps in air surveillance

capability of IAF.

 (Paragraph 2.1)

II. Irregularity in procurement of MiG aircraft

Tyres

Faulty tendering process adopted since 2009, ensured

that the contract was repeatedly awarded to the same


-----

foreign vendor, despite the vendor supplying defective

tyres. IAF is saddled with defective, unusable 3080 MiG

tyres from the firm, valuing ` 5.92 crore. Faulty RFP

was issued as it did not correctly specify the QRs and

the price evaluation criteria. Vendors were selected for

issue of RFP on pick and choose basis. Indigenistion was

foregone to facilitate import of tyres.

 (Paragraph 2.2)

III. Contract mismanagement in procurement of

Ejection Seats resulted in delay and excess

expenditure.

Incorrect objection by Additional Integrated Financial

Advisor (AIFA) and resultant delay in opening of Letter

of Credit made the vendor cancel the contract. Fresh

contract had to be signed at higher rate leading to extra

expenditure of ` 1.64 crore besides delay of two years

in delivery of ejection seats required on priority for

operation of ‘bb’ aircraft.

 (Paragraph 2.3)

IV. Irregularity in tendering for repair and overhaul

of Mi-17 IV helicopters

IAF unwarrantedly delayed the procurement of Repair

and Overhaul (ROH) facility for Mi-17 IV helicopters,

Repair and overhaul of the helicopters suffered from

severe delays, excess expenditure and monopolization


of repair and overhaul of helicopters by the Russian

firm. By the time the contract was signed, most of the

helicopters were grounded, for want of repair. By not

setting up of ROH facility which would have costed

about ` 196 crore, IAF committed to spend more than

` 600 crore by sending the helicopters abroad for

repairs.

 (Paragraph 2.4)

V. Performance Audit on Operational readiness

of IAF airfields

Operational readiness of the airfields is vital for air

operations, especially during conflict. Audit found

inadequacies in the support facilities at IAF airfields

adversely affecting their readiness. These included

facilities like restoration of runway after bombing,

modernisation of communication systems, safe landing

and take-off of aircraft, surveillance of aircraft while in

air, refueling of aircraft and handling of armaments to

be loaded on the aircraft. GOI implemented a project

for Modernisation of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI) at a

cost of ` 1220 crore for modernisation of ‘kk’ number

of airfields by 2014. Till date only ‘mm’ number of

airfields were commissioned. There were shortfalls in

the equipment to be held by the airfields, which was

mainly due to delay in the procurement.

 (Paragraph 3)





###### 2


-----

### APPENDIX-IV

|Sl. No.|Year|Details of the Audit Paras on which ATNs are pending as on 31.03.2019|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||No. of ATNs not sent to Audit by the Ministry even for the first time|No. of ATNs sent to Audit for vetting|No. of ATNs sent but returned with observations and Audit is awaiting their resubmission by the Ministry|Total Pending Audit Paras|
|1|2001|0|0|0|0|
|2|2003|0|0|0|0|
|3|2004|0|0|1|1|
|4|2005|0|0|1|1|
|5|2006|0|0|0|0|
|6|2007|0|0|1|1|
|7|2008|0|0|0|0|
|8|2009|0|0|1|1|
|9|2010|0|0|1|1|
|10|2011|0|1|1|2|
|11|2012|0|0|0|0|
|12|2103|0|3|0|3|
|13|2014|0|0|0|0|
|14|2015|0|2|2|4|
|15|2016|0|1|3|4|
|16|2017|0|4|8|12|
|17|2018|19|8|8|35|
|18|2019|1|0|0|1|
||Total|20|19|27|66|


###### Age-wise analysis of pending Audit Paras


###### 2 2


-----

-----

-----

