# AnnualAnnualAnnualAnnualAnnual ReportReportReportReportReport

#### 2003-20042003-20042003-20042003-20042003-2004

###### Ministry of Defence Government of India


-----

### ANNUAL REPORT 2003-04

###### Ministry of Defence Government of India


-----

Front Cover:
‘Tejas’ the world’s smallest light weight multi-role aircraft designed by DRDO to meet the demands of
Indian Air Force, has sucessfully completed 200 flight tests.

Back Cover:
‘INS Talwar’, the Stealth Frigate, inducted in the Indian Navy in July 2003 adds to Navy’s punch.


-----

### CONTENTS

1. Security Environment 5

2. Organisation and Functions of the Ministry of Defence 15

3. Indian Army 25

4. Indian Navy 39

5. Indian Air Force 49

6. Coast Guard 59

7. Defence Production 71

8. Defence Research and Development 97

9. Inter-Service Organisations 115

10. Recruitment and Training 127

11. Resettlement and Welfare of Ex-Servicemen 147

12. Cooperation Between the Armed Forces & Civil Authorities 165

13. National Cadet Corps 173

14. Defence Relations With Foreign Countries 183

15. Ceremonial, Academic and Adventure Activities 201

16. Activities of Vigilance Units 211

17. Empowerment and Welfare of Women 213

Appendices

I. Matters dealt with by the Departments of the
Minstry of Defence 219

II. Ministers, Chiefs of Staff & Secretaries who were in
position from April 1, 2003 onwards 223

III. Summary of latest C&AG Report on the working
of Ministry of Defence 224


-----

### 11111

 SECURITY ENVIRONMENT

Security environment around India underlines the need for a high level of vigilance and defence preparedness


-----

###### ew countries face the range of security
##### F

###### challenges, concerns and threats that

 India faces, from terrorism and low
 intensity conflict to nuclear weapons and

 missiles, in its neighbourhood.


###### ew countries face the range of security

 challenges, concerns and threats that

 India faces, from terrorism and low
 intensity conflict to nuclear weapons and

 missiles, in its neighbourhood.


1.1 India’s security preoccupations are
determined by the dynamics of the global
and regional strategic and security environment. The post-Cold War international
situation and the terrorist attack against the
United States on 9/11 have brought about a
greater international convergence on global
security issues and challenges, though
significant differences of perception and
action on specifics remain. India’s location
at the centre of an arc of terrorism between
North Africa and South-east Asia, its close
proximity to a key source of nuclear proliferation and the continuing acts of terrorism
from across her western border require India
to maintain a high level of vigilance and
defence preparedness. The nature of new
threats has also reinforced the need for
international cooperation to combat terrorism and proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, and underline the role that India
could play in the global response against
such forces.


1.2 Global events in recent years have
had a profound effect on the strategic
environment for India. The collapse of the
former Soviet Union has left the US as the
pre-eminent world power. The US-led wars
in Kosovo, Afghanistan and Iraq have demonstrated US military power and willingness
to use it unilaterally or in association with
allies or coalition partners; and heralded a
worldwide revolution in military affairs using
new technologies, notably information and
communication technologies, sensors and
satellites, and precision-guided munitions.
1.3 Old confrontations have given way
to new equations and alignments. The
European Union is consolidating and expanding to include much of former East and
Central Europe. NATO too is enlarging and
has deployed forces in Afghanistan even as
Europe has been trying to shape its own
common Foreign and Security Policy. Relations between major powers have been, by
and large, stable and tension-free. Strains


6


-----

did appear in transatlantic relations over
Iraq, but they did not interfere with cooperation in areas of common approach such
as Afghanistan and the US-led Proliferation
Security Initiative. Russia continued with its
structural reforms and deepening of ties with
the US, Europe, China and Central Asia for
its security and economic revival. Frictions,
characterizing an earlier phase of US-China
relations, eased. China is modernizing
rapidly, building up its ‘Comprehensive
National Power’. Global dependency for
energy resources on the Gulf remains and is
likely to increase, triggering rivalry and
competition for access and control of the
region and for alternatives sources of energy,
notably in Central Asia. Terrorism and the
prospect of the use of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) for terrorism, have
emerged as the new and most immediate
issues of global security concern.
1.4 In response to these and other
perceived challenges, the US is redeploying
its posture, forces, defences and operational
philosophy worldwide. As the pre-eminent
world power with global influence and ability
to project power, US policies and actions
shape the international security environment
in many ways, directly or indirectly. There
has been a stepped up US presence in
varying degrees in the Gulf, Afghanistan,
Pakistan, Central Asia and South-east Asia
and reductions elsewhere. The US declared
Pakistan a Major Non-NATO Ally (MNNA)
as a partner in the war against terrorism.
1.5 To an extent not often realized, few
countries in the world face the range of
security challenges, concerns and threats


that India faces today. At one end of the
spectrum, India has faced a series of low
intensity conflicts such as a proxy war fanned
by radical jehadi outfits and supported by
state institutions; insurgencies, in many
cases tolerated, aided or abetted by sources
from outside India; and spillovers of conflicts
in neighbouring states. At the other end, it
inhabits an environment in which two of its
neighbours have nuclear weapons and
missiles and its immediate neighbourhood
has been a source of nuclear proliferation.
In between these poles, it has experienced,
in the course of its 50-plus years of postIndependence history, at least four major
conventional border wars besides an undeclared war at Kargil on account of external
aggression.
1.6 Terrorism is India’s primary and
most immediate security threat. India’s
location at the centre of the arc of extremist
activism and terrorism and next to its
epicenter in Pakistan, amplified by a history
of Pakistan’s use of it to wage a low-intensity
proxy war against India; the prospect of
terrorists getting access to weapons of mass
destruction; and the wanton disregard they
have for the lives of others and themselves,
require that India be particularly on guard
against the phenomenon. Terrorism in and
against India has anticipated and mirrored
terrorism worldwide. The original act of
mass, synchronized terrorism, similar to the
9/11 attacks in the US, took place in Bombay in 1992. Terrorist attacks in Iraq, Saudi
Arabia, Turkey and Spain during the year
have been echoed in attacks by terrorist
groups motivated by the same ideology in


7


-----

The fencing along the Line of Control and the international border helps check infiltration.


India, notably the Mumbai bomb blast of
August 2003 and frequent acts of terrorism
in Jammu and Kashmir.
1.7 Though it is part of the same
international phenomenon of jehadi ideology, terrorism faced by India has its

specificities. Unlike the non-state nature of
most domestic and local manifestations of
terrorism, and the international terrorism of
Al Qaeda or the Jemmah Islamiyah, the
terrorism faced by India is typically crossborder and State-sponsored. Terrorism also
draws upon the radicalization of society. As
a country with a vital stake in preserving the
traditions of peaceful co-existence amongst
its diverse and mixed religious communities,
India is deeply concerned about the intrusion of dogmatic, alien and extremist religious tendencies funded by some charities


and supported by quasi-government institutions in some parts of Asia. India has the
size, population, intrinsic character, composition, and national strength to act as a
bulwark against the forces of extremism in
this region.
1.8 India’s response to these multiple
threats and challenges has always been
restrained, measured and moderate, consistent with its peaceful outlook and reputation
as a peace-loving country. Diplomacy
remains India’s chosen means of dealing
with these challenges, but effective diplomacy has to be backed by credible military
power. India’s strategic and security interests
require a mix of land-based, maritime and
air capabilities, and a minimum credible
deterrent to thwart the threat of use of
nuclear weapons against it.


8


-----

1.9 Connected by land to west, central,
continental, and south-east Asia, and by sea
to the littoral states of the Indian Ocean
from East Africa to the Indonesian archipelago, India is strategically located vis-à-vis
both continental Asia as well as the Indian
Ocean Region. It has a landmass of 3.3
million sq. kms. and is home to over a
billion people with varying ethnic, religious
and cultural backgrounds.
1.10 The topography of India is diverse
ranging from the snow clad Himalayas with
peaks over 28,000 feet to deserts, thick
jungles and vast plains. The Siachen Glacier
in the North is the world’s highest battlefield
with posts located as high as 21,000 feet.
India’s western border runs through deserts,
fertile plains and thickly forested mountains.
The north-eastern frontier also comprises
steep, high ranges and dense tropical
forests. To the South, there are ranges close
to the sea, inland plateaus interspersed with
river valleys, coastal plains, and far flung
island territories. On three sides, from
Gujarat to West Bengal, it is
bordered by the Arabian Sea,

India’s response to the Indian Ocean and the Bay
multiple threats and of Bengal. This geographical
challenges has been and topographical diversity,
restrained, especially on its borders,
measured and poses unique challenges to
moderate, consistent our Armed Forces.
with its peaceful 1.11 India’s land frontiers
outlook and extend across more than
reputation as a 15,500 kms sharing borders
peace-loving with seven neighbours namely
country. Afghanistan, Pakistan, Bangla

desh, Myanmar, China, Bhutan and Nepal.
Few of them share borders amongst themselves, heightening the focus of their relations with their larger common neighbour.
1.12 India’s peninsular shape provides
India a coastline of about 7600 kms and an
Exclusive Economic Zone of over two
million sq. kms. The island territories in the
East are 1,300 kms. away from the mainland, physically much closer to South-East
Asia. Peninsular India is adjacent to one of
the most vital sea-lanes, stretching from the
Suez Canal and the Persian Gulf to the
Straits of Malacca through which much of
the oil from the Gulf region transits. The
seas surrounding India have been a theatre
of super power rivalry in the past, and
continue to be a region of heightened
activity from and by extra-regional navies on
account of global security concerns.
1.13 Historically, India with its long,
layered and textured history stretching back
close to 5,000 years, is one of the major
sources of civilization, having received, and
radiated, influences from and to West and
Central Asia, China, Mongolia and East
Asia, South-East Asia, the Gulf and East
Africa. Today, politically, South Asia hosts a
diversity of political experiences and experiments ranging from monarchies and military
dictatorships to nascent and established
democracies. The region also faces the
menace of terrorism and trafficking in, and
proliferation of, arms and drugs. In the
midst of this, India stands as a centre of
economic gravity in the region, a beacon of
democracy, despite challenges of human


9


-----

Vigil on the High Seas by Indian Navy

diversity and economic disparity, a bastion of
stability and a symbol of peaceful coexistence and non-violence. An appreciation of
India’s security concerns and its security is
thus critical to regional and global stability
and security.
1.14 India’s size, strategic location, trade
links and Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ),


The Regional Security Environment

1.15 Though there have been positive
developments in Afghanistan and Bhutan,
and in India’s relations with China and
Pakistan, a closer look at the neighbourhood
and the wider region continues to present a
disturbing picture. Internal instability, authoritarian and/or military rule, extremist

political or religious movements, weak state
structures, and insurgencies or ethnic
conflicts characterize many of the countries
of the region. Despite attempts to crack
down on Al Qaeda and Taliban elements on
the Pak-Afghan border, the principal threat
to peace and stability in the region remains
the combination of fundamentalism and
terrorism nurtured in madarssas and training
camps in the area and the history of ingrained adventurism of a section of the
Pakistan military motivated by its obsessive
and compulsive hostility towards India. The
revelations of the involvement of top Paki

Though there have
been positive
developments in
Afghanistan and
Bhutan, and in India’s
relations with China
and Pakistan, a closer
look at the
neighbourhood and
the wider region
continues to present a
disturbing picture.


and a security environment
link India’s security directly
with its extended neighbourhood, particularly
neighbouring countries and
the regions of Central Asia,
South-East Asia, the Gulf
and the Indian Ocean.
India’s location at the top
of the Indian Ocean also
gives it a vantage point in
providing security of
shipping for all countries in
the Indian Ocean Region.


10


-----

stani scientists in an elaborate

Fundamentalist

network of clandestine nuclear

activism and

and missile trade spanning

terrorism are India’s

several countries have proven

primary security

Pakistan’s deep involvement in

challenges. Pakistan

WMD proliferation and cannot

is at its epicentre.

be taken lightly.
1.16 Bilaterally, Pakistan has
been the source of infiltration,

India is concerned

cross-border terrorism,

about the challenge

revanchism and military

posed by nuclear

adventurism and nuclear and

proliferation from its

missile posturing and threats.

neighbourhood.

There are also now concerns
related to internal stability in Pakistan on
account of sectarian conflict and promotion
of fundamentalist forces. Efforts at dealing
with them have been partial and selective. It
is not yet clear whether the sponsors of

Mid-air refuelling of Indian Air Force planes


terrorism in Pakistan realize that terrorism to
the west and to the east cannot be
compartmentalized and insulated from each
other. There have been assassination attempts on Gen. Musharraf, believed to be
by fundamentalist outfits linked to J&K and
Al Qaeda.
1.17 Afghanistan has, with the strong
support of the international community,
advanced along the framework worked out in
the Bonn Accord of December 2001. While
a new constitution has been agreed to by
the Constitutional Loya Jirgah in Afghanistan, and Presidential and parliamentary
elections have been announced, and the
tasks of reconstruction and rebuilding
institutions are progressing, there has been
some deterioration in the internal security
situation in Afghanistan and on the Pak

11


-----

Afghan border on account of

Instability in

activities of Al Qaeda, the

Afghanistan, Nepal,

Taliban and other militant

Bangladesh, Sri

outfits. Despite public procla
Lanka and Myanmar

mations of discontinuation of

pose varying security

support for the Taliban,

challenges.

infiltration of small groups of
fighters into Afghanistan with

Relations with China

the intention of fomenting

are improving.

instability especially in the east
and south-east is taking place.
India has made a major contribution to
economic reconstruction in almost every
province of Afghanistan in the interest of
peace and stability in the country.
1.18 Within the sub-continent, despite
close and good relations with most of its
other immediate neighbours, lesser security
problems continue to complicate relationships. Bangladesh has not been responsive
to India’s concerns regarding the presence
and activities of Indian insurgent groups
from the north-east and the Pakistani InterServices Intelligence (ISI) on Bangladesh
soil, large-scale illegal immigration, and
border crimes. A large cache of arms and
ammunition bound for the north-east of
India was recently detected in Chittagong.
There is a need to watch the rising influence
of political parties and organizations of
fundamentalist and radical Islamic orientation in Bangladeshi society and government.
1.19 In Nepal, the growing influence and
grip of the Maoists throughout the country
particularly in the Terai area bordering India,
and their links with left extremist outfits in
parts of India are a cause of serious concern. India has cooperated with Nepal in


addressing its security requirements. Bhutan displayed courage and good-neighbourliness in acting against military camps and
bases of operations of Indian insurgent
groups within its territory in the interest of
mutual security. In Sri Lanka, the political
stalemate and the suspension of the talks
between the LTTE and the Government is a
cause of concern though the ceasefire and
the commitment of the Sri Lankan political
parties to the peace process remain positive
features. The LTTE is a potent non-state
military force that continues to arm itself,
and the danger of backsliding of the political
process remains. Despite periodic coordination of efforts, Indian insurgent groups from
the north-east continue to operate from
camps in Myanmar.
1.20 China is pursuing a policy of rapid
military modernization drawing on the
lessons of recent US-led wars while seeking
peaceful relations with its neighbours in
order to consolidate itself politically and
economically internally and build up its
‘Comprehensive National Strength’. India
and China have stepped up efforts to build
mutual trust and confidence including
between their armed forces. Raksha Mantri,
Shri George Fernandes, visited China in
April 2003. The Chinese Defence Minister,
Gen. Cao Gangchuan, returned the visit in
March 2004. Both sides are trying to
address differences over the boundary
question and are agreed that pending an
ultimate boundary settlement, the two
countries would work together to maintain
peace and tranquillity in their border areas
and continue to implement the agreement


12


-----

signed for this purpose. A

Fundamentalist decision was taken during
activism in West, Prime Minister Vajpayee’s visit
Central and South- to China in June 2003 to
East Asia needs to appoint Special Representabe watched. tives to explore, from the

political perspective of the
overall bilateral relationship,

Concerns over the framework of a boundary
security of sea-lanes settlement. At the same time,
between Persian Gulf China’s close defence relaand East Asia shared tionship with and regular
with South-East and military assistance to Pakistan,
East Asia. including assistance in the

latter’s nuclear and missile
programmes at critical stages,
its build up in the Tibet
Autonomous Region, its military modernization, its nuclear and missile arsenals, and its
continental and maritime aspirations, require
observation.
1.21 Further west of the region, the
situation in West Asia and the US-led war
against Iraq continues to feed Islamic radicalism aggravating fault-lines based on
religion and concern in relation to the
security of the 3.5 million

Indian Armed Forces strong Indian community
prepared for the full resident in the Gulf states,
spectrum of security and of oil and energy supplies.
challenges from It has distracted international
terrorism and low- attention from Pakistani
intensity conflict to behaviour in its neighbourconventional war and hood, particularly in India and
the possibility of the Afghanistan. Sunni resistance,
use of nuclear radical Shia opposition and
weapons and missiles. the opportunity the US-led

action and presence in Iraq


has provided for radical Islamists and jehadi
terrorists, has made the situation in Iraq
volatile with daily incidents of resistance and
terrorism against Western interests in Iraq
and elsewhere. New places in Iraq, Saudi
Arabia, Turkey and Spain were added to the
terrorist target map. Efforts by fundamentalist outfits to destabilize Central Asia continue. Central Asia also attracts strategic
attention because of its location and energy
assets.
1.22 Fundamentalist religious activism
and periodic acts of terrorism across Southeast Asia, most notably Indonesia, and the
appearance of terrorist cells linked to international terrorism has also focused local,
regional and international concern on the
region as a new hub of militant Islam. India
and South-East Asia have a vital interest in
preserving the traditions of peaceful coexistence amongst their diverse religious
communities against the intrusion of fundamentalist and exclusivist tendencies. India’s
rapid economic integration with the AsiaPacific also underpins a common interest
with South-east and East Asia in the security
of shipping and energy flows from the
Western Indian Ocean to the Asia-Pacific.
Evidence of an elaborate nuclear and missile
trade involving the DPRK and Pakistan is
also a matter of serious concern to India.

Conclusion

1.23 The security environment highlighted above brings out four key elements
fundamental to India’s security planning.
These are:
(a) The Indian Armed Forces have to


13


-----

India’s force postures are defensive in orientation, while its nuclear
policy is characterized by a commitment to no-first-use, moratorium
on nuclear testing and minimum credible nuclear deterrence.


be prepared for the full spectrum of
security challenges from terrorism and
low-intensity conflict to conventional war
and the possibility of the use of nuclear
weapons and missiles.
(b) India is not a member of any
military alliance or strategic grouping;
nor is this consistent with our policies.
India thus requires a certain independent
deterrent capability.
(c) Due to an externally
inspired low-intensity proxy

India is fully committed

war, India’s Armed Forces are

to maintaining peace

involved in internal security

with its neighbours and

functions – more than most

stability in the region

other armed forces - requiring

through unilateral

a corresponding force struc
restraint, confidence

ture and orientation.

building and dialogue

(d) India’s interests and

and expanding bilateral

responsibilities in the North

interactions.

Indian Ocean, including the


security of her EEZ and island territories, and shipping in the region, highlight the need for a blue water naval
capability commensurate with its responsibilities.

1.24 Against this strategic backdrop,
India remains fully committed to maintaining
peace with its neighbours and stability in the
region through a combination of defencepreparedness, unilateral restraint, confidence building and dialogue, and expanding
bilateral interactions. In the area of defencepreparedness, it has reformed its higher
defence management and streamlined
procurement procedures. Its force postures
remain defensive in orientation while its
nuclear policy is characterized by a commitment to no-first-use, moratorium on nuclear
testing, minimum credible nuclear deterrence,
and the rejection of an arms race or concepts
and postures from the Cold War era.


14


-----

### 22222

 ORGANISATION AND FUNCTIONS

###### OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

An illuminated view of the South Block which houses the Ministry of Defence.


-----

###### he principal task of the Ministry is to obtain policy
##### T

###### directions of the government on all defence and

 security related matters and communicate them for

 implementation to the Services Headquarters, Inter
 Service Organisations, Production Establishments

 and Research & Development Organisations.


HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

2.1 A Military Department was created
in the Government of the East India Company at Calcutta in the year 1776, having
the main function to sift and record orders
relating to the Army issued by various
Departments of the Government of East
India Company. The Military Department
initially functioned as a branch of the Public
Department and maintained a list of Army
personnel.
2.2 With the Charter Act of 1833, the
Secretariat of the Government of East India
Company was reorganised in four Departments, including a Military Department,
each headed by a Secretary to the Government. The Army in the Presidencies of
Bengal, Bombay & Madras functioned as
respective Presidency Army till April 1895,
when the Presidency Armies were unified
into a single Indian Army. For administrative
convenience, it was divided into four Commands viz., Punjab (including the North


West Frontier), Bengal, Madras (including
Burma) and Bombay (including Sind, Quetta
and Aden).
2.3 The supreme authority over the
Indian Army vested in the Governor General-in-Council, subject to the Control of the
Crown, which was exercised by the Secretary
of State for India. Two Members in the
Council were responsible for military affairs,
one of whom was the Military Member, who
supervised all administrative and financial
matters, while the other was the Commander-in-Chief who was responsible for all
operational matters. The Military Department was abolished in March 1906 and it
was replaced by two separate Departments,
the Army Department and the Military
Supply Department. In April 1909 the
Military Supply Department was abolished
and its functions were taken over by the
Army Department. The Army Department
was redesignated as the Defence Department in January 1938. The Department of


16


-----

Defence became the Ministry of Defence
under a Cabinet Minister in August 1947.

POST-INDEPENDENCE ORGANISATIONAL
SET-UP AND FUNCTIONS

2.4 On August 15, 1947, each Service
was placed under its own Commander-inChief. Under the Constitution, the Supreme
Command of the Armed Forces vests in the
President. In 1955, the title of Commander-in-Chief was abolished and the three
Service Chiefs were designated as the Chief
of the Army Staff, the Chief of the Naval
Staff and the Chief of the Air Staff. In

Defence on Display : An aerial view of the Republic Day
Parade.

November 1962, a Department of Defence
Production was set up to deal with research,
development and production of defence
equipment. In November 1965, the Department of Defence Supplies was created
for planning and execution of schemes for
import substitution of requirements for
defence purposes. These two Departments
were later merged to form the Department
of Defence Production and Supplies. In
2004 the name of Department of Defence


Production and Supplies has been changed
to Department of Defence Production. A
Scientific Adviser to the Defence Minister
was appointed to advise him on scientific
aspects of military equipment, research and
design of equipment used by the Defence
forces. In 1980, the Department of Defence Research and Development was
created.
2.5 The Armed Forces are primarily
responsible for ensuring the territorial
integrity of the nation. The Ministry of
Defence, provides policy framework and
wherewithal to the Armed Forces to discharge their responsibility in the context of
the defence of the country.

DEPARTMENTS, SERVICE
HEADQUARTERS AND COMMITTEES

2.6 The principal task of the Ministry is
to obtain policy directions of the Government on all defence and security related
matters and communicate them for implementation to the Services Headquarters,
Inter-Service Organisations, Production
Establishments and Research & Development Organisations. It is also required to
ensure effective implementation of the
Government’s policy directions and the
execution of approved programmes within
the allocated resources.
2.7 The Ministry of Defence consists of
three Departments, namely, Department of
Defence, Department of Defence Production and Department of Defence Research &
Development. The Defence Secretary
functions as head of the Department of
Defence and is additionally responsible for


17


-----

co-ordinating the activities of the three
Departments in the Ministry. The principal
functions of all the Departments are as
follows:
(i) The Department of Defence deals
with the Integrated Defence Staff (IDS)
and the three Services and various InterService Organisations. It is also responsible for the Defence Budget, establishment matters, defence policy, matters
relating to Parliament, defence cooperation with foreign countries and coordination of all activities.
(ii) The Department of Defence
Production is headed by a Secretary and
deals with matters pertaining to defence
production, indigenisation of imported
stores, equipment and spares, planning
and control of departmental production
units of the Ordnance Factory Board and
for Defence Public Sector Undertakings
(DPSUs).
(iii) The Department of Defence
Research and Development is headed by
a Secretary, who is also the Scientific
Adviser to the Raksha Mantri. Its
function is to advise the Government on
scientific aspects of military equipment
and logistics and the formulation of
research, design and development plans
for equipment used by the Services.
2.8 The Finance Division of the Ministry
of Defence is headed by Secretary Defence
(Finance). He exercises financial control
over proposals involving expenditure from
the Defence Budget and is responsible for
internal audit and accounting of defence


expenditure. In the latter tasks, he is assisted by the Controller General of Defence
Accounts (CGDA). The detailed note of
items dealt in various Departments of the
Ministry of Defence is given Appendix – I of
the Report.
2.9 The three Services Headquarters,
viz., the Army Headquarters, the Naval
Headquarters and the Air Headquarters
function, under the Chief of the Army Staff
(COAS), the Chief of the Naval Staff (CNS)
and the Chief of the Air Staff (CAS) respectively. They are assisted by their Principal
Staff Officers (PSOs). The Inter-Services
Organisations, under the Department of
Defence are responsible for carrying out
tasks related to common needs of the three
Services such as medical care, public relations and personnel management of civilian
staff in the Defence Headquarters.
2.10 A number of Committees dealing
with defence related activities assist the
Raksha Mantri. The Chiefs of Staff Committee is a forum in which the Service Chiefs
discuss matters having a bearing on the
activities of the Services and advise the
Ministry. The position of Chairman of the
Chiefs of Staff Committee devolves on the
longest serving Chief of Staff, and consequently rotates amongst the three Services.
To facilitate the work of the Chiefs of Staff
Committee, a number of sub-committees
have been established.
2.11 Information regarding the Ministers
in the Ministry of Defence, the Chiefs of
Staff, the Secretaries in the three Departments of the Ministry and the Secretary


18


-----

Defence (Finance) who held positions from
April 01, 2003 onwards is given in Appendix-II to this report.

REFORMS IN MANAGEMENT OF
DEFENCE

2.12 The broad array of challenges both
existing and potential to the national Security in the fast changing geo-strategic security environment mandate a periodical reappraisal of our security procedures to cope
with them. The Government, keeping this in
view, had instituted a comprehensive review
of the National Security System in its entirety for the first time in the history of
independent India. The review was carried
out by a Group of Ministers(GOM) constituted on April 17, 2000. The GOM
consisted of the Home Minister, the Raksha
Mantri, the External Affairs Minister and the
Finance Minister. The Group of Ministers
set up four Task Forces one each in the
areas of (i) Internal Security; (ii) Border
Management; (iii) Intelligence Apparatus;
and (iv) Management of Defence, which
were multi-disciplinary in character and
comprised of acknowledged experts, to
facilitate its tasks. The recommendations of
the Group of Ministers, which aim at integration of the civil and military components
and ensuring ‘Jointness’ and ‘Synergy’
among the Armed Forces, were approved
by the Government on May 11, 2001.
2.13 The Report of the GOM in so far as
‘Management of Defence’ is concerned
included amongst others, measures such as
creation of the Chief of Defence Staff(CDS),
creation of a Defence Procurement Board, a


Defence Production Board, a Defence R&D
Board, preparation of holistic and integrated
Defence Perspective Plans for 15-20 years,
establishment of a National Defence University, effective media management, establishment of Andaman & Nicobar Island Command and Strategic Forces Command,
integration of Service Headquarters with the
Ministry of Defence and delegation of
higher administrative and financial powers to
the Services. Service Headquarters which
were until now used to be attached offices
of the Ministry of Defence have now been
integrated with the Ministry as Integrated
Headquarters of the Ministry of Defence.
Some of the major reforms are detailed in
subsequent paragraphs.
2.14 Integrated Defence Staff :  With a
view to ensure higher degree of jointness
amongst the Services and attempt interservice and intra-service prioritization, the
Government has set up the Integrated
Defence Staff, headed by the Chief of
Integrated Staff functioning under Chiefs of
Staff Committee (COSC). The role of COSC
is to supervise the Integrated Defence Staff,
to chair all multi-Service bodies and the
Defence Crisis Management Group
(DCMG). Chiefs of Staff Committee is also
responsible for the coordination of longterm plans, five year plans and annual
budgetary proposals of the three Services in
consultation and co-ordination with the
Integrated Services Headquarters. The
Chief of Integrated Staff to Chairman, Chiefs
of Staff Committee (CISC) renders advice to
the Government on prioritization, on developing force levels through restructuring


Defence (Finance) who held positions from
April 01, 2003 onwards is given in Appendix-II to this report.


19


-----

proposals, undertakes net assessment of the
national capability, formulates joint doctrines, conceptualises policy and programmes on joint planning and military
education, renders advice for evolving
responses to non-conventional and conventional threats to national security. CISC also
proposes measures for jointness amongst
the Armed Forces with a view to enhance
the efficiency and effectiveness. Within a
short period of its formation, this organisation has become fully functional and is
producing positive results.
2.15 Defence Intelligence Agency :  The
Government has also set up the Defence
Intelligence Agency (DIA) under the Director General Defence Intelligence Agency to
co-ordinate and synergise the intelligence
Wings of the Services. The Defence Intelligence Agency is responsible for providing
integrated intelligence inputs to the higher
echelons of Defence Management.
2.16 Defence Acquisition Council : The
Government has set up a Defence Acquisition Council headed by the Raksha Mantri
for decision making in regard to the totality
of the new planning process, which inter-alia
involves according ‘in principle’ approval of
capital acquisitions in the long term perspective plan and according ‘in principle’
approval for each capital acquisition programme. The decisions flowing from the
Defence Acquisition Council are to be
implemented by the following three Boards:(i) Defence Procurement Board
headed by the Defence Secretary;
(ii) Defence Production Board headed


by the Secretary (Defence Production);
and
(iii) Defence Research & Development
Board headed by Secretary (Defence
Research & Development).
These Boards have been entrusted with
specific functions. A Defence Acquisition
Wing headed by Special Secretary (Acquisition) has also been created to assist the
Defence Procurement Board in its functioning.
2.17 To work out the recommendations
for the Council, two committees have been
formed with representatives of Headquarters
Integrated Defence Staff, three Service
Headquarters, Defence Research & Development Organisation and Department of
Defence Production. These are the Annual
Acquisition Plan Categorisation Committee
and the Annual Acquisition Plan Categorisation Higher Committee. A Cross Budgeting
Team has also been formed to provide an
integrated view of the plans, weapons and
equipment and budgetary support to the
acquisition process. This integrated approach has facilitated expeditious decisionmaking and brought about higher degree of
transparency, cost effectiveness to the
process of acquisition of equipment, weapons and weapon systems. It has also given a
boost to indigenous development and
production programmes in the country.
2.18 Defence Technology Council (DTC):
Defence Technology Council has been
constituted under the Chairmanship of
Raksha Mantri by the Government to provide guidance and supervision of growth and


20


-----

promotion of research, development and
production related to Defence Technologies.
DTC will assist the Defence Acquisition
Council in taking holistic decisions on
specific Defence Projects related to long
term perspective plans and five year plans.
2.19 Andaman and Nicobar Command :
The tri-Service Command for Andaman and
Nicobar (A&N) was established in October
2001 and has been effectively operational
for over 2 years. The Command is being
headed by Officers from the
three Services on rotation

The Service

basis. The present Com
Headquarters

mander-in-Chief (C-in-C) of

which used to be

A&N Command is from Indian

attached offices of

Army. The Commander-in
Ministry of Defence

Chief exercises control over all

are now integrated

force components of the three

with the Ministry of

Services and the Coast Guard

Defence and

located in Andaman &

known as

Nicobar Islands. The C-in-C,

Integrated

A & N Command, reports to

Headquarters of

the Chairman, Chiefs of Staff

Ministry of

Committee.

Defence.

2.20 Management of
Strategic Assets : Strategic
Forces Command, created to manage our
strategic assets, has worked towards establishment of an effective Command and
Control structure. The Command is working
towards operationalisation of the strategic
assets of the country, based on the directions given by the Nuclear Command Authority.
2.21 Formation of Horizon Core Technology Group: To keep pace with the
revolutionary technological changes in the


Defence Weapon Systems and warfare, a triService team, i.e., Horizon Core Technology
(HCT) Group has been constituted. The
Horizon Core Technology Group comprises
of members of the three Services from
within HQ Integrated Defence Staff as also
the representatives of the three Services.
Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) has also been co-opted in
the HCT group by way of incorporating of
Group for Analysis of Systems (G-FAST), a
DRDO organisation.
2.22 The HCT Group interacts with
DRDO to identify Horizon Core Technologies to meet the capability requirements of
the Defence Services in the long term. The
group strives for establishment of mechanisms between the Services, DRDO and the
Industry, to provide an insight of the planning and the technology forecasting process
of DRDO/G-FAST and the potential of the
Industry to meet the Services requirements
of future capabilities and the associated
technologies.
2.23 National Defence University: The

Committee on the setting up of National
Defence University (CONDU), chaired by
Dr K Subrahmanyam, presented its recommendations on creation of a National Defence University that would conduct all such
research programmes as may be necessary
to enable it to serve as a think tank on all
strategic issues of concern to Government
and its various agencies, and to provide
educational and awareness programmes on
related subjects to present as well potential
future leaders in the National Security
community. The report of the Committee is
under examination of the Government.


21


-----

2.24 Tri- Service Com
Various

mittee On Joint Training:

administrative and

Based on the GOM recom
financial powers

mendations, a Tri-Services

have been delegated

Committee On Joint Training

to the Integrated

(TCJT) was formed by the

Service

COSC to formulate concrete

Headquarters to

proposals for carrying out

impart enhanced

optimisation and integration

autonomy in their

of training resources amongst

functioning.

the Services. TCJT submitted
its report in keeping with the
long- term perspective and Inter Services
needs, keeping in mind the optimum utilisation of resources for Joint Training. Most of
the issues have been resolved, while some
of them are in the process of implementation
through various boards of officers/experts
committees by respective Services HQrs.
2.25 Delegation of Administrative and
Financial Powers : Various administrative


and financial powers have been delegated to
the Integrated Service Headquarters to
impart enhanced autonomy in their functioning. Decentralisation of decision-making
powers has strengthened and upgraded the
decision-making apparatus in the Services.
With higher delegation of financial powers,
greater efficiency and cost effectiveness with
accountability has brought about the transparency desired in the system of defence
related expenditure.

DEFENCE EXPENDITURE

2.26 The two charts in this chapter
represent Service/Department-wise breakup of Defence expenditure for the years
2001-2002, 2002-2003, Revised Estimates for 2003-2004 and Budget Estimates
for the year 2004-2005 and Service/
Department-wise expenditure as a percentage of total Defence expenditure.


Service/Department-wise Break-up of Defence Expenditure


(Rs. in crores)

Service/Deptt 2001-002 2002-2003 R.E.2003-2004 B.E.2004-2005

Army 31096.88 32127.78 32287.52 36277.50

Navy 8368.45 8155.32 10413.75 13149.97

Air Force 11783.76 12385.26 13957.96 23270.53

DDP DGOF (-)471.61 (-)388.89 (-)210.99 (-)139.58

DGQA 368.45 374.25 393.52 440.64

Total (-)103.16 (-)14.64 182.53 301.06

DR&D 3119.80 3008.11 3458.24 4000.94

TOTAL 54265.73 55661.83 60300.00 77000.00


22


-----

23


-----

Service/Department-wise Expenditure as Percentage of
Total Defence Expenditure 2004-05 (BE)


5.20%
0.39%

DR&D
DDP

47.11%
30.22 Army

Air Force

17.08%

Navy


2.27 Observations of C&AG on the
working of Ministry of Defence:
Summary of latest Comptroller & Auditor


General (C&AG) Report on the working of
Ministry of Defence is given in Appendix-III
to this Report.


24


-----

## 3

### INDIAN ARMY

An infantry combat vehicle (BMP-II) participating in Exercise Divya Astra at Suratgarh, in Rajasthan.


-----

###### uring the year, continued efforts were made to
##### D

###### modernize and upgrade the weapons and weapon

 system of the Army to prepare it to address the

 requirements of modern day warfare, and enhance

 its combat efficiency.


###### uring the year, continued efforts were made to

 modernize and upgrade the weapons and weapon

 system of the Army to prepare it to address the

 requirements of modern day warfare, and enhance

 its combat efficiency.


3.1 The Armed Forces of India are
responsible for defending the country
against external aggression and safeguarding
the territorial integrity of the nation.  The
Indian Army has to be extremely vigilant at
all times to meet various challenges along
the borders of the country encompassing
different geographical and climatic conditions. In addition, Army helps the civil
administration during internal disturbances
and helps in the maintenance of law and
order and also during natural calamities like
floods, earthquakes, cyclones, and in the
maintenance of essential services. Keeping
in view the threat perceptions, advances in

Constant training keeps the Army jawans in fine fettle.


technology and geo-political environment,
the Indian Army is suitably structured,
equipped and trained to effectively perform
its tasks.

MODERNISATION OF WEAPON SYSTEMS
AND EQUIPMENT

3.2 During the year, continued efforts
were made to modernize and upgrade the
weapons and weapon systems of the Army
to prepare it to address the requirements of
modern day warfare, and enhance its combat
efficiency. Following are some of the notable efforts;
(i) Armoured Corps: As a part of
the effort to equip the Armoured Corps
with night fighting capabilities, Thermal
Imager Based Stand Alone Sight and
Thermal Imager Fire Control System for
the T-72 Tanks are under process for
procurement. Image Intensification
Based Sights for the drivers of T-72
Tanks and Image Intensification Based
Sights for the commanders, gunners and


26


-----

drivers of T-55 Tanks are undergoing
trials and evaluation as part of the
procurement process. Armoured Recovery Vehicles have also been contracted
for procurement.
(ii) Mechanised Infantry: To enhance
the combat efficiency of the Forces,
Konkurs-M Anti-Tank Guided Missiles
have been acquired along  with transfer
of technology. Anti-Tank Guided Missile
Launchers of the Infantry Combat
vehicle BMP-II are being equipped with
the Thermal Imaging sights to enhance
night-fighting capability. Image Intensification based Night Vision Devices for
the drivers of BMPs are also in the
process of procurement.
(iii) Artillery: To enhance the firepower of the Army, efforts are being
made to equip them with 155 mm
Artillery Gun, for employment in various
types of terrain. Besides, trials have
been successfully completed for the
Multi-barrel Rocket Launchers.  Trial
Evaluation of the latest Artillery Ammunition System for induction viz Terminally Guided Munitions, Trajectory
Guided Munitions, Velocity Enhanced
Long Range Artillery Projectiles and
Anti-radiation Ammunition is also in
progress. Moreover, to enhance the
Surveillance Capability of the Army,
considerable progress has been made in
the direction of acquisition of Long
Range Reconnaissance and Observation
System, Weapon Locating Radar and
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle.


(iv) Air Defence Artillery: The negotiations for induction of improved version
of Tunguska M1 Weapon system in Air
Defence Artillery units of strike/mechanised formations are going on. Air
Target System ‘Lakshya’, developed by
Aeronautical Development Establishment (ADE) of DRDO has also been
recently evaluated by the Army and will
be used for practice firing of Air Defence Weapon Systems. In conjunction
with the IAF, a revamp of the existing
Control and Reporting System of Air
Defence Artillery is being carried out.
The thrust is towards automation of
various warning and control systems and
processes. A review of the requirement
of modern Air defence Weapon System
has been carried out to replace the
obsolescent equipment in a phased
manner to enable it to meet emerging air
threats.
(v) Infantry: The combat potential,
surveillance and counter-insurgency
capability of the Infantry is being significantly improved by acquisition of following equipment and weapon systems:(a)  Fire Power: 20 mm Calibre and
14.5mm Calibre Anti Material Rifle,
Automatic Grenade Launcher-30,
Multiple Grenade Launcher, 84 mm MM
Rocket Launcher MK II and Kornet-E
Anti-Tank Guided Missile are under
procurement.
(b) Surveillance Devices: Battle field Surveillance Radars (BFSR), Hand-Held
Thermal Imagers (HHTI) and various


27


-----

types of Unattended Ground Sensors
(UGS) have been procured for surveillance in conventional and counterinsurgency roles and to monitor the
intrusion across the Line of Control/
Actual Ground Position Line.
(c)  Mobility: A family of High-Mobility
Vehicles, Bullet-Proof Vehicles and AntiTank Guided-Missile Vehicles are being
procured to improve the mobility of the
infantry.
(vi) Signals: Procurement of state-ofthe-art communication equipment and
systems has brought about substantial
qualitative improvements in the communication capability of the Army.  Some
of the major procurements are: RS HX
long-range frequency-hopping highfrequency radio sets, Hand-Held WalkieTalkie Radio Sets, Interception Receiver
AR 5000, Radio Set 5 Watt/20 Watt
VHF, and Radio Set 5 Watt/50Watt VHF
for Armoured Fighting Vehicles. A
countrywide-secured value-added
backbone data network is also being
established connecting the important
Formation headquarters of the Army.
(vii) Engineers: After withdrawal of
forces from the border, equipment to
assist de-mining operations, have been
procured to minimize the casualties.
Trials and procurement of various
equipment is also underway which will
improve capability for disaster-management during a nuclear, chemical and
biological warfare scenario. Army’s
capability to fight against insurgency/
terrorism has been considerably bol

stered by equipping them with more
equipment.

MODERNISATION OF ORDNANCE
DEPOTS

3.3 Ordnance Depots are used by Army
for the storage and management of armament, equipment, general stores and spare
parts.  There are seven Ordnance Depots
located at Delhi Cantonment, Dehu Road,
Cheokki, Kanpur, Agra, Mumbai and
Jabalpur. These Depots setup in the preindependence period are housed in temporary/semi-permanent structures, which have
now become dilapidated and lack modern
material handling and storage facilities.
3.4 Since the inventory is of varied
types, sizes and magnitude, the existing
manual operations are labour intensive, time
consuming and damage prone. The present
configuration of the storage buildings do not
provide scope for any improvement and
deployment of appropriate Material Handling Equipment, resulting in continued
manual operations. There is also a strain on
the existing security and safety system due
to dispersal of store warehouses and other
buildings over a wide area.
3.5 In view of the above factors, it has
been decided to take up modernization of all
the seven Ordnance Depots in a phased
manner. To begin with modernization of the
Central Ordinance Depots(COD) at Kanpur
at an estimated cost of Rs. 187 crores has
been taken up. The modernization of COD
Kanpur envisage state-of-the-art Warehousing facilities with higher vertical space
utilization, automated Material Handling


28


-----

Equipment, Forklift Trucks, Mobile belt
conveyors, hydraulic elevating cable etc., for
loading/unloading and retrieval/stacking of
stores, Computerised inventory management
system, installation of state-of-the-art fireprevention and fire- fighting and security
systems. The project is likely to be completed by the end of 2004.
3.6 Proposals for modernization of
COD Agra and COD Jabalpur, at an estimated cost of Rs. 300 crores each, have
been approved in principle and work has
begun for preparation of Detailed Project
Reports.

DE-MINING OPERATIONS

3.7 After achieving the objectives of
Operation Parakram, demining of the area
along the Western border and the LOC in
Jammu and Kashmir, was a challenging job
for the Army. Demining is a difficult operation as some of the mines had drifted due to


inundation or caught fire leading to prerecovery blasts. Out of 10.5 lakh mines laid,
8.91 lakh have been recovered. Rajasthan
has been fully cleared of mines, 95.8%
mines have been cleared in Punjab and
53.5% in Jammu & Kashmir. Different kinds
of equipment such as trawls, tractors,
Hydremas, Punch Auto Mine (PAM) and
Roller Anti Mine (RAM) were used for the
demining operations to ensure that fields
were cleared of all mines prior to handing
over the land to land owners.

COUNTER-INSURGENCY OPERATIONS

Jammu and Kashmir

3.8 Despite the severe winter, the
month of January 2003 saw higher infiltration as compared to January 2002. The
infiltration again picked up between July and
September 2003 and was higher as compared to the corresponding period previous
year. With heavy attrition of top leadership


The Army has raised special ‘Ghatak’ units to combat terrorists. ‘Ghataks’ undergoing training.

29


-----

of the major militant groups,
there had been a change in

The morale of

the terrorist strategy. To create

terrorists is low due

sensationalism, gain media

to heavy attrition,

attention and raise the sagging

resulting in

morale of their cadres, terror
uncertainty and

ist groups resorted to two

confusion in the top

suicide attacks on Army

leadership of major

camps in the Jammu region.

groups. There has

As a result of intense pressure

been a marginal

by the Security Forces, terror
reduction in

ist violence is now directed

infiltration after the

towards soft targets.

cease-fire since 26

3.9 The multi-pronged

November, 2003.

strategy adopted by the
Security Forces has been able
to create near-normal conditions for the State Government to function
efficiently. Security Forces operations have
put intense pressure on terrorist groups.
The morale of terrorists is low due to heavy
attrition, resulting in uncertainty and confusion in the top leadership of major groups.
There has been a marginal reduction in
infiltration after the cease-fire since 26
November, 2003.

North-East

3.10 The Security Forces continued to
retain ascendancy over militant groups in the
North-East. As a result, the insurgency
situation in the North-East is at its ebb.
Relentless pressure by the Security Forces
has forced the militants to escape to hideouts outside the country, especially in
Bhutan and Bangladesh. The offensive
operations conducted by the Royal Bhutan
Army in Bhutan and logistic support pro

vided by the Indian Army along the IndoBhutan border, have struck a decisive blow
to the capability of the United Liberation
Front of Assam, the National Democratic
Front of Bodoland and the Kamtapur Liberation Organization. The peace talks with
Nationalist Socialist Council of Nagaland
(Issac Muviah) and the establishment of
Bodoland Territorial Council Autonomous
District have progressed well. Peaceful
conduct of elections in Tripura and enthusiastic participation of the people in Republic
Day and Independence Day events are signs
of normalcy being restored through sustained efforts of the Security Forces.
3.11 Assam:  The two-pronged strategy
to persist with counter-insurgency operations and concurrently win hearts and minds
of the population has paid good dividends.
In the year 2003-04, 312 terrorists have
been eliminated, 930 apprehended and
1356 weapons have been recovered. More
important, 3457 militants have surrendered,
having realized the futility of continuing their
armed struggle. Implementation of the
Bodoland Territorial Council accord leading
to surrender of 2640 Bodoland Tiger cadre
on December 6, 2003 were significant
milestones in the effort to rid the State of
militancy. As a result, both National Democratic Front of Bodoland and United Liberation Front of Assam have been greatly
marginalised. Once Bodoland Territorial
Council Autonomous District is formed, the
Bodoland Liberation Tiger cadres are likely
to come overground while the National
Democratic Front of Bodoland cadres may
also join the mainstream.


30


-----

3.12 Manipur:  The situation in the
State has been generally under control.
The Security Forces have exerted unrelenting
pressure on the underground elements with
appreciable success. Despite the prevalent
peace, the ethnic polarization between the
Nagas and the Meiteis, still persists. During
the operations since January, 2003, 136
militants were killed, 701 apprehended and
139 weapons recovered.
3.13 Tripura:  Porosity of the border is
being exploited by the militants for launching trans-international border forays from
safe havens in Bangladesh. Realignment of
area of responsibility and a dynamic employment of troops has helped to keep the
militants on the run. During offensive
operations by the Security Forces, 26
militants were killed, 143 apprehended and
134 weapons recovered.
3.14 Arunachal Pradesh:  The State is
peaceful except for the districts of Tirap and
Changlang, which are declared as disturbed.
Security Forces are helping in the maintenance of law and order.

UNITED NATIONS PEACE-KEEPING
OPERATIONS

3.15 India continues to make significant
contribution to the United Nations Peacekeeping Missions. Having contributed over
68,000 troops to 38 United Nations Peacekeeping Missions, India remains one of the
largest troop contributors to United Nations
Peace-keeping Missions. The professionalism and dedication of Indian soldiers and
the quality and performance of Indian units


deployed on such missions have established
a benchmark of quality. During the year
2003-04, Indian Army was actively involved
in United Nations peace-keeping operations
in Lebanon, Ethiopia-Eritrea, Democratic
Republic of Congo, Iraq, Kuwait, Ivory Coast
and Burundi. Approximately 2,350 troops
are deployed on peace-keeping duties
overseas.
3.16 United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL): India has been contributing an infantry Battalion Group and a
number of staff officers to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon since 1998.
Established in 1978, to oversee the Israeli
withdrawal from South Lebanon and return
of Lebanese Government authority, United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon is an
extremely important peace-keeping mission
in the perpetually volatile region.  The
professionalism and tact displayed by the
Indian peace-keepers have ensured that
peace in the region is not disturbed and that
the mandate of the United Nations mission
is effectively achieved. The numerous
humanitarian projects undertaken by the
Indian Army soldiers have also endeared
them to the local population and brought a
good name to our country.
3.17 UN Mission in Ethiopia-Eritrea
(UNMEE): India has been contributing an
infantry Battalion Group, a Force Reserve
Company, an Engineer Company and a
number of Military Observers and Staff
Officers to the United Nations Mission since
2001. Established in the year 2000, at the
end of a bitter three-year war between


31


-----

Ethiopia and Eritrea, the United Nations
Mission had the task of separating the two
forces by creating a buffer zone and ensuring security in the region until the international border could be demarcated. India is
the largest contributor to this mission. A
number of relief and rehabilitation projects
undertaken by the Indian peace-keepers
have helped rebuild hope among thousands
of suffering Ethiopians and Eritreans, ravaged by years of conflict.

3.18 United Nations Mission in Congo
(MONUC): United Nations Mission in
Congo was established in 1999 and India
has been contributing Military Observers
ever since. An Aviation Unit and a Guard
Company were deployed in Congo in July
2003. The task of United Nations Organisation Mission in Democratic Republic of
Congo is to oversee implementation of the
cease-fire agreement and to assist in the
conduct of disarmament,
demobilisation, repatriation,
rehabilitation and re-integra
To reduce the

tion of various armed groups,

commitment of

thus paving the way for a

Army for internal

negotiated political settlement

security, the

of the problem.

Government has

3.19United Nations Observer

approved in

Mission in Iraq-Kuwait

principle the

(UNIKOM): India contributed

raising of 30

a total of eight Military Ob
additional

servers to the United Nations

Rashtriya Rifles

Observer Mission in Iraq
battalions.

Kuwait ever since it was
established in 1991 after the
first Gulf War. The mission


An Indian Patrol keeps vigil in the Buffer Zone separating
Ethiopia and Eritrea.

closed down in March 2003 after the
coalition forces entered Iraq.

RASHTRIYA RIFLES

3.20 The security environment in Jammu
& Kashmir is likely to remain turbulent in the
near future. To reduce the commitment of
Army for internal security, the Government
has approved in principle the raising of 30
additional Rashtriya Rifles battalions. Various
formations and units of Rashtriya Rifles have
been providing yeomen’s service to Jammu
and Kashmir in combating terrorism, providing aid to civil authorities and conducting
meaningful civic action programmes. As a
result of the vision, drive and determination
of various Rashtriya Rifles formations and
unit commanders, highly motivated patriotic
troops of the Force will continue to achieve
success in different spheres. Rashtriya Rifles
also ensured successful and safe conduct of
the Amarnath Yatra despite threats from
terrorists.

TERRITORIAL ARMY

3.21 The Territorial Army(TA) has a great
history of service to the nation and immense
potential to contribute in promoting national
integration, discipline, harmony and pride


32


-----

among the citizens, and to the defence of
the country. The Territorial Army, which
came into existence in 1949, has a strength
of approximately 32,800 personnel in 50
TA units comprising 31 Infantry Battalions
(Territorial Army) and 19 Departmental
units.
3.22 All the 31 Non-Departmental TA
units remained embodied under OP
Parakram during the year. Out of these, six
Infantry Battalions (TA) comprising 30
Companies were deployed in Northern
Command. The TA Directorate is now
providing post- commission training course
at Indian Military Academy, Dehradun. This
course is of twelve weeks duration and is to
be conducted twice a year.

ADVENTURE AND SPORTS ACTIVITIES

3.23 Mountaineering Expeditions:(a) Joint Indo-Nepal Everest Massif
Expedition 2003: Indian Army’s tradition of valour was once again proved
beyond doubt when the Joint Indo-Nepal
Army expedition team scaled Lhotse
(8510 Mtrs) on May 13, 2003 and
Everest (8850 Mtrs) on May 22 and 26,
2003. The team set many new records
in the annals of mountaineering. The
following records were set by the team:
(i) First Indian Ascent: This is the
first team to have scaled Lhotse, the
fourth highest peak in the world.
(ii) World Record on Everest: 31
members comprising nine from Indian
Army, 10 from Royal Nepalese Army and
12 Sherpas scaled Mt. Everest on May


22 and 26, 2003 and created a new
world record for the maximum number
of summiteers by any single team.
(iii) World Record on Lhotse: 12
climbers comprising five from the Indian
Army, three from Royal Nepalese Army
and four Sherpas scaled Lhotse and
created a new world record as it is the
highest number of summiteers on Lhotse
by any single team.

(b) Rashtriya Indian Military College
(RIMC)Mountaineering Expedition to
Gangotri (6672M): RIMC mountaineering expedition to Gangotri-I (6672M)
was launched on May 27, 2003. One
Officer and 16 cadets successfully scaled
the peak on June 12, 2003.
(c) Mountaineering Expedition to Mt.
Gya (6794M): An expedition by 7/11
Grenadiers (GR) succeeded in scaling
Mt. Gya on July 4, 2003. Capt. N.S.
Negi and nine ORs reached the summit
at 1200 hrs on July 4, 2003.
(d) Mountaineering Expedition to Sri
Kailash (6932 Mtrs): 14 Infantry
Division mountaineering expedition of
Sri Kailash peak was flagged off on July
31, 2003. First team of one Officer and
five ORs scaled the peak on August 24,
2003 and second team of one JCO and
four ORs reached the summit on August
25, 2003.
(e) Mountaineering Expedition to
Panchachuli – II (6904M): Kumaon
Scouts mountaineering expedition
successfully scaled the peak on September 30, 2003 and October 3, 2003.


33


-----

One Officer, two JCOs and eight ORs
scaled the peak.
(f) 4 DOGRA Mountaineering Expedition: 4 DOGRA mountaineering
expedition to Leo Pargial-I (22351 ft.)
succeeded in scaling the peak on September 4, 2003. one Officer, one JCO
and six ORs of the unit scaled the peak.
(g) Corps of Electrical and Mechanical
Engineers (EME) Mountaineering expedition: Corps of EME mountaineering
expedition to Satopanth (23347 ft) was
launched on September 2, 2003. two
Officers and four ORs successfully
scaled the peak on September 2, 2003.
(h) Mountaineering Expedition to Sri
Kailash (6932 M). Air Defence (AD)
Arty mountaineering expedition to Sri
Kailash was successfully scaled on
August 23 and 24, 2003. Three
Officers and 12 ORs scaled the peak.
(i) Army Ladies Everest Expedition
(8850 M). An Army ladies expedition
will attempt to scale Mount Everest in
2005. Approximately 34 ladies have
attended the basic mountaineering
course at the Nehru Institute of Mountaineering (NIM), Uttarkashi, for the
Indian women Army Everest Expedition.
3.24 Water Rafting Expeditions:(a) White Water Rafting Expedition by
HQ 58 Armoured Brigade: HQ 58
Armoured Brigade white water rafting
expedition has been conducted from
October 10 to 14, 2003 from
Rudraprayag to Rishikesh. Composition
of the team was four Officers, four JCOs
and 15 ORs.


(b) White Water Rafting Expedition by
14 Artillery Brigade: HQ 14 Artillery
Brigade white water rafting expedition
was conducted from November 17 to
21, 2003 from Rudraprayag to Vir
Bhadra Barrage. Conmposition of the
team was two Officers, two JCOs and
seven ORs.
(c) White Water Rafting Expedition by
14 Horse: 14 Horse white water rafting
expedition was conducted from November 15 to 25, 2003 from Karanprayag
to Haridwar. Composition of the team
was one officer, three JCOs and 15 ORs.
(d) White Water Rafting Expedition by
Garhwal Rifle Regiment Centre:
Garhwal Rifle Regiment Centre white
water rafting expedition was conducted
from November 15 to 21, 2003 from
Karanprayag to Haridwar. Composition
of the team was two officers, three JCOs
and 38 ORs.
(e) White Water Rafting Expedition by
46 Armoured Regiment: 46 Armoured
Regiment white water rafting expedition
has been conducted from November 16
to 20, 2003 from Legang to Sevoke.
Composition of the team was four
officers, four JCOs and 15 ORs.
(f) Kayaking Expedition by HQ 74
Infantry Brigade: HQ 74 Infantry
Brigade has conducted a Kayaking
Expedition from November 3 to 6,
2003 from Kota to Guhata. Composition of the team was one Officer, one
JCO and 14 ORs.
(g) White Water Rafting Expedition by
3 Mechanical Infantry: 3 Mechanical


34


-----

Infantry has conducted a white water
rafting expedition from March 19 to 23,
2004 from Teesta to Sevok Road (Tiger
Bridge). Composition of the team was
two officers, three JCOs and 17 ORs.
3.25 Miscellaneous activities:(a) Army Adventure Challenge Cup
2003: A triathlon Challenge Cup of
mountain cycling, hill running and river
rafting was conducted at Raiwala from
November 1 to 5, 2003. 21 teams
including a team each from
Indian Air Force (IAF) and

Next-of-kin of all Indo-Tibetan Border Police
battle casualties (ITBP) participated in the
and war-disabled same. During the Challenge
soldiers who Cup 2003 demonstrations on
were boarded out aero and aqua adventure
from August 15, activities comprising para
1947 to April 30, motor flying, para gliding,
1999 are being para sailing, scuba diving,
given Rupees kayaking and canoeing was
one lakh from the carried out.
National Defence (b) Indo-UK Scuba Diving
Fund/Army Expedition: Indo-UK Scuba
Central Welfare Diving expedition has been
Fund. successfully conducted in the

Andaman and Nicobar Islands
from January 6 to 13, 2004. The team
consisted of 29 personnel including 10
divers each from both the countries and
nine support members from Indian
Army.
(c) Air Race 2003: Air Race 2003
was organized by the Aeronautical
Society of India to commemorate 100
years of manned flight from November
20 to 23, 2003. Army Adventure Wing


had fielded four aircraft in the race in
which more than 50 aircraft participated. The participation has been first of
its kind by Army Adventure Wing.

WELFARE

3.26 Rehabilitation and Welfare Measures: As part of the welfare measures
initiated by the Government, the next-of-kin
of all battle casualties and war-disabled
soldiers who were boarded out from August
15, 1947 to April 30, 1999 are being
given Rupees one lakh from the National
Defence Fund/Army Central Welfare Fund.
3.27 Disabled soldiers (Battle Casualties)
who are boarded/invalided out of service
w.e.f. May 1, 1999 (other than OP VIJAY)
are eligible for one time grant of Rs one lakh
out of Army Central Welfare Fund. The nextof-kin of battle casualties w.e.f. May 1,
1999 are granted Rs 7.5 lakh as ex-gratia
and Rs 30,000/- from Army Central Welfare
Fund.
3.28 The disabled soldiers (Battle Casualties) who sustained injuries in various
military operations after May 1, 1999 and
are retained in service get a grant out of
Army Central Welfare Fund (ACWF) based
on their disability percentage. Next-of-kin of
all personnel who die in harness after April
30, 2001 are paid one time grant of Rs
30,000/- from ACWF.
3.29 The Delhi Development Authority
(DDA) has offered a housing scheme ‘Vijay
Veer Awas Yojna’. Under the scheme the
DDA has constructed 312 flats for Personnel Below Officer Rank (PBOR) and 102
flats for officers. The scheme was open for


35


-----

next of kin of battle casualty and disabled/
boarded out soldiers of all operations with
effect from May 1, 1999. The scheme was
open till September 30, 2003. The cost
laid down is Rs 5.93 lakh for flats for officers and Rs 3.98 lakh for JCOs/ORs. Cost of
land and development charges have not
been charged by the DDA.
3.30 Award of Educational Scholarship to
Children of Armed Forces Personnel Killed/
Missing/Permanently Disabled in Action:
The educational concessions available to the
children of Armed Forces Personnel killed/
missing/permanently disabled in 1962,
1965, 1971 Wars, OP PAWAN, OP
MEGHDOOT have now been extended to
all post MEGHDOOT Operation including
counter-insurgency operations, both in India
and abroad. These concessions include fee
exemptions, free books and uniforms, etc.
3.31 Pre-Release Resettlement Training:
Till November 2003, -5267 Army personnel below Officers Rank were imparted prerelease resettlement training in various
disciplines at ITIs, Public Sector Undertakings and Private Institutions.
3.32 Paraplegic Rehabilitation Centres:
Paraplegic Rehabilitation Centres have been
established for 100 per cent disabled Exservicemen of the Armed Forces. Two
Paraplegic Rehabilitation Centres at Kirkee
and Mohali are being sponsored by the
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.
3.33 Medical Welfare Teams:  15 Medical Teams visited and treated the ex-servicemen and dependents of Service personnel
of Indian Army domiciled in Nepal during
the year.


3.34 Assistance to Handicapped, Deaf,
Dumb and Blind Children: During the
period 20 applications were received from
the wards of ex-servicemen and all were
given financial assistance.
3.35 Financial Assistance to Schools:
During the period 24 schools were provided
financial assistance. Till now 548 schools
have been granted assistance under the
scheme in Nepal.
3.36 Vocational Training: A total of 3508
ex-servicemen/ widows/ wives/ wards of exservicemen have been trained so far. Various courses are conducted in the twelve
Vocational Training Centres (VTCs) to
enhance the technical efficiency of exservicemen and their families so as to enable
them to get jobs.
3.37 Army Welfare Society: Army Welfare
Society was established and registered in
June 1998 with a view to process welfare
projects particularly with the Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment. The
Ministry had agreed to provide funds for
welfare-related projects for physically handicapped children. The Army is running 28
vocational-cum-rehabilitation training
schools for disabled children at several
Cantonments. The Ministry is providing
funds to run these schools.
3.38 Admission of  Children of
Jammu and Kashmir to Army Public School,
BEAS: Army Welfare Society launched a
unique mission by admitting 101 children,
11-15 years of age, from Jammu and Kashmir alongwith four Kashmiri Teachers for
education in Army Public School at Beas.
The children are those affected by terrorist


36


-----

activity, belonging to the
under-privileged section of the

Army Welfare

society. They are being pro
Society launched

vided with free education,

a unique mission

boarding and lodging, uniform

by admitting 101

and transportation to Beas.

children, 11-15

This project has been

years of age,

launched in pursuance of the

from J&K

policy of providing a healing

alongwith four

touch to Kashmiri citizens who

Kashmiri

have been victims of violence.

Teachers for

3.39Legal advice to soldiers,

education in

families and widows: Judge

Army Public

Advocate Departmental

School at Beas.

Officers posted at various
appointments in formation
Headquarters have been
directed to render legal advice in matters
relating to property claims, matrimonial
disputes and related issues concerning
soldiers, ex-servicemen and their
dependents. Legal help is also being sought
by the families/dependents of service personnel; serving/retired/deceased with regard
to disability benefits and terminal entitlements.  Legal advice to widows is being
imparted through Army Wives Welfare
Association (AWWA) on matters of succession, property laws, marriage, divorce,
adoption and monetary entitlements.
3.40 Human Rights Cell: Our Armed
Forces are increasingly being called upon to
assist the States in controlling internal
security situations and in the maintenance of
law and order in the country. There has
been a concerted effort to sensitize all ranks
from the soldier to the officer on human


rights. The subject is included in the
training curriculum right from the time when
a soldier is inducted into the Army and is
continued later at various levels of courses
and in the formation level training. When
inducted into insurgency areas units go
through an intensive re-orientation capsule
in specially established counter-insurgency
schools, where training to sensitise them
about human rights is included in the
syllabus. Seminars are conducted in formations and training institutes where members
of National Human Rights Commission
(NHRC), media persons and other eminent
speakers come to give their views on various
human rights aspects, following which there
is an interaction with officers and men to
gather first-hand knowledge about ground
realities.

Children from Jammu and Kashmir studying at the Army
Public School, Beas

3.41 Telemedicine Project :
(i) Telemedicine Network for the
Army is being developed under the aegis
of Indian Space Research Organisation
(ISRO), Department of Space (DOS).
The first phase of the project (Pilot


37


-----

Project), wherein the Hard
When inducted into

ware and Software as well as

insurgency areas

the connectivity of 348 kbps

units go through an

for five years was to be sup
intensive re
plied free of cost has now

orientation capsule

been completed. Army

in specially

Hospital (Research and Refer
established

ral) (Delhi Cantt) Command

counter-insurgency

Hospital (Northern Command)

schools, where

(Udhampur), 92 Base Hospital

training to sensitise

(Srinagar), 153 GH (Leh),

them about human

403 Fd Amb (Partapur) and

rights is included in

2121 Fd Amb (Kargil) are the

the syllabus.

six sites where the pilot
project has been implemented. The outdoor equipment including VSAT antennas and the
indoor equipment including Servers and
Digital Cameras have been installed at


all the sites. The system has been tested
and is functional since December 1,
2003. Tele-consultations and videoconferencing between the nodes are
taking place on a regular basis and so far
a total number of 668 consultations
have taken place since December 2003.

Diagnostic techniques at Army Hospitals: tele-medicine
room which transmits data to six other centers for
assessment by specialists.


38


-----

### 44444

 INDIAN NAVY

Indian Navy – a multi-dimensional Service.


-----

###### he presence of multinational maritime forces in
##### T

###### the region placed a heavy demand on the Indian

 Navy to maintain its equipment and personnel in

 a high state of combat preparedness during the

 year.


###### he presence of multinational maritime forces in

 the region placed a heavy demand on the Indian

 Navy to maintain its equipment and personnel in

 a high state of combat preparedness during the


4.1 The year continued to witness a
great deal of maritime activity in the Indian
Ocean Region especially in the North
Arabian Sea. The presence of multinational
maritime forces in the region placed a heavy
demand on the Indian Navy to maintain its
equipment and personnel in a high state of
combat preparedness.
4.2 An upswing in naval cooperation
with friendly foreign countries in the fields of
training, exercises and operations have
further strengthened our relations with
littoral nations. The Indian Navy was also
called upon to provide assistance to foreign
countries in the form of flood relief in Sri
Lanka, seaward protection for the African
Union Summit at Mozambique, patrolling of
the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of
Mauritius and Hydrographic assistance to
Seychelles.
4.3 The induction of two Krivak class
frigates namely Talwar and Trishul in June
2003 and one Extra Fast Attack Craft
(XFAC) in October 2003 have added the


much-needed punch to the Indian Navy. To
enhance the force levels, induction of
platforms in accordance with the Long Term
Perspective Plan is being implemented in a
systematic manner. The indigenously designed stealth frigate ‘Shivalik’ was launched
on April 18, 2003. A contract has been
signed with Russia for the refurbishment and
acquisition of the aircraft carrier ‘Admiral
Gorshkov’ alongwith deck-based carrier
aircraft.

MAJOR OPERATIONS

4.4 Security Patrols off Maputo:  Indian
Naval Ships Ranjit and Suvarna were deployed at Maputo in Mozambique from
June 23, 2003 to July 15, 2003 for ensuring security of the maritime frontiers during
the ‘African Union Summit’ which was held
at Maputo from July 4 to 12, 2003. During this operation, in addition to providing
security, Indian Naval ships also provided
training to over 100 personnel of the
Mozambique Navy.  INS Suvarna also


40


-----

carried a large consignment of medicines,
which was handed over by the High Commissioner of India to the Health Minister of
Mozambique.
4.5 Anti-Smuggling/Gun-Running
Operations: Ships and aircraft of the Naval
detachments based in Gujarat and
Maharashtra, undertook regular patrols
along the coast, to prevent smuggling and
gun-running, including illegal movement of
undesirable personnel.
4.6 Palk Bay Patrols: Naval/Coast Guard
ships, aircraft, and trawlers of the seven
detachments along the Tamil Nadu coast,
undertook patrolling in the Palk Bay area,
during the year.
4.7 Surveillance-cum- Presence Missions:  Surveillance of areas of strategic
interest, which is one of the vital tasks of the
Navy, was undertaken. Naval ships and


aircraft were deployed on extensive surveillance missions, which included anti-poaching operations in the Andaman & Nicobar
and Lakshadweep Islands.  These presencecum-surveillance missions were not restricted to Indian waters only, but extended
to adjoining areas as well.

MAJOR EXERCISES

4.8 ‘SUMMEREX-2003’ was conducted
from July 5 to 25, 2003 on the eastern
seaboard while AMPHEX-2003 was conducted from December 10 to 21, 2003, in
the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. It was for
the first time that Headquarters Integrated
Defence Staff conducted an AMPHEX.
Units of the Western and Eastern Fleets,
along with elements of the Army, Air Force
and Coast Guard participated in the annual
naval exercises ‘SPRINGEX-2004’ held from
February 1 to 25, 2004 on the western
seaboard.

OVERSEAS DEPLOYMENT


4.9 Circumnavigation Voyage - INS
Tarangini: The Indian Navy’s Sail training
barque, INS Tarangini, sailed from Kochi on
January 23, 2003 on a circumnavigation
voyage, for a duration of 15 months.  During this voyage, Tarangini visited 37 ports in
18 countries covering a distance of over
34,923 nautical miles. During third leg of
her voyage, Tarangini participated in the
four races of the Tall Ship Challenge Series,
held in the Great Lakes of USA and Canada
from July 14 to August 20, 2003. Competing against professionals from USA,
Canada, UK and a number of other counINS Tarangini arriving at Kochi after completing
circumnavigation of the World.

41


-----

President Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam embarked onboard INS Tarangini on her return after circumnavigation.


tries, Tarangini stood first in her Division.
On completion of the voyage, INS Tarangini
entered Kochi on April 25, 2004. Dr. APJ
Abdul Kalam, the President of India, embarked on board along with the Chief of the
Naval Staff Admiral Madhvendra Singh and
other senior officers as part of the homecoming reception
4.10 Tri-centenary Celebrations at St
Petersburg: Soon after commissioning at St
Petersburg, Russia, on June 25, 2003, INS
Trishul participated in the St Petersburg Tricentenary Celebrations held from June 25
to 29, 2003.
4.11 Langkawi International Maritime and
Aerospace Exhibition (LIMA)-03:  INS
Delhi and Kora visited Langkawi, Malaysia,
to participate in LIMA-03 held from September 29 to October 5, 2003.
4.12 Friendship Across the Seas: During
the end of March 2003, INS Sharda was
tasked for overseas deployment to Seychelles and Mauritius. During this mission


the ship trans-shipped a Chetak helicopter
of the Mauritius National Coast Guard from
Kochi to Port Louis. On the return leg from
Port Louis, the ship also exercised with the
Mauritius ship CGS Guardian.
4.13 International Maritime Defence
Exhibition – 2003 (IMDEX-2003): IN
Ships Brahmaputra and Kirch visited Singapore, to participate in the IMDEX-2003
from November 9 to 15, 2003.
4.14 Operation SAMBANDH 03/03:
INS Nirdeshak carried out Hydrographic
Survey of sea areas, off Seychelles. The
ship was deployed in Seychelles from November 21 to December 18, 2003, for the
survey.
4.15 Other Visits: Indian Naval ships paid
goodwill visits to ports in the Persian Gulf
and the South China Sea during the year.

INTERACTION WITH FOREIGN NAVIES

4.16 MILAN 03: A multi-national exercise and interaction, involving navies of


42


-----

South Asia and South East Asia, generically
named ‘MILAN 03’, was held at Port Blair
from February 11 to 15, 2003. While
warships from Indonesia, Sri Lanka and Thailand participated, Australia, Malaysia,
Myanmar and Singapore sent their delegations.
4.17 The details of other interaction with
foreign navies, during the period under
review, are given in the table beneath.

EXERCISES AND JOINT OPERATIONS
WITH FOREIGN NAVIES

4.18 The Indian Navy has institutionalised joint exercises with USA, France, and
Singapore and joint patrols with Indonesia.
In addition, Indian Naval ships also carried
out joint exercises with Russian Naval units
in the Indian Ocean. Following are the
details of such exercises.


4.19 Joint Exercises with USA:
(a) SAREX-2003:  A bilateral Search
and Rescue Exercise (SAREX) was
conducted off Chennai from July 8 to
12, 2003.  The US Navy fielded P-3C
Orion aircraft and an Oliver Hazard
Perry Class Guided Missile Frigate (USS
Curts). Indian participation involved INS
Sukanya, a Seaking helicopter and CGS
Varaha. Two observers each from
Maldives, Sri Lanka, Madagascar, and
Mauritius, also participated.
(b) MALABAR – 03:  The annual
Indo-US Joint Exercise, ‘MALABAR-03’
was conducted off Kochi from October 5
to 10, 2003. USS Chosin (Ticonderoga
Class Guided Missile Cruiser), USS
Fitzgerald (Arleigh Burke Class Guided


43


-----

Missile Destroyer), USS Pasadena (Los
Angeles Class Attack Submarine) and
P3C Orion (Maritime Reconnaissance
Aircraft) were the major units which
participated from the US side. Indian
participation included INS Brahmaputra
(Guided Missile Frigate), INS Ganga
(Guided Missile Frigate), INS Shalki
(Submarine), INS Shakti (Replenishment
Tanker), Tu 142 aircraft (Maritime
Reconnaissance and Anti Submarine
Warfare) and Dornier aircraft (Maritime
Reconnaissance), apart from the ship’s
integral helicopters. On the sports field,
teams from the two sides, also competed
for the MALABAR Cup on October 9,
2003, which was won by the Indian
Navy team.

4.20 France:  The fourth Indo-French
Exercise of the ‘Varuna’ series, namely
VARUNA-2003/1 was conducted off


Mumbai, from August 25 to 30, 2003. The
French Navy was represented by FNS Marne
(a Replenishment Tanker and the Flagship of
the French Admiral Commanding French
Forces in the Indian Ocean), FNS Dupleix
(an Anti-submarine Destroyer) and an
Atlantique MK II aircraft (Maritime Patrol),
operating from Goa. The Indian participation included INS Ganga (Guided Missile
Frigate), INS Dunagiri (Anti-Submarine
Frigate) and INS Shankul (Submarine).

4.21 Singapore:  The sixth Indo-Singapore Anti Submarine Warfare exercise was
conducted off Kochi from March 7 to 19,
2004.  RSS Vigilance and RSS Victory
(Missile Corvettes), RSS Brave (Patrol
Vessel) and RSS Endurance (Logistics
Support) represented the Republic of Singapore. The Indian participation included INS
Ganga (Guided Missile Frigate), INS
Vindhyagiri (Leander), one Offshore Patrol


Indian Naval Ship “INS MYSORE” (left) exercising with a Russian Vessel in the Indian Ocean.

44


-----

Vessel, one Submarine and TU 142 Maritime Patrol aircraft.

4.22 Russia:  The first Indo-Russian
Exercise, called ‘INDRA-2003’ was conducted from May 20 to 22, 2003 on the
western seaboard, and from May 29 to 31,
2003 on the eastern seaboard. The Russian
participation included Moskva (Slava Class
Cruiser with Vice Admiral EV Orvlov, the
Deputy Chief of Naval Staff and Commander

Black Sea Fleet embarked), Marshal
Shaposhnikov (Udaloy Class Destroyer),
Admiral Pantyeleyev (Udaloy Class Destroyer) and Vladimir Kolechitsky (Tanker).
The Indian participation included IN Ships
Mumbai, Mysore, Viraat, Brahmaputra,
Gomati and IN Submarine Sindhuvijay on
the western seaboard and Indian Naval Ships
Rajput, Ranjit, Ranvijay and Submarines
Sindhuvir and Vela on the eastern seaboard.

4.23 Indonesia: The third Indo-Indonesia
Coordinated Patrol, called
‘INDINDOCORPAT’ was conducted from
March 5, 2004 for about a month. IN Ships
Tarasa and Tarmugli participated from the
Indian side while Indonesian Naval Ship,
KRI Pati Unus, represented Indonesia.

4.24 Oman:  The Indo-Oman Joint
Exercise ‘Thammar Al Tayyib’ was conducted on the western seaboard from April
24 to 26, 2003.
4.25 China: On completion of the
port-call to Shanghai, IN Ships Ranjit and
Kulish carried out a Search and Rescue
exercise (SAREX) with the ships of the
Chinese Navy, off Shanghai, on November
14, 2003. From the Chinese side, PLA (N)


Indian and US Naval personnel after a joint exercise.

ships Jiaxing (Frigate with integral helicopter)

and tanker Panyang Hu participated.

DEFENCE COOPERATION

4.26 HYDRO IND – 2004: As part of
the Golden Jubilee celebrations, the Indian
Navy hosted the first International
Hydrographic Seminar in India, “HYDRO
IND 2004” at Mumbai from March 26-27,
2004, which was attended by Professionals
from all over the world. The fourth meeting
of North Indian Ocean Hydrographic Commission (NIOHC) from March 24-25, 2004
preceded the seminar. Representative of the
twelve maritime countries located in the
Indian Ocean Region attended this meeting.

ASSISTANCE RENDERED

4.27 Flood Relief Operations in Sri
Lanka:  INS Sharda was deployed at Galle,
Sri Lanka from May 20 to 26, 2003, to
provide relief in the flood affected areas of
South and Central Sri Lanka. The Indian
teams distributed more than 5000 food
packets, 2500 blankets and provided medical relief to more than 1000 patients.

4.28 Towing of MCGS Vigilant:
Mauritian Coast Guard Ship Vigilant was
towed by INS Matanga from Port Louis,


45


-----

Mauritius to Mumbai in April

The Indian Navy has

2003, for undertaking repairs

institutionalized joint

at Mumbai. A Chetak heli
exercises with USA,

copter was also embarked

France, and

aboard Vigilant for transporta
Singapore and joint

tion to India, for overhaul at

patrols with

HAL, Bangalore.

Indonesia. In

4.29Assistance to Merchant

addition, Indian

Ship in Distress:  On June

Naval ships carried

10, 2003, Yard 3010 (Betwa),

out joint exercises

during the Sea Trials off Sand

with Russian Naval

Heads, provided assistance to

units in the Indian

a Merchant Vessel, ‘MV

Ocean.

Fortune Carrier’, in distress.
Betwa was able to safely
rescue the entire crew of 20 personnel from
the ship before it sank.


critically ill patient was winched up from the
merchant ship MV Car Bridge and transferred to Civil Hospital.

TRAINING

4.33 Interaction with Foreign Countries:
A total of 400 vacancies have been allotted
for training of personnel from friendly
foreign countries in India for the year 200304. The list of countries who have been
offered these vacancies is as follows: 
S.No Country Vacancies

(a) Bangladesh 10

(b) Kenya 03

(c) Malaysia 07

(d) Mauritius 16

(e) Myanmar 04

(f) Nigeria 05

(g) Seychelles 09

(h) Vietnam 03

(i) Sri Lanka 297

(j) Maldives 44

(k) Singapore 02

4.34 Similarly, a total of 31 Indian personnel have been deputed abroad for
training and various courses, which includes
12 personnel to the US under the International Military Education and Training
programme.

4.35 Hydrographic Co-operation: Ten
foreign officers from Bangladesh, Sri
Lanka, Vietnam, Nigeria, Malaysia, Seychelles, Thailand and Mauritius attended the
free basic Hydrography course between
October 21, 2002 and May 24, 2003 at
the National Hydrographic School, Goa.
This is in line with the NHD’s International


4.30 Assistance at Daman:  The Indian
Naval diving team, along with the Coast
Guard diving team, rescued personnel and
a vehicle, which had fallen in water due to
the collapse of the bridge on Daman Ganga
river at Daman on August 28, 2003.

4.31 Casualty Evacuation (CASEVAC) by
INS Sharda:  In January 2003, while keeping vigil off Minicoy Islands, INS Sharda
evacuated a Turkish sailor who was ill, from
merchant ship MV Muzeyyen Ana 100 nm
west of Minicoy. The ill sailor was brought
to Kochi on the midnight of January 30,
2003 and was handed over to the specialist
medical team of the Medical Trust Hospital.

4.32 Casualty Evacuation (CASEVAC) by
Chetak:  321 Garuda flight undertook a
CASEVAC mission off Kochi on July 12,
2003 in adverse weather conditions. A


46


-----

Cooperation efforts in the littoral region, as
part of the North Indian Ocean
Hydrographic Commission (NIOHC) efforts
of capacity building.

4.36 First Training Squadron: A total of
141 cadets were trained onboard INS Tir
and Krishna of First Training Squadron.
During the course of sea training, besides
visiting all major ports of India, the cadets
also visited port of Suez, Palermo, Alexandria, Port Said, Bandar Abbas, Al Fujaira and
Muscat during the overseas deployment.

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

4.37 Navy Wide Networking: A Navy
Wide Network is being set up to ensure data
transfer and connectivity. This is being set up
in a progressive manner over three years.


4.38 Computerisation: Various application programmes are under consideration
for development in areas of Pay and Allowances, Hospital administration and Administration. These packages shall be developed
both through in-house expertise as well as
outsourcing.

4.39 IT Training: IT Training continues to
be vital to meet the increasing requirement
of computerisation in the Navy. Various

courses are being planned and conducted
on site from time to time.

ADVENTURE AND SPORTS

4.40 First Afro-Asian Games: Following
naval personnel brought laurels to the Indian
Navy in the first Afro-Asian games held at
Hyderabad from October 24 to November


A surface-to-surface missile being fired by an Indian Navy destroyer

47


-----

1, 2003: - (a) Petty Officer, AL Lakra,
Silver Medal in boxing. (b) Chief Petty
Officer, CPRS Kumar, Bronze Medal in
weight lifting.

4.41 11[th] Asian Sailing Championship:
Naval sportsmen won 2 Gold, 2 Silver and 1
Bronze medal in the 11[th] Asian Sailing
Championship at Mumbai from January 8 to
13, 2004 in different categories.

4.42 International YMCA Boxing Tournament: Petty Officers, AL Lakra and M
Suranjoy Singh, won silver medals each in
International YMCA Boxing tournament held
at Delhi from February 3 to 7, 2004.

4.43 9[th] SAF Games: Naval sportsmen
won 6 Gold, 1 Silver and 2 Bronze medals
in the 9[th] SAF Games held at Islamabad in
March 2004.


4.44 Aero Adventure Sport: A node for
conducting para jumping, sky diving,
microlite flying etc. has been set up at Dega,
Visakhapatnam. The Navy is also setting up
its own Sky Diving Team. The team would
subsequently participate in various international events.
4.45 Mountaineering: The IN Mountaineering Cell has been set up at Naval Headquarters. After a successful assault on
Mount Suitilla in 2002, the Naval Mountaineering team recently scaled Mt Kamet/
Abigamin and Mt Saser Kangri in the year
2003.
4.46 XXIII Antarctic Expedition:  A
three-member naval team participated in the
XXIII Indian Summer Antarctica Expedition
from December 2003 to March 2004.


48


-----

### 55555

 INDIAN AIR FORCE

The induction of SU-30 MK-1 adds a cutting edge to the lethal potential of India’s defence capability.

49


-----

###### he IAF continues to modernize in a phased
##### T

###### manner and today epitomizes a credible air power

 of capability and repute.


###### he IAF continues to modernize in a phased

 manner and today epitomizes a credible air power

 of capability and repute.


5.1 The Indian Air Force (IAF) is a
modern, technology intensive force with
commitments to excellence and professionalism. IAF has completed seven decades of
dedicated service to the nation. Keeping
pace with the demands of contemporary
advancements, the IAF continues to modernise in a phased manner and today epitomises a credible air power of capability and
repute.
5.2 IAF ensures that all personnel hone
their professional skills to the highest level,
minimise wastage, reduce expenditure and
optimise output. Although the possible cost
and complexity of new technology continue
to make unprecedented demands on the skill
and commitment of the Indian Air Force,
these challenges have been met with exemplary elan and fortitude. IAF has been
operationally alert continuously and its
personnel have withstood with determination
the pressures and uncertainties.
5.3 The IAF has rendered yeoman
service and undertaken multifarious respon

sibilities viz, air defence, air interdiction,
reconnaissance and conducted countersurface operations in support of ground
forces. Besides, it is committed to provide
assistance to civil authorities during natural
calamities, for movement of personnel to
maintain law and order as well as to cater to
the needs of a large number of soldiers, who
man outposts in the treacherous, forbidding
and inaccessible reaches of the Himalayas.
IAF pilots and airmen of the transport and
helicopter fleets have maintained the lifeline
in the skies under the most gruelling conditions.

FLEET IMPROVEMENTS/INDUCTIONS

5.4 IAF has achieved significant milestones in the field of self-reliance in the
operation and maintenance of its fleet.
Many aircraft are indigenously maintained
and overhauled. In addition, aircraft and
weapon systems are undergoing upgradation
with the latest avionics systems and modifications. Follwoing are some of the significant areas of achievement.


50


-----

The Hawk, Advanced Jet Trainer, being acquired for training IAF pilots.


5.5 Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT) : The
requirement of an advanced jet trainer has
long been felt by the Air Force to meet its
training needs. The contract for Hawk AJT
aircraft was concluded on March 26, 2004
with the manufacturers, M/s BAE Systems,
UK. 24 aircraft would be procured from M/s
BAE Systems in flyaway condition and the
remaining 42 aircraft would be licensemanufactured in India by Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL).
5.6 Kiran Mk- I & II : These aircraft
were inducted in the IAF in 1968. They are
utilised for intermediate and advanced
training of IAF pilots. Another important
role undertaken by these aircraft is aerobatics as part of the Surya-Kiran Aerobatic
Team, which requires precision flying and
faultless maintenance. Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd (HAL) has indigenised many spares
of this aircraft.
5.7 Additional Multi-Role Aircraft : In
principle approval for additional Multi-Role


aircraft has been accorded.
5.8 MiG-21 (BIS UPG): MiG-21 Bis
aircraft are under series upgrade at HAL
(Nasik Division) and are being fitted with
latest state-of-the-art avionics systems. The
inclusion of new systems enhances the
capabilities of the aircraft. 64 aircraft have
been upgraded by HAL so far.
5.9 Su-30 :The first batch of Su-30K
was inducted in 1997 and Su-30 MKI Phase
I was inducted in 2002. Su-30 MKI Phase
II aircraft was inducted during OctoberDecember 2003. HAL has concluded a
contract with Russia for manufacture of Su30 MKI aircraft under licensed agreement
from 2005 to 2018. HAL will also set up
Repair and Overhaul (ROH) facilities. Induction of Su-30 MKI in IAF is a major step
towards self-reliance and will add a cutting
edge to the lethal potential of India’s defence capability.
5.10 Jaguar : Jaguar aircraft were inducted into IAF in 1979 and have given


51


-----

good service over the past 25
years. Currently, a number of

Induction of Su-30

modifications are in progress

MK-I is a major

to improve the performance of

step towards self
these aircraft. These modifi
reliance and will

cations are aimed at improving

add a cutting edge

the avionics and fitment of

to the lethal

new-generation weapon

potential of India’s

systems. These aircraft are

defence capability.

capable of air-to-air refuelling
and their radius of action has
been considerably enhanced
by acquisition of air-to-air
refuellers. Approval of the Government was
accorded for acceptance of eight new twin
seater aircraft from HAL during 2003-04.
Avionics integration on these aircraft is
completed and weapon system integration is
in progress.
5.11 Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) :
UAVs were first inducted into the Indian Air
Force in 2000. The fleet was further expanded in 2003. The delivery of the UAVs
is expected to be completed in 2004-05.
5.12 Executive Jets : The contract was
signed on September 19, 2003 for the
acquisition of four Embraer aircraft for the
IAF and one for the Ministry of Home
Affairs. The contract also involves integration of a Self Protection System (SPS) suite
by the vendor. The delivery of the first two
aircraft would commence by middle of
2005.
5.13 HS-748 Aircraft Upgrade: In view
of the obsolescence of certain avionics and
other equipment on HS-748 aircraft, it was
proposed to replace them and additionally
install a few new avionics such as Global


Positioning System (GPS), Distance Measuring Equipment (DME) and radio altimeter.
Upgrade of prototype has been completed
and the aircraft handed over to the Air
Force. Contract for modification of the
aircraft has been signed with HAL on
March 27, 2003 and the delivery will be
commencing from April 30, 2004.
5.14 Advanced Light Helicopters (ALH):
The IAF has already procured Advanced
Light Helicopters as a part of its schemes to
replace Chetak helicopters. This is an
indigenously built helicopter and received
very good reviews at the recently concluded
Singapore Air Show where the IAF displayed
the helicopter through its display team
‘SARANG’. The initial helicopters would be
with a conventional cockpit, which would be
upgraded to a glass cockpit with an upgraded engine. In February 2004, 5 ALHs
of IAF participated in the air display at
Singapore Air Show.
5.15 Light Combat Helicopters (LCH) :
IAF is planning to induct 65 state-of-the-art
Light Combat Helicopters (LCH) to be
designed and developed indigenously. Apart
from supporting the Army in Low Intensity
Conflict Operations (LICO), these helicopters would enhance the combat effectiveness
of the Air Force.
5.16 Mi-8 & Mi-17 Helicopters : Induction of Mi-8 & Mi-17 helicopters into the
IAF commenced from 1972 and 1984
respectively. They have given exceptionally
good service. IAF has procured 10 new Mi17IV helicopters. A contingent of Mi-17
helicopters is presently operating in the UN
Mission in Congo.


52


-----

5.17 Mi-35 Helicopters: Mi-35 helicopters were inducted into the IAF in 1994 and
have given exceptionally good service. These
helicopters are being upgraded for their day
and night capability. A contingent of Mi-35
helicopters is presently operating in the UN
Mission in Congo.

5.18 Pechora Missile System Upgrade :
Pechora missile system will continue to be
operational till year 2015. In order to

ensure its reliable operation, Government
has approved the proposal for selective
upgrade of Pechora Systems.

5.19 Prithvi Missile System : Prithvi
Missile Systems are gradually being inducted
in the IAF. Three squadrons along with the
associated ground support equipment are
planned to be inducted.

5.20 SAR/ISAR Option for ELTA Radar:
The SAR/ISAR option is an
upgrade on the existing fire

A memorandum of control radar on the maritime
principles and order Jaguar aircraft. The trials were
of cooperation on successfully conducted and
the AWACS project acquisition finalized through a
for IAF outlining the contract on January 13,
scope of work and 2004.
responsibility of the

5.21  Airborne Warning and

parties, was signed

Control System (AWACS): A

by the Government

memorandum of principles

of India, the

and order of cooperation on

Government of Israel

the AWACS project for IAF

and the Government

outlining the scope of work

of Russian

and responsibility of the

Federation on

parties, was signed by the

10.10.2003.

Government of India, the


Government of Israel and the Government
of Russian Federation on 10.10.2003.
Subsequently, an Inter-Government Agreement (IGA) was concluded with Israel on 3[rd]

March 2004 followed by a contract with M/s
IAD Elta System to acquire AWACS aircraft.
These aircraft, as force multipliers, would
enhance the combat effectiveness of the IAF.
The basic platform is the IL-76 aircraft, thus
giving commonality with the existing fleet of
the Air Force.

5.22  Air Defence Ground Communication
Network: Various state-of-the-art communication networks like Integrated Air Command, Control and Communication System
(IACCCS), Aerostat, Unmanned Aerial
Vehicle (UAV), Prithvi Tactical Air Centre
(TAC) / Joint Air Defence Centre (JADC) /
Delhi Area Defence Centre (DADC) /
Control and Reporting Centre (CRC) etc. are
being planned using Fibre Optic Media (FO
Media), satellite and microwaves system for
effective and efficient integration of Air
Defence Operation Elements like fighter
aircraft squadrons, radars, Command Headquarters etc. Also the existing Air Defence
Ground Environment System (ADGES)
communications network is being modernized with Asynchronous Transfer Mode
(ATM) technology using Fibre Optic Media.

5.23 Air Defence Ground Radar: Stateof-the-art radar and communication systems
such as Aerostar, Low Level Light Weight
Radars (LLLWR) etc are under various stages
of induction to provide effective Air Defence
against enemy attack.


53


-----

TECHNOLOGICAL EDGE

5.24 Central Acquisition Radar (CAR)
:This radar has been indigenously designed
and developed by the Defence Research and
Development Organisation (DRDO). In
keeping with the IAF policy to bolster
indigenous technological development, the
prototype radar underwent performance
evaluation and the results have been encouraging.
5.25 Force Multipliers : The IAF has
acquired four IL-78 Flight Refueling Aircraft
(FRA). IAF has operationalised in-flight
refueling on Su-30,   Su-30 MKI, Jaguar
and Mirage 2000 aircraft.

ENHANCING FLIGHT SAFETY


additional Bird Hazard Combat Teams
(BHCTs) have been established and 15
temporary BHCTs have been made permanent. The scope of expenditure on anti-bird
hazard measures have been enlarged to
increase its effectiveness.
5.27 Measures to Reduce Human Error
Accidents : The concept of Operational Risk
Management (ORM) is being implemented
in the IAF to reduce accidents. Software for
implementing this concept is under development.
5.28 Helpline Service : A ‘Helpline’
service has been established to render
assistance to the kin of personnel involved in
aircraft accidents.

INFORMATION AND ELECTRONIC
WARFARE


5.26 Anti-Bird Strike Measures: There

WARFARE

have been no Category I (Cat-I) accidents

5.29 Space Applications : The IAF has

due to bird strike this year (April 1, 2003

made significant progress by using space

to March 31, 2004). This was possible due

technologies in the field of communications,

to a vigorous drive for clearance of vegeta
surveillance and reconnaissance, search and

tion and implementation of anti-bird meas
rescue. INSAT series of satellites are used

ures. 52 stations have been supplied with

for communications, while IRS series of

heavy-duty tractors and grass cutting ma
satellites are used for imaging. India has

chines for environment cleaning. Two

obtained the capability of 1 metre resolution
imaging through Indian Remote Sensing
Satellite (IRS)-TES.
5.30 Progress has been made in the field
of Electronic Intelligence (ELINT) and
enhancing the resolution further in the field
of imaging. In Search & Rescue (SAR), IAF
has planned to procure beacons for its
aircraft, which would be compatible with
satellite based SAR system.
5.31 Electronic Warfare (EW) Equipment:
Microlite aircraft getting ready for a bird survey flight. The fitment of basic minimum Integrated


54


-----

EW self protection suite comprising Radar
Warning Receiver (RWR), Counter Measure
Dispensing System (CMDS) and Airborne
Self Protection Jammer (ASPJ) on the fighter
fleet is being pursued vigorously. In addition, fitment of RWR and CMDS is planned
on transport aircraft and helicopters.
5.32 A number of advanced Early Warning (EW) systems viz., Integrated EW Range,
Communication Jamming (COMJAM) systems, Airborne and Ground based Signal
Intelligence (SIGINT) systems, missile
warning systems etc. are planned for procurement to provide the cutting edge to IAF
in Early Warning (EW) capability.
5.33 Signal Intelligence (SIGINT) : New
SIGINT systems on board airborne platforms as well as ground systems are planned
to be procured to replace the ageing systems as well as to augment the surveillance
capabilities.
5.34 Integrated Early Warning (EW)
Workshop: This is a new concept introduced
so as to make Early Warning (EW) training
more efficient and to assess squadron and
units on Early Warning (EW) in an integrated
manner.
5.35 Surveillance and Early Warning :
The Aerostat surveillance system with
multiple payloads is being inducted into the
IAF. The primary role of this system is to
reinforce the low-level detection coverage of
the air defence infrastructure. The Aerostat
system will play the role of a force multiplier
and provide both strategic and tactical
advantage over adversaries. The payloads
would form a part of the aerostat balloon,
which would be hoisted in the air. This will


give the capability to peep into enemy
territory and also provide support to offensive missions.
5.36 Airborne Early Warning and Control
system (AEW&C): Two AEW&C platform are
being indigenously developed by the Centre
for Airborne System (CABS) in coordination
with DRDO. These platforms will minimize
our dependency on foreign vendors in the
field of Electronics Warfare.
5.37 Low Level Light Weight Radar
(LLLWR): The LLLWRs are lightweight
radars that can be man ported or airlifted to
inhospitable terrain and mountainous regions. Induction of these radars would give
the capability to deploy radars at any site at
short notice. It has the capability to detect
threats at low level and provide the muchrequired early warning in mountainous
terrain.
5.38 Securing L/L Communication:
Landline communications has been vulnerable to interception. Encryption system has
been planned to secure the media for
transmission of voice and data communications. Presently, 2 Mega Bits Per Second
(MBPS) inter-command network and Tropo
lines for stage-I(WAC) have been secured
using Bulk encryption units. The encryption
of other systems is planned with their
upgradation.
5.39 Nuclear, Biological & Chemical
(NBC) Warfare: Procurement of NBC
equipment for certain forward airbases and
Quick Reaction Teams (QRT) is underway.
Personal protective clothing like NBC suits,
gloves and boots and detection/decontamination equipment is part of the procurement.


55


-----

TRAINING

5.40 A review of the national security
system by a Group of Ministers (GoM)
brought out the need for greater harmony
between military and civil organisations for
bringing synergy in exploitation of resources/
efforts. Pursuing this objective, Indian Air
Force took up the issue of recognition of
training/ courses conducted in the IAF, with
All India Council of Technical Education

(AICTE) and Director General Of Civil
Aviation (DGCA). The result of this exercise
are summarised below:
        - DGCA’s approval for the training
at Flying Training Establishments and
technical training (both for officers and
airmen of Maintenance Branch) have
been obtained.

        - Award of Diploma in Engineering,
duly recognised by AICTE, to the
technical training imparted in IAF has
been obtained.

        - Recognition of the civil equivalence of military qualification
awarded to non-technical

To ensure that the

tradesmen by Government of

IAF has adequate

India, Ministry of Labour has

professionally

been obtained in June 2003.

competent

5.41Air Force Engineering

technical officers,

College : A high level of

the Government

professionalism, particularly in

has approved a

the technical branches of the

proposal, in

Air Force, is necessary, as the

principle, for

operational effectiveness of

establishing an Air

the IAF is highly dependent on

Force Engineering

the machines as much as on

College.

the men who fly and operate


them. The operational preparedness of all
support systems for the flying branch is also
a crucial factor. To ensure that the IAF has
adequate professionally competent technical
officers, the Government has approved a
proposal, in principle, for establishing an Air
Force Engineering College.
5.42 Recognition of IAF Training Institutes by DGCA : To bring out greater
synergy in aviation in the country all defence
pilots are also required to meet the commercial pilot requirements. DGCA has
recognized IAF training institutes and
conducts bi-annual examination at the Air
Force Academy. Recognition of military
aircraft IL-76, An-32 and Mi-17 for conduct
of civil license skill test is under progress.
5.43 Air Force Awareness Campaign :
The youth of our nation, especially those in
the outlying parts of the country, are not
adequately aware about aviation and a
career in the Air Force. In order to attract
bright, talented and motivated youth to join
its ranks, IAF has launched awareness
campaigns in all parts of the country. The
response to these campaigns has been
overwhelming.
5.44 Air Race 2003 : Year 2003 was
centenary year for powered flying. The first
aircraft took off on its maiden flight on
December 17, 1903. To commemorate this
event in India, an air race was organised by
the Indian Air Force along with the Aeronautical Society of India.
5.45 Utilization of Trained Defence
Manpower : To infuse greater harmony
among military and civil organizations and


56


-----

utilize highly trained and disciplined defence
manpower towards nation building, IAF has
written to various civil organizations such as
Pawan Hans, Airports Authority of India and
Indira Gandhi Rastriya Udan Academy for
lateral absorption of IAF personnel.
5.46 Training of IAF personnel abroad :
IAF is presently participating in various
courses abroad. These courses are conducted in USA, UK, France, Australia, South
Africa, Japan, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand,
Bangladesh, Netherlands, Germany and
China. In addition, one IAF officer is
currently on deputation to United Sates Air
Force (USAF) on Qualified Flying Instructor
(QFI) exchange programme.
5.47 Training of Foreign Students in IAF :
Foreign students are availing training facilities in IAF establishments. Ministry of
External Affairs (MEA) offers the training
slots under Indian Technical and Economic
Co-operation-I (ITEC-I), ITEC-II, Self
Financing Scheme (SFS) and Aid to Sri
Lanka programmes. The Government funds
training for personnel from Nepal and
Bhutan. Officers and airmen from Myanmar,
Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Mauritius, Malaysia
and Botswana have undergone training at
various training establishments in India
during the year. In addition, training slots
have been offered to Nigeria as well.

DEFENCE COOPERATION

5.48 Combined joint exercises were
undertaken by the IAF with various countries
to strengthen bilateral relations. These
exercises, besides building up goodwill
between the countries, have given an expo

sure to our personnel on the latest developments in the field of aviation. Details of the
exercises are enumerated in the succeeding
paragraphs.
5.49 Exercises led by Army : Exercise
‘Vajra Prahar 03-1’ / Ex ‘Balance Iroquois
03-1’. Ex ‘Vajra Prahar 03-1’, a joint
exercise was conducted at Vairengte and
surrounding areas during April, 2003. The
exercise was conducted with the US Special
Operations Pacific Command. The Indian
participation included two An-32 and six
Mi-17 aircraft of IAF and a team of Ex 21
Para Strike Force (SF) of the Indian Army.
The US participation comprised 21 troops
and civil affairs personnel.

5.50 The Special Forces Joint exercise in
High Altitude Area (HAA) operations Ex
‘Balance Iroquois 03-4’ / Ex ‘Vajra Prahar
03-3’ was conducted at Leh in September
2003. The exercise included rock craft and
cliff assault technique, ground training and
friendship jumps. The IAF participated with
one An-32 for paradrop. Friendship jumps
from An-32 were carried out over Stakna
Drop Zone (DZ). Seventeen US troops
along with Indian troops took part in the
friendship jumps.

5.51 Exercises Led by Navy: Indo-US
Joint Naval Special Forces exercise was
conducted at Ganpatiphule (Ratnagiri) in
March 2004. The scope of the exercise
included para jumps, combat free falls and
duck drops from 2 x An-32 aircraft and
Special Heliborne Operation (SHBO) and
Combat free fall from 2 x Mi-8 helicopters.
5.52 Exercises led by Air Force : Exercise


57


-----

‘Cooperative Cope Thunder-03’ (CCT-03),
a multilateral exercise, was conducted in
Alaska during June, 2003. Exercise CCT is
conducted every year in Alaska during the
period June-July. IAF participation in CCT03 comprised one IL-76 and 31 crew/
observers. The three observers included one each from

IAF participated in flying, fighter controller and
a multilateral metereological branches. IAF
exercise in Alaska also participated in the execuin June 2003 in tive level observer prowhich one IL76 gramme, which provided an
and 31 crew/ opportunity to interact with
observers observers from other counparticipated. tries and witness conduct of

multilateral operations from
close quarters. This was the
first ever participation by an IAF aircraft in a
multilateral exercise.  The IL-76 sorties
included airdrop mission, participation in air
power, orientation ride for executive observers and North Pole flights. Training objectives for the participation in the exercise
included successful integration in multilateral combat exercise, key involvement and
cooperation in the mission planning process
with multiple nations and use of grid navigation without magnetic compass backup. The
IL-76 Polar flight and endurance flight of
09:36 hrs was a good achievement.

5.53 Ex Cope India-04: Ex Cope India04, a bilateral exercise was conducted at
Gwalior with USAF and IAF fighter aircraft.
This was the first exercise when frontline
fighter aircraft of both sides participated.
The Dissimilar Air Combat Training (DACT)


Ex was conducted from February 14 to 26,
2004. Six F-15 aircraft of USAF flew 52
sorties against Mirage, Mig 21, Bison, MiG27, MiG-29 and SU-30 aircraft of IAF. The
objectives - to learn about each other’s
operational and maintenance procedures were achieved to a great extent.

5.54 Indo –Tajikistan Joint Exercises : A
joint airborne exercise was carried out in
Tajikistan during July-August, 2003. The

exercise was conducted on the occasion of
Tajikistan Air Force raising day on August
05, 2003. The Indian participation comprised three An-32 aircraft, paratroopers
and Para Jumping Instructors (PJIs). Paratroopers of Indian Army Para Brigade and 7
Assault Brigade of Tajikistan Army participated in the exercise, which culminated in a
paradrop at Fakrabad DZ.

SPORTS AND ADVENTURE

5.55 Achievements of IAF in Sports :
Warrant Officer Ram Mehar Singh,
Ground Training Instructor [GTI(Sports)]
was conferred ‘Arjuna Award’ for excellence
in the field of Kabaddi. The President of
India presented the award on August 29,
2003. Ram Mehar Singh was also conferred ‘Bhim Award’ by Government of
Haryana in October 2001.

5.56 Skydiving : A Basic skydiving course
was conducted in June, 2003 at the Air
Force Station Hindon, where 55 personnel
successfully completed five jumps each and
earned para wings in a record time of six
days.


58


-----

### 66666

 COAST GUARD

Coast Guard Naviks on Parade at Daman


-----

###### he Coast Guard is responsible for keeping
##### T

###### India’s Exclusive Economic Zone measuring

 over 2.02 million square kilometers under

 regular surveillance.


###### he Coast Guard is responsible for keeping

 India’s Exclusive Economic Zone measuring

 over 2.02 million square kilometers under

 regular surveillance.


6.1 The Coast Guard was set up as an
Armed Force of the Union in 1978 for the
preservation and protection of our Exclusive
Economic Zone (EEZ). The Coast Guard is
responsible for keeping India’s EEZ measuring over 2.02 million square kilometers
under regular surveillance to prevent
poaching, smuggling and other illegal
activities. Besides, Coast Guard’s charter of
duties also include pollution response at
sea, search and rescue (SAR) and protection
of marine environment.

ORGANISATION

6.2 The Command and Control of the
Coast Guard is exercised by the Director
General, from the Coast Guard Headquarters at New Delhi. It has three Regional
Commands with the Regional Headquarters
at Mumbai, Chennai and Port Blair. The
entire coastline of India and the maritime
zones are divided into three Regions. The
Regions are further divided into Coast
Guard Districts, each representing a coastal


state, under a District Commander. There
are two Air Stations at Daman and Chennai
and four Air Enclaves at Goa, Mumbai,
Kolkata and Port Blair.

FORCE LEVEL

6.3 From a small beginning in 1978, the
Coast Guard has made a steady progress in
developing its force levels with regular
induction of ships and aircraft. Consequent
to commissioning of 1 Advanced Offshore
Patrol Vessel, 1 Interceptor Boat and 1
Advanced Light Helicopter during the period
November 2003 to March 31, 2004, Coast
Guard now has a total force level of 38
ships, 20 Interceptor Boats/ Crafts, 6
Hovercrafts, 24 Dornier Aircraft, 17 Chetak
Helicopters and 3 Advanced Light Helicopters.

COMMISSIONING/ACTIVATION OF
SHIPS/ AIRCRAFT/STATIONS

6.4 Following Ships/Aircraft/Stations
were Commissioned/Activated during the
period:

60


-----

a) Coast Guard Ship Durgabai NEW ACQUISITIONS
Deshmukh built by M/s Goa Shipyard

6.5 Coast Guard has made following

Limited, Goa was commissioned in the

progress on the cases of new acquisitions:
service in April 2003.

(a) Interceptor Crafts (ICs): The

b) Acquisition of 4[th] Advanced

contract has been signed on March 22,

Offshore Patrol Vessel(AOPV): 4[th]

2004 for acquisition of eight Interceptor

AOPV CGS Sagar was commissioned on

Boats at a total cost of Rs. 3.74 crores.

November 3, 2003 at Goa. This ship is

These boats are being constructed by

based at Mumbai and has strengthened

M/s Bristol Boats, Kochi and are ex
the surveillance capabilities of the Coast

pected to be delivered within two years.

Guard Region (West).

These boats will be highly advantageous

c) Interceptor Boat (IB): The 10[th]

in carrying out patrol duties in shallow

Interceptor Boat (IB) constructed by M/s

water areas near the coastline.

Anderson Marine Private Limited, Goa

(b) Advanced Offshore Patrol Vessel

was commissioned on November 15,

(AOPV): A contract has been signed

2003 and based at Goa.

with M/s Goa Shipyard Limited, Goa on

d) 3[rd] Advanced Light Helicopter

March 18, 2004 for the construction of

(ALH): The third ALH CG 853 indig
5[th] AOPV at a total cost of Rs. 228.13

enously built by M/s HAL Bangalore has

crores. This ship is capable of 24 knots

been inducted into service on March 30,

speed and will be equipped with the

2004.

state of the art systems and designed for

e) CGS Kavaratti: Coast Guard

adequate crew comfort for extended

station Kavaratti in the Lakshadweep and

operations. The ship is designed to carry

Minicoy Islands was activated on January

an Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH) and

15, 2004 by the DGCG.

will be equipped with superior fire
fighting and pollution control capabilities.
(c) Pollution Control Vessels (PCVs):
A contract has been signed with M/s
ABG Shipyard, Surat on March 31,
2004 for construction of three Pollution
Control Vessels at a total of Rs. 424.07
crores. With this, the long outstanding
requirement of dedicated and sophisticated pollution control ships to meet
disasters of oil spill in our waters will be
Coast Guard interceptor boat crossing the Pamban met effectively. These ships are the best
Viaduct


61


-----

**Map of Indian Coast Guard**


**Map of Indian Coast Guard**

Coast Guard Headquarters
Regional Headquarters
District Headquarters
CG Station
CG Air Station
Air Sqn CG
New Stations on the anvil


of their kind in the world and will equip
the Coast Guard to handle any eventuality in our waters.
(d) Fast Patrol Vessels (FPVs): Approval has been accorded for construction of five Fast Patrol Vessels by M/s
Goa Shipyard Limited, Goa at a total
cost of Rs. 222.85 crores. These are
follow-on series ships of the two FPVs
acquired during 2002-2003 and will
enhance the capabilities of Coast Guard.
These ships are capable of a maximum
speed of 35 knots and rank among the
best ships of its class world over.


ACHIEVEMENTS

6.6 (a) Operational Achievements:
During the period the following  operational achievements have been made by the
Coast Guard.:
(i) Poaching boat apprehended - 31
(ii) Smuggling Vessels apprehended - 1
(iii) Contraband confiscated - worth Rs.
7 Lakhs
(iv) Lives saved at sea  - 169
(v) Ships saved from distress  - 13
(vi) Sea pollution averted  - 5
(vii) Sea pollution combated  - 4


62


-----

(b) Ship Reporting System ‘INDSAR’:
An advanced computer aided ship
reporting system “INDSAR” for search
and rescue services has been brought
into operation by the Coast Guard with
effect from February 1, 2003 and is
being operated through the Maritime
Rescue Coordination Centre at Mumbai.
Participation of merchant vessels of
more than 300 GRT operating or
transiting through the Indian Search and
Rescue Region, in the INDSAR is
voluntary and the ships do not have to
incur any charges or additional responsibilities than already existing under Safety
of Life and Property at Sea (SOLAS) 74
and Search & Rescue (SAR) 79.
(c) National Search and Rescue Board:
The second meeting of the National
Search and Rescue Board was held on
April 22, 2003 under the chairmanship
of Director General Coast Guard. The
meeting was attended by the representatives Ministry of Shipping,
DG(Shipping), Shipping
Corporation of India, Indian

Protection of Tamil

Navy, Department of Telecom
Nadu coast against

munication, Customs, Depart
infiltration by militants

ment of Space and National

has been entrusted to

Fish Workers Forum. The

the Indian Navy and

Chairman of the Board re
the Coast Guard.

leased the first edition of the

Coast Guard ships

National Search and Rescue

and aircraft remain on

Manual and also promulgated

continuous patrol/

National Search and Rescue

surveillance duty in

Plan-2003 for providing

the Palk Strait and

guidance to the members for

Gulf of Mannar.


effective coordination of search and
rescue resources.

6.7 Operations:

(a) Operation Tasha: Protection of
Tamil Nadu coast against infiltration by
militants has been entrusted to the
Indian Navy and the Coast Guard.
Coast Guard ships and aircraft remain
on continuous patrol/surveillance duty
in the Palk Strait and Gulf of Mannar.
(b) Operation Swan: In the year
1993, consequent to the Mumbai serial
bomb blasts, Operation Swan was
launched in coordination with the Indian
Navy to prevent landing of contraband
and infiltration of illegal immigrants on
Maharashtra and Gujarat coasts. The
Coast Guard is contributing maximum in
the joint operation, as far as outer layer
and intermediate layer patrolling is
concerned.
(c) Operation Nakabandi: In order to
check the influx of refugees and to curb
the clandestine activities in Palk Bay and
Gulf of Mannar, Operation Nakabandi
was launched in August, 1996 and is
continuing.
(d) Anti-smuggling Operations: Based
on intelligence inputs from Customs and
Department of Revenue Intelligence, the
Coast Guard undertakes anti-smuggling
operations. In addition, random antismuggling patrols are also conducted.
Due to patrolling by the Coast Guard,
incidents of smuggling contraband have
come down drastically.
(e) Anti-poaching Operations: Antipoaching operations are conducted on a


63


-----

Coast Guard ship and aircraft maintaining vigil in the
Exclusive Economic Zone .

regular basis in the Indian Exclusive
Economic Zone. Due to the Coast
Guard efforts, the incidents of poaching
have reduced compared to previous
years.

(f) Search and Rescue Operations:
Distress situations at sea demand rapid
response. Coast Guard ships and aircraft
undertook various Search and Rescue
missions and were instrumental in saving
169 lives at sea. The major search and
rescue operations are as given below:
(i) The Coast Guard deployed one
Interceptor Craft IC-134 and a helicopter on April 15, 2003 for the timely
assistance in the rescue of 18 tourists
out of 23 travelling in a boat which
capsized near Anjuna beach off Goa.
The bodies of the remaining missing
tourists were also recovered.

(ii) MV Segitega Biru: An Indonesian
Merchant Vessel ‘MV Segitega Biru’
carrying 4327 tonnes of soda ash and
1000 tonnes of Dolomite cargo, on
passage from Porbandar to Chittagong
encountered rough seas due to cyclone


on May 14, 2003 and developed crack
in the hull. Subsequently, the vessel sank
off Sagar Islands on May 18, 2003.
Coordination by Coast Guard Rescue
Centres resulted in saving all 22 crew of
the vessel.

(iii) MV Yujia: The Coast Guard
Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre
(MRCC), Port Blair, coordinated rescue
of 28 Chinese crew on August 11,

2003 from a merchant vessel MV Yujia
of Xiamen Chengyi Shipping Company,
China, which was in distress north-west
of Diglipur. The vessel, with a cargo of
14,500 tonnes of chrome ore, on
passage from Paradip to Yangon, was
experiencing heavy flooding. On receiving the distress message, the Coast
Guard identified two merchant vessels
MT CHM Piru Singh and MV Chieftain II
in the vicinity to render assistance to the
distressed vessel. As the ship crew was
unable to control the flooding, all 28
crew members had to abandon the
vessel and started drifting at sea in two
life rafts and three dingies. The Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre, Port
Blair, guided both the merchant vessels
towards the survivors and finally MV
Chieftain rescued all the 28 crew.

(iv) MSV Cutty Sark: The Coast Guard
at Port Blair received a report of a motor
sailing vessel with red hull, MSV CUTTY
SARK registered at New Mangalore,
adrift seven nautical miles East of Taralit
Bay (North of Maya Bunder). The vessel
which had seven Indian crew onboard


64


-----

had an engine failure on June 15, 2003.
The vessel was located 15 nautical miles
of Taralit Bay by Coast Guard Ship Akka
Devi and towed to safety.

(v) MV Fortune Carrier: On June 10,
2003, authorities at the Kolkata Port
Trust intimated the Coast Guard Headquarters at Haldia that Belize registered
vessel “MV Fortune Carrier” was in
distress because of flooding in the

engine room. Assistance of the Coast
Guard for search and rescue was sought.
A Coast Guard hovercraft was rushed to
the site.


July 30, 2003 from Capt. Sahi of M/s.
Sahi Operations, Mumbai reporting
flooding at the rate of 70 tonnes/hr in
the engine room of “MV Vadulu Valley”
on passage from Baharin to Mumbai.
The vessel was anchored off Porbandar.
The vessel was brought to inner anchorage and with the help of commercial
divers and Coast Guard team, the
flooding was controlled.

(viii) Ditching of MI-172 near Neelam
Heera Ratna oil Fields: The Maritime
Rescue Coordination Centre (Mumbai)
of Coast Guard received a distress on
August 11, 2003 from ONGC control
room at Mumbai informing that a Helicopter with 29 persons onboard ditched
near Rig Sagar Kiran. Immediately, the
Coast Guard directed CGS Sarang with
integral helicopter and a Dornier aircraft
ex-Daman with air droppable liferafts in
search and rescue mode.  The Coast
Guard coordinated the operations for
five days.


(vi) Assistance to MV Gulf-5: Coast August 11, 2003 from ONGC control
Guard Ship Vijaya, while on patrol on room at Mumbai informing that a HeliAugust 1, 2003 received a distress copter with 29 persons onboard ditched
message from “MV Gulf-5” off near Rig Sagar Kiran. Immediately, the
Porbandar on passage from Mangolia to Coast Guard directed CGS Sarang with
Mumbai, for scrapping. The vessel had integral helicopter and a Dornier aircraft
13 crew on board. It was flooding at ex-Daman with air droppable liferafts in
the rate of 40-50 tonnes/hr. from stern search and rescue mode.  The Coast
gland and had total power failure.  All Guard coordinated the operations for
the 13 crew were evacuated and agents five days.
were directed to mobilise pumps for (ix) Crash of Pawan Hans Dauphin off
arresting the flooding. Agents also Agatti: A Pawan Hans Dauphin Helicoparranged Tug Akash from Mumbai to ter with five persons on board (including
tow the vessel. Once the two pilots) had ditched
flooding was brought about 1.3 Kms north-west

Coast Guard ships

under control, the crew off Agatti islands on

and aircraft

were transferred to the October 30, 2003. The

undertook various

Tug. The vessel was ill-fated aircraft was bound

Search and Rescue

towed to Mumbai for for Agatti after taking off

missions and were

further repairs thereafter. from Bingaram Island. On

instrumental in

(vii) Assistance to MV receipt of information from

saving 169 lives at

Vadulu Valley:  A dis- Air Traffic Control, Coast

sea.

tress call was received on Guard Ship Samar pro

65


-----

ceeded for the rescue of the Helicopter
and the crew. Maritime Rescue Subcentre (MRSC) (Kochi) and Maritime
Rescue Coordination Centre (Mumbai)
were intimated for further co-ordination.
The CG ships and aircraft conducted a
successful search and rescue operation
which resulted in saving of life of four
persons out of five present on board the
aircraft.

(x) Rescue from MSV Jal Jyoti:  Coast
Guard Maritime Rescue Coordination
Sub-Sub Centre, Okha received an
information on February 20, 2004 from
authority of Mandavi Port, Gujarat that
MSV Jal Jyoti has sunk in position about
22 nautical miles North West of Okha
on February 19, 2004. Ten crew
members had abandoned the vessel and
were adrift at sea in a life raft. Within 15
minutes of receipt of the distress message, a hovercraft H-184 sailed from
Okha and another Coast Guard Vessel
C-141, which was operating along
IMBL, was also diverted for search and
rescue. H-184 began carrying out a
planned search pattern based on the life
raft’s most probable position. The crew
of MSV Jal Jyoti was located and taken to
Okha for medical assistance.

(xi) MV Nand Kawas: Coast Guard
Regional Headquarters (East), Chennai
received a distress message from MV
Nand Kawas of ESSAR Shipping on
December 15, 2003. The vessel was
caught in the fierce tropical cyclone and


was adrift in position 50 kms off
Machillipatnam in Andhra Pradesh. 13
people onboard were preparing to
abandon the ship. On receipt of their
distress message, the Coast Guard
Maritime Rescue Centre (MRCC),
Chennai was activated. A quick assessment of approaching weather situation
vis-à-vis threat to the 13 lives was
carried out at the MRCC, Chennai.
Despite cyclonic weather, CGS Vijaya
from Chennai was dispatched immediately for search and rescue mission. All
thirteen people of MV Nand Kawas were
rescued by the Coast Guard Ship and
brought to Vishakhapatnam.

(xii) Assistance to Drifting Barge:  The
Coast Guard Regional Headquarters
(West), Mumbai received telephonic
information from M/s British Gas that
one barge has been observed adrift 40
miles west-north-west off Daman with
four to five people onboard requesting
assistance. The information was immediately passed to the Coast Guard Air
Station at Daman. CGAS (Daman)
launched a Dornier within five minutes
of the receipt of information. The
Dornier located the barge adrift with
two crew members in waters nearby.
Dornier located a tug belonging to
ONGC in the vicinity and vectored it to
pick up the crew from water. The barge
was being towed by a boat from Belapur
(Mumbai) to Alang when it parted. The
tug Malviya-VI carried the rescued crew
to Kandla.


66


-----

Coast Guard responsibilities require a wide variety of equipment.


(xiii) Assistance for Missing Vessel-MSV
Jalaliya The Coast Guard Rescue Sub
Centre (MRSC) located at Kochi, Kerala
received an information from Port
Officer, Kavaratti regarding a missing
vessel. According to the information
MSV Jalaliya had sailed from New
Mangalore on February 7, 2004 and
was expected to arrive at Kavaratti on
February 8, 2004. The vessel could not
arrive at the stipulated time and was
also not in communication. Immediately
a Search and Rescue mission was initiated by MRSC, Kochi and a Dornier was
launched on February 10, 2004. The
aircraft located her position. MSV
Jalaliya was thereafter brought to
Androth port in Karnataka under tow
by a tug engaged by port officer
Kavaratti.


OTHER OPERATIONS

6.8 Oil Spill Response Operations :
(a) The vessel “MV Segitega Biru”
sank off Sagar Islands on May 18, 2003
posing threat to the marine environment
due to the presence of 145 tonnes of
Furnace Fuel Oil (FFO) onboard the
vessel. CG ships and aircraft with Pollution Control (PC) equipment were kept
stand by to meet any eventuality. On
May 23, 2003, an oil slick was observed
near the vessel and the Coast Guard
ordered “Operation Saf Samunder” and
deployed an Advanced Offshore Patrol
Vessel (AOPV) (Coast Guard Ship
Sarang, with helo), a Dornier/Air Cushion Vessel (ACV) to monitor and neutralise the spill by spraying of dispersant.
17 Dornier sorties and five shipborne


67


-----

helicopter sorties were undertaken to
monitor and neutralise the slick by
spraying 1350 litres of Oil Spill Dispersant (OSD). The operation terminated
on May 27, 2003 after nullifying threat
to the coast.
(b) The underwater pipeline carrying
crude oil from Bombay High to Uran
was ruptured on August 10, 2003 and
the oil was leaking out. Based on the
request received from ONGC, Mumbai,
the Coast Guard Oil Spill Response
Team at Mumbai was activated and
Coast Guard Ship Samar with response
equipment and a Dornier ex-Daman with
aerial spray pod were despatched to the
site. Coast Guard Ship Vijaya in operation nearby was also diverted to augment the effort. The Coast Guard Ship
Dornier commenced surveillance of oil
spill at first light on August 11, 2003
followed by aerial spray. The Coast
Guard used more than 100 litres of oil
spill dispersant. Approximately 90% spill
was broken down in thin sheen and 10%
in isolated patches within 24-30 hrs and
naturally faded. The timely spray of
dispersant neutralised the spill quickly.

Medical Evacuation:

6.9 (a) Coast Guard Ship Veera carried
out medical evacuation on April 10,
2003 of a crew member of Merchant
Vessel Asir Saudi. The patient, an Indian
national, was suffering from cardiac
arrest and he was brought to Kochi for
further medical treatment.
(b) The Maritime Rescue Coordination


Centre (Mumbai) of the Coast Guard
received an urgent message on August
1, 2003 from the agents of Ashapur
Shipping requesting for medical evacuation of an Indian deck cadet with fractured right shin, from “Merchant Vessel
Asha Himani”. The vessel was on
passage from Jebel Ali to Tuticorin
carrying limestone and was 420 nautical
miles off Goa. The vessel was directed
to Goa and the patient was evacuated
by the Coast Guard Interceptor Boat, C134 on August 4, 2003. The cadet
was later admitted in a hospital at Goa.
6.10 Apprehension of Vessels :
(a) As a result of sea-air coordinated
operation by Coast Guard on May 4
and 5, 2003 in Andaman & Nicobar
Islands, an Indonesian fishing vessel
“KM Famili”, with five Indonesian crew
was apprehended by Coast Guard Ship
Gangadevi  on May 5, 2003 for
poaching in our Exclusive Economic
Zone. The vessel was escorted to Port
Blair for joint investigation and handed
over to local police.
(b) A Chinese fishing mother vessel
“MV Hai Feng 838”, with 20 Chinese
crew was apprehended on June 5, 2003
in the Indian Exclusive Economic Zone
for illegal mid-sea bunkering of 122
tonnes fish from Fishing Vessel Angel I
and Angle III. The vessel was brought to
Goa for legal action.

OVERSEAS DEPLOYMENT

6.11 (a) Visit of Coast Guard ships to
Bangladesh:  Coast Guard ships Vajra


68


-----

with integral helicopter and Raziya
Sultana was deployed to visit
Chittagong, Bangladesh from April 7 to
10, 2003 to develop regional cooperation and working relations between the
Coast Guard of India and Bangladesh.
The ships departed from Paradip on
April 5, 2003 and returned on April
12, 2003.
(b) Visit of Coast Guard ships to
Myanmar:  Coast Guard ships Varad
with integral helicopter and Bhikhaiji
Cama were deployed to visit Yangon,
Myanmar from May 12 to 15, 2003 to
develop regional cooperation and
working relations between Indian Coast
Guard and Myanmar maritime Law
Enforcement Agencies. The ships
departed Port Blair on May 10, 2003
and returned on May 16, 2003.
(c) Indo-Japan Coast Guard Joint
Exercise:Coast Guard Ship Sangram with
Integral helicopter was deployed to visit
Japan to participate in the fourth IndoJapan Coast Guard joint exercise from
September 16 to 20, 2003. During the
onward passage the ship
visited Manila, Philippines

The Government from September 7 to 11,
has now approved 2003 for logistic replenishfree ration and ment as well as to interact
equalized the ration with the Maritime Law Enscale of enrolled forcement agencies of PhilipCoast Guard pines. The ship reached Kobe,
personnel at par Japan on September 16,
with naval sailors. 2003. A joint exercise on

Maritime Search and Rescue


was conducted on September 18, 2003
wherein apart from Coast Guard Ship
Sangram, 8 Japan Coast Guard ships
participated. During the return passage
Sangram visited Ho-Chi-Minh City,
Vietnam for replenishment of logistics
and interact with their Maritime Law
Enforcement Agencies.
(d) CGS Varaha and CGS Kanaklata
Barua visited Port Belawan, Indonesia
from December 20 to 22, 2003. The
visit was planned to develop working
relationship in the fields of maritime
search and rescue, pollution response
and anti-piracy efforts with the maritime
law enforcement agencies of Indonesia.
The visit of the ships was overseen by
the commander, Coast Guard Region
Andaman & Nicobar.
(e) Two Coast Guard ships visited
Mauritius from January 26-29, 2004 for
joint exercise with Mauritius Maritime
Law Enforcement Agencies.
(f) Coast Guard Ships CGS Varuna
with integral helicopter, CGS Sarojini
Naidu and one Dornier were deployed
to Male (Maldives) for the Seventh IndoMaldives Coast Guard Joint Exercise –
Dosti VII scheduled at/off Male from
February 23-27, 2004. The Director
General Coast Guard was present at
Male during the period of the exercise.

GENERAL ACHIEVEMENTS

6.12 Government has approved the
following allowance to the Coast Guard
Officers and Enrolled Personnel:

69


-----

(a) Sea Duty Allowance: The Government has approved Sea Duty Allowance in line with Navy at the following
rates:

(b) Ration Allowance:  Ration was
only entitled to the enrolled personnel at
all times and to officers when posted
onboard ship during  sailing. However,
enrolled personnel of Coast Guard were
entitled to 85% of the naval sailors
ration scale. The Government has now
approved free ration and equalized the
ration scale of enrolled personnel at par
with naval sailors. Officers posted
onboard ship and establishment are also
entitled for free ration at par with naval
officers ration scales.


70


-----

### 77777

 DEFENCE PRODUCTION

Launching of ‘INS Shivalik’ at the Mazagon Docks


-----

###### he vision of the Department of Defence
##### T

###### Production is to make India’s defence industry

 globally competitive while ensuring self-reliance in

 key areas.


###### he vision of the Department of Defence

 Production is to make India’s defence industry

 globally competitive while ensuring self-reliance in


7.1 The Department of Defence Production was set up in 1962, in the aftermath
of the Chinese aggression, with a view to
strengthen the indigenous defence production capability. In 1965, a separate Department of Defence Supplies was formed to tap
the potential of the Indian industry for
supplementing the defence production
effort. The two departments were subsequently merged in 1984 into a unified
Department of Defence Production and
Supplies. From January 2004, the department has been renamed as the Department
of Defence Production.
7.2 The vision of the Department is to
make India’s defence industry globally
competitive while ensuring self-reliance in
key areas of defence production. The immediate objectives of the Department are to:

� Equip the armed forces timely, with a
wide range of quality products at competitive prices;
� Create a diversified, self-reliant and


self-sufficient production base through
indigenisation, involvement of the
private sector, co-development and coproduction through international cooperation where required;
� Diversify the customer base with
emphasis on growth of exports.
7.3 To achieve these objectives, the
Department of Defence Production oversees
the following:
i. 39 Ordnance Factories—one more
Ordnance Factory is being set up at
Nalanda (Bihar)—under the Ordnance
Factory Board (OFB);
ii. 8 Defence Public Sector Undertakings
(DPSUs):

� Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)
� Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL)
� Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML)
� Mazagon Dock Ltd (MDL)
� Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL)
� Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited (GRSE)


72


-----

Total sales of Defence Public Sector Undertakings

� Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL)
� Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited
(MIDHANI)
iii. Quality Assurance (except naval armament):
� Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA)
� Directorate General of Aeronautical
Quality Assurance (DGAQA)
iv. Directorate of Standardisation;
v. Directorate of Planning and Coordination;
vi. Defence Exhibition Organisation (DEO)
vii. Indigenisation;
viii.Private Sector Participation in Defence
Production;
ix. Defence Production Board

ORDNANCE FACTORIES

7.4 The Indian Ordnance Factories
(OFs) organisation has a 200-year old
history. Starting with the first factory in
1801 at Cossipore, near Kolkata, the 40th
factory is presently being set up with stateof-the-art technology at Nalanda, Bihar.
These factories are geographically distrib

uted at 25 different locations in the country.
The pre-independence factories had capacities not only for the production of finished
stores, but also for the supply of basic and
intermediate materials, for which indigenous
industrial infrastructure in the civil sector
was then inadequate. With the gradual
development of civil industrial infrastructure,
both in the public and private sectors, the
factories set up after independence progressively did away with the concept of backward
integration. The emphasis shifted from
production of basic, intermediate inputs to
production of finished stores by drawing
upon supplies from the civil sector for raw
materials, components and semi-finished
goods to the extent practicable.
7.5 The 39 Ordnance Factories form a
strategic and dedicated production base for
both lethal and non-lethal defence stores.
They form an integrated base for the indigenous production of defence hardware and
equipment that include highly specialized,
complex and large variety of ammunition and
explosives, weapons vehicles and


73


-----

The Main Battle Tank Arjun manufactured at Avadi

equipments, materials and components,
armoured vehicles and ordnance equipment.
They also produce rockets, grenades, mines,
transport vehicles, optical and fire control
systems, bridges, parachutes, clothing and
personal equipment for the armed forces.
7.6 Products for the Defence Forces
have to be safe, reliable, consistent and
capable of operating under varying terrains
as well as under extreme climatic conditions.
Accordingly, the required technologies cover
a wide spectrum of engineering, metallurgy,
chemical, textile, leather and optical areas,
they must ensure high quality and productivity, apart from meeting the important objective of self-reliance. The Ordnance Factories
also fulfill certain requirements of the
paramilitary and police forces for arms,
ammunition, clothing and equipment
thereby ensuring that their capacity is
optimally utilized, not only by securing work
from the defence forces, but also by diversification into non-defence customers and by
exports.


7.7 Organisation: The Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) was set up in 1979 to
impart greater flexibility and efficiency.
Ordnance Factories are divided into operating divisions, based on the main products/
technologies employed. The factories are
grouped into 5 divisions as follows:

i. Ammunition & Explosives - 10 Factories

ii. Weapons, Vehicles & Equipment- 10

Factories

iii.Materials & Components - 9 Factories

iv. Armoured Vehicles  - 5 Factories

v. Ordnance & Equipment Group-5 Factories

7.8 A member of the Board/Additional
DGOF heads each of the above group of
factories. The four remaining Members of
the Ordnance Factory Board are responsible
for staff functions, viz. Personnel, Finance,
Planning & Material Management, Projects
& Engineering and Technical Services. A
Special Ordnance Factory Board has been
constituted by the Government with representation from the Army, Defence Research
& Development Organisation and Ministry


74


-----

of Defence. The Special Board meetings are
held periodically to provide appropriate
inputs and perspectives for planning resources, upgrading technology of products
and process and on various other critical
issues necessary for the efficient functioning
of OFB.

7.9 Product Profile and Technology:
The Ordnance Factories continuously
upgrade their products and the manufacturing technologies to meet the emerging
needs of the Defence Forces. They produce
a wide range of arms and ammunitions for
the Infantry, Artillery, Air Defence Artillery
and Armoured Corps of the Army. Ordnance
Factories produce ammunition for Navy and
Air Force and are now taking up indigenous
development of Naval armaments. The
factories produce Military Transport Vehicles, Infantry Combat Vehicles, Armoured
Vehicles, Optical and Opto-electronic
Instruments, summer & winter uniforms,
Parachutes, miscellaneous Leather Goods
and General Stores. The product profile of
the Ordnance Factories is as follows:


7.10 Ammunition & Explosive:  Artillery
Ammunition 155, 130 & 105mm calibre, T72 Tank ammunition FSAPDS/HE/HEAT,
medium calibre and small calibre ammunition
7.11 Armoured vehicles : T-90 and T-72
Tank, MBT Arjun, BMP-II
7.12 ‘B’ Vehicles: Stallion 7.5 T and
LPTA 2.5 T
7.13 Weapons : Artillery Guns, Mortars,
Insas Rifles and LMG, medium calibre
weapons, Sporting Rifles, Pistols, Revolvers
7.14 Ordnance Equipment : Clothing,
General Stores, Military Uniforms, Blankets,
Boots, Extreme climate clothing
7.15 Growth: The sales of the Ordnance
Factories have been steadily growing over
the years. A record total sale of Rs.6641
crore was achieved during 2003-2004
representing an increase of about 116% in a
span of six years (Rs.3071 crore in 199798).
7.16 In 2004-05, the sales of Ordnance
Factories are expected to be higher at about
Rs. 6800 crore. The Ordnance Factories


T-90 Tank manufactured at Heavy Vehicles Factory, Avadi is a new addition to the Armoured Corps.

75


-----

have endeavored to keep pace

A record total sale of

with the development in arms,

Rs. 6641 crore was

ammunition and other equip
achieved in 2003-04

ment by updating/upgrading

by the Ordnance

technology either through the

Factories, representing

Defence Research and Devel
an increase of about

opment Organisation or

116% in a span of six

through the transfer of tech
years.

nology (TOT) route.
7.17The Ordinanace Factories
try to achieve optimum capacity utilization
only by securing increased workload from
the Defence Forces but also through sustained efforts in diversification to nondefence customers and exports. Similarly,
thrust is also being given to strengthen the
in-house R&D capability aimed at product
and process development.
7.18 The Ordnance Factories have also
steadily increased their sales to non-defence
customers, including exports. During 20032004, 15% (Rs 992 crore) of the total sales
of the Ordnance Factories were to nondefence customers. This represents a 13.5%
growth over the previous years’ sales to
non-defence customers (Rs 874 crore). In
2004-2005, the sales to non-defence
customers are expected to be higher at
about Rs.1015 crore.
7.19 Significant Achievements : Some of
the significant achievements of the Ordnance
Factories in last few years have been as
follows:(i) All Ordnance Factories have
switched over to Quality Management
Systems as per the new version of ISO9001: 2000. The IS/ISO-9001: 2000


Quality System is an upgraded version of
IS/ISO 9000:1994 and gives special
emphasis on customer satisfaction and
continued improvement in Quality and
Process Control.
(ii)   Ordnance Factory, Ambajhari
(OFAJ) has indigenised extruded profiles
required for Ramp Girder for KM Bridge
(Army item) successfully. The quality of
the Profile has been found to be at par
with the imported Profiles and 55 Nos.
of such Profiles have been used to
produce Ramp Girders.
(iii) Opto Electronics Factory
Dehradun (OLF), took up the job of
manufacturing of Aspheric Lens and
Cylindrical Lens required for metal
finishing by CO2 Laser System. Both
types of Lens have been successfully
manufactured and supplied, thereby
establishing an indigenous source for
KW Class Laser Optics.
(iv) Ordnance Factory Ambajhari
(OFAJ) has achieved the unique distinction of manufacturing one set of Manually Launched Assault Bridge Military
Load Class–60 (MLAB-MLC-60). The
Bridge has been manufactured by using
a lightweight High Strength Aluminum
Alloy – RDE – 40 and issued to the
Indian Army.
(v) The Tungsten Heavy Alloy Granules for use of main rotor blades of the
Advanced Light Helicopter, were developed and manufactured for the first time
at the Heavy Alloy Penetrator Project,
Tiruchirapalli (HAPP) through the


76


-----

powder metallurgy route by using endcutting pieces, which arises as waste
during production of 125 mm Fin
Stabilized Armour Penetrating Discarding Sabot (FSAPDS) Tungsten heavy
alloy blank.
(vi) Ordnance Factory, Medak (OFPM)
has successfully modernized BMP-II K to
BMP-II M in association with KBP Tula,
Russia. The system was integrated by
modifying an existing BMP Turret,
Missile System, Main Gun, Grenade
Launcher and Secondary Weapon are
the main features of modernized BMP–II
M vis-à-vis the existing BMP–K.
(vii) Cordite Factory, Aruvankadu (CFA)
has developed/productionised advanced
casting powder for Rocket Propellant for
making bigger rocket grains for Akash
Booster, containing sensitive ingredients
like aluminum powder (20%) and ammonium perchlorate (30%) which have been
extruded safely for the first time in CFA
for supply to HEMRL, Pune against their
order.
(viii) Ordnance Factory, Nalanda is a
green field project conceived for manufacture of Propellant charges for 155
mm weapon systems at Rajgir in Nalanda
district of Bihar. An area of 2898.75
acres out of total 2962.58 acres required has been acquired and civil works
have commenced at the site. Action to
position the plant and machinery is also
progressing.
(ix) The production of .32" Revolver
has been increased substantially to a


level of 20,000. To enhance customer
satisfaction, an after-sales service centre
has been planned for operation at the
Ordnance Cable Factory, Chandigarh.
7.20 Self Certification : Continuing their
commitment to quality, and in line with the
practices prevailing in industry, both within
and outside the country, the Ordnance
Factories have started self-certification since
April 2002, thereby, standing guarantee to
the products supplied by them to the Defence Forces. Presently, self-certification
extends to seven fast moving Clothing and
General Store items accounting for about
20% of the turnover of the Ordnance Equipment Group of factories. In course of time,
many more items will be covered under selfcertification.

7.21 In-house Research and Development : In-house Research and Development
activities towards product and process
improvements are receiving due attention in
the Ordnance Factories. Techniques of solid
modeling and sensitivity analysis are adopted
to meet the design needs of defence stores.
Some of the major achievements in the field
of in-house R&D are: a) Development of
Ordnance 155 mm FH Gun System; b)
Development of Shell for illuminating
M1A19 Naschem; c) Development of
components/chemicals for shell155 mm
illuminating (24km) M1A1; d)
Productionisation of 155 mm ERFB Shell
based on Naschem; e) DRDO development Projects such as Tail Fuze FBT-3I for
250 kg. HSLD Bomb, Multi Barrel Rocket
System (PINAKA), 120 mm HESH Ammuni

77


-----

tion for MBT Arjun, 120 mm

Arms and

FSAPDS Ammunition for

ammunition, weapon

MBT Arjun and Heavy De
spares, chemicals

struction Charge and Charge

and explosives,

Linear Cutting.

leather and clothing

7.22Diversification into Civil

items have been

Trade and Exports : Ordnance

exported by

Factories produce a large

Ordnance Factories

variety of chemicals for com
to thirty countries.

mercial use by industries in

the civil sector. They also
manufacture a wide range of
textiles, leather goods and sporting arms
and ammunition for the civil sector. The
sales towards civil trade during 2003-2004
were Rs. 278 crore as compared to Rs. 266
crore in the preceding year, which represents
a growth of 4.5%. The production of .32"
Revolvers has been substantially increased to
20,000 during 2003-2004. Similarly, .32"
Pistols are available off the shelf. Sporting
arms and ammunition have been a major
contributor to civil trade sales. A new
sporting weapon .3006" Rifle is also being
developed.


7.23 Arms & Ammunition, Weapon
Spares, Chemicals & Explosives, Leather and
Clothing items have been exported by
Ordnance Factories to thirty countries
worldwide. Ordnance Factories are making
vigorous marketing efforts to boost exports
by participating in international exhibitions,
product promotion through advertisements
in the international media, interaction with
visiting delegations from target countries,
agents and customer’s representatives, both
in India and abroad. Product catalogue


Compact Discs (CDs) have been developed
to enable customers immediate access to
the desired information. Online Internet ID
has been set up to cut down response time
to a few hours.

7.24 The major items exported are Rifle
5.56 mm and Mine Protected Vehicle to
Nepal and Bhutan, Cartridge Case 5.56 mm
to USA, Tetryl to Germany and Sights (T72) to Poland. To boost exports further, the

following measures have been taken:
(i) Joint Projects for higher-end
products and services required by the
international market and establishing
them within a short lead-time through
synergy of competence of the partner(s)
involved;
(ii) Building up brand equity by
association with leading partners;
(iii) Resorting to strategic pricing
based on marginal costing for improving
cost competitiveness;
(iv) Procedural simplification to improve responsiveness.
7.25 Modernisation of Ordnance Factories: A modernisation plan for all Ordnance
Factories has been finalized. The plan
envisages upgrading technology, augmenting
capacities and replacement of old/obsolete
plant and machinery with those having stateof-the-art technology. Modernisation and
automation of the infrastructure in the
Ordnance Factories is being done to meet
the quantitative and qualitative demands of
the end products. The product technology,
as well as the process requirements and
capabilities, are kept in mind during the


78


-----

process of modernisation. The technologies
and machines being planned are flexible so
as to cater to a wide range of products.
During the Tenth Plan period, an investment
of Rs. 1804 crore is envisaged for modernisation. During 2003-04 Rs. 250 crore have
been invested for the modernisation of the
Ordnance Factories.
7.26 Energy Conservation: Efforts aimed
at energy conservation are a continuous
process in the Ordnance Factories. The
conservation measures encompass all
spheres of activities. Consequent to the
energy conservation measures adopted by
the Ordnance Factories, there has been a
reduction in the cost of energy consumption
and cost of production. Economy in energy
consumption is achieved through improved
efficiency, better capacity utilization and by
upgrading technology.
7.27 Safety : The safety policy was
reviewed during 1996 to bring in stringent
safety standards, safety consciousness and
vigilance in the Ordnance Factories. The
safety manuals and standing
instructions supplement safety

Computerized

policies. A disaster manage
Design Centers are

ment plan has been also

being set up in the

prepared for contingent

Ordnance Factories

measures and Safety Commit
to modernise their

tees have been constituted at

drawing and design

central and shop level. Acci
offices

dent prone and hazardous
areas have been given special
attention.
7.28 A three-tier safety audit and monitoring system ensures strict implementation
of the laid down safety norms. Monthly


safety audits are carried out at level-I by the
factory. At level-II a team of officers from
other factories carry out safety audit on a
half-yearly basis. Finally, at Level-III the
Regional Controllerate of Safety (RCS)
carries out the audit. Rectification of the
deviations reported in the audit is closely
monitored by the respective RCS and at the
Corporate level by the Controller of Safety
(COS).
7.29 Computerisation in Ordnance
Factories : Information Technology (IT) is
being used as an instrument for providing
Management Information and Decision
Support Systems at appropriate levels,
improvement of design capabilities, improvement in accounting and analysis and for
reduction in paper work. The present
infrastructure consists of independent SCOUnix based servers at each Ordnance
Factory with INFORMIX RDBMS. Custom
built on-line Production Planning Control
System, Personal Information System and
Payroll systems are operational at each
Ordnance Factory. The integrated on-line
MIS will provide information on Standard
Management Ratios, Key Performance
Indices and Control Parameters for efficient
and effective management.
7.30 The computerized Design centers
are being set up in the Ordnance Factories
to modernise their drawing and design
offices to enhance the design and development capabilities and to increase the efficiency in the area of product design and
development. The software includes drafting software, high-end modeling software
and analysis software.


79


-----

7.31 Quality Management: Implementation of Total Quality Management (TQM)
concepts has been given a major thrust in all
Ordnance Factories. Efforts are being made
towards continuous improvement as per
guidelines of ISO–9004: 2000 to meet the
needs and expectations of the end users.
7.32 The quality of products in the
Ordnance Factories are monitored through
various mechanisms that include working to
pre-determined process schedules and
quality plans, introduction of Statistical
Process Control—Statistical Quality Control
techniques for controlling the processes/
products towards improving the products
and minimizing the rejection in processes,
testing in Ordnance Factory Laboratories,
Internal Quality Audits and monthly interaction meetings with Quality Assurance establishments. The Quality enhancement drive
launched by the Ordnance Factories Board
has been extended to grass root level teams
to analyse the defects and take remedial
measures for their elimination in the manufacturing process itself.
7.33 Customer Satisfaction:

Teams from the To get feedback from customOrdnance Factories ers, teams from the Ordnance
regularly visit depots Factories regularly visit depots
and forward areas to and forward areas to attend to
attend to customer customer complaints, undercomplaints, and stand the problems faced by
understand the the users and their expectaproblems faced by tions from the product. Joint
the users teams comprising officers from

the Ordnance Factories Board
and the Directorate General Quality Assurance (DGQA) also visit forward areas to get


user feedback to improve quality.
7.34 Pollution Control : The pollution control activities in the Ordnance
Factories are given due importance. The
factories obtain statutory consent orders
from the respective State Pollution Control
Boards for discharge of liquid effluents and
gaseous emissions and have fully operational
Effluent Treatment Plants. The factories also
submit annual Environmental Statements to
the respective State Pollution Control
Boards in the specified format within the
stipulated time frame.
7.35 Afforestation: In line with the
Government policy for protection of the
environment, afforestation is undertaken in
all the Ordnance Factories as an ongoing
process. 30,00,000 new samplings were
planted during the year 2003-04.
7.36 Rajbhasha: Progressive use of Hindi
is given due importance in the Ordnance
Factories. Separate Official Language Implementation Committees (OLICs) are functioning at each unit. Quarterly meetings are
being held regularly to review the progress
of Rajbhasha in various units as well as the
Ordnance Factory Board.
7.37 Hindi Workshops were organized
for employees in the OFB Headquarters
during the year. The objective of the workshops is to provide an opportunity to the
participants to understand the use of Hindi
in day-to-day office work. Facilities for Hindi
Praveen and Pragya and Hindi Typewriting/
Stenography to the officers/employees are
available at all offices/factories. Adequate
manual/electronic typewriters are available at
all units. Efforts are being made to provide


80


-----

bilingual software on most of the computers.
Most of the Factories bring out their own
publications in Hindi.
7.38 Welfare Schemes for the benefit of
persons with disabilities: A reservation of
3% is provided to the physically challenged
persons. This reservation is equally distributed between persons for various categories
of disabilities, for whom the posts have been
identified as suitable. Further, age relaxation
for recruitment of persons under such
category is also provided as per rules.
7.39 Physically challenged persons
belonging to Group ‘C’ and Group ‘D’
posts, as far as possible, are given posting
near their native places. Request for transfer
to or near their native places are also given
preference in the case of such employees.
7.40 Productivity Bonus : The formula
for payment of Productivity Linked Bonus
(PLB) to civilian employees of Defence
Production Establishments has been revised.
Based on the revised formula, PLB equivalent to 41 days wages was paid to the
eligible employees for the year 2003-2004.

‘Kiran’ aircraft developed by HAL being flown by ‘Surya
Kiran’ aerobatics team.


DEFENCE PUBLIC SECTOR
UNDERTAKINGS

HINDUSTAN AERONAUTICS LIMITED
7.41 Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
(HAL) was formed in October 1964 by
merging of Hindustan Aircraft Limited and
Aeronautics India Limited. The company has
16 divisions located in six states.
7.42 HAL has evolved into a large Aeronautics Complex. It has built up compre
hensive skills in design, manufacture and
overhaul of Fighters, Trainers, Helicopters,
Transport Aircraft, Engines, Avionics and
System Equipment. Its product include 10
types of Aircraft and Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH), Dhruv, from in-house Research and Development and 13 types by
licence production inclusive of 8 types of
Aero Engines and over 1000 items of
Aircraft System Equipment (Avionics, Mechanical and Electrical).

7.43 HAL’s major supplies/services are to
the IAF, the Navy, the Army, the Coast
Guard and the BSF. Transport aircraft and
helicopters have been supplied to commercial airlines as well as to State Governments.
The Company also supports the Space
Vehicle programme of Indian Space Research
Organisation (ISRO) and participates in the
missile development and manufacture
programmes.

7.44 The HAL has developed into a large
multi-disciplinary aeronautical complex. In
order to meet the challenges of the 21[st]

century, the company has redefined its
mission as follows: “To become a globally
competitive Aerospace industry while


81


-----

working as an instrument for

HAL has undertaken

achieving self-reliance in

several new

design, manufacture and

projects, such as

maintenance of Aerospace

series Production of

Defence equipment and

Advanced Light

diversifying to related areas,

Helicopter(ALH)

managing the business on

Dhruv, Licence

commercial lines in a climate

Production of SU
of growing professional

30MKI, Development

competence.”

of Intermediate Jet

7.45Significant achievements:

Trainer and Limited

(i) The Company recorded

Series Production of

an all time high turnover and

Light Combat

profit before tax of Rs. 3120

Aircraft.

crore and Rs.433 crore
respectively during the year
2002-2003.
(ii) HAL has undertaken several new
projects, such as Series Production of
Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH) Dhruv,
Licence Production of SU-30MKI,
Development of Intermediate Jet Trainer
(IJT) and Limited Series Production of
Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) apart from
several upgrade programmes such as
MiG-21 BIS, MiG-27M, Jaguar and
HS-748.
(iii) The indigenously developed
Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH), Dhruv
participated in the Paris Air show held in
June 2003. It received professional
acclaim and positive indications for
being suitable for global market. The
civil variant of the ALH received DGCA
certification in October 2003.
(iv) HAL being a prime contractor for
the Design and Development of Light
Combat Aircraft has contributed by way


of structural design, systems design and
integration, development of prototype
and also design and development of a
large number of electrical hydro-mechanical and advanced avionics items.
While the first flight of indigenously
designed Technology Demonstrator-I
(TD-I) of LCA took place in 2002, the
prototype Vehicle-I (PV-I) of LCA, the
first all-composite aircraft made its
maiden flight in November 2003. TD-I
and TD-II have achieved supersonic
speed during test flights.
(v) HAL has developed a new Intermediate Jet Trainer aircraft (HJT36) as a
replacement to the Kiran stage II trainer,
which has better performance and
maneuverability with lesser weight and
lower operating cost and modern systems and avionics. The first flight of the
first prototype was successfully carried
out in March 2003.
(vi) The HAL has undertaken the
upgradation of Jaguar aircraft for integration of latest avionics systems for
improving navigation and weapon aiming
performance.
(vii) HAL achieved exports of
Rs.215.21 crore for the financial year
2003-2004 which is an all time high. In
order to give a further boost to exports,
an MOU was signed with IAI, Israel for
joint marketing of ALH fitted with Stateof-the-art IAI avionics for the international market. HAL signed a contract
with SNECMA Moteurs, France for
supply of forgings, rolled rings and
precision blade forging to SNECMA.


82


-----

HAL also signed a contract with M/s Roll
Royce, UK for supply of steel rolled
rings for Rolls Royce’s engine programme. A contract has been signed in
November 2003 with Mauritius Coast
Guard for supply of one DO-228
aircraft in Maritime role.
7.46 Popularising use of Hindi for Official
Purposes: To popularize the use of Hindi for
official purposes, training was imparted to
employees. As on 30 June 2003, the
percentage of employees having working
knowledge of Hindi stood at 85% and typists
having knowledge of Hindi Typing increased
to 86%.
7.47 Schemes for the benefit of the
persons with disabilities: HAL is committed
to follow the provisions of the Persons with
Disabilities (Equal opportunities, Protection
of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995
in order to enable the persons with disabilities to avail the benefits of reservation.
Suitable posts have been identified for
employment of persons with disabilities in
Category A, B, C, & D based on the nature
of work carried out in HAL.
7.49 In addition, HAL on its own volition
has instituted a number of schemes for persons
with disabilities such as enhanced transport
allowance to employees who are blind and
orthopaedically handicapped and special casual
leave for disabled Ex-servicemen requiring
artificial limb replacement/treatment.
7.50 ‘Vatsalya’ a school for persons
suffering from Cerebral Palsy is supported
through contributions from the HAL employees and the annual grants and infrastructure facilities provided by the company.


BHARAT ELECTRONICS LIMITED (BEL)

7.51 Bharat Electronics Limited, established in 1954 with its corporate office at
Bangalore, has nine units in the country. It
is engaged in the design, development and
manufacture of sophisticated state-of-the-art
electronics equipment/components for the
use of defence services, para-military organizations and other governmental users
like All India Radio, Doordarshan, Department of Telecommunications, Police Wireless and Meteorological Department. BEL is
focusing on Research and Development
within the company to generate business for
the company using the state-of-the-art
manufacturing and testing facilities available.
On line computerization for materials
management, state-of-the-art test facilities,
facilities for carrying out environment and
reliability checks, electro-magnetic Interference/Electro Magnetic Compatibility Testing
facility, antenna testing facility, back-up
support from standardisation, technical
information and documentation, and computer-aided design and manufacture have
made BEL a modern professional electronics
company.

7.52 Significant achievements:

(i) BEL is playing a significant role in
the civilian ‘Professional Electronics’
sector of the country particularly for the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
by supplying it with bulk of its
infrastructural requirements for Radio
and TV Broadcasting, like Studio Equipment, Transmitters, Satellite Uplinks, OB
Vans etc.


83


-----

(ii) BEL has executed a

BEL is engaged in

Satellite Communication

the design,

System Network for Andhra

development and

Pradesh covering the entire

manufacture of

state and is in the process of

sophisticated

executing a Satellite System

electronics

Network for the police in the

equipment/

entire country.

components for the

(iii) BEL pioneered the

use of defence

growth of the electronic

services, para
‘Components’ industry in the

military organizations

country by setting up the

and other

manufacture of electron

governmental users.

tubes [TV picture tubes for
the consumer electronics
industry, transmitting tubes for All India
Radio/Doordarshan and the Industrial
needs, Microwave Tubes, X-Ray Tubes,
Vacuum Interrupters ], Semiconductor
Devices, Integrated Circuits, Hybrid
Micro Circuits, Liquid Crystal Displays,
Solar Cells and systems, passive components like Crystals & Capacitors etc.
(iv) BEL has indigenously developed
the Short Range version which has been
taken up for production (2003-2004).
(v) Some Units/Divisions of BEL have
got the ISO 9001:2000 (Upgraded
version of ISO 9001:1994) certification.
(vi) Electronic Voting Machines were
customized and successfully demonstrated
in Singapore and Mauritius by BEL.
(vii) The company continues its endeavour in sustaining and improving the
standards of quality through continuous
training and TORQUE (Total Organisational Quality Enhancement), Quality
Circles (QCCs), Six Sigma programs.


(viii) BEL has played an important role
in the modernisation of the Airports
through supply of Primary/Secondary
Surveillance Radars to the Airports
Authority of India. Some of the other
recent additions to BEL’s product-mix in
the Civil Sector include Integrated Fish
Finder and Navigation Guidance System,
Solar Traffic Signals, Electronic Voting
Machine [EVM] and Simputer.

7.53 Schemes for disabled : Physically
challenged employees have been given
preference while allotting company accommodation and they have been allotted
quarters on the ground floor. Management
has granted grace time for registering
attendance for IN/OUT punch ranging from
5 to 15 minutes depending upon nature /
extent of handicap, on a case-to-case basis
to these employees. Special conveyance
allowance is also being paid to the persons
with disabilities. Hearing aid assistance,
foldable walking sticks, calipers with special
shoes, wheel chairs and special toilets have
been provided to such employees, wherever
necessary. They have been encouraged for
sports and cultural activities. An amount of
Rs.1,67,073/- has been allocated under the
schemes for the benefit of the persons with
disabilities. 210 persons were benefited by
the introduction of these schemes.

BHARAT EARTH MOVERS LIMITED
(BEML)

7.54 Bharat Earth Movers Limited
(BEML) was established in May 1964 and
commenced its operations from January
1965. With the disinvestments of shares,


84


-----

Bridging equipment manufactured by Bharat Earth Movers

Government of India is still the major
shareholder in the company with a holding
of over 61.23% of equity shares as of end
March 2004.
7.55 BEML’s manufacturing divisions are
located at Bangalore, Kolar Gold Fields
(KGF) and Mysore. All the production units
are fully equipped with necessary general
purpose machines and special purpose
machines like heavy duty lathes, Computer
Numerically Controlled machines (CNC
machines), CNC bevel generating systems, flexible manufacturing system, heavy and

Bharat Earth Movers

large size fabrication facility,

Limited achieved a

welding robots, etc., to

sales turnover of Rs.

manufacture transmission and

1770.61 crore during

axles, Hydraulic control valves,

the financial year

cylinders and pumps, diesel

2003-04, as

engines, railway coaches, rail

compared to 1681.17

buses, railway wagons, Alter
crore during the

nating Current Electrical

preceding year.

Multiple Units(ACEMUs),
heavy duty all terrain multi


axle trucks, earth moving machinery and
Tracked military vehicles like armoured
recovery vehicles, self propelled gun, tanks
and other military vehicles like heavy recovery vehicles, bridge laying tank, truck based
mobile bridge system, mounted gun system
on truck chassis and rocket launcher systems.

7.56 Significant achievements:
(i) The Company has successfully
developed the proto type BH100
Dumper, which was displayed in the
World Mining Congress in November,
2003, at New Delhi.
(ii) BEML has launched Disaster
management equipment like the Radio
Control Dozer, developed with the
financial assistance of M/s Technology
Information Forecasting and Assessment
Council (TIFAC).
(iii) BEML manufactured high-speed
stainless steel metro coaches for Delhi
Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC), in
collaborations with M/s ROTEM of
South Africa.
(iv) BEML supplied standard EM
equipment like Dozers, Loaders, Motor
Graders, to the Border Road Organisation and other agencies.
(v) The Company, Bharat Arth Movers
Limited, achieved a sales turnover of
Rs.1770.61 crore during the financial year
2003-2004, as compared to 1681.17
crore during the preceding year.
(vi) The Company’s Profit Before Tax
(PBT) during 2003-2004 stood at
Rs.52.50 crore as compared to
Rs.37.87 crore during the previous year.


85


-----

MAZAGON DOCK LIMITED (MDL)

5.57 Mazagon Dock Limited was taken
over by Government of India in May 1960.
It is a leading shipyard in the country and
builds a variety of ships for the defence and
civil sectors. Its product range includes,
destroyers, frigates, missile boats, corvettes,
submarines and patrol vessels for the defence sector and merchant vessels, dredgers
for the civil sector. MDL has also diversified
its product range to cater to the needs of


the oil exploration sector by producing and
installing well head platforms of the Oil and
Natural Gas Corporation.

7.58 Significant achievements:
(i) First Ship of Project 17 ‘Shivalik’
was launched in April, 2003.
(ii) Keel of first ship of P-15A and
third ship of P-17 were laid on 26[th]

September 2003 and 30[th] September
2003 respectively.
(iii) 4[th] Floating Border Out Port (Seema


Mazagon Dock manufactures modern ships for the Indian Navy and Coast Guard

86


-----

Prahari Bajrang) delivered to Border
Security Force (BSF) alongwith two of Fast
Patrol Boats in October, 2003.
7.59 Schemes for disabled : The various
guidelines issued by the Government from
time to time on employment for persons
with disabilities are being followed. At
present, there are 46 such employees on the
rolls of the Company in Group C & D in the
identified posts reserved for persons with
disabilities. In Group A & B there are six
such employees.

GOA SHIPYARD LIMITED (GSL)

7.60 Goa Shipyard Limited was taken
over by the Government of India in 1967 as
a Public Sector Undertaking under the
Ministry of Defence. The company builds a
variety of medium size, special purpose
ships. Its product range includes survey
vessels, missile boats, patrol vessels, offshore supply vessels, oil tankers, passenger
ferries, tugs and barges.
7.61 Significant achievements :
(i) One Fast Patrol Vessel was delivered to the Indian Coast Guard in April
2003.
(ii) The Company has augmented its
ship repair facilities by renovating and
modernising two slipways with a view to
obtain large repair and shipbuilding
orders for marine and naval vessels.
(iii) The Company has been awarded
ISO 9001 Certification for ‘Design,
Construction and Repair of various types
of ships and crafts’. The Company is also
in the process of transition to the requirements of ISO 9001-2000 standards.


(iv) The Company has embarked on an
export promotion drive through bidding
for global tenders and participating
abroad in exhibitions, seminars and
presentations relating to shipbuilding
capacities of the Company.
(v) One Advanced Offshore Patrol
Vessels was delivered to Indian Coast
Guard in October 2003.
(vi) The company delivered an Extra
Fast Attack Craft to the Indian navy in
January 2004, six months ahead of the
schedule.

GARDEN REACH SHIPBUILDERS AND
ENGINEERS LIMITED (GRSE)

7.62 Garden Reach Shipbuilders and
Engineers Ltd was acquired by the Government of India in 1960 as a public sector
undertaking under the Ministry of Defence.
The company builds and repairs warships
and auxiliary vessels for the Indian Navy and
the Coast Guard. Its product range includes
frigates, corvettes, oil tankers, patrol vessels, attack craft, high technology ship borne
equipment, portable bailey type steel
bridges, turbine pumps for the agricultural
sector, main sewage treatment plants, diesel
engines.
7.63 Significant achievements:
(i) The Company has paid dividend of
Rs. 7.49 crore being 35% of the Profit
after tax (6.05% on equity paid up capital
of Rs.123.84 crore) for 2002-03.
(ii) One Corvette (Yard-2042) was
commissioned into the Navy on 4[th]

February 2004.
(iii) Two Frigates (Yard 3010 & 3011),


87


-----

Khukhri Class Missile Corvettes

being constructed for the Indian Navy,

are in advance stage of construction and
are likely to be delivered early next
financial year.
(iv) The company has orders for construction of three Landing Ship Tank
(Large) [LST(L)s], four First Attack Crafts
(FACs) and four Anti-submarine
Warefare (ASW) Corvettes, scheduled
for delivery between 2005 to 2011.

BHARAT DYNAMICS LIMITED (BDL)

7.64 BDL was set up in 1970 for the
manufacture of guided missiles. It is among
a few strategic industries in the public sector
and possesses the capability to produce
advanced Guided Missile systems. The
Company has two units, one at
Kanchanbagh, Hyderabad and the other at
Bhanur, Medak District. Besides the indigenous Prithvi missile, it produces Milan and
Konkurs missiles along with their launchers
and other in-house developed products like
Flame launchers and Simulators. The Company is working hand in hand with the
DRDO for technology absorption of other
missiles under Integrated Missile Development Programme.


7.65 The significant achievements:

(i) The Milan, Konkurs, Prithvi and
Information Technology Divisions of the
company have ISO-9002 certification.
BDL attaches utmost importance to
customer satisfaction.

(ii) The company regularly participated
in field firings conducted by the users.
BDL implements regularly various
improvements in manufacturing process,

inspection procedures. Efficiency in the
process has increased by way of computerization. These have resulted in
increasing value addition per employee
steadily.

(iii) As part of its efforts to increase
exports, BDL exported sub-assemblies
worth Rs.44 lakh in 2002-2003. In the
areas of new products, the Company has
started manufacture of Konkurs-M and 3
UBK-20 Gun Launched Missiles. BDL
has been nominated production agency
for Naval Decoy – C303 launched from
Sub-Marine that is to be produced
under transfer of technology from M/s
Wass, Italy.
(iv) The Company has paid a dividend
of Rs. 23 crore for the year 2002-03.

MISHRA DHATU NIGAM LIMITED
(MIDHANI)

7.66 Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited
(MIDHANI) was incorporated as a Public
Sector Undertaking in 1973 to achieve selfreliance in areas of super-alloys, titanium
alloys and special purpose steels required
for strategic sectors like Aeronautics, Space,


88


-----

Armaments, Atomic Energy, Navy, Special
products like molybdenum wires and plates,
titanium and stainless steel tubes, alloys for
electrical and electronic application like soft
magnetic alloys, controlled expansion alloys
and resistance alloys.

7.67 The significant achievements:(i) Flawless performance of large size
Maraging steel hardware supplied by
MIDHANI for rocket motor casing
application to the Indian Space Research
Organisation (ISRO) contributed to the
successful launch of Polar Satellite
Launch Vehicle (PSLV-C4), the commercial version of the PSLV carrying the
Meteorological Satellite (METSAT).
(ii) Successfully developed and supplied special materials required by the
Light Combat Aircraft (LCA).
(iii) MIDHANI continued to extend
special materials support to programmes
of national importance such as LCA, PSLV/
GSLV, Armaments in the Defence, Aeronautical, Space and Atomic Energy sectors.
(iv) Designed, developed & fabricated
armoured trucks for Defence using
MIDHANI Armour sheets, which successfully met the specifications and
requirements of Defence.
(v) Successfully productionised a wide
range of high quality bio-medical implants numbering 135 in 1060 variants
made of Titanium as low-cost import
substitutes.
(vi) Successfully established state-ofart Super plastic Forming (SPF) technology practiced by only a handful of


metallurgical establishments over the
globe, bulk quantities of titanium Gas
Bottles were supplied using this technology against major orders received during
the year from Aerospace Sector.
(vii) Large size titanium alloy bars
manufactured by MIDHANI were successfully converted into closed die
forgings at an overseas work centre,
proving that they meet the best of
international standards. This has been a
rewarding benchmarking exercise, paving
the way for bulk usage of MIDHANI
materials in demanding aero engine
applications.
(viii) Indigenous supply of specialized
Titanium Fasteners has commenced with
supplies made to DRDO and ISRO
during the year. While technologies
developed in the context of strategic
sectors have been employed for manufacture of world-class biomedical implants, the technology developed for
manufacture of specialized screws for
orthopaedic surgery has in turn been
used for making titanium fasteners to
meet the needs of strategic sectors.
Work has commenced on development
and supply of Superalloy and special steel
fasteners to several discerning customers.
(ix) MIDHANI successfully
productionised and supplied weld
consumables required for critical applications of Indian Navy using in-house
facilities meeting all specifications duly
approved by Russian consultants.
Schemes for the benefit of the persons
with disabilities.


89


-----

Sales of Ordnance Factories and
Defence PSUs

7.68 The total value of sales issues by
Ordnance Factories and Defence Public
Sector Undertakings during the last three
years, is as follows: 

of supplier of raw-materials, components,
sub-systems, they have now become a
partner in the manufacture of complete
defence equipment/system. The defence
industry sector, has now been opened for
participation by the Indian Private sector.


(Rupees in crore)
Year Ordnance Public Sector Grand
Factories Undertakings Total


Total Sales Total Sales
2001-2002 6031.00 7918.38 13949.38
2002-2003 6508.20 8788.31 15296.51
2003-2004 (Prov.) 6641.00 9609.62 16250.62


7.69 Defence Public Sector Undertakings
and Ordnance Factories have exported items
worth Rs. 439 crore for the year 20032004.

Supply Wing

7.70 In the quest for self-reliance in the
crucial sector of Defence,
continuing efforts are made to
indigenise defence equipment
wherever technologically
feasible and economically
viable. It has been a part of
the indigenisation effort to
locate and develop broadbased indigenous supply
sources both in the public
sector as well as in the civil
trade for many complicated
and intricate equipment.
There has been a shift in the
role of private sector/civil
trade in the field of
indigenisation. From the role


The Indian companies are now eligible to set
up defence industry for manufacture of all
types of defence equipment under license.
Such companies could also have foreign
direct investment, upto 26% of the equity.
Detailed guidelines have already been issued
by the Department of Industrial Policy &
Promotion (DIPP) in consultation with
Ministry of Defence regarding the modalities
for consideration of applications for grant of
license.

|There has been a shift in the role of private sector/civil trade in the field of indigenisation. From the role of supplier of raw-materials, components, sub- systems, they have now become a partner in the manufacture of complete defence equipment/system.|continuing efforts are made to Ministry of Defence regarding the modalities indigenise defence equipment for consideration of applications for grant of wherever technologically license. feasible and economically 7.71 For indigenisation of the spares of viable. It has been a part of the Defence Equipment, an institutional the indigenisation effort to framework has been in existence in the form locate and develop broad- of 8 Technical Committees, consisting of based indigenous supply officers from the Directorate General of sources both in the public Quality Assurance. A Technical officer of sector as well as in the civil the rank of Major General/Brigadier or trade for many complicated equivalent heads each Committee. These and intricate equipment. committees maintain a compendium of civil There has been a shift in the industries capable of undertaking the task of role of private sector/civil trade in the field of indigenisation of defence equipment / stores indigenisation. From the role after conducting surveys and assessing their|
|---|---|


90


-----

capabilities. After identifying items in consultation with the user services for
indigenisation and keeping in view the
commercial viability and the strategic needs,
these Committees undertake the
indigenisation activity and ensure timely
supply of defence equipment/stores. During
the year 2002-2003, Supply Orders of Rs.
38.67 crore for ab-initio development and
indigenisation of 1101 items were placed.
During 2003-2004 supply orders of Rs.
210.81 crore for ab-initio development and
indigenisation of defence items were placed.
Since February, 2002, in line with Government decision, Production Agencies like
Ordnance Factories, Defence Public Sector
Undertakings and Air Headquarters are
doing indigenisation work themselves.
7.72 To help the civil sector familiarize
itself with the requirement of Armed forces,
permanent sample rooms are maintained in
four metropolitan cities. For ensuring enhanced & meaningful interaction, conferences/exhibitions are held from time to time
with civil industry. In order to encourage
civil industry for indigenous development of
Defence stores, a scheme of National Award
for excellence in indigenisation was introduced in the year 1993-94. The efforts
made by the industry in substituting the
inputs of defence equipment & stores are
duly recognized and deserving units presented with suitable awards.
7.73 After the opening up of the Defence
Industry Sector for private participation, 15
Letters of Intent have been issued to the
private companies for the manufacture of
various types of Defence Equipment. Some
of the large companies such as Larsen and


Toubro Ltd., Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd., TIL
Ltd and Automotive Coaches & Components Ltd. have obtained letters of intent to
enter the Defence Industry Sector as a full
fledged manufacturers and suppliers of
Defence equipment. The Government, on
its part, has intensified its efforts to create
greater awareness in the private sector
about the requirements of the Defence
Sector. Three Defence Industry Partnership
Meets have been held in collaboration with
the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) in
Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai during the
year. Besides, Six Defence Specialist
Groups have been constituted in which
various Defence establishments and private
industry are represented, to discuss and
identify the Defence equipment, which can
be manufactured in the private sector.

OTHER ORGANISATIONS IN
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE
PRODUCTION

DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF QUALITY
ASSURANCE (DGQA)
7.74 Directorate General of Quality
Assurance (DGQA) is an inter- service
organization functioning under the Department of Defence Production. DGQA is
responsible for Quality Assurance of all
defence stores and equipment, both imported and indigenous for the Army, Navy
(excluding Naval Armaments) and common
users items for the Air Force procured from
all sources viz Private Sector, Public Sector
Undertakings and Ordnance Factories. It
has therefore a vital role to play in the
defence preparedness of the Country.


91


-----

7.75 Organisational Structure and Functions: DGQA Organisation is structured
into seven Technical Directorates, each of
which is responsible for a distinct range of
equipment. The Technical Directorates are
vertically structured in three-tiers for functional purposes, comprising their respective
Headquarters, Controllerates, Field Quality
Assurances Establishments & Proof Establishments (in case of Armament Discipline
only). The tasks performed by them are
complementary and are integrated to
achieve maximum efficiency.
7.76 The major achievements of DGQA
Organisation are as follow: (a) Inspection of Stores: DGQA are
ensuring that stores accepted are strictly
as per laid out specifications and performance parameters. The value of
stores inspected during the last three
years is given below: 
Year Value of Stores Inspected

(Rs. in crore)

2001-2002 13778
2002-2003 16001
2003-2004 14692

(b) Quality Assurance of Imported
Equipment: DGQA is performing a vital
role of inspection of Imported Equipment & Weapon System being acquired
by the Armed Forces.
(c) Self Certification: DGQA Organisation has been awarding Self-Certification status to Quality Conscious Firms/
Manufacturers who have well established
Quality Management System and demonstrate consistent product quality


during the execution of successive
Defence Supply Orders. 42 firms have
been awarded Self-Certification status
during the year 2003-2004.
(d) Exhibitions: DGQA in association
with Department of Small Scale Industries, organized 15 exhibitions at different locations all over the country during
the year. In addition to displaying the
samples by various disciplines, Vendor
Awareness Programmes were organized
by Defence Institute of Quality Assurance, Bangalore.
(e) Training Initiatives: The Defence
Institute of Quality Assurance, Bangalore
has been training DGQA personnel in
the field of Quality Assurance, Management/Human Resource Development
and Information Technology. Courses
have been conducted for Services and
personnel from Outside Organizations
like Defence PSUs, OFB etc. Details of
Officers trained in the last two years are
as follow: 
Sl. Year DGQA Other

No. Organisations
1. 2002-2003 363 63
2. 2003-2004 391 92

DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF AERONAUTICAL QUALITY ASSURANCE (DGAQA)

7.77 DGAQA has its Headquarters at
New Delhi with Resident Inspection Establishments at various production centres in
the country. Its main functions inter-alia
include quality assurance during design/
development, production, overhaul and
repair of military aircraft and accessories,
technical association with DRDO and
participation in standardization activities etc.


92


-----

During the year 2003-2004, DGAQA
inspected Aeronautical Stores of the value of
Rs.3284.07 crore. DGAQA also actively
associated in the QA of various sophisticated indigenous projects and also participated in Integrated Guided Missile Development Programme (IGMDP) and nonIGMDP Projects like Prithvi/Akash/Trishul
Missiles, both as the overall Nodal Agency
and Quality Assurance Agency for most of
the major systems.

DIRECTORATE OF STANDARDISATION

7.78 Directorate of Standardisation was
constituted in 1962 with the objective to
control items proliferation within Defence
Services. Nine Standardisation Cells and six
Detachments have been located at nodal
Stations in the country to give boost to the
Standardisation activity. The primary objective of the Directorate of Standardisation is
to establish commonality in equipment and
components among the three Services so
that the overall inventory of the Defence
Services is reduced. This objective is sought
to be achieved through: a.) Preparation of Standardisation
documents such as Joint Services Specifications, Joint Services Preferred
Ranges, Joint Services Rationalized
Lists, Joint Services Guides, Joint Services Policy Statements & Joint Services
Qualitative Requirements;
b.) Codification and Cataloguing of
Defence Inventory; and
c.) Entry Control.
7.79 Standardisation activities are done
through 13 Standardisation Sub – Commit

tees, Panels/Working Groups under these
Sub – Committees, several Specialist Technical Panels (STP) and Defence Equipment
Codification Committee (DECC).
7.80 Achievements :
(i) 1343 items were considered for
variety reduction under 30 Joint Services
Rationalized Lists. This quantity was
reduced by 468 items thus bringing
34.7% reduction.
(ii) 375 documents, which had completed 5 years life, have been revised
against yearly target of 367 revision.
(iii) 682 Standard documents were
formulated.

7.81 Codification and Cataloguing

During the year 23,246 items have been
codified against yearly target of 29,000.

7.82 Information technology: The
official website of the Directorate has been
made more user friendly with addition of
various features and facilities. The Centre
for Advanced Computing & System Application (COCOSA) Group of Directorate of
Standardisation has coordinated the software
development project for automation of the
codification process at the various levels.
Standardisation Enterprise Network established leased line connectivity to various
Defence Standardisation Cells.
7.83 Training: The Institute of Standards Training, Pune, conducts courses on
Standardisation, Codification, Management
Development programme, Total Quality
Management & Database Management
System. The Institute has conducted following important courses: 

93


-----

(i) Course on Metropolitan Area
Network (MAN) functioning and utilization of ‘Standardisation Intranet’.
(ii) Course on Basics of e-Governance
and Information Security.
(iii) Orientation course on Standardisation and Codification.
(iv) Foundation course on Standardisation.

DIRECTORATE OF PLANNING & COORDINATION

7.84 The Directorate of Planning and
Coordination was set up in 1964 with the
primary objective of preparing overall plans
for the production of defence equipment in
the country. The Directorate is responsible
for monitoring and implementation of major
indigenisation projects being pursued by the
Ordnance Factories like the Arjun and T-90
Main Battle Tanks, product improvement of
various artillery guns and armoured vehicles,
augmentation of overhauling capacity of
tanks and engines. Development programme
of armaments for the army and navy are
other key activities of the Directorate. The
Directorate also monitors the critical
projects in the electronics sector for the
three services.
7.85 The Directorate is the nodal point
in the Department of Defence Production
for International Cooperation in defence
production and defence exports. The
Directorate supports the Export wing of the
Department during its deliberations with the
various Bi-lateral Defence Policy Groups and
Joint Working Groups with other countries.
7.86 The Directorate represents the De

partment for Defence Production in the
General Staff Equipment Policy Committee,
Standardisation Committee, Task Forces and
various monitoring committees.
7.87 The Directorate coordinates within
the Department of Defence Production the
interaction with the Integrated Defence Staff
Headquarters, regarding classification of the
respective capital acquisition plans of the
three services into “BUY”, “BUY” &
“MAKE” and “MAKE” categories. The
Directorate serves as the secretariat for the
Defence Production Board, which is charged
with the function of monitoring progress
emanating out of all “MAKE” decisions
taken by the Defence Acquisition Council
(DAC). It also assist the DAC to arrive at
optimum decisions regarding licence production, transfer of technology (TOT) and
ab-initio production/development.

DEFENCE EXHIBITION ORGANISATION

7.88 The Defence Exhibition Organisation (DEO), established in 1981, is primarily
responsible for organising and coordinating
defence exhibitions in India and abroad. It
maintains the permanent defence pavilion at
the Pragati Maidan, New Delhi, which peaks
out during Indian International Trade Fair
(IITF) held every year from 14 to 27 November. Products manufactured/developed
by Ordnance Factories, Defence Public
Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) and Defence
Research and Development Organisation
(DRDO) are displayed at the pavilion. In
addition, the Armed Forces, Directorate
General of Quality Assurance (DGQA),
Coast Guard and the National Cadet Corps


94


-----

(NCC) are also represented in the exhibition.
More than six lakh visitors visited the Defence Pavilion during IITF 2003 generating
trade inquiries for the DPSUs/DRDO/
DGQA/OFB besides aiding in inculcation of
defence consciousness among the citizens.
The Pavilion remained activated for three
additional days, from 28 to 30 November,
2003 to enable school-children, NCC
cadets and Defence personnel to see the
Pavilion in detail.
7.89 As a part of export promotion
effort, DEO organizes international defence
exhibitions in India and co-ordinates
participations of DPSUs in exhibitions
abroad. During the financial year 20032004, DEO co-ordinated participation in
the Latin America Defentech Exhibition
(LAD) 2003 held at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
from 22 to 25 April, 2003.

DEFEXPO INDIA 2004

7.90 DEFEXPO INDIA 2004-the third
biennial International Land &

Naval Systems Exhibition, was

More than six lakh

held at Pragati Maidan, New

visitors visited the

Delhi from 4 to 7 February,

Defence Pavilion

2004. The Department of

during IITF 2003

Defence Production, Ministry

generating trade

of Defence and the Confed
inquiries for the

eration of Indian Industries

DPSUs/DRDO/

organized the exhibition

DGQA/OFB besides

jointly. The exhibition covered

aiding in inculcation

an area of more than 12,000

of defence

sqm showing a growth of over

consciousness

50% from the last event.187

among the citizens.

foreign companies from 19


countries, along with 163 domestic companies including Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) and Ordnance Factories
participated in the exhibition. For the first
time the permanent Defence Pavilion at
Pragati Maidan was integrated with the
exhibition. Raksha Mantri inaugurated the
exhibition on February 4th, 2004. Highlevel official delegations from 32 countries
attended the exposition. In addition, there
were five non-official delegations, bringing
the total to 37 as against 23 in the last
event.
7.91 Approximately 35,000 visitors came
to the exhibition including senior officials
from various government departments,
armed forces, as well as trade visitors. The
feedback from the participants has been
encouraging and nearly 3,300 sqm of space
(more than 25% of total space for
DEFEXPO INDIA 2004) is already booked
by the exhibitors for the next show, scheduled to be held at the same venue from
January 31 to February 3, 2006.
7.92 Discussions on issues of bilateral
cooperation in the field of defence production were held with different official delegations as well as delegations from foreign
companies who participated at DEFEXPO
INDIA-2004. An International Seminar on
“Outsourcing” and “Offsets” besides a
Defence Industry Summit on FDI and
optimizing R&D were organized concurrently as part of DEFEXPO INDIA 2004.
7.93 Following are details of investment,
value of production and profits after tax of
eight Defence Public Sector Undertakings.


95


-----

INVESTMENT

(Rs in Crore)

Name of the PSUs             2001-2002            2002-2003 2003-2004

Equity Govt. loans Equity Govt. loans Equity Govt. loans
HAL 120.50 - 120.50 - 120.50 BEL 80.00 - 80.00 - 80.00 BEML 36.87 - 36.87 - 36.87 MDL 199.20 - 199.20 - 199.20 GRSE 123.84 - 123.84 - 123.84 GSL 19.40 - 19.40 - 19.40 BDL 115.00 - 115.00 - 115.00 
MIDHANI 137.34 - 137.34 - 137.34 TOTAL 832.15 - 832.15 - 832.15 
WORKING RESULTS

VALUE OF PRODUCTION AND SALES

(Rs in Crore)

Name of the PSUs             2001-2002           2002-2003         2003-2004(Prov.)
Value of Value of Value of Value of Value of Value of

Production Sales Production Sales Production Sales
HAL 2963.44 2774.81 3477.84 3120.42 3655.02 3690.29
BEL 2029.98 1941.99 2536.39 2508.02 2802.80 2791.37
BEML 1436.10 1424.15 1740.16 1681.17 1706.76 1770.61
MDL 582.65 737.83 539.52 569.27 464.44 80.10
GRSE 488.79 498.44 523.09 153.69 491.57 392.17
GSL 220.43 153.50 232.14 386.50 177.80 238.95
BDL 251.44 283.36 330.38 277.72 507.96 521.02

MIDHANI 107.17 104.30 93.50 91.52 105.07 125.11
TOTAL 8080.00 7918.38 9473.02 8788.31 9911.42 9609.62

PROFIT AFTER TAX

(Rs. in crore)

Name of the PSUs 2002-2003 2003-2004 (Prov.)
HAL 389.96 307.20
BEL 260.61 302.92
BEML 26.10 33.00
MDL (-)24.13 (-) 12.90
GRSE 21.33 31.50
GSL 17.83 5.75
BDL 56.69 40.87

MIDHANI (-)2.16 4.51

TOTAL 746.23 712.85


96


-----

### 88888

 DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

Brahmos, the supersonic cruise missile, developed by the DRDO


-----

###### RDO has progressively enhanced the
##### D

###### combat effectiveness of our Armed Forces

 through induction of latest technologies in

 indigenous defence systems.


###### RDO has progressively enhanced the
##### D

###### combat effectiveness of our Armed Forces

 through induction of latest technologies in

 indigenous defence systems.


8.1 Defence Research and Development
Organisation (DRDO) was formed in 1958
by amalgamation of then already functioning
Technical Development Establishments
(TDEs) of the Indian Army and the Directorate of Technical Development & Production
(DTDP) with the Defence Science Organisation (DSO). DRDO laboratories are engaged
in ever-widening spectrum of defence
technologies covering various disciplines like
aeronautics, armaments, electronics, combat
vehicles, engineering systems, instrumentation, missiles, advanced computation and
simulation, special materials, naval systems,
life sciences and agriculture, to name a few.

8.2  Mission: The Department of Defence
Research and Development came into
existence in 1980. It is dedicated to the
mission of progressive enhancement of
self-reliance in defence systems and state of
the art defence technologies. To facilitate
accomplishing this mission, there is a mission-mode structure headed by the Scientific


Adviser to Raksha Mantri, who is also the
Secretary, Department of Defence Research
& Development and Director General,
Research and Development.

ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE

8.3 DRDO Headquarters is organized in
two different types of Headquarters Directorates. The Technical Directorates act as
‘single window’ to facilitate laboratories
under their area of work in obtaining various
approvals and in co-ordinating information
with laboratories and Headquarters. Corporate Directorates like Directorate of Personnel, Human Resource Development, Material Management, Planning and Coordination, Management Services, Rajbhasha/
O&M, Budget Finance and Accounts,
Security and Vigilance, Civil Works and
Estates and Extramural Research and Intellectual Property Rights (ER & IPR) assist the
laboratories in getting Government approvals for taking up projects and creation of
facilities in their respective areas. Recruit

98


-----

ment and Assessment Centre (RAC) and
Personnel Assessment Centre (PEACE)
undertake fresh recruitments and assessment
on periodic basis for promotions of scientists for all laboratories and Headquarters of
DRDO under Defence Research Development Service (DRDS) Cadre and Defence
Research Technical Cadre (DRTC) respectively.

DRDO LABORATORIES

8.4 The programmes and projects,
undertaken by the Department, are executed
through a network of R&D laboratories/
establishments. These laboratories are
situated all over India from Tezpur in the
East to Jodhpur in the West and Leh in the
North to Kochi in the South of India.
8.5 The programmes/ projects are
executed in close partnership with User
Services. In order to harness best available
resources in terms of talent, expertise and
resources, on as required basis, DRDO
interacts and involves defence public sector
undertakings, academic institutions, research
laboratories and private enterprises, to
execute its projects and programmes. The
‘concurrent engineering’ approach is followed, in technology intensive projects, to
reduce the time lag between design, development and production.
8.6 Review Mechanism: DRDO has
institutionalized a mechanism to monitor
and review programmes/ projects on a
regular basis. There is an in-house apex
level body called ‘DRDO Research Council’
(DRC), chaired by Scientific Adviser to


Raksha Mantri, to review progress of major
projects of all the laboratories. In addition,
Corporate Reviews covering techno-managerial aspects are also carried out by a high
level committee. The staff projects for Army
are reviewed by the Vice Chief of Army Staff
(VCOAS), twice a year. For all major programmes/ projects, there are multi-tier
‘Programme Management Boards’, having
representation from the Services, DRDO
laboratories and in some cases from academic institutions and other national
research laboratories. These Programme
Management Boards periodically monitor
and review the programmes and give midcourse directions.
8.7 Consequent upon the acceptance of
recommendation of the Group of Ministers
(GOM) on National Security regarding
Rationalisation of DRDO Laboratories, the
Government had constituted a Group of
Officers headed by Secretary, Defence
Production. The recommendations of Group
of Officers addressed synergy of effort
amongst DRDO laboratories, closer interaction between DRDO and the Services and
DRDO and Production Agencies. The
recommendations of the Group, duly approved by the Raksha Mantri, are under
implementation.

CONTRIBUTION OF DRDO TO
SERVICES

8.8 The Organisation has made great
strides, since 1980, towards making our
Armed Forces self reliant. On the one hand
this has enabled our Armed Forces to face


99


-----

the arms export control regimes of advanced
countries, whereas on the other hand,
DRDO has progressively enhanced the
combat effectiveness of our Armed Forces
through induction of state-of-the-art indigenous defence systems. During last few
years, a number of defence systems and
equipment have been productionised. These
include :

  - Pilotless Target Aircraft –LAKSHYA
(aerial target practice system)

  - Radar Warning Receiver (RWR) for
MiG 23 aircraft– TRANQUIL

  - Radar Warning Receiver and Self
Protection Jammer (RWR & SPJ) for MiG
aircraft – TEMPEST

  - CATCH - An airborne Signal Intelligence Systems

  - Aircraft Arrester Barrier

Surface-to-surface Missile Agni-1



- Aircraft Weapon Trolley – BHEEMA

- Relocatable Balloon Barage System

- Parachutes for various types of
Aircrafts

- Surface-to-surface Tactical Battlefield
Missile : PRITHVI

- Surface-to-surface Missile : AGNI-I
and AGNI-II

- Main Battle Tank : ARJUN

- Multi-barrel Rocket System PINAKA (waiting for indent)

- Armoured Engineer Recce Vehicle
(AERV) for crossing of water obstacles

- Bridge Layer Tank on T-72 chassis

- Bridge Assault Mechanically
Launched: SARVATRA

- Mat Ground Surfacing, a track-way
expedient for smooth movement in
marshy terrain, shallow water and soft
soil

- Containerised Operation Theatre
Complex and Wards on Wheels

- Mobile Decontamination System for
decontaminating Nuclear, Biological and
Chemical (NBC) agents and personnel,
equipment and terrain

- Muting system for deactivating
remotely controlled explosive device –
SAFARI [Mk-I]

- Remotely Piloted Vehicle RPV –
NISHANT (for aerial surveillance)

- Bulk secrecy equipment with high
grade digital secrecy : SANSAR

- Avalanche Victim Detector

- Meals-ready-to-eat (MREs) etc.

- Combat Improved T-72 tank –
AJEYA

- Data Concentrator


100


-----

          - Battle-Field Surveillance Radar –
Short Range (BFSR-SR )

         - Weapon Locating Radar

         - Artillery Combat Command and
Control System - SAMVAHAK

         - HUMSA – Hull Mounted Sonar
System

        - USHUS Sonar System

         - Processor Based Moored Mine
(PBMM) and Processor Based Exercise
Mine (PBEM)

         - Advanced Torpedos

       - SANGRAHA

          - Electronic Support Measure (ESM)
System for Kamov/ Chetak Helicopter –
KITE

         - ESM System for Kamov/Chetak
Helicopter – EAGLE

         - Submarine based ESM – PORPOISE

          - MIHIR -Helicopter based dunking
sonar

             - NAGAN – Towed Array
Sonar

             - SECTEL - Speech Se
The Light Combat

crecy Telephone

Aircraft Tejas has

             - Mission Computer (MC)

completed 202 flight

for Jaguar.

tests. The Kaveri

             - Mission Computer (MC),

engine for the Tejas

Display Processor (DP) and

has successfully

RWR for Sukhoi aircraft.

completed phase I

PROGRESS MADE IN R&D

and II of high altitude

PROGRAMMES

testing and
undergone more

8.9 Maiden flight of Technol
than 1300 hours of

ogy Demonstrator (TD1) of

development test.

Light Combat Aircraft (LCA)
‘TEJAS’ took place on January
4, 2001 at Bangalore. Analy

sis of the test flight results have indicated a
reasonably good match between flight tests
and design objectives. Since then, two
technology demonstrators and prototype
vehicle (PV1) of LCA are undergoing flight
testing.
8.10 The Second Technology Demonstrator (TD2) was flown for the first time on
June 6, 2002. The Prime Minister has
christened the LCA as “TEJAS” on May 4,
2003 and the same day formation flights of
both the Tejas aircrafts were demonstrated.
TD1 has successfully crossed the sound
barrier on August 1, 2003 and super-sonic
flights up to 1.15 Mach have been carried
out. The reduced weight standard LCA
prototype vehicle (PV1) Tejas has also
undergone its maiden flight on November
25, 2003. LCA has completed 202 flight
tests. The equipping of the fourth Tejas
aircraft (PV2) is the progress, which is the
production standard. Design activities on
LCA Trainer Variant LCA (PV5), ensuring
commonality with LCA (Navy), has been
initiated. Jet Fuel Starter (JFS) system for
starting LCA has been indigenously developed with assistance from Gas Turbine
Research Establishment (GTRE), Bangalore
by HAL.
8.11 The Kaveri engine for the Tejas is
undergoing development trials. As on date
two Kabini prototypes (C1, C2) and five
Kaveri engine prototypes (K1 to K5) have
been built for engine testing apart from
various modules and components manufactured for their testing in the rigs to assess
their aerodynamic and structural integrity
performance. Kaveri engine has undergone

101


-----

development test of more than
1300 hours. K5 engine of

The Army has

Kaveri has successfully com
decided to go in

pleted phase I & II of high

for induction of

altitude testing at M/s CIAM,

Nishant (Remotely

Russia. K9 engine is presently

Piloted Vehicle).

under testing at GTRE, with
an aim to integrate it with
LCA ahead of post-production
clearance. General arrangement for the new layout (K10 configuration)
addressing various issues, like improved
surge margin in fan, better structural integrity of compressor and improved combustor
pressure loss, is being made with the objective to realise the weight budgeted engine
and to firm up this configuration for production release. The spin-off project ‘’Kaveri
Marinisation’ has been taken up and detailed design of the sub-systems have been
completed. Fabrication and manufacturing
work are under progress.
8.12 The limited series production of
Pilotless Target Aircraft (PTA) – ‘Lakshya’, a
reusable aerial target system, remotely
operated from ground to provide training to
gun and missile crew and to air defence
pilots is in progress for training of all the
three Services. Delivery of the five Lakshya
to Air Force has been completed. All three
Lakshyas have been delivered to the Navy
along with the Ground Control and Support
System. Two aircraft have been delivered to
the Army and rest of the three aircraft will
be delivered by September 2004.
8.13 Remotely Piloted Vehicle (RPV)
‘Nishant’, has been developed as per General Staff Qualitative Requirement (GSQR)


issued by the Army. The objectives of the
project are battlefield surveillance, reconnaissance, real time engagement of targets
by artillery fire, laser designation, limited
electronics intelligence/ gimbaled payload
assembly (GPA) with control mechanism in
azimuth and elevation has been developed
for acquisition and target tracking. The field
configuration of Nishant system comprise air vehicles, ground control stations, antenna tracking system, launcher and mission
support vehicle. More than 84 development
flights have been carried out. Army has
thereafter decided to go in for induction of
the Nishant through limited series production. Summer trials have been successfully
conducted by DRDO for Army evaluation.
These include two shake down sorties and
12 user trial flights in realistic operational
conditions at Pokhran.
8.14 The Center for Airborne Systems
(CABS), Bangalore, has designed and
developed Bheema-1000 Weapon Loading
Trolley, which was productionised by Bharat
Earth Movers Ltd. (BEML). After successful
trials, IAF has placed an order for 55 trolleys
on BEML. Recently, the trolley was airlifted
for demonstration and weapon fitment trials
at the Sri Lankan Air Force (SLAF) base at
Colombo. The trials were successfully
completed on SLAF fighter aircraft. Sri
Lankan Air Force has indicated a requirement of 5 Bheema -1000 trolleys.
8.15 The Center for Military Airworthiness and Certification (CEMILAC) is dealing
with airworthiness functions related to
military aircraft and airborne systems. It also
provides continued airworthiness support to

102


-----

production and overhaul activities of aircraft/
aero-engines. There are 14 Regional Centres for Military Airworthiness (RCMA)
spread all over the country to ensure airworthiness during design, manufacture and
overhaul of aircraft/ helicopters and its
systems built by HAL and operated by IAF.
Life extension and support to Services for
flight safety is another prime activity of
RCMAs. They also participate in the Accident Investigations. This year RCMAs
participated in 400 Defect Investigations at
various centres.
8.16 Defence Advanced Research Establishment (DARE), Bangalore has developed
Electronic Warfare Systems comprising of
Radar Warning Receivers (RWR) and Self
Protection Jammer (SPJ) for different fighter
aircraft of IAF like Jaguar, MiG-23, MiG-27
and Mig-21 Bis. The laboratory has also

Samyukta Electronic Warfare Systems


designed and developed Automatic Test
Equipment (ATE) and Ground Support
Equipment (GSE) to test and maintain the
developed EW Systems. Also, work is in
progress in respect of Radar Warning and
Jammer (RWJ). DARE has undertaken design
and development of avionics of Sukhoi
aircraft for integration.
8.17 Development and field trials of
Communication segment of Samyukta (an
Electronic Warfare Programme for Army)
have been completed and production orders
for Samyukta com Segment has been placed.
First Control Center Block of Com Segment
was handed over by the President of India to
the Chief of Army Staff.
8.18 Development of Sangraha [an
indigenous Electronic Warfare(EW) Programme for the Navy] has been completed
and various EW Systems developed under

103


-----

this programme are at different stages of
production and induction.
8.19 Preliminary trials of Electro Optical
Fire Control System (EOFCS) for naval ship
have been completed. System optimization
is being carried out in the ship.
8.20 BrahMos, a supersonic cruise
missile, has a range of upto 290 kms and
has so far gone through six successive
successful tests. The recent flights were
conducted on October 29,
November 9 and November
23, 2003 in various modes,

Nine development

meeting all the mission re
flight trials of

quirements. In the last trial on

surface-to-air

November 23, 2003, which

missile - Akash 
was assisted by the Indian

have been

Navy, the missile was fired

undertaken

from a warship cruising at a

between January

speed of about 12 to 15

2003 and March

knots an hour at a drifting

2004. Production

decommissioned vessel, and

facilities have been

the missile hit the hull of the

established at

decommissioned vessel.

Bharat Dynamics

Development of anti-ship

Limited.

version from land and ship has
been completed successfully.
Indian Navy has placed letter
of interest.
8.21 Dhanush, a naval version of the
Prithvi missile system, with a range of 250
kms has been designed and developed and
is under induction. Weaponisation on ships
is under progress. Longer range version of
Prithvi (P-II), tactical battlefield surface-tosurface missile system has been successfully
flight tested during March 2004 with Inertial
Navigational System-Global Positioning


System (INS-GPS) in integrated mode to
enhance the accuracy.
8.22 Nine development flight trials of
surface-to-air missile (SAM) - Akash have
been undertaken between January 2003 and
March 2004. Consistent performance of
propulsion, control and guidance system
were demonstrated against simulated targets. The miss distance achieved in all these
flights was within specifications. Production
facilities have been established at Bharat
Dynamics Limited (BDL), Hyderabad and the
missiles are being integrated and checked
out at BDL. For Akash, the Rajendra Radar
has been integrated with Battery Control
Center (BCC-II), Battery Surveillance Radar
(BSR) and Akash Self Propelled Launcher
(ASPL-II). Further, 3D Central Acquisition
Radar (3D-CAR) has also been demonstrated to the Air Force and Naval Users at
Ambala, Barnala and Goa. All radars have
shown consistent performance. All the
ground systems support vehicles have also
been realized.
8.23 Nag, the third generation anti-tank
guided missile with ‘Fire & Forget’ and ‘Top
Attack’ during ‘Day and Night’ were established through three consecutive flight tests
with Imaging Infra Red (IIR) Seeker in which
direct hits were scored on targets. The
reconfigured Nag Missile Carrier ‘Namica
MK-II’ was successfully field tested in desert
terrain during this summer.
8.24 Trishul is a low level, quick reaction
and guided surface-to-air missile system
developed for all the three Services. It has
been successfully test fired against remotely
piloted flying targets. Four flight tests have

104


-----

been carried out in June 2003 and February
and March 2004 demonstrating the accuracy of guidance, reliability of performance
and functioning of the warhead in integrated
node.
8.25 125 mm Fin Stabilised Armour
Piercing Discarding Sabot (FSAPDS) ammunition is a primary anti-tank ammunition of
the T-72 tank. It is therefore important to
give the crew maximum practice in FSAPDS
shots. Practice ammunition will not only
reduce cost but can be fired at any short
range available, as the maximum range is
less than 6 km. User trials were conducted
successfully in March 2003 and users are
considering their requirement for training
purposes.
8.26 State of the art Influence Mine Mk-I
to provide a full width attack to immobilize a
present day battle tank has been developed
by DRDO. Mk-II version of this mine with
higher reliability is in an advanced stage of
development.
8.27 Existing in service, Grad BM-21
rocket has a maximum range of 20.4 km.
DRDO has undertaken a project for increasing its maximum range to more than 35 km.
Development of extended
range Grad Rocket 122 mm is
in advanced stage of evalua
Production of

tion trials.

Combat Improved

8.28Production of Combat

tank ‘Ajeya’ (CIA)

Improved tank ‘Ajeya’ (CIA)

has also

has also commenced at HVF,

commenced at

Avadi. The various modernisa
HVF, Avadi.

tion schemes are being incorporated in phases. Transfer of


Technology and integration of other improvement schemes in CIA tanks are taking
place smoothly.
8.29 Ordnance Factory, Medak, has
produced and delivered 137 Carrier Mortar
Tracked, out of 198 ordered by the Army.
Remaining vehicles are in different stages of
assembly.
8.30 DRDO is developing futuristic
Infantry Combat Vehicle (ICV) ‘Abhay’ as a
technology demonstrator for replacement of
BMP-II vehicle which are presently in Service. Various systems of this vehicle are in
advanced stage of development.
8.31 Two prototypes of amphibious
floating bridge and ferry system (30 T Class)
have been developed. The system acts as a
bridge carrier vehicle on road while on
reaching wet gaps, the inflatable floats and
aquatic mobility system enable the equipment to function as a ferry/ bridge with
28.4m span and 3.6m width.
8.32 A 10 kw wind electric generator for
producing power from wind energy has been
successfully installed at Sasoma in Siachen
area to meet an urgent requirement of the
Army.
8.33 Naval Physical and Oceanographic
Laboratory (NPOL) has completed successful technical trials of the first airborne Sonar
System MIHIR. During the development
phase of the system, important technologies
in the field of Sonobuoys, VHF Receivers,
Lightweight Winches have been mastered by
the Laboratory.
8.34 The ocean environment is well
known to critically influence the design and

105


-----

performance of the Sonar Systems. It is
therefore, imperative to augment the tactical
information base for our coastal waters in
order to fully exploit optimum performance
of our sonars. Accordingly, a Consolidated
Oceanographic and Marine Acoustic Programme (COMAP) is under execution to
collect the vital oceanographic data.
8.35 Under the project Akhila, technological advancements have been made to
achieve self-reliance in transducers technology specially in the areas of development of
transducer elements for handling high power
and frequency and new generation hull mounted HF

Naval Material

transducer.

Research Laboratory

8.36Project Sipra is basically

(NMRL), Ambernath,

a competence building re
has developed

search project wherein ad
Flameless Room

vance signal processing

Heater (Bukhari)

techniques are developed to

which works on the

improve the performance of

principle of catalytic

the sonars. Exploratory

flameless burning of

studies have been undertaken,

fuel grade cheap

which has resulted in practical

alcohol

demonstration of various
algorithms.
8.37 Research and development work is
in progress to develop a sonar simulator
system called Darpan, which is capable of
near real time simulation of one or more
sonars whose specifications are currently
available, under realistic environmental
conditions, and selected operational scenarios.
8.38 A single frequency Under Water
Telephone (UWT) developed by NPOL and
M/s Keltron has been converted to a dual


frequency version for communication with
both NATO & Russian standard platforms.
Subsequent to the successful trials, the new
version is being supplied by Keltron to Navy.
8.39 The portable life-detecting device
Sanjivani for use in emergency rescue
mission to detect live human beings or
animals trapped under debris of collapsed
buildings/ landslides has been developed
and a total quantity of 200 units have been
manufactured. It is proposed to distribute
these units to State Government authorities.
8.40 Two units each of the Harbour
Deterrent Sonar (Hanet) has been given to
Eastern and Western Naval Commands.
The technical details of Hanet has been
given to M/s Bharat Electronics, Bangalore
for productionisation. Navy’s request for
additional 10 units will be met by the
production agency.
8.41 Naval Material Research Laboratory
(NMRL), Ambernath, has developed
Flameless Room Heater (Bukhari) which
works on the principle of catalytic flameless
burning of fuel grade cheap alcohol like
methanol, ethanol etc. to liberate heat.
Thermal capacity achieved so-far is around
5 kw. Toxic emission is negligible. Heat
output is controllable. This flameless room
heater does not pose any fire hazard.
8.42 Naval Science and Technological
Laboratory (NSTL), Vishakhapatnam has
developed Advance Experimental Torpedo
(AET). AET is a light weight, anti-submarine
torpedo launched from ships and helicopters. This torpedo is a very effective system
against surface as well as submerged targets.
User evaluation trials with R&D model of

106


-----

Multi-barrel rocket system PINAKA will supplement the existing artillery guns.


AET have been completed. Five development and engineering (D&E) models of AET
under fabrication by Bharat Dynamics
Limited (BDL) will be subjected to further
trials, after which it will enter bulk production phase.
8.43 Wire Guided Torpedo (WGT) is a
heavy weight torpedo launched from submarine. The technical evaluation of the system
has been completed successfully and the
system is in final stage of user evaluation.
8.44 Indian Navy required floating
container buoys to be dropped from TU
142 M / IL 38 fixed wing aircrafts for
delivery of emergency stores to the ships in
distress. The store has been developed and
named as “Sahayak”.
8.45 NSTL has developed three variants
of “Sahayak” having different payloads and
offered the same to Navy after successful
completion of user-associated trials. Navy is


also committed to productionise
Sahayak-I for service exploitation. NSTL
has completed the development of the store
in one year’s time.
8.46 Defence Materials Research Laboratory (DMRL) has established an indigenous
process for producing Aeronautical grade
Titanium Sponge. DMRL is ready for transfer of the technology to the industry.
8.47 Blast Protective Suit (BPS) has been
developed for mine clearing operation. The
suit is light weight and provides comfort,
mobility and maximum protection against
the blast of anti-personnel mine from a
distance of even 30 cm. The suit has been
designed as per the inputs received from the
Army.
8.48 Transgenic tomato plant, using
Osmotin gene through agro-mediated
genetic transformation has been developed.
These plants can thrive in hostile environ
107


-----

ments. Besides, appropriate technologies for
protected cultivation (Solar Greenhouse) of
vegetables in Ladakh have been carried out.
These have the potential of augmenting the
local production of fresh vegetables in high
altitudes as well as cold desert.
8.49 Clinical trials using 2-deoxy-DGlucose (2-DG) to improve the efficacy of
radio therapy of cancer in patients with
malignant brain tumor has yielded very
encouraging results with enhanced survival
and improved quality of life. Scientists have
also produced an indigenous 2-DG which is
being tested.
8.50 A herbal ultra-violet (UV) screen
which is 15-20% more effective than popular commercial

Snow and Avalanche brands has been developed by
Study Establishment DRDO for use by Defence
is using the snow and Personnel posted in Glaciers
met observations and high altitude areas experifrom 35 surface encing high UV radiation.
observatories and 16 They have also developed a
Automatic Weather herbal radio-protector which
Stations covering offers significant protection
J&K including against ionizing radiation.
Siachen and part of 8.51DRDO has been carrying
Himachal Pradesh out several studies on thyroid

disorders of clinical and
epidemiological interest. The
prevalence of Iodine deficiency in school
children of Delhi was identified by goiter
survey followed by the promotion of salt
iodination leading to a reduction in such
cases. DRDO has established state-of-theart micro estimation facilities and a protocol
for management of all kinds of thyroid
diseases.


8.52 During the Winter 2002-2003, the
Avalanche Forecast warnings were regularly
issued by Snow and Avalanche Study Establishment (SASE), Chandigarh for the use of
Army deployed in snow bound areas of J&K
and the civil population. These warnings
resulted in saving of many lives. For this
purpose SASE is using the snow and met
observations from 35 surface observatories
and 16 Automatic Weather Stations (AWS)
covering Jammu and Kashmir including
Siachen and part of Himachal Pradesh. In
order to increase the observatory network
over Western Himalayas, work on installation
of additional AWS is in progress.
8.53 SASE is using a versatile meso-scale
model for predicting weather three days in
advance over Western Himalayan Region.
State-of-the-art radiosonde upper air equipment have been installed at Jammu, Sasoma
(Siachen) and Manali. Regular observations
using the Meso-scale model are being taken
for weather prediction.
8.54 SASE has developed a methodology
to monitor snow cover in Western
Himalayan Region using different satellite
imageries to help in planning of operational
moves, road alignment and other activities
including troops education. In addition
these satellite imageries have been converted into fly-through models as a training
aid to the troops deployed in field areas.

TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT/
INNOVATION

8.55 Feasibility of development of the
advanced technology for manufacture of
Combustible Cartridge Case (CCC) incor
108


-----

porating resin as a binder in

Hand-held laser the nitro cellulose matrix has
warner for detecting been established. The newly
and warning enemy developed CCC has excellent
laser radiation has tensile strength without any
been developed and penalty on its combustibility.
field evaluated These CCCs are also dimen
sionally stable when stored/
handled under extreme environmental conditions.
8.56 Gallium Arsenide Enabling Technology Centre (GAETEC) produced and delivered Monolithic Microwave Integrated
Circuit (MMIC) amplifier modules in various
frequency bands for various defence and
space systems. The centre has also produced S-Band Receive Beam Former and
Digital Attenuator and single pole double
throw (SPDT) switch MMIC chips for LBand Trans-receive module for use in stateof-the-art radar systems.
8.57 Variants of Central Acquisition
Radar (CAR) for Navy and Air Force are
under development for air surveillance
requirements of the users.
8.58 Combat Net Radio - a frequency
hopping radio for data and voice communication used in armoured fighting vehicles
has been developed and user trials have
been completed successfully.
8.59 Development trials of Maritime
Patrol Radar (for Naval use) on KAMOV
helicopter platform have been completed.
The system has been installed on Advance
Light Helicopter (ALH) for user trials. The
system is under evaluation.
8.60 Thermal Imagers based on second
generation Mercury Cadmium Telluride


(MCT) array have been developed and are
under evaluation.
8.61 Hand-held laser warner for detecting and warning enemy laser radiation has
been developed and field evaluated.
8.62 A single board computer (SBC) is
developed by Advanced Numerical Research
and Analysis Group (ANURAG) by using
ANURAG’s microprocessor for on board
computing (OBC) requirements.
8.63 The self-heating pouch based
system for ready-to-eat (RTE) foods has
been found to be shelf stable upto 6 months
at ambient temperature conditions. Development of suitable self-heating system for
chapaties and water (for the preparation of
tea) is in progress. The quantity of
exothermic chemical mixture (approx. 100g)
and the package dimensions required to
heat the product from -10[0]C to 50[0]C has
been standardized. Further efforts are on to
reduce the quantity of chemical mixture
required and raise the final temperature.
8.64 Vegetable varieties/ hybrids (viz.
capsicum, garlic) developed by DRDO
Scientists have been recommended for
release by All India Coordinated Vegetable
Improvement Programme Committee at
National level. Herbal drugs such as antileucoderma, anti-eczema, anti-toothache,
cold and anti-sunburn cream have also been
developed and are presently under clinical
trials.
8.65 A herbal tea based on local medicinal plants (seabuckthorn, rose root, yarrow,
salam panja, kala jeera, wild rose etc) has
been formulated and tested.
8.66 Bio-engineering scientists have

109


-----

successfully developed the Line Replacement
Units (LRUs) of the integrated life support
system for ‘Tejas’ (LCA) and prototype
submarine escape set consisting of a hydro
suit and breathing bag. The LRUs are ready
for simulation trials. They have also integrated an AC powered Automatic Control
Unit with the modified High Altitude Pulmonary Odema (HAPO) chamber for automatic
inflation. They have also successfully
designed a backup oxygen system for Combat Free Fall Parachute system.
8.67 Mark II of the indigenously developed Nitric Oxide delivery system tailormade to be used at extreme and remote
high altitude areas for early treatment of
High Altitude Pulmonary Edema (HAPE)
patients, is under development. Scientists
have also achieved the indigenous production of nitric oxide and calibration gas used
in the delivery system thus lessening the
dependence on import of these gases.
8.68 DRDO scientists have also developed cold radio-pharmaceutical kits for
bacteria-specific infection imaging, soft
tissue (breast) and bone metastasis imaging.
These kits have successfully undergone
multicentric trials and technology transfer to
private entrepreneur is in progress.
8.69 The availability of pure drinking
water is a serious problem in the NorthEastern region due to presence of high iron
contents. DRDO has developed an iron
removal unit for treatment of water to bring
down the level of iron content conforming to
WHO Standards. Recently, 200 of these
Iron Removal Units have been supplied to
HQ Eastern Command.


BASIC RESEARCH

8.70 Four research boards are functioning in DRDO to provide thrust to Basic
research in areas of strategic importance.
The boards are : Aeronautics Research &
Development Board (AR&DB); Armament
Research Board (ARMREB); Naval Research
Board (NRB) and Life Sciences Research
Board (LSRB). These boards promote
research in collaborative mode with aca
demic institutions and other national R&D
laboratories, through approval, funding and
monitoring of grants-in-aid projects.

8.71 The Aeronautics Research & Development Board (AR&DB) started functioning
in Feb 1971 and has funded around 1250
projects to 35 institutions since inception.
It is currently funding 120 projects at 25
academic & research Institutions. It has a
ceiling of Rs.5.00 crores per year in up
stream areas of aeronautics R&D. Three
Centres of Excellence have been set up at
Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Mumbai,
National Aerospace Limited (NAL)
Bangalore and Indian Institute of Science
(IISc), Bangalore in the area of systems
design and engineering, composite structures technology and computational fluid
dynamics (CFD) with linkages at other expert
organizations. AR&DB has also recently
launched its website, which can be accessed
through drdo.com.

8.72 Under Armament Research Board
(ARMREB) 43 projects have been sanctioned, covering the field of High Energy
Materials, Sensors, Ballistics, Combustion &
Detonics, Modeling/ Simulation and other

110


-----

Diagnobact developed by the DRDO can differentiate
sterile from infectious inflamation.

fields related to Armaments, to various
academic institutions and other R&D Organisations. Out of these, 17 projects have
been successfully completed and remaining
are being pursued.

8.73 Life Sciences Research Board (LSRB)
continued its spirit of supporting, expanding
and deepening the knowledge base of life
sciences. A total of nine projects have been
sanctioned to academic institutions taking
the total number of sanctioned projects to
47. Some of the projects supported by
LSRB are for rapid diagnosis of infectious
diseases, engineering resistance to pod
borer in pigeon-pea, mycorrhizal technology
for tropical Tuber crops, Hospital waste and
Anti-fouling strategies of

To accord selective

marine organisms.

protective legal cover

8.74Naval Research Board

to intellectual property

(NRB) continued to support

generated by research

the basic research applicable

activities of DRDO,

to naval technologies. Five

sixty-four IPR

new grants-in-aid projects

applications were filed.

were sanctioned to academic
institutions and 19 out of 44
projects have since been accepted.
Extramural Research & Intellectual Property
Right (ER & IPR)


8.75 Truly indigenous solutions to military problems and the related technologies
can be developed only if judicious investments are made in expanding and deepening
the foundations of basic scientific knowledge
and the technological validation of new
concepts that emerge from such knowledge.
8.76 During the financial year 2003-04,
59 new projects with an aggregate value of
Rs. 16.5 crores were researched upon in
various academic institutions in the country.
Grant-in-Aid worth Rs. 30 lakhs was also
provided to various scientific and academic
institutions and societies for holding national
and international conferences and seminars/
workshops.
8.77 To accord selective protective legal
cover to intellectual property generated by
research activities of DRDO, 64 IPR applications (including 10 filed in foreign countries)
were filed on products/processes in the field
of materials, electronics, bio-medical sciences and food technology.
8.78 50 patents (including two in foreign
countries) were granted and 30 patents
were accepted for grant. In addition, one
design patent was granted in USA and one
copyright was registered in India. To promote IPR awareness, six awareness programmes/workshops/patent-clinics were held
during the period in different laboratories.

SUPPORT TO SERVICES

8.79 DRDO has developed a variety of
software for simulator training of Army
personnel on Air Defence Combat and
Reporting of enemy aircraft & missiles.
8.80 The indigenous brake parachute for

111


-----

SU-30 aircraft has been successfully developed and five such parachutes have been
delivered to the Air Force against their first
indent.
8.81 DRDO has developed and standardized a set of intelligence test
consisting of verbal and non
DRDO maintains

verbal tests along with norms

close liaison with

for the Directorate of Recruit
Industry by way of

ment, Army Headquarters for

transfer of

the selection of personnel to

technology. The

the Commissioned ranks.

problems faced by

8.82Five thousand survival

industries in the

rations were supplied to Army

processing and

and five hundred Meals Ready

production of

to Eat (MRE) rations to INS

various products

Abhimanyu, Mumbai. Besides,

are solved by

two thousand test kits devel
giving proper

oped for the detection of cold

advice and

slaughtered meat were sup
guidance.

plied to different units of
Army. DRDO has developed
technology for enhancing shelf
life of meat by application of permissible
acid spray.
8.83 More than 200 water purification
systems for removal of excessive iron are
being supplied to the Armed Forces in the
North-eastern region. Water purification
plants for removal of salinity (to give potable
water) have been installed at various locations in Rajasthan.
8.84 Facilities for fishery, green house
cultivation of off-season vegetables and
mushroom production have been established
by the DRDO at mountaineering brigades
of Army. The research and development
efforts of DRDO have resulted in meeting


approximately 45% of the total vegetable
requirement of Army locally in ‘L’ Sector.
8.85 DRDO agricultural laboratories are
conducting regular training programmes on
agriculture and animal husbandry for the
Services.
8.86 Carbogen Breathing Assembly, used
as protection against noise induced
hearing loss, has been developed by DRDO
scientists in collaboration with IIT Mumbai,
and was successfully tried by the Indian
Navy. The Navy has decided to acquire 12
such assemblies for induction in the engine
room of the ships. Efforts are on to design
a multi-user breathing system to maximize
efficiency.
8.87 Temperature-controlled biodigestors (for human waste) have been
installed at various places for use by the
Armed Forces.
8.88 Both spray and cream formulations
of DEPA - a multi-insect repellant - have
been developed for protection against
blood-sucking insects and are being evaluated in the field.
8.89 Scientists have conducted several
training programmes on the management of
chemical and biological casualties for the
benefit of the Armed Forces, Parliament
Security Staff and  Junior and Senior Commands of the Border Security Force.
8.90 DRDO psychologists have conducted focused studies on security forces
developed in low intensity conflict environments with respect to their psycho-social
adjustment. Efficacy of interrogation techniques, role of organizational support and
climate in enhancing the efficiency and

112


-----

commitment of these forces has been
investigated. Training programmes are also
being developed for enhancing the military
leadership effectiveness.

INTERACTION  WITH INDUSTRY

8.91 DRDO maintains close liaison with
Industry by way of transfer of technology.
The problems faced by industries in the
processing and production of various products are solved by giving proper advice and
guidance. Analytical facilities available at the
laboratory are also being extended to
Industries.
8.92 DRDO has been identified as one of
the nodal centres to provide technical
backup to State Governments in the areas of
Agro-animal development and malaria
containment programmes. Technology of
‘Typhigen Kit’ developed by DRDO scientists has been transferred for commercial
use. Anthrax kits have been provided to the
World Health Organization for their regular
use.
8.93 The nuclear, biological and chemical
(NBC) respiratory mask, NBC leak tester,
integrated hood mask and
NBC resuscitator developed
by DRDO have led to produc
DRDO has identified

tion and have been supplied

a village- Ahom

to the Army. Canisters, per
Gaon-as a model

sonal decontamination kits

village to study the

and three colour detector

psychological impact

paper is also being produced

of socio-economic

for supply to the Army.

development in the

8.94Defence Food Research

North East.

Laboratory, Mysore has


transferred the technology for freeze drying
of fruit juices and hurdle preservation of
pineapple to M/s Transindia, Kolkata. The
firm is setting up a multi-fruit-processing
unit at Bodhjungnagar, Agartala.
8.95 DRDO has established a
Germplasm Centre of German Angora
Rabbit at Village Munisiyari in Pithoragarh
under the aegis of UNDP. The germplasm
has been maintained and multiplied by
farmers under the technical guidance of
DRDO. The farmers have been given theoretical and practical training on feeding,
breeding, management, record keeping,
shearing of wool and health cover aspects.
Good progress has been made at the
Germplasm Centre both in terms of multiplication of rabbits and marketing of adult
rabbits and angora woollens.
8.96 DRDO has also identified a village Ahom Gaon, as a model village to study the
psychological impact of socio-economic
development in the North East. Socialeconomic support was provided in terms of
materials like computers, sewing machines,
water pumps, and accessories for library and
recreation centre. The support resulted in a
positive change in attitude of the villagers.
8.97 Field Research Laboratory (FRL),
Leh and Defence Agricultural Research
Laboratory (DARL), Pithoragarh have
provided affordable agro-animal technologies for rural upliftment in their respective
areas.
8.98 DRDO has also established water
purification systems for removing of various
impurities like iron and salinity in various

113


-----

An advanced Anti-Submarine torpedo which can attack
targets at 540m depth

rural areas of north eastern region and
Rajasthan.

HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

8.99 Manpower Planning Board has been
constituted in the DRDO to look after
management and induction of scientific,
technical and administrative manpower. The
manpower requirement in all categories for
various DRDO projects has been reviewed,
through various mechanisms like rationalization of cadre structure, incentive schemes,
training policies, enhanced promotional
opportunities, exit interviews. The organization has endeavoured to ensure optimum


utilization of human resource, apart from
attracting and retaining best talents.
DRDO’s two training institutes - the Institute of Armament Technology (IAT) and the
Institute of Technology Management (ITM)
are also engaged in conducting specialized
courses. To make the exercise more effective
and result-oriented HRD cells have been set
up in all laboratories/establishments of
DRDO. DRDO is sensitive to the need with
regard to empowerment and welfare of its
women employees. Government instructions and directives issued on the subject
are being followed in this organization in
letter and spirit. It is ensured that women
employees are accorded equal opportunities
for enhancement of their skill and knowledge, fulfillment of their potential and
advancement in careers through various
mechanisms of human resource development. As per Government orders, laboratories of DRDO have already been advised to
set up Women’s Cells to look after the
welfare of women employees. A similar cell
has also been constituted at DRDO Headquarters for the purpose.

114


-----

### 99999

 INTER-SERVICE ORGANISATIONS

The National Defence College is a centre of excellence on National Security and Strategic Studies


-----

###### ourteen Inter-Service Organisations function
##### F

###### directly under the Ministry of Defence. They

 include diverse establishments like the Armed

 Forces Medical Services and the National

 Defence College.


###### ourteen Inter-Service Organisations function

 directly under the Ministry of Defence. They

 include diverse establishments like the Armed

 Forces Medical Services and the National

 Defence College.


9.1 The following Inter-Service Organisations function directly under the Ministry
of Defence :(i) Military Engineer Services
(ii) Armed Forces Medical Services
(iii) Directorate General of Defence
Estates
(iv) Office of the Chief Administrative
Officer
(v) Directorate of Public Relations
(vi) Army Purchase Organisation
(vii) Services Sports Control Board
(viii) Armed Forces Films and Photo
Division
(ix) School of Foreign Languages
(x) History Division
(xi) National Defence College
(xii) College of Defence Management
(xiii) Defence Services Staff College
(xiv) Ministry of Defence Library

MILITARY ENGINEER SERVICES

9.2 Military Engineer Services (MES),
the largest construction agency of the


country provides works cover in 450 stations in peace areas as well as in forward
areas. It is the premier engineering arm of
the Ministry of Defence which provides
works services to the three Defence Services
and other related departments, such as
Defence Research and Development Organisation, Directorate General of Quality
Assurance, Ordnance Factories, Coast
Guard, Kendriya Vidalaya Sangathan and
Central and State Government undertakings.
9.3 MES has a long and eventful history
and has grown along with the engineering
profession and the needs of the modern
hi-tech armed forces of independent India.
Today it handles annual workload, exceeding
Rs.3300 crores.
9.4 MES functions under the overall
control of the Engineer-in-Chief, who is the
adviser to the Ministry of Defence and the
three Services on construction engineering.
It is structured to design works, which are
executed through contracts under the
supervision of Officers and staff consisting

116


-----

of both civilians as well as combatants from
the Corps of Engineers. It has an integral
multi-disciplinary team of architects, civil,
electrical and mechanical engineers, structural designers, quantity surveyors and
contract specialists for planning, designing
and supervision of works. While the officers’ cadre has an All India Service liability,
the subordinates are restricted to area-based
requirements.
9.5 MES has specialized in wide spectrum of civil works, ranging from conventional buildings and factories to sophisticated complex laboratories, marine works,
jetties, dockyards, wharves, workshops,
slipways, airfields, roads, blast pens, etc. It
also provides sophisticated infrastructural
services like air-conditioning, cold storage,
water supply, compressed air, sewage treatment plants, lifts and crane for the Defence
Services.
9.6 Married Accommodation Project:
Under this project, a total of 1,98,012
dwelling units have been planned for construction in four phases. In the first phase,
60,789 dwelling units are to be constructed
for Army, Navy and Air Force in 79 stations
at an approximate cost of Rs.5320 crores.
The works have been
allotted to CPWD, DRDO

A total of 1,98,012

and three PSUs viz.

dwelling units

NBCC, IRCON, and

have been

RITES at 38 stations and

planned for

the balance stations have

construction

been allotted to DG MAP.

under Married

Concept Project

Accommodation

Reports(CPR) for 42

Project.

stations and Detailed


Project Reports(DPR) for 10 stations have
been approved.

ARMED FORCES MEDICAL SERVICES

9.7 The Armed Forces Medical Services
(AFMS), consisting of the Army Medical
Corps (AMC), the Army Dental Corps
(ADC) and the Military Nursing Services
(MNS) provide comprehensive health care to
the serving Armed Forces personnel, their
families and dependents, numbering approximately 6.6 million. In addition, exservicemen and their families are also
entitled to free medical treatment from
Services sources and so are para-military
organisations like Assam Rifles, Rashtriya
Rifles, Coast Guard, DRDO and Border
Road personnel, while posted in the field.
9.8 Armed Forces Medical Services are
also activated to aid civil authorities during
epidemics, natural calamities and internal
security duties, especially in inaccessible and
difficult areas. In addition to this, care is
also provided to all civilians by the establishments of AFMS in an emergency.
9.9 Infrastructure: The Armed Forces
Medical Services are the largest and
amongst the best organized health care
delivery systems in the country. There is a
network of Regimental Aid Posts manned by
doctors. These are supported by 89 Field
Ambulances, which are mobile 45 bedded
hospitals. Besides the facilities made available in combat zones, the AFMS has 127
hospitals of varying sizes in different parts of
the country. While the peripheral hospitals
have basic specialist facilities, the eight
Command/Army Hospitals have super

117


-----

specialist centers with stateof-the-art equipment and

The Armed Forces

facilities.

Medical Services

9.10Conferences and Con
are the largest and

tinuous Medical Education:

amongst the best

(a) Conference of the

organized health

APMMC (Asta Pacific Military

care delivery

Medicine Conference) was

systems in the

held in Thailand, Bangkok.

country.

Specialist Officers attended
the conference and presented
scientific papers.
(b) DGAFMS attended the Cardiology
Conferences at USA and Washington.
(c) 47 in-house CMEs (Continuous
Medical Education), Updates, Workshops and Seminars were organized.
(c) Approximately 1244 Armed Forces
Medical Officers attended various
Conferences/Workshops of 127 approved civil bodies all over the country.

9.11 Admission to MBBS Course at
AFMC, Pune: 87,245 candidates applied
for the written examination for admission to
the 2003 session for the MBBS course at
Armed Forces Medical College, Pune.
Based on their merit 939 candidates were
called for interview out of whom 130 have
been admitted for the MBBS Course 2003.
All candidates have liability to serve as
commissioned officers in the Army Medical
Corps on completion of the course.
9.12 Advanced Course: Medical Officers
of the Armed Forces Medical Services, on
the basis of a competitive examination, are
selected for Advanced Courses during
which they acquire Post-Graduate qualification from Pune and other Universities. 99


officers have been detailed for the purpose
during the year 2003.

DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF DEFENCE
ESTATES

9.13 The Directorate General, Defence
Estates is the nodal executive agency of the
Ministry of Defence for procurement of
immovable property for defence purposes by
way of acquisition, transfer, requisitioning
and hiring. There are a large number of
acquisition/transfer of land projects in
different states.
9.14 An amount of Rs.1518.74 lakh has
been allotted by Ministry of Defence for
acquisition of land for the three Services
during the year 2003-04.
9.15 Ex-gratia compensation has been
given to the farmers living in the border
areas of the states of Punjab, Jammu and
Kashmir and Rajasthan for the damages
occurred to their crops during the preparatory state of “Op Parakram”. An amount of
Rs. 10415.79 lakhs has been placed with
the respective Commands during the year
2003-04.
9.16 There are 62 Cantonments in India.
These are located in 19 States and the
National Capital Territory of Delhi. The
Cantonment Boards are autonomous bodies
functioning under the overall control of the
Ministry of Defence as per the provisions of
Cantonments Act, 1924. Cantonment
Boards comprise elected representatives
besides ex-officio and nominated members.
Parity is maintained between elected and
official members. The Station Commander
is the President of the Cantonment Board.

118


-----

Supervision and control over the working of
these bodies is exercised through the General Officer-in-Chief of the Commands at
the intermediate level and by the Central
Government through Director General
Defence Estates(DGDE), Ministry of Defence, at the apex level.
9.17 The resources of the Cantonment
Boards are very limited as the bulk of the
property in the Cantonment is Government
owned on which no tax can be levied.
Boards however receive payment of Service
Charges in respect of Central Government
properties. The nature of the Cantonment is
such that neither industries can come up nor
trade and business can achieve any significant growth.  The Central Government
provides financial assistance
by way of Grant-in-aid to a
certain extent to balance the

There are 62

budget.

Cantonments in India.

9.18To improve the overall

These are located in

performance and to inculcate

19 States and the

spirit of unity, a Cultural Meet

National Capital

of all Cantonment Board

Territory of Delhi

Schools was organized during
the year in which children
from different parts of the
country studying in Cantonment Board Schools participated.
9.19 Most of the Cantonment Boards are
maintaining hospitals or dispensaries to
cater to the needs of civil population of the
Cantonment. Total Hospitals/Dispensaries
maintained are 69 in number. Cantonment
Boards also maintain primary and Higher
Secondary Schools and Intermediate/Junior
colleges. Total schools and colleges main

tained by Cantonment Boards are 189 in
number.
9.20 The Director General, Defence
Estates functions as an adviser to the Ministry of Defence on land and Cantonment
Board matters. DGDE is an attached office
of Ministry of Defence responsible for
executive functions relating to hiring, requisition or acquisition of land and buildings to
meet the defence requirements. The defence
land considered temporarily/permanently
surplus is also disposed of by the Service by
way of license, lease or transfer to other
Central Government Departments/State
Government/PSUs or reputed schools/
institutions or ex-servicemen. While the
functions of the Directorate General, Defence Estates, in regard to the Cantonment
Boards relate to the municipal administration
of the Cantonments through Principal
Director/Directors, the Command and
Cantonment Executive Officers, its management of land, custody of land records,
procurement of immovable property is
carried out through Defence Estates officers.
Out of 17.31 lakh acres of defence land
holding 0.68 lakh acres of land is under the
direct management of DGDE.

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE
OFFICER

9.21 The office of the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) is responsible for providing civilian manpower and infrastructural
support to the Services Headquarters and
the Headquarter offices of Inter-Service
Organisations (ISOs) under the Ministry of
Defence. Joint Secretary (Training) dis
119


-----

charges the functions of the Chief Administrative Officer and Director (Security) as
well. In relation to security, he oversees the
work of the Chief Security Officer.
9.22 The functioning of CAO’s Office is
discharged by the following six Divisions:(i)Administration Division, (ii) Personnel
Division,   (iii) Manpower Planning and
Recruitment Division, (iv)Training,
Coordination and Welfare Division,
(v)Finance and Materials Divisions and
(vi)Estates and Works Division.
9.23 The Administration Division provides administrative cover to about 10,000
civilian employees employed in the Army
Headquarters and Inter-Service Organisations. A Grievances Cell is functioning
within the Administration Division to examine the grievances of serving/retired Armed
Forces Headquarters civilian employees and
to ensure their speedy settlement.
9.24 The Personnel Division provides
civilian manpower to the Service Headquarters and Inter- Service Organisations and
deals with the management of this manpower.
9.25 Manpower Planning and Recruitment Division is responsible for framing
policy on recruitment rules in consultation
with DOP&T and effecting direct Recruitment against all vacancies against civilian
posts in the Service Headquarters and ISOs
through prescribed channels.
9.26 Finance and Materials Division
provides material support which includes
procuring and provisioning of office equipment, stores, furniture and stationery to all
offices of Army Headquarters and ISOs.


9.27 The Defence Headquarter Training
Institute, functioning under the Training,
Coordination and Welfare Division of CAO’s
Office, caters for the training needs of the
civilian personnel posted in Service Headquarters and Inter-Service Organisations.
9.28 Estates and Works Division performs
the estate functions in respect of residential
accommodation of Service Officers posted at
Armed Forces Headquarters.
9.29 The CAO also looks after the
welfare of civilian employees in Service
Headquarters and the Ministry of Defence.
Armed Forces Headquarters/Inter-Service
Organisations Welfare Fund and Defence
Civilian Medical Aid Fund (DCMAF) provide
financial help to the employees during acute
distress.
9.30 The Chief Security Officer and the
personnel under his command ensure the
physical security of office buildings in the
Defence Security Zone under the supervision of JS (Trg) & CAO. Security of the
buildings has to be ensured to preclude
breach of physical security in the zone.
Efforts are also made through briefings to
sensitise officers and personnel on maintaining security of information.

DIRECTORATE OF PUBLIC RELATIONS

9.31 In a democratic polity such as
ours, the media plays a pivotal role in
disseminating information to the public.
Revolutionary changes in the field of communication technology have opened new
opportunities and challenges in the field of
information dissemination. The Directorate
of Public Relations with its Headquarters in

120


-----

New Delhi and 25 regional offices across
the country is the nodal agency for providing
media support and services to the Ministry
of Defence, the three Services and InterService Organisations under the Ministry of
Defence. It also facilitates media interaction
with the leadership and senior officials of the
Ministry of Defence and Armed Forces. The
Directorate brings out a fortnightly journal,
‘Sainik Samachar’, for the Armed Forces in
13 languages (Assamese, Bengali, English,
Gorkhali, Hindi, Kannada, Malayalam,
Marathi, Oriya, Punjabi, Tamil, Telegu and
Urdu), and coordinates the preparation of a
radio programme “Sainikon Ke Liye”, a
popular 40-minute daily programme broadcast over the All India Radio, for the benefit
of the Armed Forces personnel. The Directorate has a Photo Section that provides
photographs of defence-related events to
the print media.
9.32 Among the events covered by the
Directorate during the period 2003-04,
were relief operations for earthquake affected victims of Bam, Iran, by the Army and
Air Force, and flood relief operations in Sri
Lanka by the Navy which demonstrated the
Armed Forces disaster management response and international assistance and
solidarity. Major events pertaining to the
Indian Army ranged from coverage of the
major anti-terrorist operation in Surankot
region of J&K in May 2003, the Army
Commanders’ Conference held in October
2003, the Army Day function on January
15, 2004, and flood-relief operations in aid
of civil authorities in Bihar. In regard to the
activities of the Indian Navy, the Directorate
enabled media coverage of important events


such as the commissioning of Talwar-class
frigates, goodwill visits by the Indian naval
ships abroad, the round-the-world circumnavigation voyage by Indian Navy sail training ship, INS ‘Tarangini’, and joint naval
exercises with Russia off Mumbai and
Visakhapatnam in May 2003, with France
(‘Varuna’), off Mumbai in August 2003, the
US (‘Malabar’) off Kochi in October 2003,
the first ever India-China naval exercise held
off Shanghai in November 2003 and with
Singapore in March 2004. Navy’s assistance
in the flood-relief operations in Orissa were
also covered. For the Air force, IAF participation at Ex-Cope Thunder in Alaska in July
2003 and a joint display of IAF ‘Surya
Kirans’ and the Royal Air Forces’ ‘Red
Arrows’ at Hindon in October 2003 were
given good publicity. Visits of Defence
Ministers and Chiefs of Staff and Services,
were suitably projected. The DPR also
facilitated coverage of the successful test
flights of the supersonic cruise missile
Brahmos jointly developed by India and the
Russian Federation, the Pilotless Target
Aircraft, ‘Lakshya’, tests of the Agni-I,
Prithivi, Nag and Akash missiles conducted
by DRDO, flight trials of the Light Combat
Aircraft (LCA) ‘Tejas’, and the entry into
production of systems such as the Combat
Net Radio, serial production of the ‘Arjun’
Main Battle Tank (MBT), EW systems for
naval platforms and ‘Sarvatra’ bridging
systems.

ARMY PURCHASE ORGANISATION

9.33 Army Purchase Organisation (APO)
in the Ministry of Defence is entrusted with

121


New Delhi and 25 regional offices across
the country is the nodal agency for providing
media support and services to the Ministry
of Defence, the three Services and Inter-
Service Organisations under the Ministry of


-----

the responsibility of the procurement and
timely supply of dry ration items for the
consumption of the Defence Forces. APO
procures rice and wheat through the Food
Corporation of India; sugar is allotted by the
Directorate of Sugar out of levy quota
allocated to various sugar mills. Other items
like pulses, animal rations, edible oils,
vanaspati(hydrogenated edible oil), tea and
milk products are purchased from the
Central and State Public Sector Undertakings, and various National/State-Level
Cooperative Consumer Federations. Whole
milk powder, skimmed milk powder, butter
and ghee are purchased through negotiated
contracts from National Cooperative Dairy
Federation of India. Tinned items like
vegetables, fruits, jams, tinned milk, meat
and fish products, coffee, egg powder etc.
are procured from registered suppliers
including private parties/dealers through
open tender. The indented quantities are
procured specially during the flush season
when availability of the items is high and
prices are low.
9.34 During the year 2003-04, a budget
provision of Rs. 754 crore was provided to
the Army Headquarters for procurement of
the above items by this Organisation. The
said budget provision has been fully utilized.
9.35 The quality control of the contracted items is ensured by the Composite
Food Laboratories under the charge of the
Army Headquarters, who, after inspection and
acceptance of the tendered commodities, also
supervise dispatches of the goods to different
Supply Depots as per requirement.


SERVICES SPORTS CONTROL BOARD

9.36 Services Championships : The
Services Sports Control Board (SSCB)
conducts and co-ordinates various sports
activities in the three Services. A total of
four teams (Army Red, Army Green, Navy
and Air Force) participate in 19 Services
championships conducted under the aegis of
SSCB. During the year 2003-04, Army Red
were overall champions winning 14 out of

19 events. The Navy was second followed
by Army Green and Air Force.

9.37 National Championships : SSCB is
affiliated to 28 National Sports Federations
and participates in 38 National Championships including 10 Junior sections. In the
National Championships held during 200304, Services stood first in 11, Runner-up in
5, third in 5 and fourth in 3 events.

9.38 International Championships :
During this period, Services sportsmen
participated in the following International
Championships:
(i) 1[st] Afro-Asian Games: The 1[st] AfroAsian Games were conducted at Hyderabad
from October 24, 2003 to November 1,
2003. 24 Services sportsmen were part of
the Indian contingent and won 1 Gold, 4
Silver and 3 Bronze medals.

(ii) 3[rd] Military World Games: Indian
Armed Forces contingent consisting of 18
players and 8 officials took part in the 3[rd]

Military World Games, organized by the
International Military Sports Council (CISM)
held in Catania, Italy from December 4 to
11, 2003. One Bronze medal was awarded
to the Boxing Team.

122


-----

9.39Best Services Sportsman:

In the National On the basis of performance
Championships in the Services, National and
during 2003-04, International Championships
Services stood of the preceding year, one
first in 11, best sportsman is selected
Runner-up in five, from the three Services.
third in five and Company Havildar Major
fourth in three (CHM) Sanjay Ghosh of 1
events Signal Training Centre,

Jabalpur was adjudged “Best
Services Sportsman” for the year 2002-03
and the trophy was presented in November,
2003. The Athlete won two Gold medals in
4 X100 Mtr relay and 100 Mtr run in 32nd
National Games and won Bronze medals in
4[th] Asian Grand Prix Athletic Meet at Manila
(Philippines) in 4 X100 Mtr relay and 100
Mtr run in the same events, secured 5[th]

position in 14[th] Asian Athletic Championship
and 4[th] position in Asian Games at Busan
(Korea).
9.40 Arjuna Awardees: Two Services
sportsmen Warrant Officer Ram Mehar
Singh and Naib Subedar Inderpal Singh
were awarded Arjuna Awards in August
2003 in Kabaddi and Rowing respectively.

ARMED FORCES FILMS & PHOTO
DIVISION

9.41 The Armed Forces Films & Photo
Division (AFFPD) is primarily responsible to
meet the requirements of Services Headquarters and other Defence Organisations
with regard to production, procurement and
distribution of training films, production of
photographs and art work to meet the needs
of training, weapon trials, security, defence


research and intelligence. It also provides
photo and video coverage of ceremonial
functions of the Ministry of Defence.
9.42 AFFPD has a very rich collection of
rare films and photographs of pre-independence period of great historical value. It is
maintained and preserved in the Central
Defence Film Library of the Division. The
photographs depict, Indian forces in action
in the various theaters of Second World War,
ceremonial functions, personalities and
training activities. Some important film titles
preserved include Battle of Britain, Battle
of Russia, Battle of China, Desert Victory,
Japanese Surrender, Nazis Strikes, Burma
Campaign, Churchil the Man and London
Victory Parade.
9.43 The Central Defence Film Library
(CDFL) of this Division is responsible for
distribution of training films to various units/
formations/training establishments/commands, to meet their specific training requirements. The Library holds 570 titles in
35 mm sizes, 1010 in 16mm sizes and 310
in Video formats. During the year, 4031
training Films/Video Cassettes have been
distributed to the troops. This year CRPF
has also made use of 17 training films on
various subjects for training of their personnel.
9.44 This year three films have been
specially made for High Altitude Warfare
School to train troops how to deal with the
enemy occupying cliff tops in high altitude
mountain terrain and operations in glaciated
terrain. The films also teach how to negotiate glacier, carry out crevasses rescue and
operate in inhospitable snow bound areas

123


-----

and impart working knowledge of the causes
of different types of avalanche and methods
of avalanche rescue.
9.45 The Mobile Cinema Unit of this
Division also procures/distributes Documentary films/News Magazines of information,
cultural and family welfare values to the
troops in the forward areas.

SCHOOL OF FOREIGN LANGUAGES

9.46 The School of Foreign Languages
(SFL) has been a pioneer in foreign language
teaching in India since 1948. At present,
the School of Foreign Languages is engaged
in imparting training in 16 foreign languages
to personnel of the Armed Forces. It also
caters to the needs of the other Ministries of
the Government of India, such as the Ministry of External Affairs, the Cabinet Secretariat and the Central Police Organizations.
9.47 The languages taught on regular
basis at the SFL are - Arabic, Bhasa Indonesia, Burmese, Chinese, French, German,
Persian, Pushto, Russian, Spanish, Sinhala,
Tibetan and Thai. The courses offered by
the SFL are as follows:- (a) Interpretership
Course, (b) Certificate of Proficiency
Course, (c) Advanced Diploma Course and
(d) Short-term Course /Adhoc Course
9.48 The Interpretership Course is a full
time Course. The students are sponsored by
the Ministry of Defence, the Cabinet Secretariat and other Government Departments.
This course trains the students to become
experts in the highly skilled work of interpretation and translation. Furthermore, they are
trained in writing and speaking the language
with utmost fluency. The course is need

oriented and has been designed and formulated solely to meet the specific needs of the
Armed Forces.
9.49 The Certificate of proficiency
Course is followed by the Advanced Diploma Intensive Course. Both are part-time
courses and each of one year duration.
Together, this 2-year course is equivalent to
the 3 year Diploma Courses of the universities.
9.50 Short-term courses are purely needbased programmes. They are conducted as
and when necessary, especially for designated Military Attaches and officers being
sent on UN Missions.
9.51 The SFL is the controlling organization for other defence institutions namely
National Defence Academy, Pune and Army
Education Centre and Training College,
Pachmarhi, where foreign languages are
taught. It conducts their examinations and
issues diplomas to the successful candidates.
For the Indian Foreign Service probationers,
it is obligatory to pass Advanced Diploma
examination conducted by this Institute.
9.52 Capsule courses in Czeck, Hebrew,
Japanese, Malay, Thai and Vietnamese
languages are being imparted on specific
demands of Service Headquarters and also
as on requirement basis by various security
organizations. In addition, the following
technically intensive courses in Russian
languages have been successfully conducted
by the SFL:(a) At INS Hansa, Goa for Naval
Aviators under the aegis of Indian Navy;
(b) At Controller of Quality Assurance
(Heavy Vehicles), Avadi for Army per
124


-----

sonnel under the aegis of Director
General of Quality Assurance.

HISTORY DIVISION

9.53 Historical Section was created after
the end of World War II to prepare a detailed official history of the War with particular reference to the operations conducted by
the Armed Forces of undivided India. After
partition, it served as the Combined InterServices Historical Section (India and
Pakistan). The official history of the Armed
Forces of undivided India in World War II
(1939-45) was brought out in 24 volumes
by the Combined Inter-Services Historical
Section (India and Pakistan). On completion
of the work it was wound up in 1963.
9.54 In the meanwhile, Historical Section
(India) was established on October 26,
1953 to write and publish the official
account of the post independence military
operations of the Indian Armed Forces.
History of the operations in Jammu and
Kashmir (1947-48) was its first assignment.
Till now, it has brought out 19 volumes. The
Historical Section was redesignated as
History Division with effect from April 1,
1992.
9.55 The History Division functions as
the military archives and reference organization of the Ministry of Defence and the
Indian Armed Forces. It also provides expert
advice to the Ministry of Defence and the
three Services Headquarters on matters
relating to heraldry and ceremonials. During
the year, about 4,200 operational records
were received from the Services Headquarters, Units and Formations for permanent


retention in the History Division. About 350
service officers and scholars visited the
record room to consult records and books in
connection with research assignments
pertaining to military history. This Division
has provided information relating to military
history in respect of over 275 queries
received from various Units and Formations,
and scholars from India and abroad.
9.56 This Division also provides two
Research fellowships for conducting research
in military history under the Research
Fellowship Scheme of the Ministry of Defence.
9.57 The Heraldic Cell of the History
Division has been assisting the three Services Headquarters and the Ministry of
Defence by suggesting names for new
establishments, designing of crests and
badges and coining suitable mottoes for
Units and Formations.

NATIONAL DEFENCE COLLEGE

9.58 The National Defence College
(NDC) was inaugurated on April 27, 1960
by the first Indian Prime Minister, Pandit
Jawahar Lal Nehru. Located in the heart of
Delhi, the College has grown from strength
to strength in the last 43 years and has
established a name for itself as a center of
excellence on matters pertaining to National
Security and Strategic Studies. It has
evolved into an institution that seeks to
comprehend and interpret the dynamics of
India’s Security Strategy in a world of
transition.
9.59 The NDC runs a 47-week course
every year for selected Senior Defence and

125


the military archives and reference organiza-
tion of the Ministry of Defence and the
Indian Armed Forces. It also provides expert
advice to the Ministry of Defence and the
three Services Headquarters on matters
relating to heraldry and ceremonials. During
the year, about 4,200 operational records
were received from the Services Headquar-
ters, Units and Formations for permanent


-----

Civil Service Officers from

The NDC runs a 47- India and friendly foreign
week course every countries. The endeavour is to
year for selected prepare the future policy
Senior Defence and makers for increased responsiCivil Service Officers bility through a programme of
from India and friendly studies in National Security
foreign countries. and Strategies. The course is

structured to cover sociopolitical, economic, technological, diplomatic and military dimensions
of national security. The alumni of the NDC
have risen to high positions in India as also
in foreign countries.
9.60 In October 2003, the 7[th] ASEAN
Regional Forum (ARF) Meet of Heads of
National Defence Universities/Colleges/
Institutions was hosted by the NDC on
behalf of the Ministry of Defence. The event
was spread over three days and was a
resounding success. It has contributed
towards fulfillment of the ARF objectives of
peaceful cooperation in the South East
Asian region.

COLLEGE OF DEFENCE MANAGEMENT

9.61 Institute of Defence Management,
Secunderabad, was established in 1970. It
was renamed as the College of Defence
Management (CDM) in 1980. The CDM
conducts training programmes oriented
towards the application of management
concepts and techniques to defence situations in all facets : operations, logistics,
intelligence and training. The prominent
programmes conducted by CDM are Long
Defence Management Course, Senior
Defence Management Course, Defence


Management Seminar and Assignment
Oriented Management Training Programme.
The college also undertakes management
consultancy studies. The college is equipped
with modern and state-of-the-art training aids.

DEFENCE SERVICES STAFF COLLEGE

9.62 The Defence Services Staff College
(DSSC) is one of the oldest military institutions which was established in 1905 in
Deolali and has been functioning at Wellington since 1950. The DSSC imparts training
to middle level officers of the three Services
besides a few civilian officers and officers
from friendly foreign countries. The college
conducts a 45-week training programme
from June to April every year. The Staff
Course at DSSC aims at imparting training
in operational and staff functions in an InterService as well as Joint Service environment.
The training enables the officers to effectively perform any staff/ operational appointment as Major/ Lieutenant Colonel and
equivalent ranks in other Services.

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE LIBRARY

9.63 The Ministry of Defence Library,
provides literature on subjects relevant to
planning and policy formulation in the
Ministry of Defence, three Services Headquarters, Inter Service Organisations and
other allied Defence Establishments located
in Delhi. It specialises  in Defence and
related subjects, besides catering to the
needs of general readers. The reading
material for the library is selected by Book
Selection Sub-Committee.  During the year,
the library added 2128 books, subscribed
to 110 journals and 23 Newspapers.

126


-----

### 1010101010

 RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING

Passing Out Parade at the National Defence Academy (NDA), Khadakvasla


-----

###### he recruitment to the Armed Forces is
##### T

###### voluntary and every citizen of India, irrespective

 of his caste, class, religion and community is

 eligible for recruitment to the Armed Forces.


###### he recruitment to the Armed Forces is

 voluntary and every citizen of India, irrespective

 of his caste, class, religion and community is

 eligible for recruitment to the Armed Forces.


10.1 The Armed Forces epitomize the
ideals of service, sacrifice, patriotism and
our country’s composite culture. The
recruitment to the Armed Forces is voluntary and every citizen of India, irrespective
of his caste, class, religion and community,
is eligible for recruitment to the Armed
Forces provided he meets the laid down
physical, medical and educational criteria.

RECRUITMENT BELOW OFFICER RANK

10.2 The Army has 11 Zonal Recruiting
Offices, 58 Branch Recruiting Offices, 1
Gorkha Recruiting Depot, Kunraghat and an
Independent Recruiting Office at Delhi
Cantonment. In addition 47 Regimental
Centres are also entrusted with the task of
recruitment to the Army.

RECRUITMENT OF AIRMEN

10.3 Unmarried male Indian citizens
irrespective of caste, creed and religion and
domicile (subject of Nepal) are eligible for
recruitment to the Indian Air Force provided


they meet the laid down physical, age and
educational criteria. The selection of suitable
candidates for enrolment in the IAF is
carried out through a centralized selection
system on All India basis.

RECRUITMENT OF SAILORS

10.4 Naval Recruitment Organisation
(NRO) of the Directorate of Manpower
Planning and Recruitment at Naval Headquarters is responsible for recruitment of
sailors in the Indian Navy. Recruitment of
sailors is carried out for the following
entries:- (a) Direct entry artificers with three
years diploma (DEDH), (b) Artificer apprentices (AA) – (10 + 2), (c) Matric entry
recruits (MER), (d) Non-matric entry recruits
(NMER), (e) Direct entry petty officers
(outstanding Sportsmen)
10.5 Recruitment Procedure: Recruitment into the Navy is carried out on AllIndia basis. The recruitment tests are carried
out at 30 centres located throughout the
country. The number of personnel recruited

128


-----

depends on the number of eligible applicants who are able to qualify in the written
examination, physical fitness test and medical examination. No preference is given on
the basis of caste, religion or area.

10.6 Improvement in Educational Qualifi
cations: The educational qualification for

Soldier Clerk/Store Keeper Technical,

Soldier Technical and Nursing Assistant has

been enhanced from existing 10[th]/Matric to

10 + 2/Intermediate pass with effect from

April 1, 2003. Detail are as under:

Young aspirants keen to join the Air Force

through the Union Public Service Commis
sion (UPSC). Recruitment is made directly
through the respective Recruiting Directorates for the Army, the Navy and the Air


(a) Soldier Clerk/* Store-Keeper/ (i) 10 + 2/Intermediate examination pass from
Technical any stream (Arts, Commerce, Science with
English) with minimum 50% marks in
aggregate.
(ii) Individual should have secured minimum
40% marks in each subject.
(iii) Individual with proficiency in Computer and
typing will be given additional weightage of
20% as bonus marks on the marks scored by
the candidate in written examination
(Common Entrance Examination only)*
Graduates have been exempted from the
above minimum marks stipulation.
(b) Soldier: Technical (i) 10 + 2/Intermediate exam pass in Science
with Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics and
English with minimum 50% marks in
aggregate.
(ii) Individual should have secured minimum
40% marks in each subject specified for the
trade.

(c) Soldier: Nursing Assistant (i) 10 + 2/Intermediate exam pass in Science
with Physics, Chemistry, Biology and English
with minimum 50% marks in aggregate.
(ii) Individual should have secured minimum
40% marks in each subject.


COMMISSIONING OF OFFICERS

10.7 Recruitment of Commissioned
Officers in the Armed Forces is mainly done


Force for Technical Branches, Women
Special Entry Scheme, NCC Special Entry
Scheme and service entries.

129


-----

Finally selected candidates join the respective training academies, viz., the Indian
Military Academy (IMA)/Officers Training
Academy(OTA) for the Army, the Naval
Academy for the Navy and the Air Force
Academy for the Air Force.

RECRUITMENT THROUGH SELECTION
BOARDS

10.10 Recruitment through Service Selection Boards/Air Force Selection Board is
made for the following branches of the
Army, the Navy and the Air Force:

Commissioning ceremony of new officers at the Indian
Military Academy

RECRUITMENT THROUGH THE UPSC

10.8 The UPSC holds an examination for
entry into the National Defence Academy
(NDA) twice a year. Candidates on completion of the 10+2 Examination or while in
the 12[th] standard, are eligible to compete.
Successful candidates are put through the

Service Selection Board (SSB) interviews.
Finally selected candidates join the NDA.
On completion of the NDA course, they are
sent to the respective Services academies
for their pre-commission training.
10.9 The UPSC holds an all-India competitive examination, known as the Combined Defence Services Examination
(CDSE), twice a year. University graduates
including those studying in the final year,
are eligible to appear in the examination.
Successful candidates are put through the
Service Selection Board (SSB) interviews.


ARMY All Arms and Services except
Army Medical Corps and
Army Dental Corps

NAVY Electrical Engineering,
Engineering (Naval
Architects),Logistics, Law,
Education, Air Traffic Control,
Executive, Hydro, Naval
Armament Inspection

AIR FORCE Flying Pilot (FP), Aeronautical
Engineering (Electronics),
AeronauticalEngineering
(Mechanical), Education,
Administration,Logistics,
Accounts and Meteorology.

AERONAUTICAL ENGINEERING COURSE
(AEC)

10.11 Aeronautical Engineering Course
envisages recruitment of qualified technical
graduates through the Air Force Selection
Boards (AFSBs), to attend training at the Air
Force Academy, Hyderabad, followed by Air
Force Technical College (AFTC), Bangalore.
On successful completion of training at the
AFTC, they are inducted in Electronics and
Mechanical streams of the Technical Branch.
10.12 University Entry Scheme: Final/pre
130


-----

Government has
approved the creation
of a 6,000 strong
Support Cadre of
Special
Commissioned
Officers to be filled
by eligible Junior
Commissioned
Officers and Other
Ranks


final year students in the
notified Engineering disciplines are eligible to apply for
commission into the technical
Arms/Services of the Army
under the University Entry
Scheme. Finally selected
candidates are required to
undergo one year training at
IMA, Dehradun, before being
Commissioned.

TECHNICAL GRADUATES
(TG) ENTRY


Commissioned Officers in the following
Arms/Services of the Armed Forces:


10.13 Engineering graduates from Notified
disciplines of Engineering including those
studying in the final year are eligible to apply
for commission into the Army through TGC
Entry. Selected candidates are commissioned after one year training at IMA,
Dehradun.

Short Service Commission (Technical)

10.14 Engineering graduates from Notified disciplines of Engineering including
those studying in the final year are eligible to
apply for Short Service Commission into
Technical Arms/Services through this entry.
Selected candidates are commissioned after
11-months training at OTA, Chennai.

RECRUITMENT OF WOMEN OFFICERS

10.15 Women Special Entry Scheme
(WSES-O) is open to eligible women in
three streams, namely, Technical, nonTechnical and Specialist. On selection they
undergo six months training at OTA Chennai
and are commissioned as Short Service


ARMY Corps of Electrical and
Mechanical Engineers, Corps
of Signals, Army Education
Corps, Army Ordnance
Corps, Army Service Corps,
Corps of Military Intelligence
and Judge Advocate General’s
Branch

NAVY Engineering(Naval Architects),
Logistics, Law, Education, Air
Traffic Control

AIR FORCE Flying, Aeronautical Engineering (Electronics), Aeronautical Engineering (Mechanical),
Education, Administration,
Logistics, Accounts and
Meteorology

NCC SPECIAL ENTRY

10.16 University graduates possessing
NCC ‘C’ Certificate with a minimum ‘B’
grade and 50% marks in graduation are
eligible to apply for commission into the
Navy and the Air Force as Regular Commissioned Officers and as Short Service Commissioned Officers in the Army. They are
exempted from appearing in the written
exam (CDSE) and are directly put through
the SSB interview. Finally selected candidates undergo 11 months training at OTA,
Chennai, before being Commissioned.

SPECIAL COMMISSIONED OFFICERS

10.17 Government has approved the
creation of a 6,000 strong Support Cadre of
Special Commissioned Officers to be filled
by eligible JCOs and ORs. Under this entry,
JCOs/NCOs/ORs in the age group of 30-35
years, with an Army Senior School Certifi
131


-----

cate Pass (Class XI CBSE Pattern) qualification, are eligible for Commission after
screening/selection through Service Selection Board and a Medical Board. They have
to undergo a pre-commission training of one
year duration at IMA, Dehradun. The
officers so commissioned earn promotion
upto the rank of Colonel. The rules for
substantive promotion and acting promotion
are the same as for regular officers. These
officers are employed in units as sub unit
Commanders/Quarter Masters and on
various ERE appointments upto the rank of
Major. They retire at the age of 57 years
after serving about 20-25 years as officers.
The scheme not only improves the career
prospects of the existing JCOs/NCOs/ORs
but also helps in making up the deficiency of
officers in the Army to a considerable
extent.

10.18 SNCO Commissioning in IAF:
Under this entry, serving personnel with
minimum 10 years of service (of technical
and non-technical trades) of the rank of
Sergeant and above upto the age of 36
years and minimum educational qualification
as 10 + 2, are eligible for Commission in
the Indian Air Force after screening at unit
level followed by AFSB selection tests and
medical examination. However, candidates
possessing higher education qualification are
preferred. Service personnel of technical
trades are inducted in the Technical Branch
and personnel from non-technical trades are
inducted in the Ground Duty Branches.
10.19 Branch Commissioning: Under this
entry, serving personnel of technical and
non-technical trades of the rank of Sergeant


and above in the age group of 37 to 42
years with minimum educational qualification
as 10[th] pass, are eligible for Commission in
the Indian Air Force after clearing a written
exam, followed by AFSB selection tests and
medical examination. Service personnel of
technical trades are inducted in the Technical Branch and personnel from non-technical
trades are inducted in the Ground Duty
Branches.
10.20 Technical Entry Scheme (10 + 2
TES): Qualified 10+2 CBSE/State Board
candidates with Physics, Chemistry and
Maths are eligible for commission in the
Army under the Technical Entry Scheme
(TES). On selection, they undergo one year
basic training at IMA Dehradun and thereafter undergo three years Engineering degree
course. On being commissioned they are
further put through one year specialized
training. Though technical entrants, they are
liable for commissioning into any Arm/
Service of the Army.
10.21 10+2 Technical Entry Scheme Of
The Navy: Under the scheme, candidates
with PCM in class XII are selected through
the Services Selection Board, and are sent
to INS Shivaji for four years B.Tech degree
course in Marine Engineering/Electrical
Engineering. 12 cadets from each batch are
nominated for Naval Architecture degree
course at Cochin University of Science and
Technology (CUSAT). These cadets are
granted Permanent Commission (PC) as Sub
Lieutenants. The aim of this scheme is to
provide well trained technical officers to
meet the requirement of PC officers in the
Technical Branch.

132


-----

RECRUITMENT OF MEDICAL AND
DENTAL OFFICERS

10.22 Medical graduates from the Armed
Forces Medical College, Pune are directly
inducted as Permanent Commissioned
Medical Officers in the Armed Forces. For
recruitment of Regular Commissioned/Short
Service Commissioned Medical Officers
from the Graduates/Post Graduates of Civil
Medical Colleges, the Directorate General

of the Armed Forces Medical Services
conducts an all-India competitive examination.

PUBLICITY FOR RECRUITMENT

10.23 Measures have been taken to make
the youth of our country more aware of the
opportunities in the Army for the officers
cadre. The means of publicity adopted to
attract better talent are as follows:
(a) Press Advertisements: Advertisements are released through the Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity
(DAVP) in the Employment News/Rozgar
Samachar and in newspapers
in different languages for
various entries viz –UPSC

Image Projection

and non-UPSC entries. UPSC

Campaigns were

entries include the National

launched in print,

Defence Academy(NDA),

audio, visual and

Indian Military

audio-visual media to

Academy(Direct Entry) and

make young persons

Officers Training

aware of the

Academy{Short Service

opportunities available

Commission(Non-technical)}.

as commissioned

Non-UPSC entries include

officers.

Technical Graduate
Commission(TGC), University


Entry Scheme(UES), 10+2 Technical
Entry Scheme(TES), Short Service
Commission(Technical), Women Special
Entry Scheme (Officers), Short Service
Commission(NCC Special Entry) and
Judge Advocate General(JAG) Branch for
law graduates. Advertisements are also
released for Other Rank categories viz.
Havildar Instructors and Junior Commissioned Officers (Catering and Religious
Teachers) etc. Concerned Zonal Recruitment Offices (ZROs)/Branch Recruitment Offices (BROs) also publish advertisements on recruitment of Other Ranks
in the local regional newspapers. Advertisements are also published in journals
brought out by educational institutions.
(b) Hoardings: Hoardings are erected
at selected places in the country to
attract young men and women to join
the Armed Forces.
(c) Printed Publicity: Information
folders, leaflets, brochures, data cards,
posters and blow-ups, prepared through
the DAVP and private professional
agencies, are widely distributed in
schools and colleges.
(d) Exhibition and Fairs: Every year, at
the Defence pavilion at the India International Trade Fair, New Delhi, a stall is
established where information regarding
recruitment is provided to visitors. This
is also done in other organized fairs,
which are career oriented and meant for
students.
(e) Image Projection Campaign: To
make young persons aware of the opportunities available as commissioned


133


-----

officers, the following Image Projection
Campaigns (IPC) were launched in print,
audio, visual and audio-visual media :
(i) IPC-I - September 1997 to March 1998

(ii) IPC-II - August 1999 to August 2000

(iii) IPC-III - June 2002 to May 2003

Based on the inputs received from the above
three campaigns, the fourth phase of the
Image Projection Campaign (IPC-IV) is to be
launched shortly.


TRAINING FOR DEFENCE
SERVICES

Several features
distinguish Human 10.24 Several features
Resource distinguish Human Resource
Management in the Management in the Defence
Defence Sector. Sector. Training being imTraining aims to parted aims to equip the
equip the officers officers and soldiers with
and soldiers with necessary inputs to make them
necessary inputs to efficient fighting men and also
make them efficient well-informed on national and
fighting men and international developments.
also well-informed on The environment in which the
national and defence officers have to work,
international demand a holistic approach to
developments. training. The training require
ments are properly matched
for the freshly recruited
officers, for officers in need of
advanced and specialized training, and for
Other Ranks (ORs). Accordingly, a large
number of training institutions in the Defence Sector work in coordination with one
another to achieve these objectives.


SAINIK SCHOOLS

10.25 The Sainik Schools were established


as a joint venture of the Central and State
Governments. These are under the overall
governance of the Sainik Schools Society.
At present there are 20 Sainik Schools,
including the two Sainik Schools which were
inaugurated on October 12, 2003 at
Nalanda and Gopalganj in Bihar. The Sainik
Schools prepare boys academically, physically and mentally to enter Armed Forces
through the National Defence Academy
(NDA).
10.26 The objectives of the Sainik Schools
is to bring quality public school education
within the reach of common man, all round
personality development of a child and to
remove regional imbalace in the officer’s
cadre of the Armed Forces. Sainik Schools
have been fulfilling their objective for which
adequate and varied infrastructure/equipment have been provided.
10.27 Sainik Schools admit students in
classes VI and IX. Their age should be 1011 years for class VI and 13-14 years for
class IX as on 1[st] July of the year in which
admission is sought. Admissions are made
strictly on the basis of an Entrance Examination held in February each year. Admission is
further subject to the candidates being
found medically fit according to medical
standards prescribed for entry to National
Defence Academy (NDA). The Sainik
Schools are affiliated to CBSE. As on date,
about 6000 officers of the Defence forces
are alumni of Sainik Schools.

MILITARY SCHOOLS

10.28 The five Military Schools in the
country at Ajmer, Bangalore, Belgaum,

134


-----

Dholpur and Chail are affiliated to CBSE. The Military

The National

Schools admit boys in class

Defence Academy

VI, based on an all India

is a premier Joint

Entrance Examination. In the

Services Institution

Military Schools, 67% seats

for training of young

are reserved for the wards of

cadets as future

JCOs/ORs called “entitled

officers of the

category”. Out of the 33%

Defence Services.

non-entitled category seats,
20% are reserved for wards of
service officers and 13% for
wards of civilians.
10.29 The aim of the
Military Schools is to impart quality education to enable the students to take All India
Secondary School Examination and Senior
Secondary Certificate Examination conducted by CBSE and also to facilitate their
entry into the NDA.

RASHTRIYA INDIAN MILITARY COLLEGE,
DEHRADUN

10.30 Rashtriya Indian Military College
(RIMC) was founded on March 13, 1922
with the object of providing preliminary
training for boys of Indian birth or domicile,
wishing to become officers in Indian Armed
Forces. The institution now serves as a
feeder institution to the National Defence
Academy, Khadakwasla (Pune), wherein
cadets of the Army, Navy and Air Force
receive their initial training. The aim of this
College is to train suitable candidates for
admission to the NDA. Selection for the
RIMC is through a written examination-cumviva-voce conducted through the State
Governments. Seats for respective States


are reserved based on their population.
Intake into the RIMC is biennial in January
and August, 25 cadets per term with maximum strength of RIMC being 250. The
intake of boys is at Class VIII in the age
group of 11 ½ to 13 years. The college
runs classes from 8th to 12th on 10+2
CBSE pattern.

NATIONAL DEFENCE ACADEMY,

KHADAKVASLA

10.31 The National Defence Academy
(NDA) is a premier Joint Services Institution
for training of young cadets as future officers
of the Defence Services.
10.32 Entry into NDA is based on a
competitive examination conducted by
UPSC. Cadets of all the three Services viz.
Army, Navy and Air Force undergo combined training at NDA for three years. After
passing out from the NDA, the cadets go to
their respective Service academies for
specialised training before being commissioned in the Armed Forces. The Academy
is a unique institution wherein Inter Service
aspects are developed right from the formative stages of an officer, thus developing a
bond of friendship and respect for each
other’s service.
10.33 The academic curriculum of NDA is
in tune with the national educational format
of 10+2+3. The syllabus of the Academy
has been approved by the Jawaharlal Nehru
University for grant of B.A. or B.Sc. degree
at the time of passing out from the Academy. The present strength of NDA is 1788
including cadets from friendly foreign countries. Presently cadets from Bhutan,

135


-----

President Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam inspecting the Guard of Honour at the National Defence Academy, Khadakvasla.


Maldives, Lesotho, Krygstan and Palestine
are undergoing training at NDA.
10.34 Indian Military Academy, Dehradun:
The Indian Military Academy (IMA),
founded in 1932, has a glorious and colourful history. Aim of the IMA is to train
Gentlemen Cadets (GCs) for commission

into the Army. It also has a wing for training
service cadets selected for commission in
the Army. The IMA also imparts training to
Gentlemen Cadets from friendly countries.

10.35 The various modes of entry into
IMA are: (a) on graduation from NDA; (b) on
graduation from Army Cadet College,
which is a Wing of the IMA itself; (c)
direct entry graduate cadets, who join
on qualifying in the Union Public Service
Commission Examination and the Services Selection Board; (d) Technical


Graduates; (e) University Entry Scheme
for engineering college students in Final/
Pre-Final year of studies; and (f) 10+2
Technical Entry Scheme for candidates
who have passed 10+2 with more than
70% marks in Physics, Chemistry and
Mathematics.

OFFICERS TRAINING ACADEMY,
CHENNAI

10.36 The Officers Training Academy
(OTA) was established in 1963 as ‘Officers
Training School’ to meet increased demand
of officers in the Army. It was re-designated
as ‘Officers Training Academy’ from January
1, 1988 on completion of 25 years of its
existence. Its main task was to train Gentlemen Cadets for grant of Emergency Commission but from 1965 onwards after which
the Emergency Commission was dispensed
with, the Academy started training cadets for

136


-----

Short Service Commission.

Since September 21, 10.37 Since September
1992, the Indian 21, 1992, the Indian Army
Army has opened up has opened up its portals for
its portals for entry of entry of women as commiswomen as sioned officers. Initially 50
commissioned lady cadets were commisofficers. sioned every year with the
Approximately 100 entries presently limited to
Lady Officers get Army Service Corps, Army
commissioned from Ordnance Corps, Army
Officers Training Education Corps, Judge
Academy every year. Advocate General’s Depart
ment, Corps of Engineers,
Signals and Electrical and
Mechanical Engineers. Approximately 100
Lady Officers get commissioned from OTA
every year.
10.38 The OTA imparts pre-commission
training for the following courses:
(a) Short Service Commission(NonTechnical) for Graduates, (b) Short
Service Commission(Technical) for
Engineering Graduates and (c) Short
Service Commission (Women) for
Graduate/Post Graduate Lady Cadets.

ARMY WAR COLLEGE, MHOW

10.39 Army War College, earlier known as
College of Combat was created out of the
Infantry School and established as an independent institution on April 1, 1971. It is a
premier All-Arms-Tactical-Training Institution
for officers and performs the important
functions of evaluation of new concepts and
doctrines in the fields of tactics and logistics.


10.40 Courses: The Higher Command
(HC) Course aims at training officers for
higher command, with particular reference
to a Division and for holding senior staff
appointments. Senior Command(SC)
Course is to train selected Majors/Lieutenant Colonels of all arms and services in the
tactical employment of a Battalion/Combat
Group as a part of a Brigade or Combat
Command in cooperation with air and other
arms and services, as also, in the training
and administration of a unit in peace and
war. To train officers of all arms and services with not less than six years of service in
the tactical employment of a Rifle Company/
Combat Team, the College imparts Junior
Command(JC) Course. For potential Grade-I
and above logistics staff officers in operational and peace time logistics and administration, there is All Arms Logistics Course
(AALC). To prepare potential divisional
commanders for command of their formations in field and peace. The college also
undertakes Formation Commanders Orientation Programme (FCOP).

JUNIOR LEADERS WING, BELGAUM

10.41 The Junior Leaders Wing, Belgaum
trains junior officers, JCOs and NCOs in
Sub Unit level Tactical and Special Mission
technique to make them capable to carry
out assigned operational missions in varied
terrain conditions under severe stress and
strain and be able to command and administer their Sub Units effectively in war and
peace. It prepares them in commando type
operations and make them capable of

137


-----

tactical and administrative handling of the
sub-unit, forming part of special mission
groups and leading independent missions in
all types of terrain and operational environments.

JUNIOR LEADERS ACADEMY, BAREILLY


JUNIOR LEADERS ACADEMY, RAMGARH

10.43 A second adhoc Junior Leaders
Academy was raised at Panagarh in July
2001. The Academy was moved to
Ramgarh in January 2002. The Academy
was fully raised at Ramgarh with one company and become the Second Junior Leaders
Academy with effect from November 1,
2002. This Academy too, is an all Arms
and Services training institution like JLA

Bareilly, with the sole aim of training Junior
Leaders (JCOs/ORs) of Indian Army in
leadership, resource management, decision
making and communication skills.

DEFENCE SERVICES STAFF COLLEGE,
WELLINGTON


10.42 The Junior Leaders Academy (JLA)

Academy with effect from November 1,

imparts institutionalised leadership training

2002. This Academy too, is an all Arms

for our Junior Leaders i.e. JCOs and NCOs.

and Services training institution like JLA

The following two types of JL courses are

Bareilly, with the sole aim of training Junior

conducted for the JCOs/NCOs of all arms

Leaders (JCOs/ORs) of Indian Army in

and services :
leadership, resource management, decision

(a) Junior Leaders Course (JLC) : A

making and communication skills.

six week course is conducted for newly
promoted JCOs and NCOs approved for DEFENCE SERVICES STAFF COLLEGE,
promotion to the rank of the JCO. Six WELLINGTON
courses are conducted annually to train

10.44 The Defence Services Staff College

3240 JCOs;

(DSSC) is a premier tri-service training

(b) Potential Subedar Majors Orienta
establishment imparting training to middle

tion Course (PSM) : Newly promoted

level officers of the three wings of the Indian

Subedar Majors or Senior Subedars

Armed Forces, friendly foreign countries and

approved for promotion to Subedar

the Indian civil services. The alumni of this

Majors undergo a four week course. Six

college have risen to great eminence in the

courses are conducted annually to train

country and abroad.

640 JCOs.

10.45 The college was established in
1905 in Deolali and has been functioning at
Wellington since 1950. The College conducts a 45- week training programme from
June to April every year, sub-divided into six
tutorial periods each of five to nine weeks.
The aim of the course is to train selected
officers of the three Services in command
and staff functions in inter-service and joint
service environment.
10.46 Award of M.Sc. (Defence and
Junior Leaders are trained at Bareilly and Ramgarh Strategic Studies) Degree : The DSSC


138


-----

Training at ‘Siachin Battle School’

awards the symbol of PSC (passed staff
course) on successful completion of training.
The DSSC is affiliated to the University of
Madras which awards M. Sc. in Defence
and Strategic Studies degree to all students
who qualify the course. Officers on the
faculty of the College, with aptitude for
academic research, can register for M Phil
degree.

HIGH ALTITUDE WARFARE SCHOOL,
GULMARG

10.47 The Aim of the School is to train
selected personnel in all aspects of high
altitude warfare, mountain warfare and
develop techniques for fighting in such
terrain. The School functions as the Army’s
nodal instructional facility for specialised
training and dissemination of approved
doctrines in High Altitude, Mountain and
Snow Warfare.
10.48 HAWS conducts two series of
courses i.e. Mountain Warfare(MW) and
Winter Warfare (WW) at Sonmarg and
Gulmarg respectively. All courses are
combined for officers, JCOs and NCOs.


The training periods are broadly from
January to April (WW Series) and May to
October (MW Series).

COUNTER-INSURGENCY & JUNGLE
WARFARE SCHOOL, VEIRANGTE

10.49 The Counter-Insurgency & Jungle
Warfare (CIJW) School, Veirangte evolves
and reviews tactical doctrine and techniques
regularly for operations in Counter Insurgency & Jungle Warfare and keeps abreast of
all tactical and technical aspects of insurgency in all parts of the world. The School
conducts Counter-Insurgency Techniques
course; language courses in Assamese,
Bodo, Nagamese and Manipuri/Tangkhul for
Officers, JCOs/NCOs; and Pilot Counter
Terrorism (CT) course.

10.50 A number of students from paramilitary forces and friendly foreign countries
like Sri Lanka, Nepal, Singapore, Kenya, Iraq
and USA also attend the courses conducted
by CIJW School. With the present capacity,
the school is training 120 Officers and 460
JCOs/NCOs.

139


-----

COUNTER-INSURGENCY-PREINDUCTION TRAINING


10.51 Due to continuation of the insurgency problem in J&K and in the East, a
need was felt to impart pre-induction training to all units being inducted into counterinsurgency environment. Capacity of CIJW
School was limited. Besides, due to peculiar
operational situation and administrative
problems of movement of units, it was

necessary to impart training to units in areas
closer to their operation areas.
To overcome these problems,

Pre-induction three Theatre Battle Schools
training is given to were established at Kheru for
all units inducted units moving into the Kashmir
into counter- Valley; at Sarol for units
insurgency moving into Chamba and
environment adjoining areas and at

Thakurbari for units moving
into Assam and Meghalaya.
Pre-induction training in these
schools has benefited all the units, as they
were able to understand the peculiarities of
the insurgency problem in their locality.
Besides training for counter insurgency,
these schools especially in the Northern
Command are training units for their role
along the Line of Control and in high altitude areas

INFANTRY SCHOOL, MHOW

10.52 The Infantry School, Mhow, is the
largest and the oldest military training
institution of the Indian Army. The origin of
the institution can be traced back to the year
1885. The present Infantry School owes its


origin to a decision taken shortly after
independence to amalgamate the country’s
various tactical and weapons training institutions into one single school of instruction at
Mhow.
10.53 Eleven courses are conducted at
Infantry School (including Junior Leaders
Wing) viz. Young Officers Course, Ghatak
Course, Platoon Weapon Course, Mortar
Course, Anti-Tank and Guided Missile
Course, Platoon Commanders Course,
Medium Machine Gun and Automatic
Grenade Launcher (J/N) Course, Section
Commanders Course, Automatic Data
Processing Course, Sniper Course and
Battalion Support Weapon Course.
10.54 The institution trains Officers, JCOs
and ORs of not only infantry but other arms
and services besides Para-Military Forces
and Civil Police Organisations. A number of
friendly foreign countries make use of the
facilities. During the current training year,
90 Officers and 160 JCOs/NCOs from
friendly foreign countries are likely to attend
courses. The institution is presently training
1195 Officers and 5900 JCOs/NCOs in a
year. The School also has on its establishment Army Marksmanship Unit which has
produced a large number of champion
shooters at national and international level.

COLLEGE OF DEFENCE MANAGEMENT

10.55 The College of Defence Management is one of the few institutions of its kind
in the country imparting training in modern
Management concepts and techniques to
officers of the Defence Services. Osmania

140


-----

University recognizes the core course of
CDM, namely the Long Defence Management Course for the award of the degree of
Master of Management studies (MMS).
10.56 The following courses are conducted by CDM, Secunderabad:
(a) Long Defence Management
Course (LDMC)- This is of 44 weeks
duration and is attended by 90 officers
of the rank of Col/Lt Col and equivalent
from other Services.

(b) Senior Defence Management
Course (SDMC) – This is of six weeks
duration and is attended by 33 officers
of the rank of Brig/Col and equivalent
from other Services.

(c) Defence Management Seminar
(DMS) - This is of two weeks duration
and is attended by 20 officers of the
rank of Maj Gen/ R Adm/ AVM.

(d) Assignment Oriented Management
Training (AOMTs) - CDM conducts four
AOMTs on Project Management Resource Management, Financial Management, Operational Research / Systems
Analysis Workshop of one week’s duration and Quantitative Aids to Decision
Making for middle level officers, of two
weeks duration.

MATERIALS MANAGEMENT COLLEGE,
JABALPUR

10.57 The college owes its lineage to
‘Indian Army Ordnance Corps (IAOC)
School of Instruction’ established in October, 1925. The School was later re-designated as ‘IAOC Training Centre’ in 1939. In


January, 1950, it became the ‘AOC School’.
With the changing doctrine of training and
the advanced concepts introduced, the AOC
School was renamed as the College of
Materials Management (CMM) in 1987.
10.58 The College was affiliated to the
University of Jabalpur (Rani Durgavati
Vishwa Vidyalaya) in 1987 and its proven
excellence earned it an autonomous status in
1990. The college is also registered as a
‘Government College’ with the University
Grants Commission. The approval of All
India Council of Technical Education
(AICTE) was another achievement of the
College.
10.59 The College provides structured
training in Ordnance Management, Munitions, Technical Stores, Ordnance Logistics
Support, Computer Technology and Management Studies.

SCHOOL OF ARTILLERY, DEOLALI

10.60 The School of Artillery, Deolali, is
the academic centre for various sub-disciplines of the science and methodology of
artillery warfare. It imparts technical training
to officers, JCOs and NCOs of the Regiment
of Artillery on artillery weapons and systems
including training of pilots for Air Observation Post duties. Besides the review of
doctrines, study and trials of artillery equipment, both Indian and foreign, is also
carried out.

10.61 The School of Artillery has trained a
large number of Officers, JCOs and NCOs
in the year to help them to imbue and
develop technical skills and expertise in

141


-----

operating and employing artillery weapon
systems. During the year, several officers
and personnel from various foreign countries
were also imparted training.

ARMY AIR DEFENCE COLLEGE,
GOPALPUR


Course, Unit Instructors and Crew Based
Training and Automated Data Processing
Course.

ARMY SERVICE CORPS (ASC) CENTRE
AND COLLEGE, BANGALORE

10.64 Consequent to the merger of ASC
School, Army School of Mechanical Transport (ASMT) and ASC Centre (South), the
ASC Centre and College came into existence
at Bangalore in 1999. The ASC Centre and
College has become a premier institution for
imparting training in logistics related facets.
The institution has nine decades of nurtured
intellectual wealth of all the three elite
training sets, which have united to give a
sound foundation to this newly created
organization. Since 1992, the ASC College
is recognised and affiliated to the
Rohilkhand University, Bareilly for award of
diplomas/degrees in Logistics and Resource
Management.

ARMY EDUCATION CORPS TRAINING
COLLEGE & CENTRE, PACHMARHI


10.62 Army Air Defence College (AADC) School, Army School of Mechanical Transearlier functioned as a wing of School of port (ASMT) and ASC Centre (South), the
Artillery, Deolali till October, 1989, when it ASC Centre and College came into existence
was moved to Gopalpur as a precursor to at Bangalore in 1999. The ASC Centre and
bifurcation of Air Defence Artillery from the College has become a premier institution for
main branch of Artillery. The College trains imparting training in logistics related facets.
personnel of Air Defence Artillery, other The institution has nine decades of nurtured
arms and armed forces personnel of foreign intellectual wealth of all the three elite
countries in Air Defence related subjects. training sets, which have united to give a
10.63 The Army Air Defence College sound foundation to this newly created
conducts a number of courses of instruction. organization. Since 1992, the ASC College
Some of the important courses are Long is recognised and affiliated to the
Gunnery Staff Course (Officers), Young Rohilkhand University, Bareilly for award of
Officers Course, Electronic Warfare Course, diplomas/degrees in Logistics and Resource
Senior Command Air Defence Course, Management.
Long Gunnery Staff Course, Junior Commis
ARMY EDUCATION CORPS TRAINING

sioned Officers (JCOs)/Non-commissioned

COLLEGE & CENTRE, PACHMARHI

Officers (NCOs), Technical Instructors Fire

10.65 With the ‘Mashal’ (Torch) as its

Control Course, Aircraft Recognition

emblem, symbolizing its worthy goal of the
pursuit of knowledge, Army Education
Corps Training College & Centre fulfils a
triple role in its capacity as Category A and
B Establishment and also as an autonomous
college of the Barkatullah University, Bhopal.
As an Autonomous College, it designs its
course, conducts training and examinations
and awards degrees and diplomas in education. Apart from it, its various courses
include map reading, foreign languages,
Gunnery training at the School of Artillery, Deolali. computer applications and military music,


142


-----

which are subscribed to by all ranks of all
Arms and Services of the Indian Army. Para
Military Forces Personnel, as well as those
from friendly foreign countries also attend
the courses.

MILITARY MUSIC WING, PACHMARHI

10.66 The Military Music Wing (MMW)
was raised in October 1950 as a part of the
Army Educational Corps Training College &
Centre and is the only one of its kind in
Asia. The Wing has not only been prolific
with over 200 musical compositions to its
credit, but has also excelled in maintaining
the standard of Military Music in India
through its diverse range of courses designed to take recruit bandsmen, pipers or
drummers, from a rudimentary stage of
music to enviable musical proficiency.

REMOUNT AND VETERINARY CORPS
CENTRE AND SCHOOL, MEERUT

10.67 The Remount and Veterinary Corps
(RVC) Centre and School, located in
Meerut, is the alma mater of all RVC personnel. The aim of the Scool is to train
officers and personnel below officer rank of
all Arms and Services on animal management and veterinary aspects. Eleven courses
for officers and six for PBORs are conducted. The total strength of students being
trained is 250.

ARMY SPORTS INSTITUTE

10.68 To restore national pride in the
hearts of our fellow countrymen and to
project a winning image of the Army, Raksha
Mantri has approved the establishment of an


Army Sports Institute at Pune and Army
Sports Nodes in selected disciplines at
various places in the country. Appropriate
funds have been earmarked for state-of-theart infrastructure and equipment coupled
with food habitat, foreign exposure and
training under foreign coaches.

ARMY SCHOOL OF PHYSICAL TRAINING

10.69 Army School of Physical Training
(ASPT) is a premier institution imparting
systematic and comprehensive instruction to
personnel of the Army regarding the conduct of Physical Training in units and sub
units. It also imparts basic training in Sports
and Games with a view to improve standard
in the Army and complement physical
training through recreation in games and
sports. These courses are attended by
Officers, JCOs and ORs of the Army, Para
Military Forces and from friendly foreign
countries. ASPT has started six allied sports
courses in collaboration with National
Institute of Sports in Boxing, Volleyball,
Basketball, Swimming and Life Saving, Judo
and Yoga Courses for personnel below
officer rank.

COMBAT ARMY AVIATOR TRAINING
SCHOOL (CAATS)

10.70 Combat Army Aviator Training
School (CAATS) has been raised at Nasik
Road in May 2003. Aim of CAAT School is
to train aviators in aviation skills and handling of aviation units in various operations
of war and also to train aviation instructors,
develop Standard Operating Procedures
(SOPs) and assist Army Training Command

143


-----

in development of Aviation Tactical Doctrine
in synergy with ground troops. The courses
identified to be run in the School are Prebasic Pilot Course, Basic Army Aviation
Course, Pre-qualified Flying Instructor
Course, Aviation Instructor Helicopter
Course, Helicopter Conversion on type,
Flight Commander’s Course and New
Equipment Course.

THE COLLEGE OF MILITARY
ENGINEERING, PUNE

10.71 The College of Military Engineering
(CME) at Pune is a premier technical institution. The training is conducted for personnel
of the Corps of Engineers, other Arms and
Services, Navy, Air Force, Para Military
Forces, Police and Civilians. Besides, personnel from friendly foreign countries are
also trained. CME is affiliated to Jawahar Lal
Nehru University (JNU) for the award of B.
Tech and M. Tech degrees. All India Council
for Technical Education (AICTE) also recognizes the graduate and post graduate
courses run by the CME. The College trains
on an average 1500 officers and 800
Personnel Below Officer Ranks every year.

MILITARY COLLEGE OF EME

10.72 The aim of Military College of
Electronics and Mechanical Engineering
(MCEME), Secundrabad is to provide
technical education in engineering and in
various weapon systems and equipment with
special reference to their maintenance,
repairs and inspection to all ranks of EME
including civilians. MCEME is organized into
four Faculties, namely, Faculty of Electrical


and Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of
Electronics, Faculty of Industrial Engineering
Tactics and Faculty of Aeronautical Engineering. A Cadets Training Wing for Gentleman Cadets of 10 + 2 Technical Entry
Scheme also functions directly under HQ
MCEME. MCEME also provides technical
and administrative support to the Simulator
Development Division. The College trains
approximately 1200 officers and 4000
Personnel Below Officers Ranks (PBOR)
every year.

CORPS OF MILITARY POLICE CENTER
AND SCHOOL, BANGALORE

10.73 Aim of the School is to train officers
and PBOR on military and police duties in
legal, investigation, traffic control etc. Four
courses for officers and fourteen courses for
PBOR are being conducted. Total strength
of students being trained is 910.

MILITARY COLLEGE OF
TELECOMMUNICATION ENGINEERING,
MHOW

10.74 Military College of Telecommunication Engineering (MCTE), Mhow is the Alma
Mater of all Signal officers. They are trained
in Combat Communication, Electronic
Warfare, Communication Engineering,
Computer Technology, Regimental Signal
Communications and Cryptology. Besides
the five Training Faculties and Wings, the
College has a Department of Administration
to provide administrative and logistic support to the staff and the students, a Conceptual Studies Cell to evolve communication
doctrines and produce training material, a

144


-----

modern and well-stocked library, and an inhouse printing press. Trainees are given an
opportunity to study and train in a formal
setting with a view to imbibe and inculcate
in them the requisite skills, knowledge and
abilities necessary to perform tasks at their
current and future levels of responsibility.

MILITARY INTELLIGENCE TRAINING
SCHOOL AND DEPOT

10.75 The Military Intelligence Training
School and Depot (MINTSD) is a premier
establishment responsible for imparting
training in Intelligence Acquisition, CounterIntelligence and Security aspects to all ranks
of the Indian Army, Navy, Air Force and Para
Military Forces. The School also imparts
training to personnel from friendly foreign
armies. Apart from the above, civilian
officers of the Directorate of Revenue
Intelligence are also trained at this establishment.

ELECTRONICS AND MECHANICAL
ENGINEERING SCHOOL (EME SCHOOL)
VADODARA

10.76 Consequent to the re-designation of
the Corps of Electrical and Mechanical
Engineering (EME) to Corps of Electronics
and Mechanical Engineers, the EME School
has been re-designated as ‘Electronics and
Mechanical Engineering School’ with effect
from June 1, 2001.
10.77 The EME School conducts postgraduate level courses for officers and
diploma and certificate level courses for
PBOR. A number of foreign officers and
PBOR from friendly foreign countries have


been attending various courses conducted at
EME School.

INSTITUTE OF MILITARY LAW (IML),
KAMPTEE

10.78 In the Army, justice is administered
by the Commanders at various levels. Minor
offences can be disposed of summarily by
powers vested in them under the provisions
of the Army Act. For grave offences, Courts
Martial are assembled on the orders of
superior commanders. Commanding Officers are empowered to hold summary Courts
Martial, decision of these Tribunals are not
appealable. It is, therefore, essential to
judiciously exercise these powers and adhere
to the laid down procedures. With this
background, the Institute of Military Law
was established at Shimla. On August 26,
1989, the institute was shifted to Kamptee.

10.79 The Charter of Duties of the School
is to cater for a comprehensive system of
legal education for Officers of all Arms and
Services of the Army and to undertake wide
ranging research, development and dissemination work in the field of Military and allied
laws.

ARMOURED CORPS CENTRE AND
SCHOOL, AHMEDNAGAR

10.80 In 1948, after partition, the Training
Wings, the Recruits Training Centre and
Armoured Corps Depot and Records were
shifted to Ahmadnagar where the Fighting
Vehicles School was already functional and
they were all amalgamated to from the
Armoured Corps Centre and School and
Armoured Corps Records. It has six wings

145


-----

namely School of Armoured Warfare, School
of Technical Training, Basic Training Regiment, Driving and Maintenance Regiment,
Automotive Regiment and Armament and
Electronics Regiment for specialized training
in these disciplines.

TRAINING OF FOREIGN ARMY
PERSONNEL AT ARMY TRAINING
ESTABLISHMENTS

10.81 After Operation VIJAY and Operation PARAKARAM, the interest of foreign
armies for training in Indian Army establishments has increased tremendously. Over
3200 Army personnel from neighbouring
countries, South East Asia, Central Asian
Republics, African continent and a few
developed countries are being trained in
India this year. The Government of India
provides assistance to the developing and


under developed nations under the International Technical and Economic Cooperation
(ITEC) programme of Ministry of External
Affairs. Under this programme, personnel
from friendly foreign countries get training in
service institutions free of cost or at subsidized rates.  Developed Western countries
also send their officers for training to our
institutions on reciprocal basis and on self
financing basis by paying cost of training and
other related charges.
10.82 For 2003-04, a total of 4,506
vacancies have been demanded by 41
countries against which 3230 vacancies
have been allotted to them. Para Military
Forces and State Police Organisations have
demanded 4156 vacancies for the year
2003-04. A total of 3750 vacancies have
been allotted.

146


-----

### 1111111111

 RESETTLEMENT AND WELFARE

###### OF EX-SERVICEMEN

Vocational training for disabled Ex-servicemen


-----

###### t the time of retirement majority of service
##### A

###### personnel are at an age where they have

 numerous unfinished responsibilities which

 necessitate their taking up a second occupation


###### t the time of retirement majority of service

 personnel are at an age where they have

 numerous unfinished responsibilities which

 necessitate their taking up a second occupation


11.1 In order to maintain a youthful
profile of the Armed Forces, approximately
60,000 service personnel retire or get
released every year at a comparatively young
age. At the time of retirement majority of
service personnel are at an age where they
have numerous unfinished responsibilities
which necessitate their taking up a second
occupation. As per statistics a total of
18,31,863 Ex-Servicemen (ESM) and
3,83,012 widows have been registered and
reported to be surviving as on 31 December
2003. The Ex-Servicemen population is
mainly concentrated in the States of Uttar
Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, Maharashtra,
Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan and
Uttaranchal.  Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB)
under the Chairmanship of the Raksha
Mantri lays down general policies for the
welfare of Ex-Servicemen and their
dependents, for the administration of
welfare funds, and also for coordinating the
work of the Sainik Boards in the country.
Similarly, at the State level the Rajya Sainik


Boards (RSBs) and at the district level the
Zila Sainik Boards (ZSBs) have been established. The Govt of India bears 50% of the
expenditure incurred on the organisations of
Rajya Sainik Boards while the remaining
expenditure is borne by the respective State
Governments. The Directorate General of
Resettlement (DGR) under the Ministry of
Defence looks after all matters connected
with the resettlement and welfare of ExServicemen and their dependants.
11.2 Resettlement: The Central Government constantly makes efforts to explore
various avenues for employment of ExServicemen. The following are some of the
steps taken by the Government:(a) Training programmes to re-orient
retiring Defence personnel for civil
employment;
(b) Reservation of posts for providing
employment opportunities in Government/semi-Government/public sector
organizations; and
(c) Schemes for self-employment.

148


-----

11.3 Training Programmes: Training for
preparing both Ex-Servicemen and retiring
service personnel for their resettlement in
civil life is one of the major functions entrusted to the Directorate General of Resettlement. The emphasis of the programmes
run by the DGR has been able to organise
employment/self employment oriented
training programmes so as to provide viable
options for commencing a second career
after retirement to officers as well as for
other ranks. The programme includes
courses on managerial science, technology
oriented technical skills and agro based
industry. Constant endeavour is made to
improve the quality of training by regular
monitoring. The programme to impart
courses is reviewed every year to include
courses in new fields based on the participation in current requirements of civil market
and corporate world and also to delete
obsolete courses.

11.4 Officers Training: The Resettlement
Training Programmes range
from vocational courses of
three months duration to

The Directorate

degree/diploma courses in

General of

Information Technology,

Resettlement has

Security Services, Entrepre
been able to

neurship Development,

organise

Business Administration,

employment

Personnel Management, Hotel

oriented training

Management, Tourism and

programmes for

Human Resource Develop
commencing a

ment of one to three years’

second career

duration.  While the three
after retirement

month courses are full-time,


one to three year courses are based on
distant learning programmes.

11.5 JCOs/Ors Equivalent Training:
Resettlement Training Programme for JCOs/
ORs and their equivalents from the three
services are carried out under three different
schemes viz. Vocational  Training, On Job
Training (OJT) and ITI Training. Under
Vocational Training programmes, courses in
diversified fields are conducted for a dura
tion up to one year in Government, semiGovernment and private institutes spread
all over the country. Courses are conducted
in fields like Security Services, Management
Services,  IT  Services, Travel  and
Tourism including Adventure Tourism,
Entrepreneurship Development, Technical
(including Medical) trades, non-technical
trades, Secretarial Support Services, Agrobased industry and many other miscellaneous trades.  Under this scheme more than
350 courses are conducted in a year.
Under ITI Training Scheme, 4000 seats are
reserved in 400 ITIs in different states in
the Country.  Under “On the Job” Training
(OJT), retiring Servicemen are trained in
more than 60 workshops of 27 Public
Sector Undertakings. This training is
provided in nine different trades for a period
of nine months. On completion of this
training successful candidates are awarded
National Trade Certificate (NTC).

11.6 Vocational Training: Under this
scheme funds are allotted to Rajya Sainik
Boards (RSBs) for conduct of vocational
training for Ex-Servicemen (ESM) in their
States. The scheme is primarily meant for

149


-----

those ESM who could not avail the facility of
resettlement training while in service. The
scheme has also been extended to the
widow/one dependent of the ESM.

11.7 The details of the personnel imparted training in various fields during
the last six years, till 31[st] March, 2004 as
are follows:

State Governments, except for the States of
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, J&K,
Kerala and Meghalaya, are providing reservations to Ex-Servicemen in the State
Government jobs. It has, however, not been
possible to have statutory backing to the
reservations being provided to them inter
alia due to the overall ceiling of 50% im

SCHEME 1998-99 1999-2000 2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04

Offrs Training 606 431 387 409 353 583

PBOR Training 5824 4563 5718 3518 2958 4019

On the Job Trg 1419 1847 1452 1363 1027 1027

ITI Training 1292 1847 2675 1510 1510 2821

ESM Training 333 385 58 421 856 

11.8 Re-employment: The Central and
State Governments provide a number of
concessions to Ex-Servicemen for their reemployment in Central/State Government
posts. These include reservation of posts
and relaxation in age and educational qualifications, exemption from payment of application/examination fees, priority employment

to disabled Ex-Servicemen and dependants
of deceased service personnel on compassionate grounds.

11.9 Reservation in Government Jobs:
The Central Government has reserved 10%
of vacancies in Group ‘C’ posts and 20% in
Group ‘D’ posts for Ex-Servicemen. Central
Public Sector Undertakings and Nationalised
Banks provide 14.5% reservation in Group
‘C’ and 24.5% in Group ‘D’ posts. Besides
10% vacancies of Assistant Commandants
in Para-Military Forces are also reserved for
Ex-Servicemen. In addition, most of the


posed by the Supreme Court and 49.5%
reservation already having been provided in
the Government jobs for SC/ST/OBCs.
Therefore, the reservation being provided to
Ex-Servicemen is not of a vertical nature as
in the case of reservation for SC/ST/OBCs.
It is of horizontal nature, which implies that
Ex-Servicemen selected against the vacan
cies reserved for them are subsequently
adjusted against the relevant category i.e.,
SC, ST, OBCs or General to which they
belong. There is also no carry forward of
unfilled reserved vacancies under horizontal
vacancies.

SECURITY AGENCIES

11.10 The Directorate General of Resettlement (DGR) registers/sponsors Security
Agencies for providing Security Guards to
various Public Sector Undertakings and
industries in private sector. The Scheme
offers self-employment opportunities to

150


-----

retired Defence Officers and

Government has employment opportunity to
formulated several ex-Service Personnel Below
schemes for Officers Rank (PBOR). The
encouraging and Department of Public Entergiving financial prises (DPE) had issued
support by way of instructions to the PSUs to
loans to ex- get security personnel through
servicemen DGR sponsored Security
intending to set up Agencies. The Scheme has
small and medium shown good results. The
industries Director General Resettlement

has also written to Chief
Secretaries of all States urging
them to issue suitable instructions to all concerned under their jurisdiction to obtain security cover through DGR
empanelled agencies, thereby furthering the
cause of resettling Ex-Servicemen. A case
has also been taken up with the Government
of Maharashtra to exempt Security Agencies
operating in that State from the Maharashtra
Security Guard Regulations of the employment and Welfare Act 1981.

11.11  Placement of JCOs/ORs: The
details of Ex-Servicemen, provided employment through DGR and Zila Sainik Welfare
Offices in the States during the last six
years is as follows:


11.12  Officer’s Employment: During
the year 2003-04, a total number of 737
officers were registered with the DGR for
employment assistance. Till date, 3187
officers have been sponsored for various
employment opportunities. To spread the
awareness about potential in ex-defence
personnel, Seminars were organised in
conjunction with the Confederation of Indian
Industries at Pune, Bangalore, Indore, Delhi
and Kochi.
11.13  Schemes for Self-employment:
As it is not feasible to provide Government
jobs to all Ex-Servicemen after their retirement from the Armed Forces, Government
has formulated several schemes for encouraging and giving financial support by way of
loans to ex-servicemen entrepreneurs
intending to set up small and medium
industries. Important self employment
schemes are SEMFEX-I, SEMFEX-II, National Equity Fund Scheme and SEMFEX-III.
Applications for sanction of loans are
submitted by Ex-servicemen directly to
concerned Zila Sainik Boards in the States.
The applications are scrutinised and those
who satisfy eligibility criteria and other terms
and conditions are recommended for sanction of loan through Small Industries Devel

1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003* 2004

Central Govt 5188 3992 4035 4982 5153 5503 **

State Govt & State Govt. PSUs 2825 2540 2219 2136 2162 3092 **

Private Sector 3304 3068 2766 3221 3051 3064 **

Security Agencies 7140 13810 8717 5650 8679 9543 2534


(upto 31.3.2004)
*UPTO 31[st ]December 2003
** Data not yet available


151


-----

A handicapped ex-serviceman receiving a wheel chair at the Paraplegic Rehabilitation Centre, Kirkee.


opment Bank of India (SIDBI), Central
Cooperative Banks, State Land Development
Banks and Regional Rural Banks aided by
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development (NABARD) and the State
KVIB and Banks aided by the Khadi and
Village Industries Commission (KVIC).
11.14  CNG Stations in National Capital
Region (NCR): The scheme for management
of CNG stations belonging to Indraprasta
Gas Ltd was launched as a pilot project in
July 2001. The scheme has been extended
to retired officers. As on date, there are 57
retired officers managing 70 CNG stations.
Three ex-lady officers have also been allotted the CNG stations in Delhi.

EX-SERVICEMEN COAL
TRANSPORTATION SCHEME

11.15  DGR sponsors Ex-Servicemen
Coal Transport Companies for the execution


of loading and transportation of coal in
various coal subsidiaries of Coal India
Limited(CIL). The unemployed retired
officers and JCOs registered with DGR are
selected to form ex-Servicemen Coal Transport Companies and are sponsored to
respective coal subsidiaries for five years,
extendable by another four years. Presently,
nearly 94 such companies are operating
under the various coal subsidiaries of CIL.
11.16  Coal Tipper Scheme: The widows
of defence personnel who died while in
service due to causes attributable to military
service can be sponsored by DGR for
attaching one tipper truck in their name with
an Ex-Servicemen Coal Transport Company.
Eligible widow/disabled soldier is required to
make a deposit of Rs. 85,000/- with any of
the nominated coal transport company. The
company will pay them Rs. 3000/- p.m. for
a period of five years and thereafter the

152


-----

deposited amount of Rs. 85,000/- is paid
back to widow/disabled soldier. At present
232 widows and 42 disabled soldiers are
availing the benefit of this scheme.

ALLOTMENT OF OIL PRODUCT
AGENCIES

11.17  Ministry of Petroleum and Natural
Gas have reserved Eight percent of the Oil
Product Agencies, i.e. LPG dealership,
petrol pumps, kerosene distributorship etc
in the marketing plan for widows and
dependents of those who died in war/peace
with death attributable to Military service
and disabled soldiers with disability of 50
percent and above attributable to military
service. Eligible persons can apply as and
when such a vacancy under Defence Category is advertised in the newspapers. The
Director General Resettlement sponsors
eligible candidates by issuing Eligibility
Certificates to them.  Interview is conducted by a Dealer Selection Board constituted by the Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas. Final allotment is made by the
concerned oil company to the selected
candidates. This year 521 eligibility certificates have been issued by DGR since
January 2004 till date.

ALLOTMENT OF ARMY SURPLUS
VEHICLES

11.18  Ex-Servicemen/widows of Defence personnel who died while in service
are eligible to apply for allotment of an Army
Surplus/phased out Class V-B vehicle. The
application forms are routed through Zila/
Rajya Sainik Boards in the case of retired


personnel and through Units for those in
last six months of service to DGR for registration and onward transmission to Army
Headquarters for allotment on the basis of
depot wise seniority maintained by them.

RESERVATION IN CSD

11.19  The Canteen Stores Department
of India (CSDI) has reserved 15% of the 30
selected CSD items and the Ministry of
Defence has reserved 10% of the 262
selected items manufactured by the ExServicemen Entrepreneurs under the Defence Purchase Programme for which ExServicemen manufacturing units alone are
eligible.

MOTHER DAIRY MILK AND FRUIT &
VEGETABLE SHOPS

11.20  Junior Commissioned Officers/
Other Ranks are allotted Mother Dairy Milk
Shops and Fruit & Vegetable shops in
National Capital Region. As on date 684
Milk Shops and 280 Fruit and Vegitable
shops are being operated by Ex-Servicemen.
Dependent sons (where the ex-Servicemen
is not eligible) are also considered for
allotment of Mother Dairy Fruit and Vegetable Booths in Delhi.

PUBLICITY

11.21 Wide publicity of policies and various
schemes sponsored by Directorate General
Resettlement is of paramount importance.
This aim is achieved by the DGR by means
of publication of periodical magazines,
brochures, leaflets, articles in Sainik
Samachar and Baatcheet.

153


-----

11.22  The DGR had put up an impressive stall at Aero-India 2003 at Bangalore
and Defexpo 2004 at New Delhi to spread
awareness about schemes concerning ExServicemen.
11.23  The film on Armed Forces Flag
Day was telecast on the National Channel of
Doordarshan on 6[th] and 7[th] December,
2003 and the film on activities of DGR was
telecast on 3[rd] April and 5[th] April, 2004.

WELFARE

11.24 The Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB)
under the Chairmanship of Raksha Rajya
Mantri, is the nodal agency to look after the
welfare of ex-servicemen and their families
in liaison with Rajya/Zila Sainik Boards. The
performance of the KSB is reviewed in the
periodical meetings. The KSB also administers various welfare activities through the
Armed Forces Flag Day Fund, which are
financed from interest earnings of the fund.
The Fund has a corpus of Rs 106 crores as
on date. Financial assistance is provided to
institutions such as Paraplegic Homes at
Kirkee and Mohali, the Red Cross Society,
Cheshire Homes, Military Hospitals, St.
Dunstan’s After Care Organisation and
Homes for taking care of old and physically
handicapped ESM and their dependents.
Financial assistance is also provided to
individual ESM and their families who are in
a state of penury to meet their specific
needs.

ASSISTANCE FROM RAKSHA MANTRI’S
FUND

11.25 A portion of the earnings of Armed


Forces Flag Day Fund is set apart as Raksha
Mantri’s Discretionary Fund which is used to
provide financial assistance to poor and
needy Ex-Servicemen for various purposes
viz. medical treatment, daughters’ marriage,
house repair and education of children.
Monthly financial assistance upto a period
of two years is also provided to old and
infirm Ex-Servicemen and widows of ExServicemen living in penury.
11.26  Concessions and Facilities: Under-mentioned concessions and facilities are
available to eligible personnel:
(a) Free Educational Facilities to Children
of Defence personnel killed  or disabled in action in schools/colleges
recognised by the Central or State
Governments.
(b) 28 Seats in the MBBS, one seat in
BDS and one seat in engineering stream
are available through Kendriya Sainik
Board to dependants/wards of certain
categories of defence personnel through
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
(c) 25% seats are reserved for the wards
of serving and Ex-Service personnel in
Sainik Schools.
(d) States/UTs have made reservation of
seats in professional colleges/ITIs/
polytechnics for wards of serving and
retired defence personnel.
(e) Two educational grants of Rs 600/and Rs 300/- per month are provided to
wards of war bereaved, disabled attributable and non attributable peace time
casualties, respectively. They are granted
to those housed in 35 War Memorial

154


-----

Hostels to enable them to

A new medical pursue their studies.
scheme for (f)  Medical Facilities to Exproviding medical Servicemen: Presently, Excare to ex- servicemen, their families and
Servicemen, War families of deceased Service
widows and their personnel drawing pension of
dependents on the any kind are entitled to free
pattern of Central out-patient treatment in 127
Government Health Military Hospitals and more
Scheme(CGHS) has than 1000 Medical
been introduced Inspection(MI) Rooms includwith effect from ing 24 exclusively reserved for
1.4.2003 ex-servicemen. In-patient

treatment is also provided
subject to availability of beds.
Ex-servicemen who are not availing medical
facilities from Military Hospitals may choose
to draw Rs. 100/- every month for medical
treatment. Ex-Servicemen/dependents are
also provided financial assistance from
Armed Forces Flag Day Fund and Group
Insurance Schemes for treatment of specified serious diseases.

(g)  Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health
Scheme (ECHS) : A new medical
scheme for providing medical care to exServicemen, War widows and their
dependents on the pattern of Central
Government Health Scheme(CGHS) has
been introduced with effect from
1.4.2003. The details of the scheme
are as under:i) The facilities existing at 104
military stations is being augmented at a
capital cost of Rs. 49 crores and annual
recurring expenditure of Rs. 52 crores;


ii) Fresh medical facilities in the
nature of poly-clinics/medical inspection
rooms is being set up at 123 stations
where the population of ex-Servicemen
is more than 2,500. This will involve a
capital cost of Rs. 69 crores and annual
recurring cost of Rs. 98 crores;
iii) The Ex-Servicemen, war widows
and their dependents at other stations
where ex-Servicemen population is less
than 2,500 will be attached to the
existing poly-clinics/medical inspection
rooms as mentioned in (a) above or with
poly-clinics/medical inspection rooms to
be created at 123 stations vide (b)
above.
iv) The ex-Servicemen, war widows and
their dependents will also be reimbursed
the cost of medicines not provided by
the poly-clinics/medical inspection
rooms, fee of the specialists to whom
they are referred to, the charges of
laboratories for pathological or other
diagnostic tests and also the cost of
hospitalization.
v) The ex-servicemen and their
dependents will be required to make a
contribution at the same rate at which
the Central Government pensioners are
required to make contribution for
availing medical facilities under the
CGHS after retirement. To ameliorate
the financial hardship of ex-servicemen/
widows, the Government has decided to
allow remittance of contribution in three
consecutive yearly installments.
vi)The war widows have been exempted
from making contribution under ECHS.


155


-----

vii) The reservation for ex
The war widows servicemen for contractual
have been employment of staff for ECHS
exempted from polyclinics would include exmaking contribution servicemen and widows of
under ECHS. deceased service personnel

including war widows.
viii) The scheme will be
implemented in a phased manner in five
years.
(h)  Travel Concession:  The following
concessions are available to War Widows/Gallantry Award Winners, which can
be availed on production of identity card
issued by the Kendriya Sainik Board:
(i)  Rail Travel Concession: 75%
concessions in rail fare for travel in II
Class is available to war widows, including the widows of IPKF casualties.
Besides, recipients and widows of
posthumous recipients of Chakra series
of gallantry awards, along with a companion, are entitled to free rail pass for
traveling in Class I/II AC Sleeper.
(ii)  Air Travel Concession: Certain
categories of personnel are eligible to
75% concession in fare for air travel in
domestic flights of the Indian Airlines.
These are:
          - 75% concession to recipients of
Gallantry Awards of level I and II
namely Param Vir Chakra, Maha Vir
Chakra, Ashok Chakra and Kirti Chakra.

         - 50% concession to Permanently war
disabled officers who have been
invalided out of service and the dependent members of their families.



    - 50% concession to War widows of
post-Independence era.
(i) Reservation for House Sites/Houses:
Majority of States have made reservations for serving/retired Armed Forces
personnel in allotment of house sites/
houses.
(j) Grant for Repair of Houses: Financial assistance is provided especially to
War Widows/War-disabled for repair of
houses on 50% cost sharing basis with
State Governments upto an extent of Rs
10,000/-.
(k) Sainik Rest House Facilities : Over
252 Sainik Rest Houses have been
created in the country, which provide
transit facilities to Ex-Servicemen and
their dependants at nominal rates.
(l) Cash Award/Annuity/Cash, in lieu of
Land for Gallantry/Non Gallantry Award
Winners: The State/UTs provide Cash
Award/Annuity/Cash in lieu of Land for
Gallantry/Non Gallantry Award Winners.

PENSION TO ARMED FORCES
PERSONNEL

11.27  The service conditions of Armed
Forces personnel differ greatly from civilians
owing to exigencies of service and the need
to work in difficult geo-climatic conditions,
such as, desert in the west, glaciers in the
north, rain forests in the east and the high
seas in the south. Service in Armed Forces
also involves periods of separation from the
family. In the event of hostilities, they are
also expected to make the supreme sacrifice
of life to maintain the territorial integrity of
the country. The Armed Forces are required

156


-----

to maintain a youthful profile at all times and
display the highest degree of combat efficiency. Hence, they are retired/ released at
a younger age as compared to civilian
employees and are granted pensionary
benefits at a somewhat liberal scale as
compared to their civilian counterparts. The
nature of retirement/ release from service
determines the admissibility of the type of
pension in the case of Armed Forces Personnel. The eligibility conditions, rates etc. of
the different types of pensions are detailed
in the succeeding paragraphs.

RETIRING/SERVICE PENSION

11.28 Retiring/ Service pension, admissible to the Armed Forces Personnel is calculated at 50% of the average reckonable
emoluments drawn during the last ten
months. In the case of Personnel Below
Officers Rank (PBOR), it is calculated with
reference to the maximum of scale of pay
of the rank and Group, held for 10 months
preceding retirement. In the case of retirement/ death, Dearness Allowance (DA)
admissible on the date of retirement/ death shall also be treated
as emolument. Retiring pension

Pension, admissible

shall be subject to a minimum of

to the retired Armed

Rs.1275/- per month and

Forces Personnel, is

maximum of upto 50% of the

calculated at 50% of

highest pay, applicable to Armed

the average

Forces Personnel. As per for
reckonable

mula evolved under the modified

emoluments drawn

parity, in the case of past pen
during the last ten

sioners, with effect from January

months

1, 1996, pension would not be
less than 50% of the minimum


pay in the revised scale of the pay introduced with effect from January 1,1996 for
the rank, rank and group (in the case of
PBORs) held by the pensioner. While in the
case of commissioned officers of the Army,
Navy and Air Force, the minimum period of
qualifying service (without weightage)
required for earning retiring pension is 20
years (15 years in the case of late entrants),
in the case of PBOR it is 15 years {20
years in the case of Non-Combatants Enrolled (NCsE)}. However, keeping in view
their early retirement, Armed Forces personnel are given the benefit of weightage
ranging from 9 years for Captains and below
to 3 years for Generals. Personnel Below
Officers Rank are given uniform benefit
weightage of 5 years. For calculating gratuity, a uniform weightage of 5 years service is
given to all ranks. Armed Forces Personnel
are also permitted higher commutation of
their pension at 43% for officers and 45%
for PBORs as compared to 40% for civilians.
11.29  Army Reservists, who did not opt
for grant of pension and have not availed the
benefits of Rehabilitation assistance granted
by the Government and are not in receipt of
any other pension, are sanctioned an exgratia payment of Rs. 600/- per month plus
dearness relief with effect from  November,
1997, provided they had rendered minimum
qualifying service to earn pension.

CATEGORISATION FOR PENSIONARY
BENEFITS

11.30  On the basis of recommendations
of the 5th Central Pay Commission, for
determining the pensionary benefits for

157


-----

death or disability under different circumstances due to attributable/ aggravated
causes, the cases have been broadly divided
into 5 categories as indicated below :
CATEGORY A : Death or disability due to

natural causes.
CATEGORY B : Death or disability due to
causes attributable or aggravated by military services.
CATEGORY C : Death or disability due to
accidents while performing
duties.
CATEGORY D : Death or disability due to acts
of violence/attacks by terrorists whether or not on duty.
CATEGORY E : Death or disability due to war

or war-like situation.

11.31  Disability Pension: A person,
who is released/ retired from service, on
account of a disease/ injury/ wound attributable to or aggravated by military service
(Categories B and C), is entitled to disability
pension provided the disability assessed by
the Medical Board is 20% or more. Disability Pension consists of Service element and

Disability element. The Service element is
related to the length of service rendered by
the individual and the Disability element is
paid in the form of compensation for the
disablement and depends on the degree
of disablement. The amount of service
element is equal to the normal retiring/
service pension. With effect from January 1,
1996 the service element subject to a
minimum of Rs.1275/- per month is also
payable when the length of service rendered
is less than the minimum pensionable
service. Personnel with 100% disability are
also paid a Constant Attendant Allowance at


the rate of Rs. 600/- per month on the
recommendations of a Medical Board. In all
other cases, where the personnel are
invalided out of service with a disability,
neither attributable to nor aggravated by
military service, invalid pension is granted, if
the service, actually rendered is 10 years or
more. If the service is less than 10 years,
such Service personnel are paid invalid
gratuity depending upon the length of
service. Pursuant to the implementation of
the 5th Central Pay Commission, the rates
of disability pension have been revised with
effect from January 1, 1996 as under:
(a) On Invalidment : Where an individual is
invalided out of service on account of
causes attributable to or aggravated by
military service, he/ she is entitled to disability pension as under :(i) Service Element - Equal to normal
retiring/ service pension for the length of
service actually rendered plus weightage
as admissible. With effect from January
1, 1996, the service element subject to
a minimum of Rs.1275/- per month is
admissible. There is no condition of
minimum qualifying service for earning
this element.
(ii) Disability Element - The rates of
disability element for 100% disability for
various ranks admissible with effect from
January 1, 1996 are as under:
###### • Commissioned Officers/ Honorary

Commissioned Officers - Rs. 2600/- p.m.

###### • Junior Commissioned Officers (JCOs)

& equivalent - Rs. 1900/- p.m.

###### • Other Ranks - Rs 1550/- p.m.

158


-----

(iii) Broad-banding of disability- In case
of invalidment on or after January 1,
1996, the extent of disability or functional incapacity is determined as under
for the purpose of computing disability
element :Disability less than 50%  - 50%
Between 50 and 75%  - 75%
Between 76 and 100%  - 100%
Where permanent disability is not less than
60%, the disability pension (service element
plus disability element) is payable at not less
than 60% of the reckonable emoluments last
drawn by the individual.
(b) Retention Despite Disability: Where
an individual is retained in service
despite disability and retires/ is discharged on attaining the age of retirement or on completion of tenure, with
effect from January 1, 1996 he / she is
entitled to disability element at the
following rates (for 100 % disability):
###### • Commissioned Officers/ Honorary

Commissioned Officers - Rs. 2600/- p.m.

###### • Junior Commissioned Officers (JCOs)

& equivalent - Rs. 1900/- p.m.

###### • Other Ranks - Rs 1550/- p.m.
 • For disabilities less than 100% but not
less than 20%, the above rates are
proportionately reduced. No disability
element for less than 20% disability is
admissible.

###### • Retiring/ service pension or retiring/
service gratuity as admissible is also
payable in addition to the disability
element from the date of retirement/
discharge.
On the basis of the recommendations of the
5th Central Pay Commission, the procedure


regarding acceptance of attributability
pertaining to disability and special family
pension and assessment of degree of disability has undergone change. As per the
revised instructions the procedure of periodical reviews by Re-Survey Medical Board
for re-assessment and continuance of
disability pension has also been dispensed
with. In injury cases, the percentage of
disability as recommended by Invaliding/
Release Medical Board and as approved by
the next higher medical authority is treated
as final unless the individual himself requests
for a review. Likewise in cases of diseases of
a permanent nature, the assessment of
degree of disability as recommended by
Invaliding Medical Board (IMB)/ Release
Medical Board (RMB) and as adjudicated by
Medical Adviser (Pensions) [MA(P)] in case
of PBOR and Service Headquarters in
respect of Officers is treated as final unless
the individual himself requests for a review.
In case of disabilities which are not of a
permanent nature, there will be only one
review which will be final and for life unless
the individual himself asks for a review.

(c) Lumpsum disability compensation:
If an individual is found to have a disability
which is assessed at 20% or more for life but
is retained in service despite such disability,
he/she is paid a compensation in lump sum
(in lieu of disability element) equal to the
capitalised value of disability element on the
basis of disability actually assessed. In cases
of casualties occurring on or after January 1,
1996 the rates for disability element are
applicable for calculating the capitalised
value. Once a compensation has been paid

159


(iii) Broad-banding of disability-
of invalidment on or after January 1,


-----

in lieu of the disability element, there is no
further entitlement to the disability element
for the same disability.
11.32  War Injury Pension:  War Injury
Pension is sanctioned to an individual, who
sustains injury/ disability in war or war like
operations (Category E) and are invalided
out of service due to it. War Injury Pension
consists of service element and war injury
element. Service element is calculated equal
to retiring/ service pension to which he/ she
would have been entitled on the basis of his/
her pay on the date of invalidment but
counting service upto the date on which he/
she would have retired in that rank in normal
course including weightage as admissible.
War Injury Element is payable equal to
reckonable emoluments last drawn for 100%
disablement. However, in no case, the
aggregate of service element and war injury
element will exceed last pay drawn. Pursuant to the implementation of the recommendations of the 5th Central Pay Commission
relating to disability pension/ liberalised
pension/ war injury pension etc. the rates of
disability element in respect of war injury are
taken as double the amount as mentioned
above at para 11.31(a) (ii). The extent of
disability or functional incapacity for the
purpose of computing war injury element in
the cases of invalidment is determined as in
para 11.31(a) (iii).
11.33  With effect from January 1, 1996,
Armed Forces Personnel sustaining disability
due to acts of violence/ attack by terrorists,
anti social elements, bomb blasts in public
places or transport, indiscriminate shooting


incidents etc. (Category-D) are entitled to
the same pensionary benefits (i.e. service
element and retirement gratuity) as admissible to war injury cases on invalidment/
retirement/ discharge including lumpsum
compensation in lieu of disability, as mentioned above, except that on invalidment
they would be entitled to disability element
instead of war injury element.
11.34  Family Pension: Ordinary Family
Pension: Families of Armed Forces Personnel who die during service or after retirement with pension, are granted family
pension at a uniform rate of 30% of the
reckonable emoluments. The amount of
minimum family pension, which, earlier was
Rs.375/- per month, has been raised to
Rs.1275/- per month, with effect from
January 1, 1996 on the basis of the recommendation of the 5th Central Pay Commission. As per orders issued with regard to
modified parity, past family pensioners are
entitled to get at least 30 % of the minimum
of revised pay scale which came into force
with effect from January 1, 1996 for the
rank and group, last held by the pensioners/
deceased individuals. If the deceased
personnel had rendered a minimum continuous qualifying service of 7 years or more
and dies while in service or after retirement
with a pensionable service, the family is
given family pension at enhanced rate for the
first 7 years or upto the time the deceased
would have reached the age of 67 years,
whichever is earlier. The amount of enhanced family pension will, however, not be
more than 50% of the reckonable emolu
160


-----

ments or the amount of retiring/service/
invalid pension/service element of disability
pension/special pension (before commutation) admissible, if the death takes place
after retirement but before 67 years of age.
11.35  With effect from January 1, 1996
Ordinary Family Pension is admissible also
to (i) the parents who were wholly dependent on the Armed Forces Personnel when
he/ she was alive, provided the deceased
had left behind neither a widow nor a child
and (ii) widowed/ divorced daughter till she
attains the age of 25 years or upto the date
of her remarriage whichever is earlier. The
income criteria, in respect of parents and
widowed/ divorced daughter, is that their
earning is not more than Rs. 2550/- per
month. Pensionary benefits to the eligible
Next-of-Kin (NoKs), as defined above were
made applicable from January 1, 1998 and
as such, all past cases are also to be considered on merits for grant of family pension
from January 1, 1998.
11.36  With effect from July 27, 2001,
family pension admissible under the Employees Pension Scheme, 1995 and the Family
Pension Scheme, 1971 has been allowed in
addition to the family pension admissible to
the Armed Forces Personnel under the
relevant Pension Regulation.
11.37  Special Family Pension: If the
death of a service personnel has occurred
on account of causes attributable to or
aggravated by Service (Categories B and C),
the family is paid Special Family Pension.
There is no condition of minimum service
on the date of death for grant of Special
Family Pension. In the case of Commis

sioned Officers, Special Family Pension is
payable to the widow. The families of Short
Service Commissioned Officers and Emergency Commissioned Officers are also
entitled to Special Family Pension. In the
case of PBORs the rules provide for nominating anyone from the eligible members of
the family (except dependant brothers/
sisters) for the first life award and for transfer of the same in full to the widow regardless of her financial position in the event of
death of parents where they were nominated
as original awardees.
11.38  With effect from January 1, 1996,
Special Family Pension is calculated at the
uniform rate of 60% of reckonable emoluments drawn by the deceased, subject to a
minimum of Rs.2,550/-per month irrespective of whether widow has children or not.
There is no maximum ceiling on Special
Family Pension. In case the children become beneficiary, the Special Family Pension
is payable at the same rate to the senior
most eligible child till he/ she attains the age
of 25 years or upto the date of his/ her
marriage whichever is earlier. Thereafter,
Special Family Pension passes on to the next
eligible child. Widowed/ divorced daughters
upto the age of 25 years or re-marriage,
whichever is earlier, are also eligible for the
purpose of Special Family Pension. In case
the eligible child is physically or mentally
handicapped and unable to earn a livelihood, Special Family Pension is admissible
for life. In the absence of wife and children,
dependent pension at the prescribed rates is
admissible to the parents of the deceased.
Widows who got remarried on or after

161


relevant Pension Regulation.
11.37  Special Family Pension:
death of a service personnel has occurred
on account of causes attributable to or
aggravated by Service (Categories B and C),
the family is paid Special Family Pension.
There is no condition of minimum service
on the date of death for grant of Special
Family Pension. In the case of Commis-


-----

January 1, 1996 are also eligible for Special
Family Pension subject to certain conditions.
11.39  Liberalised Family Pension: In the
event of death of Armed Forces Personnel

[including Short Service Commissioned
Officers (SSCOs) & Emergency Commissioned Officers (ECOs)] in war or war like
operations, counter-insurgency operations
or in an encounter with or in an incident
involving armed hostilities, terrorists/ extremists, anti-social elements etc.(Categories
D and E), their families are granted liberalised family pension equal to the reckonable
emoluments last drawn by the deceased
personnel at the time of their death. Pension at this rate is payable to the widow in
the case of officers and to the nominated
heir in the case of PBOR until death or
disqualification. If the personnel is not
survived by widow but is survived by child/
children only, all children together are
eligible to Liberalised Family Pension (LFP)
at the rate equal to 60% reckonable emoluments last drawn by the deceased. Liberalised Family Pension is payable to the seniormost eligible child till he/she attains the age
of 25 years or upto the date of his/her
marriage, whichever is earlier, and thereafter
the LFP passes on to the next eligible child.
Widowed/ divorced daughters upto the age
of 25 years or re-marriage, whichever is
earlier, are also eligible for the purpose of
LFP. In case the eligible child is physically or
mentally handicapped and unable to earn a
livelihood, LFP is admissible for life. No
children allowance is payable in addition to
Liberalised pension.


11.40  On re-marriage of a widow, both
in the case of Commissioned Officers as also
in the case of PBOR in whose case LFP is
sanctioned as first life award to widow, full
liberalised family pension would continue to
the widow if she continues to support
children after re-marriage or has no children. However, if the widow does not
support the children after re-marriage,
Special Family Pension at the rate of 60%
will pass on to the children and Ordinary
Family Pension at the rate of 30% to the
widow. In the absence of wife and children,
dependent pension (Liberalised) at the
prescribed rates is admissible to the parents
of the deceased without reference to their
pecuniary circumstances.

EX-GRATIA AWARDS IN CASES OF
DEATH OF CADETS

11.41  The following ex-gratia awards are
payable subject to certain conditions in the
event of death of a cadet due to causes
attributable to or aggravated by military
training :

(a)  Ex-gratia lumpsum of Rs. 2.5 lakh

(b) An ex-gratia of Rs. 1275/- per month in
respect of both married and unmarried
personnel to Next-of-kin in addition to
(a) above.
11.42  The ex-gratia lumpsum is admissible in cases of death of cadets occurring on
or after August 1, 1997. However, the
benefit of revised monthly ex-gratia amount
as mentioned at 11.41(b) above, is admissible to pre August 1, 1997 cases also, with
financial effect w.e.f. 1.8.1997.

162


-----

EX-GRATIA AWARDS IN CASES OF
DISABILITY OF CADETS

11.43  The following ex-gratia awards are
payable subject to certain conditions in the
event of invalidment of a cadet (Direct) on
medical grounds due to causes attributable
to or aggravated by military training :
(a) Monthly ex-gratia of Rs. 1275/- per
month
(b) Ex-gratia disability award @ Rs 2100/
per month for 100 % disability during
the period of disablement. The amount
is reduced proportionately from the exgratia disability award in case the degree
of disablement is less than 100 %.
(c) Constant Attendance Allowance(CAA) of
Rs. 600/-per month for 100% disability
on the recommendation of Invaliding
Medical Board.
11.44  The ex-gratia disability awards are
applicable with effect from August 1, 1997.
However, the same benefits are admissible
to pre August 1, 1997 cases also, with
financial effect w.e.f. 1.8.1997.

DEATH WHILE PERFORMING MILITARY
DUTY

11.45  In pursuance of the recommendations of the 5[th] Central Pay Commission, in
addition to Special Family Pension/ Liberalised Family Pension, Ex-gratia is granted to
the family of a deceased service personnel in
the event of death occurring on or after
August 1, 1997 as under:
(a) Death occurring due to accidents in the
course of performance of duties - Rs. 5.00
Lakh


(b) Death occurring in the course of performance of duties attributable to acts of
violence by terrorists, anti-social elements
etc. - Rs. 5.00 Lakh

(c) Death occurring during (i) border skirmishes and (ii) Action against militants,
terrorists, extremists etc. - Rs. 7.50 Lakh*

(d) Death occurring during enemy action in
international war or such war like engagements which are specifically notified by the
Government. - Rs. 10.00 Lakh*
*(with effect from 1.5.1999)

REVISION OF PENSION IN RESPECT OF
PRE 1996 ARMED FORCES
PENSIONERS

11.46  Necessary orders for regulation/
consolidation with effect from January 1,
1996 of pension/ family pension of all pre
January 1, 1996 pensioners/ family pensioners were issued. Further, in pursuance of the
5th Central Pay Commission’s recommendations relating to modified parity in pension,
necessary orders have been issued by the
Government for revision of Disability Pension/ Special Family Pension/ Liberalized
Family Pension/ War Injury Pension etc. in
respect of pre-January 1, 1996 Armed
Forces Pensioners. For the widows who
were in receipt of Liberalized Family Pension
(LFP), the consolidated pension shall be not
less than the reckonable emoluments calculated on the minimum pay in the revised
scale of pay introduced with effect from
January 1, 1996 of the rank, rank and group
(in the case of PBORs) held by the deceased
personnel at the time of death, irrespective
of the date of award of the pension. For the
special family pensioners, the consolidated
pension shall not be less than 60 % of the

163


August 1, 1997 as under:-

(a)

Lakh


-----

minimum pay in the revised scale of pay
introduced with effect from January 1, 1996
of the rank, rank and group (in case of
PBORs) held by the deceased personnel at
the time of death, subject to a minimum of
Rs. 2550/-per month. The rates of Disability Pension, War Injury Pension (except
invalidment cases), Constant Attendant
Allowance as applicable to post January 1,
1996 pensioners have also been extended
to pre January 1, 1996 pensioners who are
in receipt of Disability Pension, War Injury
Pension, Constant Attendant Allowance
etc., with effect from January 1, 1996.
11.47  Defence Pension Adalat: In order
to address to the legitimate grievances of
the Defence pensioners near to their place
of work/residence, Defence Pension Adalats
are organized in different parts of the
country. These Aadalats are becoming quite
popular.
11.48   As the Adalat consists of representatives from various agencies concerned
with pensionary matters of Armed Forces,
emphasis is on redressal of grievances on
the spot. During the financial year 2003-04,
Defence Pension Adalats have been held at
Chennai, Chandigarh, Jammu, Agra,
Dharamshala, Kottayam, Mumbai and
Vishakhapatnam.
11.49  In the last Defence Pension
Adalats, held during 2003-04, the response was encouraging. Of the 2307
representations received, 1920 have been


settled and the remaining 387 are being
pursued for finalisation.
11.50 Delegation of Powers to Service
Headquarters: Government has delegated
administrative powers to Service Headquarters with effect from 14.8.2001 on certain
pension matters mainly regarding division of
family pension, initial award of special family
pension/ ex-gratia/ disability pension in
respect of officers, first appeal cases, time
bar sanction for filing appeals beyond 12
months, grant of pension in dismissal from
service cases and implementation of judgements delivered by various courts.
11.51  The number of Defence Pensioners
is estimated to be about 20.51 lakh. Approximately, 55,000 service personnel retire
every year. Pension to Defence Pensioners is
disbursed through 35,000 branches of
Public Sector Banks, 534 Treasuries, 61
Defence Pension Disbursing Offices and 5
PAOs, scattered all over India. The annual
expenditure on Defence pensions, during
last three years and estimated for (2003-04)
and (2004-05) is as follows:

Year Pension Disbursed
(Rs. Crore)

2000 - 2001 10538.93
2001 - 2002 10487.92
2002 - 2003 10092.07
2003 - 04 (BE) 11000.00
2003 - 04 (RE) 11000.00
2004 - 05 (BE) 11250.00


164


-----

### 1212121212

 COOPERATION BETWEEN

###### THE ARMED FORCES
 AND CIVIL AUTHORITIES

Naval teams rescuing villagers in flood-hit Orissa.


-----

###### esides guarding the borders, the Armed
##### B

###### Forces assist the civil authorities for maintenance

 of law and order, essential services and in rescue

 and relief operations during natural calamities


###### esides guarding the borders, the Armed

 Forces assist the civil authorities for maintenance

 of law and order, essential services and in rescue

 and relief operations during natural calamities


12.1 Besides ensuring inviolability of the
borders of our country, the Armed Forces
are also mandated to assist the civil authorities for maintenance of law and order,
essential services and in rescue and relief
operations during natural calamities. While
providing actual relief, the Armed Forces
continue to maintain regular liaison with the
civil authorities to refine contingency planning and ensure timely response. The
details of assistance provided by the Armed
Forces during the period are outlined in the
succeeding paragraphs.

###### ARMYARMYARMYARMYARMY

MILITARY CIVIC ACTION PROJECTS

12.2 An important ingredient of the
Army’s counter-insurgency strategy has
been to win the hearts and minds of the
local populace, to wean them away from
militants and assist the Civil Administration
in ensuring that the fruits of development
reach the grassroots. Army’s Civic Action


Programmes have been generously supported by grants from the Central Government. Some of the major Civic Action
Programmes undertaken by the Army in
Jammu and Kashmir and in the Northeastern States are as follows: (a) Renovation
of school buildings. (b) Establishment of
computer training centres and science
laboratories. (c) Excursion for school children to places of historical importance in
India. (d) Organising adventure sports. (e)
Construction of ancillaries. (f) Implementing
drinking water schemes. (g) Construction of
bridges. (h) Employment generating
schemes such as Training apprentice cadres,
vocational training, handloom and weaving.
(i) Organising medical camps in remote
areas, running nursing courses for women
and distributing medicines. (j) Organising
veterinary camps in remote areas. (k) Organising pre-recruitment training for the youth.
12.3 Flood Relief Operations In Sri Lanka
(Op Denim): Consequent to unprecedented
floods afflicting the districts of Ratnapura,

166


-----

Girls learn knitting at a Army Unit in Jammu and Kashmir.

Kalutara, Matara and Hambantota in central
and southern regions of Sri Lanka, the
Government of Sri Lanka had requested
Government of India on May 18, 2003 for
medical-cum-humanitarian assistance for
approximately 15,000 flood victims.
12.4 Indian Army Disaster Management
teams comprising 20 doctors and approximately 200 para-medics, engineers and
administrative support personnel were
airlifted by the Indian Air Force from
Allahabad and Secunderabad to Colombo
on May 20, 2003. The Indian Army troops
established medical camps in Ratnapura,
Galle and Matara besides a number of
Medical Aid Posts in the affected villages on
May 21, 2003, where a total of 16,957
victims were provided medical relief.  Special medical supplies were sent to fight


outbreak of epidemics such as typhoid and
other deadly diseases like dengue fever and
malaria. The teams were de-inducted on
June 6, 2003.
12.5 Medical Aid to Earthquake victims
in Iran: Consequent to heavy devastation

caused by the earthquake measuring 6.3 on
Richter scale at 0530 hours on December
26, 2003 at Bam in Iran, an Indian Army
Medical team comprising 68 persons (15
doctors and 47 para-medics and also four
persons from the Corps of Engineers and
two from the Corps of EME) was airlifted to
Iran (Kerman) in four aircraft on December
30 and 31, 2003 and January 1, 2004 for
relief and rescue work. The team established
a 75-bed hospital at Bam. The OPD facilities commenced on January 2, 2004 and
the hospital became fully functional with

167


-----

effect from January 3, 2004. A total of
50,699 OPD and 5716 surgical patients
were treated till March 20, 2004. The
Indian Army Medical Team returned to India
on April 4, 2004.

FLOOD RELIEF OPERATIONS IN INDIA

12.6 Orissa: Due to heavy release of
water in the Mahanadi system on August
29, 2003, low-lying areas in the districts of
Cuttack, Kendrapara, Jagatsinghapur,
Khurda, Puri and Jajpur were flooded.
Accordingly, five Army columns were deployed in the affected areas from August 30
to September 12, 2003. Army carried out
rescue and relief operations on a massive
scale. 175 marooned persons were rescued
and 9430 persons were provided medical
aid. The Army assisted the civil administration in the distribution of a large quantity of
relief material.
12.7 Bihar: Consequent to heavy rains
and rise of water level in Ganga and its
tributaries, the districts of Patna, Saran,
Munger and Samastipur were flooded in
September 2003. Five Army columns were
deployed in the flood-affected areas from
September 11 to 22. During the rescue
and relief operations, 886
persons were evacuated and

An Indian Army

3395 persons were provided

medical team

medical aid. The Army also

comprising 68

assisted in the distribution of a

persons established

large quantity of rations and

a 75 bed hospital at

other relief material.

Bam in earthquake 
12.8 Uttar Pradesh: One

hit Iran in January

Army column was deployed

2004.

from August 27 to September


5, 2003 to plug a 75-meter breach in the
Bundh on Ghaghara River in Azamgarh
district on August 27, 2003 and to carry
out rescue and relief operations.  During
the flood-relief operations the breach was
successfully plugged and 2698 persons
were rescued and 4724 persons were
provided medical aid. In another breach on
a Bundh on River Ganga in the district of
Ballia, one Army column was deployed from
September 13 to 19, 2003 to plug the
breach and assist the Civil Administration in
rescue and relief operations.

12.9 Madhya Pradesh:  During the month
of September 2003, heavy rains caused
floods in the districts of Rewa and Satna.
One Army column provided aid to the flood
ravaged victims from September 10 to 14.
A total of 66 persons were evacuated, 523
persons were provided medical aid and
1500 food packets were helidropped.

12.10 West Bengal: Heavy rains in
Jalpaiguri district resulted in the flooding of
large parts of village Matigara on Bagdogra–
Siliguri road on July 8, 2003. One Army
column was deployed at the site to provide
aid to flood-ravaged victims from July 8 to
10.

12.11  Assam: Due to incessant rains in
Sibsagar district in July 2003, Army assistance was requisitioned for flood relief
operations. One Army column was deployed from July 9 to 13 and again on July
23, for rescue and relief operations.
12.12  Uttaranchal: Consequent to flash
floods in River Ganga in Haridwar on August
5, 2003, 10 civilians were drowned. One

168


-----

Army Jawans re-construct a bridge washed away during floods at Baijnath


Army rescue team was made available to
recover the bodies.

OTHER TYPES OF ASSISTANCE

12.13  Fire in Chemical Factory in Agra:
Consequent to fire breaking out in Nice
Chemical Factory, Agra, on May 5, 2003,
one Army column was deployed for rescue
and relief operations.
12.14  Fire in Mumbai – Amritsar Mail:
Three bogies of Mumbai –Amristar Frontier
Mail caught fire at Ladowal in Punjab on
May 15, 2003. One Army column was
made available to provide immediate medical
assistance to the victims. A few Army
personnel travelling in the train displayed
exceptional bravery and presence of mind
when they de-coupled the three bogies
engulfed by the inferno from rest of the train
and thus prevented fire spreading to other
bogies and averted a major disaster.


12.15  Fire in Paper Mill in Gurdaspur
District: Consequent to fire breaking out in a
Paper Mill in Gurdaspur district on May 19,
2003, one Army column was tasked for rescue
and relief operations on May 19 and 20.

12.16  Karwar-Mumbai Holiday Special
Train Accident: Consequent to the derailment of Karwar-Mumbai Holiday Special
Train near Ratnagiri in Maharashtra on June
22, 2003, two Army columns rushed to the
site and provided humanitarian assistance to
the victims of the train accident till June 24.

12.17 Construction of Bridge:
Narsinghpur (MP): In response to a request
of Government of Madhya Pradesh, one
Army Engineer platoon was deployed for
construction of a 172-meter span pedestrian
bridge over Narmada River near Barman
Ghat in Narsinghpur District of MP for use
during Makarasankranti Mela.

169


-----

Fresh water being transported by Naval personnel to flood-hit villages in Orissa.


12.18  Construction of Bridge: Ujjain
(MP): Three bridges, approximately 100meter span each, were launched by the
Army over Shipra River in Ujjain (MP) for
use during Simhastha (Ardh Kumbh Mela),
2004 at Ujjain from March 31 to May 15.

###### NANANAVYNANAVYVYVYVY

12.19  Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ)
Surveys: A major survey of the Coastal
Regulation Zone was undertaken for the
Government of Karnataka at a cost of Rs.
56.56 lakhs. Phase two and three of the
survey are in progress. The Navy also
undertook the CZM survey of Greater
Mumbai during January 2003. These surveys were aimed at demarcating the Coastal
Regulation Zone as part of Environment
Protection Project in which Hydrographic
parameters are of relevance to Coastal
Planning and development.


12.20  Fire Support: INS Rajali firefighting team provided aid to civil authorities
for fighting the fire in a train compartment at
the Arakonam Railway Station on January
16, 2003.
12.21  Medical Camp: With a view to
provide aid to the poor and needy villagers
and to create health awareness amongst
them, a medical camp was organised at
Fatarkativillai village on September 27,
2003. This programme benefited around
135 villages.
12.22  Supply of Fresh Water to Villages:
The Navy has been providing fresh drinking
water to villages near Tirunelvelli, particularly during ceremonial occasions in temples
and mosques.
12.23  Flood Relief Operations / Aid to
Civil Power: One Prahar (a unit of Marine
Commandos) was deployed during floods in
Marshaghai villages, Kandrapada district of

170


-----

Orissa in early September 2003. The Prahar
extensively travelled the flood-hit area using
Geminis and distributed food materials,
offered medical assistance and rescued
people from the submerged villages. One
Chetak was deployed at Icchapuram on
October 8 and 9, 2003 on request of the
State Government of Andhra Pradesh for flood
relief operations and dropping of food packets.
12.24  National Security Environment:
During the year the Southern Naval Command held a series of discussion sessions
with heads of villages in the neighbourhood
of Naval bases to apprise them of the overall
security requirements.

###### AIR FORCEAIR FORCEAIR FORCEAIR FORCEAIR FORCE

12.25  Flood Relief: During the floods in
Bihar eight IAF sorties were undertaken by
IL-76 and An-32 aircraft to airlift 35 tons of
load, 183 passengers, Army personnel and

Indian Navy Sailors rescue marooned villagers in Sri Lanka.


boats from Bareilly to Patna. Flood relief
operations were also undertaken in Orissa.
Two sorties were undertaken by IL-76 to airlift
4327 tons of load and 152 passengers from
Gwalior to Bhubaneswar. A total of 141.73
tons of load and 182 passengers in 154
sorties were airlifted to Bihar and Orissa.
12.26 Op DENIM: Two IL-76 aircraft were
pressed into service in Sri Lanka for floodrelief operations. The aircraft carried
engineering equipment and Army personnel.
One An-32 aircraft also airlifted 4.5 tons of
blankets.
12.27 Casualty Evacuation: Casualty
evacuation was undertaken on many occasions in the northern sector of Jammu &
Kashmir and eastern sector of Arunachal
Pradesh. A total of 176 sorties were flown
involving 134:35 hrs of flying to airlift 246
passengers from January 1, 2003 to March
31, 2004.


171


-----

An Air Force Helicopter with food packets for flood victims.

12.28  Courier Operations: Kargil courier
commenced operations from January 26,
2003 for the civilians of J&K. The An-32
flight operates once a week on route KargilSrinagar-Jammu-Srinagar-Kargil.


12.29  Special IL-76 flights for earthquake relief to Iran were undertaken by the
IAF in December 2003 and January and
February 2004. 93878 kgs of relief material and 50 passengers were airlifted.


172


-----

### 1313131313

 NATIONAL CADET CORPS

NCC girl cadets at the Republic Day Camp.


-----

###### he National Cadet Corps strives to provide the
##### T

###### youth of India opportunities for all-round

 development with a sense of commitment,

 dedication, self-discipline and moral values, so that

 they become good leaders and useful citizens.


###### he National Cadet Corps strives to provide the

 youth of India opportunities for all-round

 development with a sense of commitment,

 dedication, self-discipline and moral values, so that

 they become good leaders and useful citizens.


13.1 The National Cadet Corps (NCC)
established under the NCC Act, 1948, has
completed 55 years of its existence. The
NCC strives to provide the youth of this
country opportunities for all-round development with a sense of commitment, dedication, self-discipline and moral values, so
that they become good leaders and useful
citizens and can take their appropriate place
in all walks of life in the service of the
nation.
13.2 The total sanctioned strength of
NCC cadets is 13 lakhs. The Wingwise
distribution of the enrolled cadet strength is
as  under :
(a) Army Wing 9,46,964

(b) Air Wing 65,350

(c) Naval Wing 66,300

(d) Girls Wing 1,72,473


TRAINING OF CADETS

13.3 Training Camps: Camp Training is
an important part of NCC Curricula. The
camps help in developing camaraderie, team
work, dignity of labour, self confidence and
inculcate unity and discipline. The various
types of camps conducted are as listed
below:

(a) Annual Training Camps (ATC):
Annual Training Camps are conducted at
the State Directorate level. A minimum
of 50% of enrolled strength of cadets
numbering approximately 6.5 lakhs
attend at least one camp per year.
Approximately 900 such camps are
conducted in a training year.

(b)  National Integration Camps(NIC):
37 National Integration Camps were
held during the year in which over
23,000 cadets from all States and Union
Territories participated. In addition,
Special NICs were conducted at the
following places:
174


The NCC has units in 8,243 schools and
4,967 colleges in almost all the districts of
the country.


-----

(i) NIC Leh: A special NIC

23000 cadets from was conducted at Leh from
all States and Union June 10 to 21, 2003 wherein
Territories a total of 200 cadets from all
participated in the parts of the country particiNational Integration pated.
Camps held during (ii)  NIC Dibrugarh: The
the year. special NIC in the North-East

was conducted at Dibrugarh
(Assam) from October 9 to
20, 2003 with the participation of
200 cadets from the North East
Region and 600 cadets from the rest
of India.
(iii) NIC Port Blair: A special NIC was
conducted at Port Blair (Andaman &
Nicobar Islands) from February 9 to
20, 2004 with the participation of
130 cadets including 80 cadets from
the mainland.
(c)  Vayu Sainik Camp (VSC): An All
India Vayu Sainik Camp for Air Wing
SD/SW cadets was conducted at Air
Force Station Jalahalli (Bangalore) from
October 10 to 21, 2003. 420 Senior
Division (SD) and 180 Senior Wing
(SW) cadets participated.


(d)  Nau Sainik Camp (NSC):  400 SD
cadets and 160 SW cadets attended the
Nau Sainik Camp at Visakhapatnam from
October 29 to November 9, 2003.
(e) Thal Sainik Camps (TSC): Two Thal
Sainik Camps are conducted at the
Republic Day Parade ground, Delhi
Cantonment every year, one for Senior
Division and Junior Division boys and
other for Senior Wing and Junior Wing
girls. 640 Boy and 640 girl cadets take
part in these camps. The camps were
conducted from October 10 to 21,
2003.
(f)  Leadership Camps: These camps
are conducted on an all-India basis.
There are four Advance Leadership
Camps (ALC), one each for SD, JD, SD
Naval Wing boys and SW Girls and
three Basic Leadership Camps one each
for SD boys, SW and JW Girls. These
camps impart training to 2950 boy and
girl cadets and were conducted during
the months of September and October
2003.
(g) Rock-Climbing Camps: Eight rockclimbing camps are held every year to
expose the cadets to the basics of rockclimbing and to inculcate the spirit of
adventure. Four of these camps are held
at Gwalior in Madhya Pradesh and other
four camps at Neyyar Dam near
Trivandrum in Kerala. 1080 boy and girl
cadets attended these camps from
October to December 2003.
(h)  Republic Day Camp-2004:  Republic Day Camp – 2004 was conducted from January 1 to 29, 2004 at


NCC Cadets examining a Gun at the Republic Day
Training Camp .


175


-----

Delhi. The Camp was attended by
1800 cadets from all over India. Cadets
of friendly foreign countries with whom
we have a Youth Exchange Programme
also participated in the Republic Day
Camp. Inter-Directorate competitions,
connected with institutional training,
cultural competitions and National
Integration Awareness presentations
were conducted during the month-long
camp. A host of dignitaries visited the
camp. The camp was inaugurated by
the Vice-President of India on January
8, 2004. As a regular feature, Prime
Minister’s Rally was held on January 27.
The Camp culminated with the tea for
selected cadets hosted at the Rashtrapati
Bhawan.
13.4 Attachment Training: The NCC
cadets derive first hand experience of immense value on brief attachment to the
Armed Forces units. During the year,
attachments conducted were as under:(a) 440 Officers and 20,000 cadets
were attached to the regular Army units.
This included 560 Women Officers and
SW Girl Cadets.
(b) 120 boy cadets were attached to
Indian Military Academy, Dehradun
during June 2003 and 48 girl cadets
with Officers Training Academy, Chennai
during September 2003. Both attachments were for the duration of two
weeks.
(c) 1000 girl cadets were attached with
various Military Hospitals.
(d) 38 SD and 12 SW cadets of Air
Wing were attached to the Air Force


Academy, Dundigal from October 13 to
24, 2003.
(e) Naval Attachment-IND Mandovi:
Third attachment training camp for
Naval Wing(SD) cadets was conducted
at Naval Academy, INS Mandovi, Goa,
for a duration of 12 days from December 15 to December 26, 2003. 25 SD
cadets from all 16 Directorates attended
the training.
13.5 Gliding and Microlite Flying: Gliding facilities are provided at 38 NCC Air
Squadrons.  Despite the fact that the
serviceable holding of gliders has fallen to as
low as 25% of the authorization, the NCC
Air Squadrons have carried out 18818
launches during the past year. Microlite
flying is being conducted in NCC as an
adventure activity to give air experience to
the Air Wing NCC cadets (SD). A total of
3262 hrs of microlite flying was undertaken
during the past year.
13.6 Sea Training: NCC cadets of the
Naval wing, during their sea training and
attachment, are imparted intensive training
in Naval subjects like Navigation Communication, Gunnery, Seamanship, Damage
Control and Ship Safety, First Aid, and
Ship’s Husbandry. This year 295 cadets
were attached to ships of the Eastern and
Western Naval Command and Coast Guard,
for sea training.
13.7 Screening Courses at OTA: Two
SSB Screening Courses for Senior Division
(SD) cadets aspiring to join the Armed
Forces were held at OTA Kamptee from May
17 to 26, 2003 and from September 29 to
October 8, 2003. 192 SD cadets from all

176


-----

State Directorates attended the course. SSB
Screening Course to train SW cadets was
held at OTA, Gwalior, from January 19 to
29, 2004. 94 SW cadets from all State
Directorates attended this course.
13.8 Foreign Cruise: The following
foreign cruises were undertaken during the
year:(a)  Coast Guard Cruise:
(i) Five Naval SD cadets attended the
cruise from April 5 to April 12,
2003. The route of cruise was from
Paradip to Chittagong(Bangladesh)
and back.
(ii) Six Naval SD cadets attended the
cruise from May 10 to May 16,
2003. The cruise was from Port
Blair to Yangon and back.
(b) Naval Cruise:
(i) Eight Naval SD cadets attended
the programme held from March 7
to April 18, 2003 from Goa to
Palermo (Italy), Alexandria (Egypt)
and back to Mumbai.
(ii) Eight Naval SD cadets attended
the cruise from October 8 to

NCC Cadets prepare the model of an Aircraft Carrier at
the Republic Day Camp.


October 31, 2003 from Mumbai to
Bandar Abbas, Al Fujairah, Muscat
and back.
(c) INS Tarangini: Two Naval SD
cadets joined in INMS Tarangini World
Cruise from Montreal to Washington
from September 1 to  October 3,
2003.
13.9 Adventure Training: Adventure
activities are organized to develop special
qualities of courage, leadership team work,
spirit of adventure and sportsmanship
among the cadets.
(a) Mountaineering Courses: NCC
nominates Boy and girl cadets from all
NCC Directorates to the Nehru Institute
of Mountaineering, Uttarkashi,
Himalayan Mountaineering Institute,
Darjeeling and Directorate of Mountaineering and Allied Sports, Manali, every
year for various courses. 186 cadets
were nominated for various courses
during 2003-04.
(b) Mountaineering Expeditions: NCC
has been conducting two Mountaineering Expeditions every year, one for the
Senior Division boy cadets and the other
for Senior Wing girl cadets. Since
1970, the NCC has conducted 52
Mountaineering Expeditions, of which
28 were for boys and 24 for girls. This
year the boys expedition team successfully climbed the Jogin Peak III (19,971
ft) in May-June 2003 and girls team
climbed Gangotri Peak (6590M) in
September-October 2003.
(c) Cycle and Motor Cycle Expeditions: These expeditions are organized

177


-----

both at the national and state levels.
During the current year, Sadbhavana
Motor Cycle Rally was organized by
Punjab Directorate from May 15 to
June 11.
(d)  Trekking Expedition: A total of 10
Trekking Expeditions were conducted
during the year 2003-04 with the
participation of 10,000 cadets. Seven
expeditions were for boy cadets and
three for girl cadets.
(e)  Para Sailing: Para Sailing is conducted at each Group level as a part of
adventure activity for boy and girl cadets
of the NCC. During the past year
65,904 cadets have been trained in this
activity.
(f) Para Basic Courses: During the
last year 20 boy cadets and 20 girl


cadets of NCC were trained at Army
Airborne Training School, Agra.
(g) Slithering Demonstration: 10 SD
and 10 SW cadets took part in slithering demonstration during PM’s Rally in
January 2004.
(h) Desert Camel Safari: Desert Camel
Safari involving NCC cadets and cadets
from Singapore was conducted from
November 17 to November 28, 2003.
(i) White Water Rafting: White
Water Rafting Node has been established at Raiwala (Haridwar). NCC is in
the process of finalizing establishment of
three more white water nodes in Punjab,
West Bengal and Gujarat.
(j) Sailing Expeditions: The following major Whaler sailing expeditions
were conducted during the year:

Dte From To Distance Date No. of Cadets

1. AP Visakhapatnam Ichchapuram 405 Kms May 5 to 44SD &
14, 2003 16SW
2. Bih Allahabad Patna 659 Kms Sept 29 to 20 SD
9 Oct, 2003
3. Del Yamuna River 432 Kms Sep 26 to Oct. 40 SD &
9, 2003 8 SW
4. Guj Darudeshwar Bhadboot 405 Kms Sep 17-28, 36SD
2003
5. Kar Karwar Udupi 450 Kms Dec 5 to
21, 2003 40 SD
6. Mah Ambegaon Pandaripur 450Kms Sept 19 to 32 SD & 08
30, 2003 SW
Madhyameshwar Vishupuri 478 Kms Sep 26 to 40 SD & 20
Oct 7, 2003 SW
7. MP Brahmangat Hoshangabad 230 Kms Oct 17 to 30 SD
23, 2003
8. WB Farakka Kolkata 450 Kms May 5 to 40SD
24, 2003
9. TN Pondicherry Kodiakarai 436 Kms June 20 to 36 SD & 10
30, 2003 SW
10. Pb Govindsagar Lake 420 Kms Sep 8 to 20 SD
19,2003
11. Raj Jai Samand Lake 430 Kms Aug 25 to 30 SD
Sep., 5,2003
Bilaspur Dam 420 Kms Sep 15 to 30 SD
16, 2003

178


-----

YOUTH EXCHANGE PROGRAMME(YEP)

13.10  The following visits were undertaken during the year as part of YEP:(a) Visit by DGNCC to Bangladesh from
March 24 to 27, 2003 and to UK from
July 23 to August 3, 2003.
(b) Visit of one officer and twelve cadets
to UK from July 22 to August 10,
2003.
(c) Visit of two officers and ten cadets

to Russia from September 29 to
October 8, 2003.
(d) Visit of one officer and six cadets
to Sri Lanka from October 15 to October 22, 2003.
(e) Visit of two officers and twelve
cadets to Bhutan from November 10 to
November 16, 2003.
(f) Visit of two officers and twenty
cadets to Vietnam from November 17
to November 30, 2003.
(g) Visit of two officers and eight
cadets to Singapore to partici
NCC has adopted pate in Camp Pinnacle from
community December 4 to December 14,
development activities 2003.
with the aim of (h) Visit of one officer and
imbibing selfless two cadets to Nepal from
service to the February 12 to February 22,
community, dignity of 2004 to participate in Nepalabour, importance of lese NCC Camp and Army
self-help, need to Day Parade.
protect the (i) Visit of one officer and
environment and to twelve Cadets to Bangladesh
assist weaker sections from March 20 to March 31,
of the society in their 2004.
upliftment. (j) Visit of ADG(A) & DDG,


PHHP & C Directorate to Bangladesh from
March 24 to March 27, 2004.
13.11 In-Coming YEP Visits : The following in-coming Youth Exchange Programme
visits by foreign delegations were undertaken
during the year as part of YEP:
(a)  One officer and six cadets from
Singapore for Nau Sainik Camp at
Visakhapatnam from October 29 to
October November 9, 2003.
(b)  One officer and two cadets from
Singapore for Desert Safari at Jaisalmer
from November 17 to November28,
2003.
(c)  9 Officers and 69 cadets from nine
countries during Republic Day Camp
January 2004.
(d)  One officer and eight cadets from
Bangladesh NCC attended All India
Yachting Regatta from January 8 to
January 18, 2004 under the ageis of
NCC Directorate, Orissa.

SOCIAL SERVICE AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT

13.12 NCC has adopted community
development activities with the aim of
imbibing selfless service to the community,
dignity of labour, importance of self-help,
need to protect the environment and to
assist weaker sections of the society in their
upliftment. This is envisaged through
programmes involving adult education, tree
plantation, blood donation, visit to Old Age
Homes, slum clearance, village upliftment
and various other social schemes. NCC
cadets participate in the following community development activities:
179


-----

(a)  Tree Plantation: NCC cadets plant
saplings and look after them in conjunction with the concerned State Department.
(b)  Blood Donation: Cadets donate
blood as voluntary service whenever
needed by Hospital/Red Cross. Approximately 2,85,000 cadets have
donated blood this year.
(c)  Old Age Homes: Old Age Homes
in the country are patronized and
regularly visited by NCC Cadets.
(d)  Adult Education: NCC Cadets visit
remote areas, villages and underdeveloped areas to emphasise the need for
education and to assist in the conduct
of the Adult Education Programme.
(e)  Community Projects: Cadets of
NCC participate in the rural and urban
community projects and other development works like track improvement, well
cleaning etc.
(f) Disaster Relief: NCC has extended its helping hand during natural
and other calamities and accidents.
Over the years, NCC cadets have rendered outstanding service during floods,
earthquake, cyclones, train accidents
etc. and have provided the healing tough
in riot affected areas.
(g)  Anti-Leprosy Drive: NCC Cadets
have launched anti-leprosy drive
throughout the country and are helping
various voluntary organisations.
(h)  AIDS Awareness Programme: NCC
also participates actively in the AIDS
awareness programme. The NCC is
working alongwith UNAIDS and DG
AFMS in carrying out Aids Awareness


programmes throughout the country.
(i) Cancer Awareness Programme:
NCC Cadets actively participate in
Cancer Awareness Programmes organised at various cities.

SPORTS ACTIVITIES AT NATIONAL
LEVEL

13.13  The NCC cadets also participated
in the following activities conducted at the
national level:(a)  Jawahar Lal Nehru Tournament :
During the year 2003 four teams viz
two junior (boys), one junior (girls) and
one sub junior (boys) from NCC participated in the tournament. Junior (girls)
team from Kar & Goa Directorate won
the Fair Play Trophy.
(b)  Subroto Cup Football Tournament:
NCC has been participating in this
tournament for the last 25 years. Two
NCC teams, one each from Kar & Goa
Directorate participated in the tournament held from November 25 to December 21, 2003 at New Delhi.
(c)  All India GV Mavlankar Shooting
Championship: The XIII All India GV
Mavlankar Shooting Championship was
held at Chennai from August 22 to 28,
2003. 32 NCC Cadets (16 Boys and
16 Girls) took part in the event. This
year the NCC Cadets won four Gold,
four Silver and four Bronze medals. In
addition, eight NCC Cadets qualified for
the National Shooting Competition
conducted by NRAI at Hyderabad. The
XIV All India GV Mavlankar Shooting
Championship will be conducted at
Coimbatore in the month of September
2004.

180


-----

(d)  National Shooting Championship
Competition: The 47[th] National Shooting Championship Competition (NSCC)
was conducted at Hyderabad from
December 7 to December17, 2003.
Eight cadets from NCC participated in
the event. The cadets performed commendably well and two cadets qualified
to participate in the National Shooting
Trials likely to be conducted during the
current training year.
(e)  All India NCC Yachting Regatta: All
India NCC Yachting Regatta was conducted at INS Chilka from January 20 to
January 27, 2004. 48 SD and 48 SW
cadets from all the NCC Directorates
participated. In addition, 6 cadets from
Bangladesh also participated in the
event.
(f) XIV National Inter State Kayaking
and Canoeing Competition: XIV National Inter State Kayaking and Canoeing
Championships were conducted from
January 23 to January 26, 2004 at
Hyderabad. Cadets from NCC Directorates AP, MP and Mah participated in
this event.
(g) National Team Sailing Championship: NCC team participated in the
National Team Sailing Championship2003 held at Rishi Konda Beach,
Vishakhapatnam from November 2 to
November 8, 2003 conducted by
Yachting Association of India (YAI).
(h) Equestrian Competition: NCC
participated in Shivalik Horse Show,
Chandigarh from November, 2003 and
won one Gold, one Silver and three
Bronze Medals. NCC team from Orissa
Directorate also participated in Junior


National Equestrian Championship,
Pune from December 22 to December
31, 2003 and won one Gold Medal
and Rs.4000/-.
13.14  Training of Staff: The following
courses with vacancies as indicated were
conducted for training of Associated NCC
Officers (ANOs) and Permanent
Instructions(PI) staff during the year 200304:(a) Refresher Course for ANOs: 16
Courses are conducted every year at
Officer Training Academy (OTA)
Kamptee for 1135 ANOs.
(b) Orientation Courses for PI Staff:
26 courses at OTA Kamptee for 2810
PI Staff.
(c) Pre-Commission Courses: Four
PRCN courses are conducted at OTA
Kamptee for 500 ANOs.
(d) Refresher Courses for Lady ANOs:
Four courses at NCC OTA Gwalior for
110 lady ANOs. Two courses each are
also conducted for Senior and Junior
Wing Direct Entry NCC ‘C’ Certificate
ANOs.
(e) PRCN Courses for Lady ANOs:
Two courses for Senior Wing and two
courses for Junior Wing are conducted
for ANOs at NCC OTA Gwalior.
(f) Refresher Course for Naval ANOs:
29 SD and 82 JD ANOs attended
Refresher Course from September 1 to
September 18, 2003 at INS Circars
Vizag.
(g) Orientation Course for Naval PI
Staff: 36 Naval PI Staff attended Refresher Course at Seamanship, Kochi
from August 26 to September 13,
2003.

181


-----

(h) Pre- Commission Course for Naval
ANOs: Naval SD/JD ANOs underwent
Pre-Commission Training at Seamanship
School, Kochi from July to September
2003 as follows:(i) 12 SD - July 14 to September 26,
2003
(ii) 37 SD - August 18 to September
26, 2003

(i) Orientation Course for Air PI
Staff: 40 Air PI Staff undertook Orientation Course of 5
days duration at OTA

Nearly thirty percent of

Kamptee from January 12 to

those getting admitted

January 16, 2004 and Febru
to National Defence

ary 23 to February 27, 2004.

Academy, Indian

(j) Civil Defence Manage
Military Academy and

ment Courses: A total of 27

the Officers Training

Officers/JCO/ANOs were

Academy are from the

detailed to attend various

National Cadet Corps.

courses conducted at National
Civil Defence College
(NCDC), Nagpur during the
year.
(k) Life Saving Capsule for ANOs: To
impart instructions in life saving techniques, a life saving capsule was conducted at OTA Kamptee from June 9 to
June 12, 2003 by Rashtriya Life Saving
Society India {(RLSS) (I)} Pune. Members of faculty and fifty selected ANOs
from all State Directorates were trained.
Similarly a capsule of four days duration
was conducted for selected Lady ANOs
at OTA Gwalior from November 14 to
November 17, 2003.


LOGISTICS

13.15 The following improvements were
carried out in the field of Logistics during
the year under review:(a) Additional Light Vehicles for
North-Eastern Region and J&K: The
minor units in the North-Eastern Region
have been issued 22 light vehicles. In
addition, three additional light vehicles
have been provided to NCC Directorate
(J&K).
(b) Procurement of Service Rifle 7.62
mm in lieu of .303 Drill Practice (DP)
Rifles: To meet the deficiency of Rifles
for training activities, 18396, 7.62 mm
rifles have been procured to replace the
existing obsolete .303 Drill Practice
Rifles.
(c) International Competition Rifles:
Thirty-two. 22 International Competition
Rifles have been provided to all the
sixteen State NCC Directorates at the
scale of two per Directorate to train the
cadets for participation in shooting
championships.
13.16 The National Cadet Corps has come
up a long way from its modest beginning in
1948 as is evident from the achievements
during 2003. More NCC Cadets have
succeeded in getting admitted to the National Defence Academy/ Indian Military
Academy/ Officers Training Academy. Their
number has steadily increased to nearly 30%
of the total cadet strength. Today the NCC
armed with the motto of ‘Unity and Discipline’ is steadily marching forward to groom
tomorrow’s leaders.

182


-----

### 1414141414

 DEFENCE RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN COUNTRIES

Russian Defence Minister Sergai Ivanov inspecting the Guard of Honour at South Block, New Delhi.


-----

###### ajor changes have taken place in recent years
##### M

###### in the global security, political and strategic

 environment. India has responded by developing

 an expanding web of defence relations with a

 wide-range of countries.


###### ajor changes have taken place in recent years

 in the global security, political and strategic

 environment. India has responded by developing

 an expanding web of defence relations with a


14.1 A closer security dialogue and
strengthening of defence cooperation with
friendly countries remain an important
objective and component of our overall
defence and foreign policies. These have
been reinforced by the major changes that
have taken place in recent years in the global
security, political and strategic environment.
The emergence of a new and virulent brand
of international terrorism, as one of the
primary threats to domestic and international security, has brought about a greater
convergence in security perceptions among
nations and prompted closer security and
defence-related contacts, exchanges and
cooperation with a widening group of
countries. Concerns about the leakage and
proliferation of weapons and technologies
that can be used for mass destruction and
threats to the security of transport, travel
and the sea lanes, have also served to bring
countries closer and cooperate for their
mutual security.


14.2 India too has reacted to these
developments by developing an expanding
web of defence relations with a wide-range
of countries. These have taken the form of
increased defence diplomacy in the form of
exchanges of high-level defence-related
visits and dialogue on security challenges,
port calls etc. and defence cooperation in
the form of training exchanges, combined
exercises, sourcing, development, production and marketing of defence equipment,
and other forms of cooperation.
14.3 Since March 2003, the Defence
Ministers of France (April 2003), Japan
(May 2003), Tanzania and Singapore
(October 2003), Mongolia (November
2003), Brazil, South Africa and Sudan
(December 2003), Russia (January 2004),
Mozambique (February 2004) and China
(March 2004) have visited India on bilateral
visits. Outgoing visits have included the
landmark visit of Raksha Mantri Shri George
Fernandes to China in April 2003, his visit

184


-----

to Brazil in July 2003, Ukraine and the
Czech Republic in October 2003,
Kyrghyzstan and Kazakhstan in November
2003, and South Africa in February 2004
for the 1[st] meeting of Defence Ministers of
the India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA) Forum.
Raksha Mantri’s participation in “Shangri La
Dialogue” in Singapore in May-June 2003
also provided an opportunity for him to
meet his counterparts and security experts

from many countries.
14.4 Defence relations and cooperation
also formed the agenda of high-level, Heads
of Government/ State visits from Poland,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Hungary and
Djibouti, amongst others, and outbound
visits at the level of the President to Sudan,
Vice President to Seychelles and of the
Prime Minister to Russia, Tajikistan, Turkey
and Thailand. Defence cooperation also


featured during incoming and outgoing visits
by Foreign Ministers and/or Ministers
dealing with the defence-related industries
of a large number of countries notably,
Eritrea and Armenia (May 2003) and
Ukraine (August 2003) as also Congressional and parliamentary representatives
from the US and Russia. Defence agreements or MoUs on defence cooperation
were signed with Armenia (May 2003), UAE
(July 2003), Seychelles (September 2003),
Tanzania, Singapore and the Czech Republic
(October 2003), Hungary (November
2003) and Brazil (December 2003).
14.5 Over the years India has developed
robust institutionalized security dialogues
and defence consultative mechanisms at the
Defence Secretary’s level with a growing
number of countries. Those who have met
since April 2003 included the India-UK


Indian and US Navy personnel duirng a joint-exercise in Arabian Sea

185


-----

Defence Consultative Group

Over the years

(June 2003), the India-Italy

India has

Joint Defence Committee (July

developed robust

2003), the India-US Defence

institutionalized

Policy Group (August 2003),

security dialogues

the 1[st] India-Vietnam Security

and defence

Dialogue, the India-France

consultative

High Committee on Defence

mechanisms with a

Cooperation (November

growing number of

2003) and the India-South

countries

Africa Joint Defence Committee and the India-Israel Joint
Working Group on Defence Cooperation
(December 2003). Other incoming visits at
the level of Defence Secretary took place
from Nepal (August 2003) and Sri Lanka
(January 2004). During the course of the
year, the Ministry of Defence also participated in security dialogues led by the
Ministry of External Affairs with Australia,
Japan, Nepal, and the Philippines, and Joint
Commissions with Indonesia, Mauritius,
Myanmar, Nigeria and Oman. Defencerelated visits at other levels from the Ministry of Defence also took place with Sri
Lanka, Ukraine, Poland, Belarus, the Republic of Korea and Mongolia.
14.6 Visits at the level of Chiefs of
Defence/General/Joint Staff or Services form
a vital part of our military-to-military relationship expanding the framework of professional interaction and exchanges and enhancing mutual understanding. Chiefs of
Defence/ General/ Joint Staff of the Lesotho
(June 2003), UAE, Thailand and US (July
2003), UK and Djibouti (October 2003),
Sri Lanka (December 2003) and Vietnam
(March 2004) visited India during this


period. The Deputy Chief of the German
Armed Forces visited in October 2003, and
a Deputy Chief of General Staff from China
in December 2003.
14.7 Visits at the level of Service Chiefs
included the visits of the Chiefs of Army of
Russia (April 2003), Israel (November
2003), Sri Lanka (December 2003) and
Afghanistan (January-February 2004); Chiefs
of Air Force from Iran (May 2003),
Myanmar (September 2003), Kenya (January
2004), Israel (February-March 2004) and
Sri Lanka (March 2004); and Chiefs of Navy
of Singapore (March 2003), the UK (November 2003), and Nigeria and Kenya in
February 2004 for DEFEXPO 2004 in
Delhi. In addition, the Commander of the
US Pacific Air Force (PACAF), the Chief of
Naval Operations of the US, and the Commander of the US Pacific Fleet visited India
in March-April 2003, October 2003 and
January 2004 respectively.
14.8 From India, the Chairman, Chiefs of
Staff Committee and Chief of Naval Staff
visited the UK in July 2003, Myanmar in
September 2003, France in October 2003,
Vietnam in December 2003 and Thailand in
March 2004 on bilateral visits; to Russia
and Canada in connection with activities of
the Indian Navy in June 2003, and to
Singapore in November 2003 to attend the
Singapore Maritime Defence Exhibition,
IMDEX. The Chief of Air Staff undertook
bilateral visits to Algeria in March 2003,
Maldives in July 2003, South Africa in
August 2003, Russia in October 2003 and
Bangladesh in February 2004. He also
attended the Latin American Defentec

186


-----

Exhibition and Air Show at Rio de Janeiro in
April 2003, participated in the Global Air
Chiefs Conference in the US in September
2003 and presided over the major IAF
participation at the Singapore Air Show in
February 2004. The Chief of Army Staff
visited Bhutan in March 2003, Nepal in
April 2003, Russia in June 2003 and
Singapore and Philippines in SeptemberOctober 2003, Botswana and South Africa
in February 2004 and the US in March
2004. Vice-Chief of Army accompanied
Raksha Mantri to China in April 2003, and
visited South Africa and Botswana in July
2003 and Malaysia and Indonesia in March
2004.
14.9 India has been a traditional contributor to UN peace-keeping missions and
activities. Currently, India has major
deployments in Lebanon (UNIFIL) since
1998, Ethiopia-Eritrea (UNMEE) since
2001 and Congo (MONUC) since July
2003 with a presence of 650 personnel,
including the Force Commander, at the
UNIFIL in Lebanon; 1,500 for the UNMEE
at Ethiopia-Eritrea, presently the largest
single Indian deployment for any UN PKO,
and 243 Indian Air Force personnel and 90
others for the MONUC in
Congo, constituting attack and

India has been a tradi
utility helicopter units and

tional contributor to UN

support personnel.

peace-keeping missions

14.10 Training coopera
and activities. Currently,

tion and assistance, both

India has major

incoming and outgoing,

deployments with the

constitutes one of the bed
United Nations Forces.

rocks of our defence coopera

tion with a large number of countries.
During the year, armed forces training
institutions enrolled over 2000 trainees at
various institutions of the Army, 343 at
Indian Naval training establishments and
276 at Air Force training institutions. The
Indian Armed Forces have military training
teams at Botswana, Laos, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, Seychelles, Tajikistan and
Zambia.
14.11 Indian delegations have also participated in various security-related meetings
on subjects such as peacekeeping operations, confidence building measures, disaster
management, search and rescue, anti-piracy,
counter-terrorism, etc., through mechanisms
sponsored by various international organizations as also the ARF, the US, Japan and
security think-tanks. Vice-Chief of Army
represented the Indian Army at the Pacific
Armies Management Seminar in September
2003. The GOC-in-C, Northern Command
participated in a military conference in
Australia in September-October 2003. The
Quarter Master General (QMG) participated
in an IISS-sponsored seminar on South
Asian security in Oman in December 2003.
The Ministry of Defence-CII organized
DefExpo 2004 in February 2004 also
witnessed participation by delegations from
over 35 official/non-official countries including 12 at the level of Defence Minister.
14.12  A noteworthy feature in our
defence cooperation with foreign countries
this year has been increased frequency of
activities such as joint and combined exercises with friendly armed forces. These

187


-----

exercises are growing in scale and complexity. Prominent among them during the year
have been combined exercises involving the
Air Force with the US notably the Cooperative Cope Thunder–03 multilateral exercise
conducted in Alaska in June 2003, and the
Exercise Cope India–04 bilateral Dissimilar
Air Combat Training (DACT) exercise at
Gwalior in February 2004; joint and combined exercises involving army and air force
in Tajikistan in July-August 2003; joint and
combined counter-insurgency exercises led
by the Army with the US at Vairengte,
Mizoram in April 2003 and High Altitude
Area Exercises at Leh in September 2003;
and joint and combined exercises led by the
Navy with US Special Forces at Ratnagiri in
March 2004. Indian Navy has an institutionalized joint exercises with the US, France
and Singapore. Naval exercises were conducted with Oman (April 2003), Russia
(May 2003), US (October 2003), France
(August 2003), UK (November 2003),
China (November 2003) and Singapore
(March 2004) during the course of the year.
Joint exercises involving the Coast Guards of
Japan and India were held off Kobe, Japan, in
September 2003.
14.13  Naval goodwill visits are a conventional instrument of defence diplomacy.
Major overseas deployments of the Indian
Navy on good will visits during this period
have included the deployment of INS Sharda
to Seychelles and Mauritius in March 2003,
Eastern Fleet units to Brunei and Cambodia
in October 2003, the visit of the INS Ranjit
and Kulish to Pusan and Shanghai in No

vember 2003, ships to Phuket, Thailand
(November 2003) and Ho Chi Minh City
(December 2003), and other good-will visits
to the Persian Gulf (Dubai, Doha and Kuwait
in December 2003) and South China Sea
areas. The Flag Officer and C-in-C, Eastern
Command, visited Pusan and Shanghai to
time with the visit of INS Ranjit and Kulish
to these ports in November 2003. Indian
naval ships participated in the LIMA-03
Exhibition at Langkawi, Malaysia, in September-October 2003, and the IMDEX 2003
at Singapore in November 2003. Coast
Guard ships visited Chittagong, Bangladesh,
in April 2003, Yangon, Myanmar, in May
2003, Manila, Philippines, and Ho Chi Minh
City, Vietnam, in September 2003, Belawan,
Indonesia, in December 2003, Mauritius in
January 2004 and Maldives in February
2004.
14.14  Indian naval ships were also
deployed on joint, cooperative or friendly
assistance to neighboring littoral countries.
The INS Nirdeshak carried out a
hydrographic survey on behalf of Seychelles
in November-December 2003. The INS
Sharda was deployed at Galle from May 2026, 2003 to provide relief for flood-affected
areas of south and central Sri Lanka in mid2003. Two Indian Naval Ships, Ranjit and
Suvarna were deployed in Mozambique from
June 23 to July 15, 2003 at the request of
Mozambique Government, to provide
coastal and maritime security during the
African Union Summit held at Maputo from
July 4-12, 2003 and provide training to
over 100 personnel of the Mozambique

188


-----

India’s Sail Training Ship ‘INS Tarangini’ won admirers worldwide during her circumnavigation voyage.


Navy. A Mauritius Coast Guard ship, CGS
Vigilant, was towed from Port Louis to
Mumbai in April 2003 for repairs. Indian
and Indonesian naval ships conducted the
3[rd] India-Indonesia Coordinated Patrol in
March 2004. Navy-to-Navy meetings to
discuss joint exercises and activities, or
meetings of an operational nature were held
with Sri Lanka, France, Thailand, Israel and
the US.
14.15  The Indian sail training ship, INS
Tarangini, had reached the last leg of its 15month, round-the-world voyage that began
at Kochi on January 23, 2003. By the end of
its voyage of nearly 35,000 nautical miles
touching 37 ports over 18 countries,
foreign officer-trainees from 13 friendly
countries including Australia, Egypt, France,
Indonesia, Italy, Malaysia, Singapore, South


Africa, South Korea, Spain, the UK and the
USA would have participated in the voyage
as part of the INS Tarangini’s endeavour to
‘build bridges of friendship’ across the seas.
The Tarangini also performed creditably at
the Tall Ship Challenge Series in the Great
Lakes of US and Canada. The President of
India Dr. Abul Kalam welcomed INS
Tarangini on its return to Kochi.
14.16 Military-level exchanges at other
levels with the US, China, France, South
Africa and Sri Lanka were noteworthy. With
the US and France they took the form of
joint exercises and training exchanges, with
South Africa and Sri Lanka, mainly training
and exchange of experiences, and with China
they formed an important confidencebuilding measure. A synopsis of India’s
defence relations and military and security
189


-----

related exchanges and cooperation activities
with individual countries, building on Chapter-I on ‘The Security Environment’, is
summarized below.
14.17  India’s historically friendly relations with China suffered a serious setback
with the Chinese aggression of 1962. China
has continued its occupation of Indian
territory mainly in the Aksai Chin area and
has claims in the Eastern Sector. Attempts to
improve the bilateral relationship in the
political, economic and defence-related
spheres resumed after the visit of former
Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi to China in
1988. Defence exchanges with China,
suspended after India’s nuclear tests in May
1998, resumed in 2000 with a visit by an
Indian naval ship to Shanghai in September
that year.
14.18  Bilateral and defence relations
received a major boost with the visits of
Raksha Mantri George Fernandes to China
in April 2003 and of Prime Minister Atal
Behari Vajpayee in June 2003. Raksha
Mantri’s visit contributed to enhanced
understanding and mutual confidence
building and paved the way for an intensified
exchange of military delegations. During
Prime Minister’s visit important steps were
taken in addressing some of the root causes
inhibiting relations, promoting trade, cooperation and bilateral relations as a whole and
making a modest beginning in military
cooperation. A 60-member delegation from
the PLA Air Command College visited India
in June-July 2003. A major training delegation visited India in September 2003, and in
December 2003, Deputy Chief of General


Staff, Lt. Gen. Wu Guanxu led a high-level
delegation to India. From India, the GOC 4
Corps, Lt. Gen. Mohinder Singh, and an
inter-services training delegation led by Air
Marshal G.C.S Rajwar visited China in
October and December 2003 respectively.
The first India-China naval Search and
Rescue Exercises were conducted off Shanghai in November 2003 during the visit of
Indian naval ships INS Ranjit and INS Kulish
in November 2003. Chinese Defence
Minsiter, Gen. Cao Gangchuan visited India
in end-March 2004, as part of a tour that
also took him to Pakistan and Thailand.
14.19  India has historically close relations with Bhutan extending also into the
defence and security sphere. An Indian
Army Training Team assists the Royal
Bhutanese Army in meeting many of its
training requirements. Chief of Army Staff
made a visit to Bhutan in March 2003. The
existence of armed camps of the United
Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA), Bodo
(NDFB) and Kamtapur Liberation Organization (KLO) militants has been a matter of
security concern to both Bhutan and India
for some time and an issue on which the two
countries has been in close touch. Attempts
by the Bhutanese government to persuade
these organizations to abandon their antiIndia activities from Bhutanese soil and
vacate Bhutanese territory did not bear fruit.
In December 2003, the Royal Bhutanese
Army commenced military action to close
down and dismantle the camps in a determined effort to reassert its sovereignty over
its territory and demonstrate goodneighborliness and sensitivity to India’s

190


-----

security concerns. The operations were
successful in seriously disrupting the military infrastructure of hostile groups in
Bhutan. Several militants were apprehended
as they tried to escape the action and cross
over to India.
14.20  With regard to India’s other
eastern neighbors, India’s traditionally close
defence ties with Nepal in the sphere of
training, equipment supplies and cooperation in the sphere of security
continued. The Chief of Army

Military-level Staff of India visited Nepal in
exchanges with the April 2003. The Defence
US, China, France, Secretary of Nepal, Mr.
South Africa and Sri Madan Prasad Aryal, visited
Lanka were India in August 2003. A new
noteworthy. With the institutionalized bilateral
US and France they forum for dialogue on defence
took the form of joint and security-related issues
exercises and training under the Ministry of External
exchanges, with Affairs, the Bilateral ConsultaSouth Africa and Sri tive Group, was set up and
Lanka, mainly training had two meetings in 2003and exchange of 04. India continues to support
experiences, and with Nepal in its attempts to
China they formed an ensure peace and internal
important confidence- security and has endeavoured
building measure to render whatever assistance

has been requested by Nepal
for its security-related requirements.
14.21  Defence relations with Bangladesh
continued in the form of participation in
training courses and ship visits by ships of
the Indian Coast Guards. Chief of Air Staff
visited Bangladesh in February 2004 returning the visit of the Bangladesh Air Chief in


2003. With Myanmar, new areas of cooperation continued to be explored. Building
on the port call by the Indian Navy to
Myanmar in December 2002, the Chief of
Naval Staff of India, Admiral Madhvendra
Singh, timed a visit to Yangon with the visit
of a naval ship in September 2003. Basic
naval exercises were also conducted during
the visit.
14.22  With Sri Lanka, mutual understanding of each other’s security concerns at
the political and military levels grew significantly during the year. The Chief of Air Staff
of India, Air Marshal S. Krishnaswamy, had
visited Sri Lanka in February 2003. Discussions on the security situation in Sri Lanka
and the development of defence ties were
prominent in high-level visits at the political
level, including that of the Sri Lankan Prime
Minister, Ranil Wikremesinghe to India, and
at the military level, notably the visit of the
Commander of the Sri Lankan Armed
Forces, Lt. Gen. L.P.Ballagalle in December
2003. Cooperation in operational matters of
mutual interest continued through institutionalized consultations such as the Operational Review Talks. The GOC-in-C, Southern Command visited Sri Lanka in October
2003. The Defence Secretary of Sri Lanka,
Mr. L.D.C. Herath visited India in January
2004 for talks on ways and means to step
up defence ties with India. Sri Lankan armed
forces comprise the largest number of
foreign trainees in Indian armed forces
training institutions.
14.23  Defence and security cooperation
with the Maldives continued on a steady
course. The Chief of Air Staff visited the

191


-----

Maldives in July 2003 on the occasion of
the installation of a radar by the Indian Air
Force to meet the Maldives’ security needs.
Training and other assistance continued.
14.24 The Central Asian Republics are an
integral part of India’s strategic neighbourhood. Developments in the region have a
direct bearing on our security interests.
India shares deep-rooted historical and
cultural ties with these societies and was
amongst the first to establish diplomatic
relations in all the Central Asian States.
During the year, it continued to expand
defence ties and deepen understanding of
security perspectives with individual Republics and build upon past initiatives.
14.25  Raksha Mantri’s visit to
Kyrghyzstan and Kazakhstan in November
2003, the first by a Defence Minister from
India, building upon earlier visits to
Tajikistan in April 2002 and Uzbekistan in
February 2003, was an occasion to review
ongoing cooperation on the
supply of defence equipment

The Central Asian

and training, develop the

Republics are an

Defence Cooperation Agree
integral part of India’s

ment signed during the visit of

strategic

Prime Minister to Kazakhstan

neighbourhood.

in June 2002 and explore

Developments in the

prospects to stimulate and

region have a direct

expand them further.

bearing on India’s

14.26 Building upon

security interests.

the Defence Cooperation

India shares deep
Agreement signed during

rooted historical and

Raksha Mantri’s visit to

cultural ties with

Tajikistan in April 2002,

these societies

defence ties with Tajikistan
continued to grow in the form


of training, joint exercises and technical
assistance. As an expression of our growing
bilateral relations, Prime Minister visited
Tajikistan in November 2003. Defence
relations with Uzbekistan began to gather
momentum building on proposals initiated
during Raksha Mantri’s visit to Uzbekistan in
February 2003. A Programme of Cooperation for the year drawn up during the visit of
the Deputy Minister of Defence of
Uzbekistan, Col. R. Niyazov, to expand
defence cooperation was followed up by
exchanges of visits at the military and military-technical level. The delivery of two
contracted IL-78 air-to-air refueller aircraft
marked a relationship with Uzbekistan that
went beyond a training relationship to
extend to procurements.
14.27  The Persian Gulf represents a vital
part of India’s extended and strategic neighbourhood, a source of energy and host to a
large expatriate Indian population. Relations
with Oman have been traditionally close and
historically unique and extend to a desire on
both sides for a deeper defence relationship.
Raksha Mantri visited Oman in October,
2002. As before, training, naval interactions
including joint exercises and ship visits,
constituted the core of such cooperation
during the year. An India-Oman joint naval
exercise took place off the Western seaboard
of India in April 2003. Defence cooperation
featured as part of structured consultations
between the two foreign offices in September 2003. Chief of Air Staff visited Oman in
January 2004. A security dialogue at the
level of the Secretary of the National Security Council of the Islamic Republic of Iran

192


-----

continued with the visit of Dr.

A more intensive

Hassan Roohani to India in

security dialogue and

February 2004.

cooperation on

14.28 A welcome

defence and security

development was growing

matters form an

defence interaction with the

important component

UAE. A UAE naval ship

of India’s relations

visited Kochi in March 2003.

with countries of

Indian defence enterprises and

South-east Asia on

an Indian naval ship, INS

account of their

Mumbai, participated in the

strategic location

IDEX defence exhibition held
at Abu Dhabi in March 2003.
An agreement on defence cooperation was
signed during the visit of the Chief of Staff
of the UAE Armed Forces, Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed al Nahyan to India at the
invitation of the Ministry of External Affairs
in June-July 2003. Chief of Air Staff’s visit
to UAE in January 2004 has opened prospects for training cooperation between the
air forces of India and the UAE.
14.29  Defence relations and cooperation
between India and Israel, with an accent on
defence equipment for India’s security
needs, has been diversifying and gaining
momentum. The 2nd meeting of the IndiaIsrael Joint Working Group on Defence
Cooperation, formed to institutionalize such
cooperation, was held in India in December,
2003. Israel was well represented at the
DEFEXPO 2004 defence industry exhibition
with a delegation headed by Israeli Deputy
Defence Minister, Mr. Ze’er Boim. Other
interactions between defence industries and
the Armed Forces also continued.
14.30 A more intensive security dialogue
and cooperation on defence and security


matters forms an important component of
India’s relations with countries of South-east
Asia on account of their strategic location,
challenges posed by fundamentalist activism
and terrorism in the region and India’s ‘Look
East’ foreign policy. India’s increasing
engagement with the ASEAN is manifest in
increasing security interaction in the framework of the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF),
bilateral defence cooperation agreements,
exchanges of visits, and joint activities
including joint exercises and patrols with a
growing number of countries of this region
such as Singapore, Laos, Vietnam, Thailand,
Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines.
India hosted the 7[th] meeting of the Heads of
National Defence Institutes and Universities
of ARF member countries.
14.31  India and Singapore significantly
stepped up their security dialogue and level
of defence cooperation. Raksha Mantri, Shri
George Fernandes, participated at the Asian
Security Conference, the ‘Shangri-La Dialogue’ organized by the London-based
International Institute of Strategic Studies
(IISS) and hosted by Singapore in June
2003. A Defence Cooperation Agreement
was signed in October 2003 during the visit
of the new Defence Minister of Singapore,
Rear Admiral, Teo Chee Hean, the first ever
visit by a Singapore Defence Minister to
India. The Chief of Army, General N.C Vij,
paid a good will visit to Singapore in September 2003. Two Indian naval ships, the
INS Brahmaputra and Kirch participated in
the IMDEX 2003 at Singapore in November
2003. Chief of Naval Staff, Admiral
Madhvendra Singh, also attended the event.

193


-----

The Chief of Air Staff, Air Marshal S.
Krishnaswamy, presided over the strong
Indian Air Force participation by its ‘Surya
Kiran’ aerobatics team and the ‘Sarang’
Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH) display
team at the 12[th] Asian Aerospace 2004
exhibition and conference in February 2004.
An equally vigorous level of visits at the
operational level took place from Singapore
as well. The latest, annual, India-Singapore
joint naval exercises were held off Kochi in
March 2004. The inaugural Defence Policy
Dialogue presided over by Defence Secretary, Shri Ajay Prasad, and Singapore Permanent Secretary for Defence, Mr. Peter Ho,
took place at Singapore in March 2004.
14.32  Defence cooperation with other
countries in the ASEAN were advanced
incrementally. Several important visits from
and to Vietnam took place during the year.
High-level delegations from the Vietnamese
Navy and defence industry visited India in
August 2003. CGS Sangram called at Ho
Chi Minh City in September-October 2003.
Senior Lt. Gen. Nguyen Huy Hieu, ViceMinister of Defence represented Vietnam at
the first India-Vietnam Security Dialogue
held in India in November 2003. This was
followed shortly after, in December 2003,
by the visit of the Chairman, Chiefs of Staff
Committee and Chief of Naval Staff, Admiral
Madhvendra Singh, to Vietnam. Certain
naval spares were gifted to the Vietnamese
navy during the visit of INS Magar on the
occasion. Sr. Lt. Gen. Phung Quang Thanh,
Vice-Minister of Defence and Chief of
General Staff visited India in March 2004.
14.33  Defence contacts and exchanges


between India and the Philippines gained
momentum the visit of the Philippines
Defence Minister, Gen (retd) Angelo Reyes
in February 2002 and the Philippines Chief
of Army, Lt. Gen. Dionisio R. Santiago to
India in August 2002. Chief of Army Staff
visited the Philippines in October 2003.
Indian naval and Coast Guard ships
transiting through the Philippines were well
received. Intelligence exchanges are becoming more regular. The potential of defence
cooperation was further explored during the
Ministry of External Affairs-led Security
Dialogue in Manila, Philippines in March
2003 at which the Ministry of Defence also
participated.
14.34  With Indonesia, defence cooperation featured in the 1[st] meeting of the IndiaIndonesia Joint Commission headed by
External Affairs Minister, Shri Yashwant
Sinha for India, in Jogjakarta, Indonesia, in
August-September 2003. Two coast Guard
ships, Varaha and Kanaklata Barua called at
Belawan, Indonesia in December 2003.
Indonesia was represented at the DefExpo
2004 by W.R. Argawa, Vice Chief of Naval
Staff. The third, month-long India-Indonesia
Coordinated Patrol, ‘INDINDOCORPAT’
was conducted along the Indian-Indonesia
maritime border line from March 5, 2004.
14.35  Amongst other ASEAN countries,
high-level visits to and from India, and ship
visits from India to Thailand, increased. The
Supreme Commander of the Thai Armed
Forces, gen. Surayadh Chulanont visited
India in July 2003. Indian naval ships Trinkat
Tarasa and LCU 38 called at Phuket in
November 2003. Working Groups from the

194


-----

Indian and Thai navies met to negotiate an
MOU on joint patrolling of the common
international maritime border. Chief of Naval
Staff, visited Thailand in March 2004.
Malaysia evinced interest in stepping up
cooperation in Air Force related training and
equipment and medical training and services
for its armed forces. The INS Delhi and Kora
participated in the LIMA-03 Exhibition at
Langkawi, Malaysia in September-October
2003. Following up on the signing of an
Agreement on Defence Cooperation between India and Laos during the visit of
Prime Minister Vajpayee to Laos in November 2002, Defence Secretary, Shri Subir
Dutta’s visit to Laos in March 2003 led to
an enhanced level of military training for the
Lao armed forces.
14.36 The year 2003-04 witnessed
increasing contact with countries in The East
Asia/Pacific region such as Japan, Mongolia,
the Republic of Korea and Australia based
on a realization of common security challenges arising from terrorism,
proliferation of weapons of

The year 2003-04

mass destruction and the

witnessed increasing

security of sea-lanes in Asia. A

contact with

growing appreciation of

countries in the East

common interest in the safety

Asia/Pacific region

and security of sea-lanes in

such as Japan,

the Indian Ocean, especially in

Mongolia, the

relation to piracy and

Republic of Korea

transnational crimes, built

and Australia, based

over high level visits in previ
on a realization of

ous years, interaction within

common security

the framework of the ARF and

challenges.

other Japanese maritime
security initiatives, has led to


greater interaction between the Coast Guard
organizations of India and Japan. These and
other contacts have raised the level of
familiarity with, and goodwill for, each other
in the security and defence spheres. The
Director General of the Japan Defence
Agency, Mr. Shigeru Ishiba, visited India for
talks with Raksha Mantri in May 2003. The
Chief of Policy and Programme Division of
the Japanese Defence Agency, Maj. Gen.
Toshiro Miyashita visited India in October
2003. Japanese Maritime Defence Agency
ships and Indian naval ships conducted basic
exercises during a transit visit to Kochi in
November 2003.
14.37  A beginning was made in developing defence relations with Mongolia and
the Republic of Korea. The Defence Minister
of Mongolia, Mr. Jugderdemid Gurragchaa,
led a delegation to India in November
2003. A defence delegation also visited
Mongolia and the Republic of Korea in
September-October 2003 to explore scope
for cooperation. Two Indian naval ships
called at Pusan, ROK, in October 2003.
The Republic of Korea was also represented
by a delegation at the Defexpo 2004 in
February 2004.
14.38  With Australia, defence relations
and a security dialogue revived over highlevel contacts since 2001, notably Raksha
Mantri’s meetings with the Australian
Defence Minister at the Asia Security
Conference at Singapore in June 2002 and
2003, the Australian Defence Secretary’s
visit to India in August 2002, the Chief of
Naval Staff’s visit to Australia in November
2002 and the India-Australia Strategic

195


-----

Dialogue with participation by defence
representatives last held in Canberra, March
2003, continued. The 3[rd] India-Australia
Strategic Dialogue under the Ministry of
External Affairs took place at New Delhi in
March 2003 and drew up a road map for
future visits and a framework for defence
relations and cooperation.
14.39  India’s strategic ties with Russia
were manifest in four meetings at the level
of Prime Minister Vajpayee and President
Putin, including a tradition of annual summits, reflected in Prime Minister Shri Atal
Bihari Vajpayee’s bilateral visit to Russia
from November 11-13, 2003, the Declaration on Global Challenges and Threats to
World Security and Stability identifying 21[st]

century challenges and threats such as
international terrorism, illegal narco-business, extremism, developmental and environmental challenges, and reiterating a
commitment to enhance bilateral cooperation and reinforce multilateralism and the
role of the UN, a robust security dialogue at
the level of heads of National Security
Councils, mechanisms to deal with specific
challenges such as terrorism and Afghanistan, the only ministerial-level mechanism
for defence-industrial cooperation (the IndoRussian Inter-Governmental Commission on
Military Technical Cooperation), and a
significantly large proportion of Indian army,
navy and air force platforms being of Soviet/
Russian origin.
14.40  The tradition of high level defence-related visits and advanced defence
acquisitions was maintained with the visit of


the Russian Defence Minister, Sergei B.
Ivanov to India in January 2004 and the
signing of new contracts for the refurbishment and acquisition of the aircraft carrier,
the ‘Admiral Gorshkov’ along with deckbased carrier aircraft. The Chief of Army
visited Russia in June 2003 and the Chief of
Air Staff in October 2003. Supplies and
Transfer of Technology related to ongoing
procurement contracts for the T-90 tanks
and Sukhoi 30 MKI continued. In June
2003, Chief of Naval Staff presided over the
commissioning of the INS Talwar, the first of
3 new frigates constructed at Russian naval
dockyards. Progress on the joint development of the BrahMos cruise missile was
highly encouraging.
14.41  Countries of Central and Eastern
Europe have been traditional partners in the
area of defence industries. Raksha Mantri’s
visit to Ukraine and the Czech Republic in
October 2003 sought to update this relationship in the context of political and
economic changes in Europe. A defence
cooperation agreement was signed with the
Czech Republic. Expert-level delegations
from India also visited Ukraine (July 2003),
the Czech Republic (October 2003) and
Belarus and Poland (March 2004) to explore
the possibilities for sourcing platforms,
equipment, systems, spares and overhauling
in these countries. The Polish First Deputy
Minister of National Defence, Mr. Janusz
Zemke represented Poland at the DefExpo
in February 2004. An Agreement on Defence Cooperation was also signed with
Hungary during the visit of the Prime Minister of Hungary to India in November 2003.

196


-----

The Deputy Foreign Minister of Armenia,
Mr. Tatoul Margarian signed an MoU on
defence cooperation between India and
Armenia during the visit to India in May
2003.
14.42  India has an active strategic and
security dialogue with its principal interlocutors in Western Europe and a mutually
beneficial defence relationship covering a
widening range of activities including training exchanges, joint exercises and defence
procurement, production and R&D. Institutional mechanisms for defence cooperation
exist with France, U.K, Italy and Germany.
Special emphasis was placed on long term
stability of supply of equipment and technology, and on a transition from a ‘buyer-seller’
relationship to a partnership based on
collaboration in design, R&D and production in a manner that optimally exploits
complementarities for mutual benefit in our
defence dialogue with these countries.
14.43  The Defence Minister of France,
Mme. Michelle Alliot-Marie visited India in

Royal Air Force Red Arrows aerobatic team performing at
Hindon Airbase in October 2003.


April 2003. A joint naval exercise, ‘Varuna’
witnessed by the French Navy Chief was
conducted off Goa in May 2003 following
up the major joint air exercise ‘Garuda’
conducted at Agra in February 2003 at
which the French Chief of Air Staff was also
present. A 90-member delegation from the
French General Staff School (CSEM) visited
India in May 2003. The Sixth meeting of the
Indo-French High Committee on Defence
was held in New Delhi in November 2003.
14.44  The 7[th] meeting of the India-UK
Defence Consultative Group was held in
London in June 2003. General Sir Michael
Walker, Chief of British Defence Staff visited
India in September 2003. The First Sea
Lord of the UK, Sir Alan West, visited India
with Prince Charles in November 2003. The
Indian Defence Secretary visited U.K. in
November 2003. An MoU on the purchase
of 66 Hawk Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT) from
the UK was signed in March 2004 giving a
major boost to the defence relationship.
Lord Bach, the UK Minister of State fro
Defence Procurement led a large UK delegation to the DefExpo 2004.
14.45  The first meeting of the India-Italy
Joint Working Group on defence equipmentrelated matters met at Delhi in April 2003
prior to the regular meeting of the Joint
Defence Committee in July 2003 at the level
of Defence Secretary from the Indian side
and Secretary General for Defence and
Armaments Director of the Italian Ministry
of Defence for Italy. Italian Deputy Minster
for Defence, Mr. Salvatore Cicu, visited
India in February 2004 for the DEFEXPO
India 2004. Defence relations with other

197


-----

Indo-US troops patrolling as ‘buddy’ during Indo-US
Joint Exercises held at the Counter-Insurgency and Jungle
Warfare School, Variengate.

West European countries like Germany also
saw intensification. The Third Round of
Indo-German Staff Talks were held from
October 27–29, 2003 in New Delhi. The
Inspector General of the Swedish Army,
Maj.Gen. Alf Sandqvist visited India on the
occasion of DefExpo 2004.
14.46  Indo-US relations have undergone
a major transformation since 9/11 driven by
shared values of democracy and realization
of a convergence of security concerns
related to terrorism, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, security of sealanes in the Indian Ocean and peace and
stability in Asia. India and the United States
continued to pursue the goal, outlined by


Prime Minister A. B. Vajpayee and President Bush in November 2001, of transforming bilateral relations aimed at imparting it a
strategic content. India and the United
States held regular high-level consultations
on important global and regional issues
continued their institutionalized dialogue on
India’s immediate and extended neighbourhood. In an important manifestation of the
qualitative change in India-US relations, US
President Bush and PM Vajpayee announced
on January 12-13, 2004, steps towards
engagement and cooperation in civilian
nuclear, civilian space, and ‘dual use’ goods
and technologies, and an expanded dialogue
on missile defence. Although differences on
proliferation issues were not fully resolved,
understanding on security and strategic
issues increased significantly. Differences in
respective positions on the war in Iraq and
the Indian decision not to contribute troops
to Iraq did not have a material impact on the
development of India US relations.

14.47  The two governments sustained
the momentum in expanding defence cooperation. The Defence Policy Group (DPG)
met in Washington in August 2003. Executive Steering Groups (ESGs) of the Air
Forces, Navy and Army met in July, November and December 2003 respectively. A
Master Information Exchange Agreement
facilitating exchange of defence research and
development information was signed by US
Secretary of State, Mr. Donald Rumsfeld and
Raksha Mantri, George Fernandes, in
February 2004. A senior defence technology security group met in Washington in

198


-----

February 2004. The 6[th] meeting of the Joint
Technical Group on R&D cooperation met
in Delhi in March 2004. The two countries
stepped up training exchanges and conducted increasingly complex and sophisticated combined exercises in India and the
US. US Special Operations Command
Pacific (SOCPAC) participated in counterterrorism and jungle warfare exercises in
Vairengte, Mizoram, in April 2003. Indian
and US forces participated in the exercises at
Guam in June-July 2003 and Leh, J&K, in
September 2003. The Indian Air Force
participated in multilateral air exercises with
transport planes at the Cooperative Cope
Thunder 03-3 in Alaska in June 2003. US
and Indian air forces also participated in the
first bilateral Dissimilar Air Combat Exercise
(DACT) at Gwalior in February 2004 with
their fighter aircraft.
14.48  The continent of Africa has many
countries with which India has had deep
historical and political bonds, including
those linked to India’s stance against
colonialism and apartheid and India’s role in
the Non-Aligned Movement. Countries in
the South and West African regions have
had close defence training interaction with
Indian military training establishments
though defence cooperation with countries
in North Africa has so far been sporadic and
below their potential despite some training
exchanges with the Arab world in general.
India is also providing troops for peacekeeping missions in Africa in Ethiopia and
Eritrea (UNMEE) and Congo (MONUC).
The largest number of India military training


teams are deployed in Africa including
helicopter training detachments in Mauritius
and Namibia. 12 African countries were
represented at the DefExpo 2004.
14.49  India has significant defence ties
with South Africa as an important supplier of
defence equipment as well as training and
professional exchanges. South African
Defence Minister, Mr. M.G.P. Lekota, was
part of the South African President, Thabo
Mbeki’s official delegation to India during
his state visit to India in October 2003. The
4th India-South Africa Defence Committee
meeting was held in New Delhi in December
2003. Defence Minister Lekota visited India
again in December 2003 to sign an InterGovernmental Agreement of defence supplies. Defence Ministers of South Africa and
India met once again in February 2004 in
the context of the IBSA Forum meeting of
defence ministers at Pretoria. The Chief of
Air Staff visited South Africa in August
2003 and the Chief of Army Staff (COAS) in
February 2004. The Vice-Chief of the Army
(VCOAS) had visited earlier in June 2003.
From South Africa, the Chief of the South
African Army, Lt. Gen. Romano had visited
India in March 2003 followed by a naval
training delegation in July 2003 and the
visits of the Chief of the South African
National Defence Force’s Command and
Management System, Maj. Gen. A.C
Hurribance, and the Inspector General of
the South African Armed Forces. Maj. Gen.
V.I. Ramlakan, in November 2003. COAS
and VCOAS also visited Botswana where
India has a training team.

199


-----

14.50  The Defence Ministers of Tanzania, Philemon M. Sarungi and Sudan, Maj.
Gen. Bakri Hassan Salih visited India in
October 2003 and the Defence Minister of
Mozambique, Tobias Joaquim Dai, in February 2004 timing his visit with DefExpo. An
MoU on defence cooperation with Tanzania
was signed during the visit of the Tanzanian
defence minister. The Chief of the Tanzanian
Defence Forces, Gen. G.M. Waitara attended DefExpo 2004. A Tanzanian delegation also visited India to study and develop
relations of cooperation in the area of
defence research and industries. The Indian
Navy deployed two ships to Mozambique
following a request by the Mozambique
government for coastal security during the
African Union Summit at Maputo in July
2003. The ships provided on-board training to
the Mozambique navy during the deployment.
14.51  India’s long-standing defence
relations were refreshed with the visit of the
Defence Minister of Sudan, opening the way
for defence training and capacity building,
including in the defence industries. The visit
of the President of Djibouti, H.E. Ismail
Omar Guelleh, followed by that of the Chief
of defence Forces, Gen. Fathi Ahmed
Hussein in October 2003 similarly opened
prospects for defence relations, training and
capacity building with Djibouti. These
initiatives are to be developed.


14.52  India’s traditional relationship with
Mauritius, strengthened by the visit of the
Mauritius PM to India in January 2003 and
the visit of CNS to Mauritius in February
2003, continued in the form of defence
supplies, technical support for Mauritius
naval vessels and aircraft, Coast Guard
related cooperation, training activities, etc.
The Mauritius Coast Guard ship, CGS
Vigilant, and a helicopter were repaired in
India. Also in the Indian Ocean, Indian
Armed Forces personnel also provide valuable training to the Seychelles security
forces. Vice-President, Shri Bhairon Singh
Shekhawat’s visit to Seychelles in September
2003 provided an occasion for the signing
of an MoU on defence cooperation with a
view to promoting the relationship further.
14.53  As may be appreciated from the
above, India’s defence cooperation engagement with the countries of the world increased and diversified very significantly in
2003-04. The growth of defence cooperation with partners was driven by strategic,
security, political and commercial considerations. They are also reflective of a perception by many nations of India as a force for
peace, moderation and stability in the region
and beyond. Defence relations and cooperation will remain an important aspect for our
external and bilateral relations in the interest
of peace.

200


-----

### 1515151515

 CEREMONIAL, ACADEMIC

###### AND ADVENTURE ACTIVITIES

March Past at the Republic Day, New Delhi on January 26, 2004.


-----

###### he Ministry of Defence promotes academic
##### T

###### and adventure activities through autonomous

 institutions.


###### he Ministry of Defence promotes academic

 and adventure activities through autonomous


15.1 The Ministry of Defence encourages
and promotes both academic and adventure
activities through autonomous institutions
which are provided regular financial assistance. These institutions are :(i) The Institute for Defence Studies and
Analyses, New Delhi;
(ii) Mountaineering Institutes at
Darjeeling and Uttarkashi; and
(iii) The Jawahar Institute of Mountaineering and Winter Sports (JIM) at Aru,
Kashmir
15.2 The important activities of these
institutions during the period under review
are enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.

INSTITUTE FOR DEFENCE STUDIES AND
ANALYSES (IDSA)

15.3 The Institute for Defence Studies
and Analyses was established in November,
1965, to initiate studies and research on
problems of national security and the impact
of defence measures on economic, political


and social developments. Over the years,
the Institute has evolved as a premier
research institution, carrying out authoritative policy-related studies on national and
international security issues. The institute is
a registered body under the Societies Act of
1860 (Punjab Amendment Act, 1957) and
is governed by an Executive Council elected
by the members of the Institute. The Institute is accessible to political leaders, scholars, the media, service officers and others
who have an interest in problems of national
security.
15.4 The Research Faculty: The Institute
has a well qualified and a multi-disciplinary
research faculty of over 50 scholars. They
are drawn from the academia, the defence
forces, the para military organisations and
the civil services. Presently, there are 16
researchers under the 2002-03 fellowship
programme who are engaged in individual
research projects. Their collective efforts
ensure an all encompassing and, by and
large, an Indo-centric assessment of various

202


-----

regions, countries and issues that affect our
current and futuristic security environment.
The Institute also offers facilities to foreign
scholars for their research. To enrich the
quality of research work of the scholars,
IDSA has bilateral ties with a number of
similar Institutes across the globe.
15.5 Activities: The Institute organized
major international conferences such as the
6[th] Asian Security Conference on “United
Nations, Multilateralism and International
Security” from January 27-29, 2004. The
conferences were attended by foreign
participants including policy makers and
opinion shapers from Asian countries and
major powers. The 3[rd] India-Central Asia
Regional Conference was organized by the
IDSA and the Institute for Strategic and
Regional Studies (ISRS) as co-sponsor in
Tashkent during Nov. 06-08, 2003. The
Institute organized 55 Round Table Discussions with visiting scholars, diplomats and
foreign delegations/teams.
15.6 Bilateral and Multilateral Interactions: The Institute has bilateral ties and
multilateral interactions with the Japan
Institute of International Affairs (Japan),
Emirates Centre for Strategic Studies &
Research (UAE), South Africa
Institute of International

The Institute for Studies (South Africa), InstiDefence Studies and tute of International and
Analyses initiates Strategic relations (France),
studies and research Institute for National Strategic
on problems of Studies (USA), Bangladesh
national security Institute of International and

Strategic Studies (Bangla

desh), Institute of Political and International
Studies (Iran), Begin-Sadat Centre for
Strategic Studies (Israel), Kazakhstan Institute for Strategic Studies (Kazakhstan) and
the Council for Security Cooperation in the
Asia Pacific (CSCAP).
15.7 Research Orientation: The research
output of the faculty is mainly published in
the Institute’s journal ‘Strategic Analysis’ or
as monographs and books. The researchers
frequently present their papers in various
national and international seminars and also
contribute articles and chapters to foreign
journals and publications. Besides, the IDSA
also brings out the ‘Strategic Digest’ which
is a monthly compendium of information
from the open sources on nuclear and
disarmament issues, military doctrines, arms
transfer and technology developments. It has
been found useful by many institutions and
the defence departments of the numerous
universities in India.
15.8 Books published during 2003:
Books published by the IDSA during the
period under review are titled “Iraq War
2003: Rise of the New Unilateralism”,
“Jihadis in Jammu and Kashmir: A Portrait
Gallery” and “Navies of South Asia”.
15.9 Training Programmes : Besides the
research projects, the Institute is also engaged in training programmes for the
Government officers drawn from the Indian
Administrative Service, Indian Foreign
Service, the Armed Forces and the ParaMilitary Forces. During the year as many as
three training capsules were conducted by
the IDSA. The faculty members were often

203


-----

invited as guest speakers at various training ters jointly with the concerned State Govestablishments and universities around the ernments three Mountaineering Institutes
country. namely Himalayan Mountaineering Institute
15.10  Information Resources : The (HMI), Darjeeling in West Bengal, Nehru
Institute is constantly upgrading its Informa- Institute of Mountaineering (NIM),
tion Resources Division, which has sizeable Uttarkashi in Uttranchal and Jawahar Instiinformation resource base on national tute of Mountaineering & Winter Sports
security and defence strategy subjects. It has (JIM), Aru (presently located at Pahalgam in
a collection of over 48,273 books and a J&K).  The expenditure on the institute is
number of CD-ROM databases. In addition, shared by the Central and respective State
more than 300 current journals are re- Governments as per agreed funding pattern.
ceived, in print as well as electronic/online These Institutes are run as private Regisversions. Apart from its referred quarterly tered Societies and have been conferred the
journals ‘Strategic Analysis’ and the monthly status of autonomous bodies. Raksha
compendium ‘Strategic Digest’. IDSA also Mantri is the President of these Institutes.
publishes a monthly bulletin called ‘Current The Chief Minister of the respective State is
Journal Contents’ that lists the contents of the Vice-President of the Institute. These
about 140 core journals received in the Institutes are governed by separate ExecuLibrary. The Institute maintains a web-site tive Councils consisting of members elected
(address: http://www.idsa-india.org). Details by the General Bodies, nominees from
of new activities as well as progress in the amongst donors and/or persons who are
ongoing activities are posted on the site. likely to promote the cause of the Institute

and representatives of Central and State

MOUNTAINEERING INSTITUTES

Governments. A representative each of the

15.11  The Ministry of Defence adminis
Ministry of Defence and State Government
acts as Secretary of the Institute.
15.12  The HMI, Darjeeling, was founded
in November 1954 by the then Prime
Minister Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru to commemorate the historical ascent of Mount
Everest by Tenzing Norgay along with Sir
Edmund Hillary on May 29, 1953. With
the establishment of this Institute, an impetus to mountaineering as a sport was provided in India. To give further boost to
mountaineering and to inculcate the spirit of
Himalayan Mountaineering Institute imparts skills to adventure in youth, the NIM, Uttarkashi,
negotiate different obstacles.

204


-----

was set up in October 1965 and the JIM at
Aru in J&K in October 1983. Due to
disturbances in the valley, students were
reluctant to come to Aru for training.
Accordingly, it was decided to shift the
Institute temporarily to Batote on the Jammu
side of Banihal in August 1990. However,
in view of certain adverse reports regarding
law and order, regular training courses
conducted by the Institute were temporarily
suspended from April 1996. The Institute
is now conducting some courses on an adhoc basis. The Headquarters of the Institute
has been shifted to Pahalgam since October
2003.
15.13  The broad objectives of the
Mountaineering Institutes are:(a) to impart theoretical and practical
training in mountaineering and rock
climbing techniques;
(b) to awaken interest in and love for
mountains and exploration; and
(c) to encourage and provide training in
Winter Sports
15.14  The Mountaineering Institutes
conduct Basic and Advance Mountaineering
Courses, Method of Instruction Course
(MOI), Search and Rescue Course (S&R)
and Adventure Courses. The syllabi, duration, age limit of participants and grading
system for various types of courses are
almost uniform at all the Institutes. During
the lean period, the Institutes detail their
Instructors to conduct rock-climbing courses
at the request of Mountaineering Clubs/
Organisations around the country. The
Instructors also join various expeditions.


15.17  HMI also conducted five Special
Adventure and four Rock Climbing Courses,
in which 229 men and 44 women were
trained during the period. NIM also conducted several special courses for various
organizations in which 312 men including
foreigners and 118 women were trained
during the year. JIM has trained a total
number of 10755 men and women in
various ad-hoc training courses conducted
by it during the period.

205


15.15  Trainees for these courses come
from all parts of the country and include
Army, Air Force, Navy, ITBP and BSF Personnel, NCC Cadets and private students.
Foreigners are also now permitted to join
the courses. The Institutes conducted the
following courses during the year upto
March, 2004 :

Courses HMI NIM

Basic 07 05

Advance 04 03

Adventure 06 05

MOI 01 01

S&R - 01


15.16  The number of students trained
in these courses in HMI/NIM are as under:

Courses Men Women

Basic 495 138

Advance 154 37

Adventure 274 140

MOI 18 07

S&R 11 04


-----

Budding Mountaineers : Rappelling down.

15.18  The Institutes at Darjeeling and
Uttarkashi have separate stores of mountaineering equipment for loan to the Indian
Mountaineering Expeditions on nominal hire
charges.  An Artificial Climbing Wall of
international standard is under construction
at NIM Campus. This would give boost to
the training capability of NIM.
15.19  HMI Darjeeling conducted an
expedition to Mount Everest from North
Ridge (Tibet) side during April-May 2003 to
commemorate the Golden Jubilee of the
first successful ascent of Mount Everest in
1953. The expedition was led by the Principal of HMI, Col Vijay Singh. While all
members reached upto North Col, the
moment of glory came at 1230 hrs on May
21, 2003 when two members namely Shri


Kushang Sherpa and Shri Nadre Sherpa,
climbed the summit.

CEREMONIALS, HONOURS & AWARDS

15.20  The Ministry of Defence is responsible for organization of National functions
like the Republic Day Parade, the Beating
Retreat Ceremony, Martyrs’ Day and the
Independence Day. The Ministry also
organizes Defence Investiture Ceremonies
for presentation of Gallantry and Distinguished Service Awards at Rashtrapati
Bhawan in association with the President’s
Secretariat. Following ceremonial functions
were organized during 2003-2004.
15.21  Independence Day: On 15th
August, 2003, the Prime Minister after
inspection of Guard of Honour presented by

206


-----

the three Services and the Delhi Police,
unfurled the National Flag on the ramparts
of the Red Fort, to the accompaniment of
the National Anthem played by the Services
Band. A 21 gun salute was also presented
on this occasion. This was followed by the
Prime Minister’s Address to the Nation.
The function began with the singing of
patriotic songs by school children in different Indian languages and concluded with the
singing of the National Anthem by the
children and the NCC Cadets from schools
of Delhi and release of balloons.
15.22  The following gallantry awards
were announced on the Independence Day
2003:

Ashoka Chakra 1 (Posthumous)

Kirti Chakra 7 (6 Posthumous)

Shaurya Chakra 37 (18 Posthumous)

Bar to Sena Medal (G) 7 (1 Posthumous)

Sena Medal(G) 202 (27 Posthumous)

Nao Sena Medal (G) 3

Mention-in-Despatches18


National Flag at the Rajpath. The President’s
Body Guard presented the National Salute
followed by the National Anthem played by
the Service Bands. In a brief investiture
ceremony at Rajpath, the President presented two Ashoka Chakra awards posthumously to the next-of-kin of the awardees.
His Excellency Mr. Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva,
President of Brazil, was the Chief Guest on
the occasion.
15.25  Army’s mounted columns of 61
Cavalry and ASC Cavalry led the parade.
They were followed by mechanised columns
comprising of T-90 and MBT-Arjun tanks,
Prithvi and Agni-II missiles, Satellite Communication Vehicles marching contingents
and bands of Services, Para Military Forces,
Delhi Police, RPF and the NCC. The
pilotless aircraft ‘Lakshya’, OSA Air Combat
Vehicle, ‘Indra-II’ Radar were part of the Air
Force Vehicular column. The DRDO equipment column included missiles like Agni-I,
Akash, Brahmos, multi-barrel rocket system
‘Pinaka’ and communication system
‘Samyukta’. National Bravery award winning
children on elephants, tableaux and cultural
items were other attractions of the parade.
The tableaux and march past by children
reflected the cultural diversity of the nation
and presented glimpses of the progress
made by the country in different fields. The
parade ended with a dare-devil motor cycle
display by the Border Security Force followed by a Fly-Past by aircraft of the Indian
Air Force.
15.26 The following gallantry and distinguished service awards were announced on
the Republic Day:

207


15.23  Amar Jawan Ceremony: The
Prime Minister laid a wreath at the Amar
Jawan Jyoti Memorial, under
the arch of the India Gate on

The Republic Day January 26, 2004 to pay
Parade, the Beating Homage to the memory of
Retreat Ceremony, those who sacrificed their
the Martyrs’ Day and lives in safeguarding the
the Independence freedom of the nation.
Day are the 15.24 Republic Day
country’s major Parade: The Republic Day
National functions. Celebrations commenced

with the unfurling of the


-----

In addition to the above, twenty awards of
Mention-in-Despatches were announced on
the Republic Day.
15.27  Beating Retreat Ceremony: The
Beating Retreat Ceremony, organised at
Vijay Chowk on January 29, 2004, brought
the curtain down on the Republic Day
festivities. Bands of the three Services
participated in this Ceremony. The conclusion of the Ceremony coincided with illumination of the Rashtrapati Bhawan, North
Block, South Block and Parliament House.
15.28  Martyr’s Day Ceremony: On
January 30, 2004, the President placed a
wreath at the Samadhi of Mahatma Gandhi
at Rajghat. Floral tributes were also paid by
the Prime Minister, the Speaker of Lok
Sabha and some of his Cabinet colleagues.
This was followed by observance of two
minutes’ silence at 1100 hours as a mark of
respect to the memory of the Father of the
Nation.


OFFICIAL LANGUAGE DIVISION

15.29  Functions/Performance: The main
functions of the Official Language Division
of Ministry of Defence is to implement
Official Language Policy of the Union and to
ensure effective measures to promote use of
Hindi in official work. The division also
oversees the implementation of official
language in various inter-service organizations, Defence Public Sector Undertakings
as well as all other defence offices located
throughout the country.
15.30  Targets/Achievements: During the
year steps were taken:
(i) To reconstitute Hindi Advisory
Committees - one for the Department of
Defence and the Department of Defence
Research and Development, and another
for the Department of Defence Production under the chairmanship of the
Raksha Mantri - and to organize meet
208


-----

Martyr’s Day Ceremony at Rajghat

ings of these committees from time to
time and implement the decisions taken
therein;
(ii) To organize quarterly meetings of
the two departmental Official Language
Implementation Committees under the
chairmanship of respective Joint Secretaries, in which representatives of three
Service Headquarters and various Inter
Service organizations based in Delhi
participate;
(iii) To ensure implementation of the
provisions of section 3(3) of Official
Language Act and the rules made there
under and to render translation of
documents emanating from various
offices, divisions and sections of the
Ministry to ensure progressive use of
Hindi in the official work of the Ministry.


(iv) To promote progressive use of Hindi
by organizing Hindi workshops, seminars
and conferences and by implementing
various incentive schemes formulated by
the Department of Official Language;
and
(v) To nominate officers/officials for
undergoing training in Hindi, Hindi
stenography and Hindi typing under the
Hindi Teaching Scheme of the Ministry
of Home Affairs.
15.31  During the year the official language division organized Hindi workshops,
official language inspections of various
sections of the Ministry, nomination of 50
officials for training in Hindi, Hindi stenography and Hindi typing and also for holding
meetings of the Hindi advisory committees
and the departmental Official Language

209


-----

Implementation Committees. Workshops
were held to train officers and staff of the
Ministry in noting and drafting in Hindi.
15.32  Translation: During the year
under report, the requirement pertaining to
translation from Hindi to English and viceversa of various sections/divisions of Ministry of Defence were also successfully met by
the Official Language Division. The translation material received in the division included general orders, notifications, resolutions, cabinet notes, documents relating to
Public Accounts Committee, Republic Day/
Independence Day celebrations, investiture
ceremony, audit paras, Consultative Committee and Standing Committee on Defence,
annual report, papers to be laid in the
Parliament and VIP references.
15.33  Hindi Fortnight: Hindi Fortnight
was celebrated in the Ministry from 1[st] to
15[th] Sept. 2003. Competitions were held
during the fortnight in which a large number
of officers and staff participated. Cash
awards and gifts were given to those who
participated in various competitions. Similar
fortnights were also organized in various
Defence Undertakings, Inter-Service organizations and offices located throughout the
country.
15.34  Monitoring/Inspection: Apart
from conducting various Official Language
activities within the Ministry (HQrs), the


Division also undertook monitoring of such
activities in the three Service Headquarters.
Inter-Service Organisation, Defence Undertakings and various Defence establishments
located all over the country. In addition, the
implementations by various subordinate
offices were also conducted.

15.35 Inspection of various Defence
Organisations by the Committee of Parliament on Official Language: During the year
the First Sub-Committee of the Committee
of Parliament on Official Language carried
out official language inspections of a number
of offices under the Ministry of Defence.
For this purpose, the committee selected a
number of Defence offices located at Delhi,
Ghaziabad, Vishakhapatnam, Bangalore,
Mysore, Wellington, Mumbai, Kolkata,
Gangtok, Darjeeling and Siliguri. The
Official Language Division ensured adequate
cooperation from the offices concerned for
these inspection meetings. The Joint Secretaries in charge of the Official Language
divisions and the Director(Official Language)
represented the Ministry in these meetings.
Appropriate action on the issues raised/
decisions taken in these meetings was
initiated and instructions issued to officers
concerned for timely fulfillment of the
assurances given by them to the Committee
during such inspections.

210


-----

### 1616161616

 ACTIVITIES OF VIGILANCE UNITS

16.1 The Vigilance Division in the Minis-

Ministry of Defence as a whole are received

try of Defence deals with vigilance cases

by the Vigilance Division of the Ministry of

involving Group ‘A’ Civilian officers working

Defence through the Department of Admin-

in the Ministry of Defence. For administra-

istrative Reforms and Public Grievances.

tive convenience, the vigilance work in

These grievances are also received from the

respect of the Department of Defence and

petitioners directly. All these grievances are

the Defence Research and Development

reviewed on a fortnightly basis. The names

Organisation is being looked after by one

of vigilance officers of various subordinate

Chief Vigilance Officer and in respect of the

organizations of Ministry of Defence have

Department of Defence Production by

been put on the website of the Ministry.

another Chief Vigilance Officer. The Vigi-

VIGILANCE AWARENESS WEEK

lance Division looks after all vigilance
matters and provides a link between the 16.3 In accordance with the directives
Ministry/Department and the Central Vigi- issued by the CVC, Vigilance Week was
lance Commission (CVC). The Vigilance observed from October 31, 2003 to No-
Division is responsible for regular and vember 6, 2003 in the Ministry of Defence,
surprise inspection of sensitive spots, review all Public Sector Undertakings, the DRDO
and streamlining of procedures and initiating establishments and Attached and Subordi-
measures for combating corruption. The nate Offices.
complaints received through the Prime

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE RESEARCH

Minister’s Office and Raksha Mantri’s

& DEVELOPMENT

Complaint Box are also being dealt by the

16.4 DRDO observed Vigilance Aware-

Vigilance Division.

ness Week – 2003 by holding a Workshop

REDRESSAL OF PUBLIC GRIEVANCES

at Aeronautical Development Establishment

16.2 Public grievances pertaining to the (ADE), Bangalore. In this, Vigilance Offic-


-----

ers, Administrative officers and

Public grievances

other senior officers from the

pertaining to the

Southern Region participated.

Ministry of
Defence as a DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE
whole are PRODUCTION
received by the

16.5 Ordnance Factories:

Vigilance Division

Ordnance Factories Organisa
of the Ministry of

tion has given primacy to

Defence through

vigilance activity in all its units.

the Department of

At the corporate level a Chief

Administrative

Vigilance Officer (CVO) and

Reforms and

two Group Vigilance

Public Grievances

Officers(GVOs) have been

and also directly

positioned at Kanpur and

from petitioners.

Avadi, Chennai. Further, each
factory has got a part time
vigilance officer to undertake surprise
inspections, preventive vigilance measures
and to aid and advise the General Managers
and to act as a link with the CVO.
16.6 Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL):
During the year 2002-03, a detailed action
plan was prepared covering all the departments with specific emphasis on sensitive
areas. A total number of 1939 surprise/
routine inspections were conducted and 165
vigilance cases were instituted. 236 complaints were received and 192 were taken up
for investigation.
16.7 Vigilance Manuals have been published and a Magazine “MARGADARSHAN’
was released. A highly structured training
course for the newly inducted 36 Vigilance
Staff was conducted at HAL Technical
Training Institute, Bangalore, in March
2003.
16.8 Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL):


Various measures were taken to strengthen
Preventive Vigilance by streamlining of
procedures. Procedural Manuals such as
work contract, administration and use of
Website for online tendering of Work Contracts have been prepared/issued.
16.9 Bharat Earth Movers Limited
(BEML): A full time Chief Vigilance Officer is
in position in the Company. In all the
manufacturing Units of BEML, a Vigilance
Awareness Week was observed from October 31, 2003 to November 6, 2003.
16.10  Mazagon Dock Limited (MDL):
MDL observed the Vigilance Awareness
Week during November 2003. A Vigilance
Exhibition, slogan competition on “Vigilance
Awareness” and an Essay competition on
“Corruption-Challenge to the Nation” were
organized.

16.11   Garden Reach Shipbuilders and
Engineers Limited (GRSE): GRSE carried
out regular/surprise inspections of its files
pertaining to various tenders and purchases
for detection of irregularities.

16.12  The GRSE has published a Personnel as well as a Purchase Manual. A
computerized vendor registration cell has
been set up revising the system for blacklisting, installing proper measuring methods,
having regular interaction with Quality
Assurance Department and ensuring that
officers of high integrity are put in-charge of
sensitive posts. As a result, the GRSE has
been awarded 10 in the scale of One to 10
of “PROBITY PERCEPTION INDEX-META
PERCEPTION’ published by CVC in the
year 2002.

212


-----

### 1717171717

 EMPOWERMENT AND WELFARE

###### OF WOMEN

Women officers under training


-----

###### ith the induction of women in various non##### W

###### combatant branches of Armed Forces a

 larger role is envisaged for them.


###### ith the induction of women in various non
 combatant branches of Armed Forces a

 larger role is envisaged for them.


17.1 The role of women has been increasing steadily in the field of national
defence. Women are employed in Defence
Production Units, Defence Research &
Development Laboratories and as Doctors
and Nursing Officers in Armed Forces. With
the induction of women in various noncombatant branches of Armed Forces like
logistics and law, a larger role is envisaged
for them.
17.2 Women Special Entry Scheme
(WSES) has been introduced for women to
join as officers in non-combatant branches
of the Armed Forces. WSES has also been
extended to widows of Service officers killed
in action. Eligible women are recruited as
officers on Short Service Commission basis
in various branches of Army, Navy and Air
Force.
17.3 Women candidates can be inducted
in the Indian Army in certain identified
vacancies in various Arms/Services through
the Women Special Entry Scheme (Officers).
The annual intake is 150 with effect from


September, 2003. Presently, there are
approximately 760 Women Officers serving
in the Indian Army. The Government has
recently sanctioned extension of their tenure
upto a maximum of 14 years.
17.4 The Indian Navy first inducted
women in 1992. As on date, a total of 179
(including 58 Medical Officers) women
officers are serving in the various units of
the Navy. These officers are assimilated into
the mainstream and their promotion prospects, training as well as career progression
are at par with their male counterparts.
17.5 Induction of women as Short
Service Commission (SSC) officers in Flying,
Technical and Non-Technical branches in the
Indian Air Force also commenced in 1992.
Presently there are 423 women officers in
the IAF. Government has approved granting
a second extension of Short Service Commission tenure upto 15 years on merit to all
women officers.
17.6 In the Coast Guard Women officers
are appointed to Coast Guard Headquarters,

214


-----

Women officers at the Commissioning Parade at Officer’s Training Academy.


Regional Headquarters and to various
District Headquarters. They carry out the
duties of Logistics Officers, Electronic Data
Processing (EDP) Officers and various other
duties, on par with male officers. Presently,
lady officers are not appointed on board
Coast Guard Ships.

17.7 The Ministry of Defence has taken
several steps to ensure that conducive work
environment and appropriate working
conditions are provided to women. The
manpower/ human resource development
policies followed in the Ministry of Defence
make no distinction/discrimination on
grounds of sex.
17.8 The guidelines of the Supreme
Court to prevent sexual harassment at
workplace for working women are being
implemented in the Armed Forces, Inter
Service Organisations, Defence Public


Sector Undertakings and Defence Laboratories/Establishments. ‘Complaints Committees’ have been constituted at the Headquarters as well as at Unit levels for
redressal of complaints received from
women employees and to review matters
relating to the safety of women. Various
rules and regulations have been amended as
per guidelines laid down by the Supreme
Court.
17.9 The guidelines of National Commission for Women (NCW) are also being
implemented by the Women’s Cell of Ministry of Defence, with assistance of 23 Nodal
Women Cells spread all over the country.
17.10 Ministry of Defence has special
pension schemes for the widows of Service
personnel under which the widows of the
Armed Forces personnel died in war/ war
like operations/ counter-insurgency opera
215


-----

tions/ in incidents involving armed hostilities
or on account of causes attributable to or
aggravated by service, are granted Liberalised Family Pension/ Ordinary Family Pension/ Special Family Pension even after
remarriage, subject to certain conditions.
17.11 Schemes for Civilian Defence
Employees:
(i) For promoting the welfare of
women civilian employees in the lower
formations of Army, women cells have
been established in Army units/establishments having sizable number of women,
in accordance with guidelines issued by
the National Commission for Women.
(ii) The women cells at the unit level
undertake development activities for
women employees as well as female
family members of employees. Common
room, crèche, ladies toilets manned by
women safai karamcharis are provided in
most of the Army units.
(iii) The work of the women cell at unit
levels is monitored at the Command HQ
level as well as at Army HQ. There is
also a redressal mechanism for prevention of sexual harassment at work places.
(iv) For social and economic development of female members of employee’s
families, employment assistance, nonformal education of girls, health care
measures, family planning assistance,
sports and recreation facilities are also
available in most of the Army units.
17.12 Financial Assistance on demise of a
soldier:
(i) On the demise of a soldier, a grant


of Rs.30,000/- from Army Central
Welfare Fund (ACWF) and Rs.5,000/from Army Wives Welfare Association
Fund is released immediately to the nextof-kin. This grant enables the widow to
overcome initial problems caused by the
death of her husband. In cases where
there is a dispute between the widow
and her in-laws, the grant from ACWF is
still given to the widow.
(ii) If an Officer/Personnel Below
Officers Rank is married, his wife automatically becomes his next-of-kin even if
the soldier had not published official
details to this effect.
17.13 Financial Assistance – Fatal Battle
Casualties of August 15, 1947 to April
30, 1999: As part of welfare measures,
next-of-kin of all battle casualties during the
period from August 15, 1947 to April 30,
1999 are being given Rs. 50,000/- each
from the National Defence Fund and Army
Central Welfare Fund. Even if the widow
gets remarried, she continues to be eligible
for the grant. Financial assistance upto
Rs.25,000/- for Agro-based ventures/Dairy
Development is provided to those war
widows. Financial assistance of Rs.30,000/is also provided for re-marriage of the
widows.
17.14 Scholarship for Wards: Children of
war widows are eligible for reimbursement of
full fees and other expenses incurred for
education. Education scholarships are
provided to the children of widows of
soldiers who die in harness as following:
(a) Class 1 to Class XII, Rs.5000/- per

216


-----

A lady pilot of the Air Force

annum; (b)Graduation, Rs.10,000/- per

annum; (c) Post Graduation, Rs.15,000/per annum and (d) Professional Courses,
Tuition Fee + Rs.5,000/- per annum
maximum upto Rs.40,000/-.
17.15 Demise Grant: A demise grant of
Rs.2,000/- is paid to next-of-kin of deceased Ex-Servicemen (Personnel Below
Officers Rank only) through respective
Record Offices. From August 1, 2004 this
grant is being enhanced to Rs.3,000/
DEFENCE RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT
ORGANISATION (DRDO)

17.16 Women are playing an important
role in Defence Research and Development
Organisation. Qualified women scientists
and technical officers and staff are actively
involved in various research projects. Many
senior women scientists are heading important Research Divisions in the various
Defence Laboratories/Establishments.

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE
PRODUCTION

17.17 A separate forum of Women in
Public Sector (WIPS) has been established in
Defence Public Sector Undetakings (DPSUs)


under the ageis of Standing Conference of
Public Enterprises (SCOPE) to assist the
DPSUs in harnessing the full potential of
women employees, to play a catalytic role in
improving the status of women in and
around DPSUs. DPSUs have provided
certain facilities to working women, such as
crèches for the children of working women,
lunch and rest rooms for them and grievances cells.
17.18 Some of the important steps taken
by the DPSUs for empowerment and welfare
of women are as follows:
(i) Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
(HAL): The strength of women employees in HAL as on March 31, 2003
was 1661. A sizable number of women
employees are in supervisory and
executive cadres..

(ii) Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL):
BEL employs a large number of women
in all their Units since electronic assembly work calls for a high level of
precision  work and women are generally considered to be the best exponents
for meeting such demands.

(iii) Bharat Earth Movers
Limited(BEML) : A Women Cell has
been constituted at the Corporate Office
comprising of one women representative
from each unit. The cell is entrusted the
task of looking after the grievances of
women employees and to make necessary suggestions/recommendations. A
Committee for protecting women employees from sexual harassment has also
been constituted in the Divisions. About

217


-----

Women Officers serving abroad - A lady doctor with
UNIFIL Lebanon.

75 women officers and 234 women
employees are working in the company
as on August 31, 2003.
(iv) Mazagon Dock Limited(MDL) : A
database has been has been prepared to
collect comprehensive information on
the profile of women employees to
evolve meaningful policy in order to
improve the status and position of
women employees. A Women Cell
comprising of a senior Manager and lady
employees has been set up to deliberate

Computer Training for Women Officers.


on measures to the growth and development of women employees.

(v) Bharat Dynanics Limited(BDL):
There are 36 women executives and
178 women non-executives in the
Company. Women employees are nominated to take part in various training and
development programmes, both internal
and external. Women also participate in
Selection Committees and recruitment/
promotion boards.

ORDNANCE FACTORIES

17.19  Women, are actively involved in
various activities of the Ordnance Factories
Organisation at all levels. A number of
senior women officers are presently holding
important posts in the Organisation. At the
shop floor level, women also operate machines, including sophisticated CNC machines, in many Ordnance Factories. A
woman General Manager is in-charge of
Ordnance Factory, Dehu Road.

218


-----

Appendix-I


MATTERS DEALT WITH BY THE DEPARTMENTS OF
THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE


A. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE

1. Defence of India and every part
thereof including preparation for defence
and all such acts as may be conducive in
times of war to its prosecution and after
its termination to effective demobilization.
2. The Armed Forces of the Union,
namely, the Army, the Navy, the Air
Force.
3. Integrated Headquarters of the
Ministry of Defence comprising Army
Headquarters, Naval Headquarters, Air
Headquarters and Defence Staff Headquarters.
4. The Reserves of the Army, Navy
and Air Force.
5. Territorial Army.
6. The National Cadet Corps.
7. Works relating to Army, Navy, Air
Force and Ordnance Factories.
8. Remounts, Veterinary and Farms
Organisation.
9. Canteen Stores Department
(India).
10. Civilian Services paid from Defence Estimates.
11. Hydrographic Surveys and preparation of navigational charts.
12. Formation of Cantonments, delimitation/ excision of Cantonment areas,
local self-government in such areas, the
constitution and powers within such


areas of Cantonment Boards and authorities and the regulation of house
accommodation (including the control of
rents) in such areas.
13. Acquisition, requisitioning, custody and relinquishment of land and
property for defence purposes. Eviction
of unauthorized occupants from defence
land and property.
14. Matters relating to ex-Servicemen
including pensioners.
15. Defence Accounts Department.
16. Administration of :(i) the Pension Regulations for the
Army, 1961 (Parts I and II);
(ii) the Pension Regulations for the Air
Force, 1961 (Parts I and II);
(iii) the Navy (Pension) Regulations,
1964; and
(iv) the Entitlement Rules to Casualty
Pensionary Awards to the Armed
Forces Personnel, 1982.
17. Purchase of foodstuffs for military
requirements and their disposal excluding those entrusted to Ministry of food
and Civil Supplies (Department of
Food).
18. All matters relating to Coast Guard
Organisation, including :(i) Surveillance of maritime zones
against oil spills;
(ii) Combating oil spills in various
maritime zones, except in the


219


-----

waters of ports and within 500
metres of off-shore exploration and
production platforms, coastal
refineries and associated facilities
such as Single Buoy Mooring
(SBM), Crude Oil Terminal (COT)
and pipelines;
(iii) Central; Coordinating Agency for
Combating of Oil Pollution in the
coastal and marine environment of
various maritime zones;
(iv) Implementation of National Contingency Plan for oil spill disaster;
and
(v) Undertaking oil spill prevention
and control, inspection of ships
and offshore platforms in the
country, except within the limits of
ports as empowered by the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.

19. Matters relating to diving and
related activities in the country.

20. The following inter-Service Organisations function under the Ministry of
Defence:

(i) Military Engineer Services.
(ii) Armed Forces Medical Services.
(iii) Directorate General of Defence
Estates.
(iv) Office of the Chief Administrative
Officer.
(v) Directorate of Public Relations.
(vi) Army Purchase Organisation.
(vii) Services Sports Control Board.
(viii) Armed Sports Control Board.
(ix) Armed Forces Films and Photo
Division.


(x) School of Foreign Languages.
(xi) History Division.
(xii) National Defence College.
(xiii) College of Defence Management.
(xiv) Ministry of Defence Library.

B.  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE
PRODUCTION

1. Ordnance Factory Board and Ordnance
Factories.

2. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL).

3. Bharat Electronics Limited(BEL)

4. Mazgon docks Limited (MDL).

5. Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers
Limited(GRSE).

6. Goa Shipyard Limited(GSL)

7. Bharat Dynamics Limited(BDL)

8. Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited(MIDHANI)

9. Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML).

10. Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA) including Directorate of
Technical Development & Production (Air).

11. Standardisation of defence equipments
and stores including Directorate of Standardisation.

12. Development of aeronautics industry
and Co-ordination among users other than
those concerned with the department of
Civil Aviation and the Department of Space.

13. Indigenisation, development and production of items required for defence
purposes.

14. Procurement exclusive to the defence
services.

15. Defence exports and international
Cooperation in defence production.

220


-----

C.  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

1. Apprising, assessing and advising Raksha
Mantri on the influence on National Security
of Emerging developments in Sciences and
Technology.
2. Rendering advice to Raksha Mantri and
to the three services and inter-services and
inter-Services Organizations on all scientific
aspects of weapons; weapon platforms;

military operations; surveillance; support
and logistics, in all likely theatres of conflict.
3. To function, with the concurrence of the
Ministry of External Affairs, as the nodal
co-ordinating agency of the Ministry of
Defence on all matters relating to instruments of Accord with foreign Government
relating to the acquisition of technologies
whose export to India is the subject of
national security related controls of foreign
Governments.
4. Formulation and execution of programmes of scientific research and design,
development, test and evaluation, in fields of
relevance to national security.
5. Direction and administration of agencies,
laboratories, establishments, ranges, facilities; programmes and projects of the Department.
6. Aeronautical Development Agency.
7. All matters relating to certification of the
design air worthiness of military aircraft,
their equipment and stores.
8. All matters relating to the protection and
transfer of technology generated by the
activities of the Department.
9. Scientific analysis support and participa

tion in acquisition and evaluation proceedings of all weapons systems and related
technologies proposed to be acquired by the
Ministry of Defence.
10. To render advice on the technological
and intellectual property aspects of the
import of technology by production units
and enterprises manufacturing, or proposing
to manufacture, equipment and stores for
the Armed Services.
11. To deal with reference made under
section 35 of the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of
1970).
12. Financial & other material assistance to
individuals, institutions and bodies corporate, for study and for the training of manpower on aspects of Science and Technology
that bear on national security.
13. In consultation with the Ministry of
External Affairs, international relations in
matters connected with the role of Science
and Technology in national security including:
(i) matters relating to relations with
Research Organizations of other
countries and with Inter-Governmental agencies, particularly those
which concern themselves, inter
alia, with the scientific and technological aspects of national security.

(ii) arrangement with Universities,
educational and research-oriented
institutions or bodies corporate
abroad to provide for foreign
scholarships and the training of
Indian scientists and technologies
under the administrative control of
the Department.

221


-----

14. Execution of works and purchase of
lands debitable to the budget of the Department.

15. All matters relating to personnel under
the control of the Department.
16. Acquisition of all types of stores,
equipment and services debitable to the
budget of the Department.
17. Financial sanctions relating to the
Department.

18. Any other activity assigned to, accepted
by, the Department through understandings
or arrangements with any other Ministry,
Department Agency of the Government of
India whose activities have a bearing on the
scientific and technological aspect of national security.

D. DEFENCE (FINANCE) DIVISION

1. To examine all Defence matters having a
financial bearing.
2. To render financial advice to the various
functionaries of Ministry of Defence and the
Service Headquarters.
3. To act as integrated finance Division of
Ministry of Defence.


4. To assist in the formulation and implementation of all Scheme/proposals involving
expenditure.
5. To assist in the formulation and implementation of Defence Plans.

6. To prepare Defence budget and other
estimates for the Defence Services and to
monitor the progress of the Schemes against
the budget.

7. To exercise post-budget vigilance to

ensure that there are neither considerable
shortfalls in expenditure nor unforeseen
excesses.

8. To advise heads of branches of the
Armed Forces Headquarters in the discharge
of their financial responsibility.

9. To function as the accounting authority
for Defence Services.

10. To prepare the Appropriation Accounts
for the Defence Services.

11. To discharge the responsibility for
payments and internal audit of Defence
expenditure through the Controller General
Defence Accounts.

222


-----

Appendix-II

MINISTERS, CHIEFS OF STAFF AND SECRETARIES
WHO WERE IN POSITION FROM APRIL 1, 2003 ONWARDS

RAKSHA MANTRI

Shri George Fernandes From October 15, 2001 to May 22,2004
Shri Pranab Mukherjee From May 23, 2004 onwards

RAKSHA RAJYA MANTRI

Shri Chaman Lal Gupta From July 1, 2002 to May 22,2004

RAKSHA UTPADAN RAJYA MANTRI

Prof. O. Rajagopal From January 29, 2003 to May 22, 2004
Shri B.K. Handique From May 23, 2004 onwards

Defence Secretary Chief of Army Staff
Shri Subir Dutta General N.C. Vij,
From June 30, 2002 to July 4, 2003 PVSM, UYSM, AVSM, ADC
From January 1, 2002 onwards
Shri Ajay Prasad
From July 14, 2003 to June 30, 2004 Chief of Naval Staff
Admiral Madhvendra Singh,
Shri Ajai Vikram Singh PVSM, AVSM, ADC
From July 1, 2004 onwards From December 30, 2001-July 31, 2004

Secretary Defence Production Admiral Arun Prakash
Shri N.S. Sisodia PVSM,AVSM.VRC,VSM,ADC
From October 1, 2002 to July 7, 2003 From July 31, 2004 onwards
Ms. Uma Pillai Chief of Air Staff
From July 9,2003 to August 1, 2004 Air Chief Marshal S. Krishnaswamy,
Shri Shekher Dutt PVSM, AVSM. VM, and Bar, ADC
From August 2, 2004 onwards From December 31, 2001 onwards
Secretary Dept. of Def. Res. & Dev. and S.A. to Raksha Mantri
Dr. V.K. Atre
From December 29, 1999 to August 31, 2004

Shri M. Natrajan
From September 1, 2004 onwards
Secretary (Defence Finance)
Shri Biswajit Banerjee
From August 1, 2002 to October 31, 2003
Financial Advisor (Defence Finance)
Ms. Somi Tandon
From October 31, 2003 to August 9, 2004
Secretary (Defence Finance)
Ms. Somi Tandon
From August 10, 2004 onwards.

223


-----

Appendix-III

SUMMARY OF LATEST COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR GENERAL (C&AG) REPORT
ON THE WORKING OF MINISTRY OF DEFENCE


DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE
Exploitation of Defence Lands: The Ministry
of Defence is vested with the ownership of
4.47 lakh acres of land which are under
custody, control and management of the
three wings of Armed Forces and other
Defence Organisations.  Management of
other categories of Defence Lands vests with
the Defence Estates Department and Cantonment Boards. A review on the exploitation of Defence lands was carried out and
salient features noticed in audit revealed
that:
Revenue aggregating to Rs.1.71 crore
realized from lease of Shopping Complex
constructed out of Public Fund on Defence
lands in 2 Commands was irregularly appropriated to Regimental Funds instead of
Public Funds.
Defence Lands and buildings were under
occupation by the Army Wives Welfare
Association at Kolkata, a private Engineering
College at Pune and Jawahar Training Ship at
Mumbai without lease agreements being
concluded resulting in non realization of
revenue aggregating to Rs.3.58 crore.
Non-renewal of leases in respect of 510.20
acres of Defence lands occupied by two
private clubs, a tea estate, several private
parties and a Public Enterprise resulted in
outstanding rent amounting to Rs.63.56
crore.
The Cricket Association of Bengal at
Kolkata, Naval Institute of Technology at


Mumbai, Army Public School at Kapurthala
and two schools at Ranchi had been occupying Defence land aggregating to 64.685
acres without either paying any rent or
paying rent at inappropriate rates leading to
revenue aggregating to Rs.11.45 crore
being forgone.
Contrary to the Rules which provide that
rent of lands leased to private parties for
commercial and lucrative purposes should
be based on their market value, rents were
fixed at levels not reflective of the market
value by adopting different approaches on
different occasions.
(Para 2 of Report No.6 of 2003)
Army and Ordnance Factories
Non-recovery of outstanding advance:
Failure to ensure concurrent extension of
bank guarantees furnished by a company
with the extension of delivery period of

supply of a Radio Trunk system to the Army

led to non-recovery of Rs.1.75 crore as the
firm had wound up in the meantime.
(Para 4 of Report No.6 of 2003)
Army and Ordnance Factories
Idle investment on manufacture of defective
ammunition: Ordnance Factory Khamaria
manufactured defective ammunition for a
tank leading to stock piling in five Army
commands thereby rendering the investment
of Rs.607.43 crore on their manufacture
unproductive.
(Para 8 of Report No.6 of 2003)
Army and Ordnance Factories

224


-----

Accumulation of stocks of Grenades: A
sizeable quantity of grenades valued at
Rs.8.94 crore remained unutilized at various
ammunition Depots, in absence of matching
metallic detonators. Expenditure of
Rs.22.08 crore on the production of these
metallic detonators remained waste.
(Para 9 of Report No.6 of 2003)
Army and Ordnance Factories
Recoveries effected at the instance of Audit:
An aggregate amount of Rs.1.56 crore was
recovered at the instance of audit on omission to avail rebate on electricity consumed,
mistakes in regulation of personal entitlements and incorrect appropriation of revenue realization to Regimental Fund.
(Para 11 of Report No.6 of 2003)
Army and Ordnance Factories
Irregular recruitment of personnel: Delay in
communicating the Government’s ban order
on recruitment resulted in irregular recruitment of 1505 personnel by Military Engineer Services involving expenditure of
Rs.12.65 crore on their pay and allowances.

(Para 14 of Report No.6 of 2003)
Army and Ordnance Factories
Unproductive expenditure on construction
of residential accommodation: Delays in
handing over an operationally essential site free
from all hindrances to the firm entrusted with
the task of construction of accommodation
resulted in non-completion of work even after
an investment of Rs.6.49 crore and the
contract ultimately had to be cancelled.
(Para 15 of Report No.6 of 2003)
Army and Ordnance Factories
Unfruitful investment on an incomplete
scheme: Inadequate soil surveys and investigations by a Garrison Engineer where sewage


pipes were to be laid resulted in execution of
the scheme being held up for over seven years
after incurring Rs.5.36 crore besides an
estimated cost over run of Rs.1.59 crore and
unnecessary arbitration proceedings.

(Para 16 of Report No.6 of 2003)
Army and Ordnance Factories
Over-provisioning of Tippers: Directorate
General of Border Roads failed to modify a
supply order for tippers in terms of requirements and their subsequent decision to
divert them to three other projects resulted
in over-provisioning of 98 tippers valuing
Rs.6.74 crore.

(Para 24 of Report No.6 of 2003)
Army and Ordnance Factories
Avoidable expenditure on construction of a
border Road: Directorate General of Border
Roads and the Chief Engineer concerned failed
to suspend construction of a Border Road and
sanctioned additional works even-though Army
no longer required them resulting in avoidable
expenditure of Rs.1.74 crore.
(Para 25 of Report No.6 of 2003)
Army and Ordnance Factories
Procurement of Laser Guidance Kits: On
account of depletion of the War Wastage
Reserve of Laser Guidance Kits, essential for
effective bombing of targets, the Air Force
had to resort to emergency purchases at
higher prices from a single vendor involving
an estimated additional expenditure of
Rs.36.39 crore. Further, because of delay in
the procurement of the related penetration
bombs, the shelf life of these Kits would
have reduced considerably by the time
deliveries of the bombs are completed.
(Para 2 of Report No.7 of 2003)
Air Force and Navy

225


-----

Mismatch in procurement of bombs and
components: Expenditure aggregating to
Rs.117.28 crore incurred on the procurement of a particular type of bomb and its
related tail units notwithstanding, the compatible and essential fuzes had not been
made available even after the lapse of
considerable time. Failure to synchronize
the procurement of the bombs and its
integral components so as to ensure availability of adequate stocks necessitated
alternative interim arrangements that were
relatively less effective and reliable.
(Para 8 of Report No.7 of 2003)
Air Force & Navy
Avoidable additional expenditure on
procurement of Ground Power Units:
Continued procurement, without inviting open
tenders, of Ground Power Units for IAF aircraft
from the vendor who had been supplying these
Units earlier even after identifying and approving an alternative source of supply resulted in
these Units being procured at higher prices,
involving avoidable additional expenditure of

Rs.3.30 crore.
(Para 10 of Report No.7 of 2003)
Air Force & Navy
Procurement of unsuitable vehicles: Failure
of the Air Force to properly evaluate the
suitability of the vehicles procured for
containerization of critical communication
equipment necessitated additional purchases
of alternative vehicles and transfer of the
unsuitable ones costing Rs.2.70 crore to
other units. This also had an adverse impact
on the operational mobility of the communication equipment.
(Para 12 of Report No.7 of 2003)
Air Force & Navy


Avoidable expenditure on repairs attributable
to negligence: Failure, attributable to negligence, of Air Force personnel to ensure that
the correct Fuel control Units were installed on
acro-engines fitted on a particular type of
aircraft resulted in two of these aircraft being
damaged necessitating repairs at a cost of
Rs.1.88 crore.
(Para 14 of Report No.7 of 2003)
Air Force & Navy
Recoveries effected at the Instance of Audit:
Recoveries aggregating to Rs.12.85 crore,
representing erroneous payments to two
shipyards and Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
and over payments to Defence civilians of the
Naval Hydrographic office, were effected at the
instance of Audit.
(Para 16 and 19 of Report No.7 of 2003)
Air Force & Navy
Procurement of Sonobuoy Processing and
Control Systems: The efficacy and acceptability of a sonobuoy Processing and Control
System, indigenously developed at a cost of
Rs.9.27 crore for processing of data relating
to submarines were yet to be conclusively
established to facilitate its approval and
commencement of regular production to
meet the Navy’s operational requirements.
(Para 17 of Report No.7 of 2003)
Air Force & Navy
Avoidable additional expenditure on refit of a
Naval Ship: Award, in violation of established
tendering procedures, of a contract relating to
the refit of a Naval ship to a firm which was not
the lowest tenderer and even when its offer
was not complete in all respects was prima
facie biased and resulted in an estimated
additional expenditure of Rs.1.42 crore.
(Para 18 of Report No.7 of 2003)
Air Force & Navy

226


-----

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE
PRODUCTION AND SUPPLIES:
Machine Tool Prototype Factory: Machine
Tool Prototype Factory at Ambernath is the
designed factory for production of components of T-72 tanks/Infantry Combat Vehicles, production of items relating to trucks,
weapons, machine tools and miscellaneous
items. Review by Audit of the performance
of the factory revealed a number of deficien
cies in:
Sub-optimal utilization (weapon items: 40 to
66 percent, components of tanks and
vehicles: 24 to 65 per cent and machine
tools miscellaneous items: 41 to 83 per
cent) of available man-hour capacity in
production.
Gross under-utilisation of machine hours in
the absence of matching manpower.
The factory offloaded jobs to trade valuing
Rs.0.73 crore even though it had the
capacity to do so.
Inspite of non-utilisation of available
manhors, the factory deployed personnel on
overtime involving payment of Rs.8.91
crore.
Production of sub-standard machines costing Rs.6.47 crore meant for sister factories
resulting in their non-utilisation.
Shortfall in achieving targets in respect of
civil trade ranged from 32 to 86 per cent.

(Para 28 of Report No.6 of 2003)
Army and Ordnance Factories
Defective Manufacture of Shells: Rejected
lots of ammunition manufactured by Ordnance Factory, Chanda valued at Rs.7.18


crore were held in stock for over seven years
without rectification. More shells worth
Rs.10.89 crore manufactured during 20002001 were also rejected requiring urgent
corrective action.
(Para 30 of Report No.6 of 2003)
Army and Ordnance Factories
Idle investment on procurement of defective
navigation equipment: Ordnance Factory
Medak failed to adhere to the storage,
transportation and operational requirements
of an import contract for a navigation
equipment. This equipment was not rectified within the warranty period resulting in
unproductive investment of Rs.2.54 crore.

(Para 32 of Report No.6 of 2003)
Army and Ordnance Factories
Procurement of defective Track Assemblies:
Issue of bulk production clearances for
manufacture of track assemblies worth
Rs.1.33 crore for tanks even before establishing the acceptability of the pilot samples
resulted in their rejection. Their replacement is doubtful.

(Para 33 of Report No.6 of 2003)
Army and Ordnance Factories
Bharat Earth Movers Limited and its subsidiary Vigyan Industries Limited included
inadmissible items as part of ‘emoluments’
and applied incorrect formula for the payment of ex-gratia under voluntary retirement
scheme. This resulted in an extra expenditure of Rs.13.52 crore from 1992-93 to
2001-02.

(Para 8.2.1 of Report No.3 of 2003
(Commercial)

227


-----

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE RESEARCH
AND DEVELOPMENT

Avoidable import of Directional Solidification furnace: Defence Metallurgical Research
Laboratory imported a furnace for Rs.96.17
lakh despite prior knowledge of difficulty in
developing technology on it in comparison
to the efforts required to develop the technology on the existing old furnace thereby
resulting in avoidable expenditure.

(Para 22 of Report No.6 of 2003)
Army and Ordnance Factories
Procurement of defective equipment: Equipment, essential for ensuring secrecy in
communication, procured for the Air Force
at a cost of Rs.4.47 crore remained
unutilized for over four years because of
several shortcomings noticed in the course
of the evaluation trials that were conducted
without reference to the Qualitative Requirements and had to be backloaded to the
manufacturer.

(Para 11 of Report No.7 of 2003)
Air Force and Navy

Delay in installation of an underwater
Optical Imaging System: An Underwater


Optical Imaging System procured in the year
1992 for installation on board a Marine
Acoustic Research Ship for the collection
and study of data from the sea bed had not
been installed and commissioned even after
a decade, thereby defeating the objective of
its procurement, besides rendering an
investment of Rs.0.78 crore largely unproductive.

(Para 21 of Report No.7 of 2003)
Air Force and Navy

Establishment of Torpedo Test Facilities:
Benefits expected by the establishment of a
facility for the testing of developmental
torpedoes in sheltered waters by a Laboratory of the Defence Research and Development Organisation had not been realized
even after more than 12 years and investments aggregating to Rs.7.96 crore and the
Laboratory concerned continues to depend
on the Navy and foreign ranges for its
testing requirements,

(Para 22 of Report No.7 of 2003)

Air Force and Navy

228


-----

-----

