-----

-----

-----

### Contents

Message from An Taoiseach

Ministerial Foreword

Chapter 1 - Introduction

Chapter 2 - The Security Environment

Chapter 3 - National Security - Defence Policy Response

Chapter 4 - Other Policy Requirements

Chapter 5 - Roles of the Defence Forces

Chapter 6 - Capability Requirements

Chapter 7 - Defence Human Resources

Chapter 8 - The Reserve Defence Force (RDF)

Chapter 9 - Civil Defence

Chapter 10 - White Paper Implementation

Appendix A

Appendix B

Appendix C

Glossary of Acronyms


iii

v

1

11

23

47

59

61

73

95

103

109

120

121

122

126


-----

-----

### Message from An Taoiseach

I am very pleased, on behalf of Government, to present this White Paper on
Defence. It sets out a long-term and forward-looking approach to defence
provision. The decisions taken in this White Paper will influence the development
of defence capabilities for the next decade and beyond whilst acknowledging
that the future is inherently uncertain. The maintenance of such flexible and
adaptable military capabilities represents a very pragmatic and appropriate
approach to dealing with such uncertainty.

Irish people take great pride in our Defence Forces and the contribution made
by the Permanent Defence Force, the Reserve Defence Force and by Civil
Defence. I have witnessed at first hand the important work that the Army, Air Corps and Naval Service
undertake both at home and overseas. I am also acutely aware of the excellent work of Civil Defence as
part of the local government response, in supporting communities in times of adversity. The commitment
of the members of Civil Defence and the Reserve Defence Force is also testament to the continued spirit
of voluntary service.

The defence contribution to our domestic security, international peace and security and to a broad range
of supports to government departments and agencies means that this White Paper is important to a wide
range of stakeholders, who have been consulted during the development of this document.

This White Paper charts a course for the continued development of capabilities across the Defence
Organisation, whilst recognising that people are the key element of success. The Government are
committed to ensuring that the Defence Organisation remains one in which people, both civil and military,
are proud to serve.

The Department of Defence continues to provide leadership on defence policy and to ensure efficient and
effective defence provision. Since taking up office, the Government have made a number of decisions
in order to maintain and develop the operational capacity of the Defence Forces. This White Paper is
further demonstration of the Government’s commitment to ensuring that defence policy and associated
capabilities offer a pragmatic and appropriate response to a highly dynamic security environment and
anticipated future operational requirements.

**ENDA KENNY T.D.**

**TAOISEACH**


-----

-----

### Ministerial Foreword

As Minister for Defence it is both a privilege and an honour to introduce a White
Paper that sets out a defence policy framework and practical vision for the next
ten years.

From my experience as Minister the single greatest asset the Defence Forces
has is its personnel. I have witnessed at first hand their operational skills and
commitment both at home and overseas. The professionalism and dedication
shown in a wide variety of roles has been inspiring.

A career in the Defence Forces is a form of patriotism that provides an
outstanding example to all of Irish Society.

We are a small State and dependent on global trade for our economic well-being. Ireland is vulnerable to
a broadening range of security threats that affect the world today. Such security threats are increasingly
interconnected, more diverse and less predictable. No one country acting alone can adequately respond
to them. This White Paper contains a comprehensive security assessment that provides the context for
the defence policy response.

In setting out defence policy to meet these security challenges, it builds on an all-embracing Government
response and effective engagement with international organisations. In this context, it situates defence
policy within the State’s broader security framework. A key goal is to ensure that Ireland retains credible
military capabilities that can meet anticipated future threats to the State’s security, whilst ensuring that
those capabilities remain flexible and responsive to a changing environment.

Ireland has a long and proud tradition of participation in UN mandated peace support operations. The
deployment of the Defence Forces on such missions continues to provide an active and very tangible
demonstration of Ireland’s commitment to supporting the maintenance of international peace and security.
This has enhanced Ireland’s reputation throughout the world.

Defence capabilities and resources are also used to provide support to other state bodies in a variety of
roles. This has significant benefits to the State in maximising the utility of defence capabilities and reducing
the duplication of service delivery. While recognising the core functions of defence, this White Paper also
sets out a framework through which defence can contribute further to our political, social and economic
development.

The Government value the service and contribution that members of our Defence Forces make to the
State. We remember those who have made the ultimate sacrifice in the service of the State including those
on overseas peacekeeping missions in support of the United Nations. The Government also recognise the
contribution of the Department of Defence and the service of those volunteers in the Reserve Defence
Force and Civil Defence who devote so much time in service to the State. I also acknowledge the service
and contribution of our veterans and their continued active support of the Defence Forces.

I am very proud to have had the opportunity to shape this White Paper on Defence, which sets out the
future strategic direction for defence policy. I would like to thank all of those who supported me in its
development, in particular the team in the Department of Defence and the Independent Advisory Group
chaired by John Minihan. Finally I would like to acknowledge the work of my predecessor Alan Shatter,
T.D. for his vision in developing the Green Paper on Defence in advance of this document.


-----

I believe that this White Paper on Defence sets out a policy framework that will deliver the flexibility,
support and modernisation needed to respond to a complex and changing environment both at home and
abroad over the next decade.

**SIMON COVENEY T.D.**

**MINISTER FOR DEFENCE**


-----

-----

# 1


-----

### Chapter 1 | Introduction


##### 1.1  Context

The security of the State and its citizens is a primary responsibility of Government. It is
a whole of Government concern and a broad range of government departments and
agencies are assigned security responsibilities. Providing for the military defence of
the State’s territory is a fundamental security requirement and responsibility for this
is vested specifically in the Department of Defence[1] and the Defence Forces. In a
modern state, Defence[2] is conceived as the ultimate guarantee of freedom.

The defence contribution to security also encompasses defence inputs to domestic
security, in particular in support of An Garda Síochána who have primary responsibility
for protecting the internal security of the State; defence inputs to the State’s response
to large scale emergencies; and defence inputs to international peace and security. In
addition, defence resources are used for other non-security tasks which maximise the
utility of defence assets for the benefit of the State.

All of these requirements highlight the key role that the Department of Defence,
the Defence Forces and Civil Defence play within the State’s security and support
framework. Security is the bedrock on which a society’s cultural, social and economic
achievements are built. Defence underpins Ireland’s security as well as the promotion
of the State’s strategic interests in the international environment. As such, there is a
significant cross-cutting policy dimension to this White Paper on Defence and Defence
policy should be viewed in these broader terms.

Defence policy is a manifestation of civil control[3] of Defence and encompasses a
number of essential components including: decisions on defence requirements and
the defence contribution within a wider security framework; decisions on the use of
defence assets towards non-security ends; decisions on the financial resourcing of
defence and capabilities to be retained and developed; and matters relating to the
administration of defence. There are many possible approaches to the provision of
defence but a key consideration relates to how Ireland engages with other countries.
In this context defence policy and foreign policy must be fully congruent.

##### 1.2  New Challenges

Historically and from a state perspective, the concept of national security was principally
associated with defending the sovereignty of nation states. In this context, the focus of
national security, for most countries, was towards external threats from hostile forces.
As such, defence policy is fundamental to the well-being of the State and its citizens.
Given our particular history, the threat of internal subversion of the State was also a

1 The Department of Defence comprises civil and military elements with distinct but complementary roles. Defence Forces Headquarters
(DFHQ) is the military element of the Department of Defence. References to the Department of Defence in this document refer to both
the civil and military elements unless otherwise qualified.

2 Other terminology used in the White Paper is as follows; the term ‘Defence’ is used to refer in a broad sense to defence provision in
Ireland; “Defence Forces” refers to the military organisation; the term “Defence Organisation” refers to the Department of Defence
and the Defence Forces.

3 In Ireland civil control of Defence including the armed forces of the State is exercised by the Government through and by the


-----

key national security focus. These remain fundamental components of national
security and responsibility for these matters rests with[4] the Department of the
Taoiseach, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Department of Defence
and the Defence Forces and the Department of Justice and Equality and An Garda
Síochána.

The concept of security has broadened considerably in the decades since the end of
the Cold War and this ongoing trend was highlighted in the White Paper on Defence[5]
(2000). In the international sphere, a more diverse range of issues are now recognised
as posing security threats. The European Security Strategy[6] (ESS), which was adopted
by the EU Heads of State and Government in 2003 identified that at that time the EU
faced security threats “which are more diverse, less visible and less predictable”.
These threats included: terrorism, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
regional conflicts, state failure and organised crime.

The 2004 report of the UN Secretary General’s High-Level-Panel on threats challenges
and change, entitled “A more secure world: Our shared responsibility”[7], identified
social and economic threats, transnational organised crime, as well as inter-state
conflict, internal conflict, terrorism and weapons of mass destruction, as global security
threats. In 2005, the former UN Secretary General, Kofi Annan’s report “In Larger

4 Subsequent chapters will outline where other departments and agencies have assumed security responsibilities.

5 Available at www.defence.ie

6 Available at www ec europa eu


-----

to that list.

A report on the implementation of the ESS was carried out by the EU’s then High
Representative in 2008[9]. It considered evolving threats, e.g., cyber attacks, energy
security, climate change and piracy and highlighted the fact that security concerns
had broadened geographically and spatially, e.g., cyber space. The publication of the
European Commission’s Joint Communication on a Cyber Security Strategy of the
European Union[10] in 2013 and the EU’s Maritime Security Strategy[11] in 2014, represent
important components of the EU’s response to the 2008 report.

Globalisation, that is growing trade and other links among countries, brings increased
interdependence among countries. As well as building on lessons learned in the
security domain, including from past failings, this broadening of the range of security
threats also reflects this increased global interdependence. New vulnerabilities have
arisen, including an increased reliance on technologies and services which facilitate
global business. The complexity and transnational nature of many of today’s threats
means that no one country acting alone can adequately respond to them: collective
engagement and a comprehensive range of policy instruments are necessary.

##### 1.3  Implications for National Security

This broadened concept of security has in turn influenced how countries now view
national security. In recent years, many countries have developed consolidated national
security strategies. In addition to the traditional fundamental national security focus,
many such strategies have expanded the range of threats to include others with
the potential to cause serious disruption to the functioning of a state or to the well
being of its citizens. There is also now a general acceptance that, due to increased
interdependence and globalisation, the national security of many states is intertwined
with regional and global security.

This broader concept of national security also now encompasses certain threats such
as natural disasters, cyber security and pandemics. Within this broader concept, threats
to a state’s economy, such as the financial crisis, may also be considered matters of
national security.

In recent years there has been an increased focus on identifying broader national
risks for Ireland. In December 2012, the Office of Emergency Planning published “A
National Risk Assessment for Ireland”.[12] This assessment was intended to advance
best practice relating to emergency planning and preparedness. It examined hazards
under four categories; natural, transportation, technological and civil. Each of these
hazards was assessed having regard to probability of occurrence and likely impact,
and the results were presented in a risk matrix. Whilst the majority of these hazards
/ threats do not pose national security concerns; threats such as terrorism, severe
flooding, infectious diseases, loss of critical infrastructure, disruption to energy supply
and cyber attacks can impact on national security.

In 2014, the Department of the Taoiseach published the National Risk Assessment
2014[13]. The purpose of that assessment was: “to identify the risks (both financial

8 Available at http://www.un.org

9 Available at http://cosilium.europa.eu

10 Available at http://www.ec.europa.eu

11 Available at http://www.ec.europa.eu

12 Available at http://www oep ie


-----

_and non-financial) which might have an adverse impact on Ireland’s well-being_
_and ensure appropriate prevention and mitigation frameworks are in place to_
_address the nominated risks.”_

In considering the requirement for a broader risk assessment than that undertaken
in the past, the document acknowledges that: “Many other countries are looking
_at similar exercises, reflecting recent experiences and the extent of inter-_
_connectedness between countries in the current era of globalisation. It is obvious_
_that incidents such as terrorist attacks, pandemics, natural disasters or financial_
_shocks in distant locations can have significant reverberations in Ireland. A feature_
_of current efforts in many countries is an effort to broaden risk assessment from_
_the traditional approach focused on national security and civil emergency-type_
_events, to encompass broader economic and social factors”._

The “National Risk Assessment for Ireland” listed five categories of risks: economic
risks, environmental risks, geo-political risks, social risks and technological risks. All
of the categories of risks outlined pose security challenges or can be exacerbated by
deteriorations in the security environment. Risks within the geo-political category such
as war or regional instability can adversely affect the economy, the environment, etc.
Incidents such as piracy off the Horn of Africa can lead to increased costs for business
and impact competitiveness. Cyber attacks, state sponsored or otherwise, can cripple
a country’s electronic infrastructure, including the wide range of network connected
devices and systems that control or operate critical national infrastructure. As such,
“traditional” security related issues are linked to, and can increase a range of risks such
as economic risks environmental risks social risks and technological risks


-----

Conversely, certain of the risks outlined above can intensify “traditional” security
threats. Climate change, which is considered an environmental risk, can lead to changes
in resource distribution, poverty and disaffection. This in turn can provoke resource
conflicts, crime or extremism. Technological change can create new vulnerabilities
that can be exploited by those disposed to doing so, creating new security risks.
Furthermore, risks that disrupt societal norms can have significant security implications.
This complex web of cause and effect linkages challenges the traditional view that
internal and external security concerns are separate and distinct. The reality is that
security risks have become increasingly inter-related.

In this context, a key challenge for Government is to ensure that threats are identified
and that the full range of Governmental policy responses is brought to bear. This White
Paper on Defence is an essential part of that broader process.

While individual strategies are in place to deal with threats that are faced, Ireland has
not presented these as a consolidated national security strategy; however, the security
environment assessment outlined in the next chapter considers a comprehensive
range of threats that could adversely affect our national security. This White Paper
focuses on threats where Defence plays a lead or supporting role.

A wide range of state agencies and bodies are responsible for leading and planning
for the response to such threats and our memberships of and engagement with
international organisations are also central to responding to these threats. The defence
policy response, including the specific roles assigned to defence within this broader
national security paradigm, will be discussed in subsequent chapters.

##### 1.4  Objectives of the White Paper

This White Paper on Defence sets out the Government’s defence policy for the next
decade. It provides a framework that will enable a flexible and adaptive response to any
adverse changes in a dynamic security environment. It also sets out the security tasks
that the Department of Defence and the Defence Forces will undertake in supporting
those other departments and agencies which are constituent parts of the State’s
security architecture. In addition, the White Paper sets out the Government’s policy on
using defence resources in other non-security roles for the benefit of the State.

The key objectives of the White Paper are:

         - To provide a medium term policy framework for defence that is flexible and
responsive having regard to the dynamic nature of the security environment and
the key role that Defence plays in the State’s security architecture;

         - To give appropriate underpinning to Ireland’s engagement in international bodies
particularly the United Nations and the European Union;

         - To ensure that the stated roles of the Defence Forces are consistent with
requirements;

         - Building on recent re-organisation measures for the Permanent Defence Force
(PDF) and the Reserve Defence Force (RDF), to guide and underpin decisions
relating to the capacity of the Defence Organisation to include: corporate skills,
organisation, force composition and equipment acquisition over the next ten
years;

         - To underpin the development of required civil and military capabilities with an
appropriate multi-annual resource commitment;


-----

         - To ensure defence policy contributes in a congruent way with wider social and
economic policy.

##### 1.5  Background and Overview of Process

The White Paper on Defence (2000) was the first such white paper in the history of
this State. As previously outlined, in the intervening period there have been significant
changes in the security environment. For Ireland, a key policy issue has been the
developing responses of global and regional security organisations with which Ireland
acts in pursuit of international peace and stability, principally the UN, the EU, the OSCE
and NATO Partnership for Peace (PfP). Political, economic, social and security cooperation within the EU has deepened and this has been underpinned by institutional
developments within the EU in accordance with successive treaties to which Ireland
has subscribed, albeit with specific points of clarification. Threats to the EU are now
regarded as threats to Ireland’s interests and welfare. Within the security field, these
changes, in turn, have informed required operational responses and associated
capability requirements, as anticipated in the White Paper on Defence (2000).

Whilst the changes over the period to 2008 were driven by the White Paper modernisation
agenda and emergent operational requirements, following the economic downturn
more recent changes have been in response to financial constraints. In 2015, defence
expenditure (excluding pensions) is some 20.8% less than 2008 expenditure and 14%
less than 2007 expenditure. In Budget 2012, the Government decided to stabilise
the strength of the PDF at an establishment of 9,500 personnel. In March 2013, a
revised establishment of 4,069 personnel was introduced for the RDF in line with the
recommendations of a Value for Money Review, which was published in November
2012. The Defence Forces, both Permanent and Reserve also implemented significant
re-organisations in order to maximise operational effectiveness within these revised
strength ceilings.

In July 2013, a Green Paper on Defence was published as part of the process leading
to the publication of this White Paper. The purpose of the Green Paper was to stimulate
an open debate about future defence requirements and submissions were sought.
In total, 122 written submissions were received from a wide variety of interested
parties (see Appendix C). Civil and military personnel of the Defence Organisation had
some 20 follow-on meetings with selected groups and individuals. Officials from the
Department of Defence also met with other government departments and agencies,
and international organisations as part of the consultation process.

An inter-departmental group comprising representatives from the Department of the
Taoiseach, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Department of Defence,
the Department of Justice and Equality and An Garda Síochána, prepared a security
assessment, which is set out in Chapter 2 of this White Paper.

Two groups, comprised of civil and military personnel from the Defence Organisation,
undertook detailed work on identifying future operational and capability requirements.
This work included the consideration of various policy approaches having regard to
resource requirements. The membership of these groups are set out in Appendix A.

The Minister also established an External Advisory Group to support him in the
development of the White Paper. Mr. John Minihan was appointed Chairman of this
group and the membership and terms of reference of this group is set out in Appendix B.


-----

debate around key policy emphases. It provided a final opportunity for inputs from
these stakeholders, prior to the finalisation of the White Paper.

##### 1.6  Chapter Outline

The White Paper firstly considers the security environment: it then sets out the
Government’s policy response before moving on to consider capability requirements
and implementation issues. The White Paper also has a specific chapter dealing with
Civil Defence. The chapter outline is as follows:

###### Chapter 2 - The Security Environment

This chapter provides the context for the policy approach set out in subsequent
chapters. It provides an overview of broad trends that are likely to influence the security
environment in future years and security threats. It then sets out an assessment of the
geo-political security environment and of the domestic security environment.

###### Chapter 3 - National Security - Defence Policy Response

This chapter considers defence policy requirements having regard to the security
assessment set out in Chapter 2. A key challenge is to balance the cost of maintaining
military capabilities with the risk of being unable to respond to an attack on the State,
should this occur. The security assessment highlighted the importance of collective
security responses and, in this context, the chapter sets out the defence policy response
to international peace and security. The chapter also sets out the defence contribution
to domestic security, principally in support of other government departments and
agencies.

###### Chapter 4 - Other Policy Requirements

While the security roles underpin the raison d�être of the Defence Forces, the
Government also require the Defence Forces to undertake a broad range of non-security
related roles. This facilitates the elimination of duplication of service provision by the
State and promotes enduring savings to the exchequer. The extent to which defence
resources can be harnessed for the benefit of the State is also a key consideration. This
chapter considers these important issues.

###### Chapter 5 - Roles of the Defence Forces

This chapter sets out the revised roles of the Defence Forces having regard to the
policy response set out in Chapters 3 and 4.

###### Chapter 6 - Capability Requirements

This chapter considers capability issues for the coming decade whilst recognising
that there is a requirement to adopt a flexible and responsive approach. It sets out
key principles in capability development, including jointness, and sets out the major
equipment projects that will be implemented for the Army, Air Corps and Naval Service,
as well as priorities in the event of additional funding being made available. The chapter
also considers infrastructure and the provision of medical services.

###### Chapter 7 - Human Resources

This chapter considers the most important defence asset, its people. The defence
workforce comprises a broad range of individuals with differing skills sets and


-----

employees within the Defence Organisation. In this context, the chapter considers
future requirements and key HR developmental areas for the coming years.

###### Chapter 8 - The Reserve Defence Force

This chapter considers the future development of the RDF. It reviews the findings of
the VFM review of the RDF and its recommendations. The further development of the
RDF is discussed and the roles that Government have assigned to the RDF are set out.
It also considers force structure and RDF human resources matters.

###### Chapter 9 - Civil Defence

This chapter sets out the Government’s commitment to the future development of
Civil Defence. This includes the development of Civil Defence capabilities around its
central strategic objective of supporting the Principal Response Agencies (PRAs) in a
range of emergency and non-emergency situations.

###### Chapter 10 - White Paper Implementation

This chapter sets out the approach to implementation of the White Paper. It includes
some significant innovations which are directed at achieving this. The principal elements
relate to civil and military management, defence review arrangements, funding and
implementation frameworks.


-----

-----

# 2


-----

### Chapter 2 | The Security Environment


##### 2.1  Introduction

The previous chapter identified the increasingly blurred boundaries between internal
and external security and highlighted that events in other countries can have significant
reverberations in Ireland. This has led to a broader view of national security. In that
context, this chapter considers broad security threats facing the State. The lead role in
responding to these threats can rest with a range of departments and agencies within
the State’s broader security architecture. Subsequent chapters will set out the defence
contribution to the response.

The first section of this chapter describes key trends and threats that are likely to
influence the security environment in future years. It then considers the geo-political
security environment and the domestic security environment.

##### 2.2  Overarching Trends

###### 2.2.1 Conflict

The nature of conflict will continue to evolve and present new challenges. State and
non-state actors are likely to combine conventional and high-end asymmetric methods
concurrently across land, sea, air, space, cyberspace and information/propaganda
operations, commonly characterised as hybrid warfare. Instability caused by fragile
states has the potential to provoke broader conflicts. Conflict zones and fragile states
are breeding grounds for terrorism, extremism and cross-border organised crime.

Conflict is likely to involve a range of transnational, state, group and individual participants
who will operate at global, regional and local levels both collectively and individually.
In some conflicts, there is likely to be concurrent inter-communal violence, terrorism,
insurgency and criminality. In many instances, conflicts will lead to catastrophic
humanitarian crises, resulting in increases in refugees, migrants and internally displaced
persons. These in turn can represent a growing threat to regional stability in the affected
areas. Conflicts between state and non-state actors will impact on international crisis
management operations, including UN missions operating in these areas and the
ability of peacekeeping forces to undertake the mandate assigned to them. They will
also impact adversely in the operation of non-governmental organisations (NGOs),
development agencies and humanitarian workers.

###### 2.2.2 Proliferation of Weapons

The illegal and unregulated distribution of conventional weapons, including small
arms, has exacerbated conflicts in many regions of the world, including Africa. Such
weapons empower insurgents, extremists, pirates and criminal gangs, which can in
turn undermine the governance structures of fragile states. This issue remains a key
security challenge.

Concerns also remain about the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
missile technology. Thousands of such weapons exist and the risks increase where
the possibility arises that state authorities may lose control of parts of their missile and


-----

for terrorist groups to obtain Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN)
weapons. Controlling access to materials and technology, from which such weapons
could be manufactured, is a key security issue.

###### 2.2.3 Globalisation

As a small open economy, Ireland benefits from globalisation, which continues apace
and we are now more closely linked and inter-dependent on others than ever before.
At the same time, Ireland is exposed to all of the dangers, uncertainties and challenges
in the wider defence and security environment that accompany globalisation.

Ireland is highly dependent on external trade links and is reliant on the unimpeded
movement of goods for our economic well being. Any disruption to this movement
of goods or services is of concern as Irish businesses try to grow exports to new and
emerging markets. As an island nation, Ireland is highly reliant on sea transport routes,
particularly via the United Kingdom, for the import and export of goods and for essential
supplies. The high reliance on these transport links presents a potential vulnerability
that could be exploited. Increased access to transport and the increased movement of
people throughout the world also increases and accelerates the risks associated with
pandemics.

###### 2.2.4 Economic Developments

The balance of economic power is expected to shift over the next half century.
Emerging countries will account for an ever-increasing share of economic output. The
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) predicts that China
will surpass the Euro area and the United States in the next few years to become the
largest economy in the world. India is also projected to surpass the Euro area in about
20 years.[14]

Defence expenditure has grown in some of these emerging economic states,
particularly in some Asian states which have expanded their military capabilities. The
associated re-balancing of global military forces can increase the risks associated with
existing inter-state rivalries, including those relating to contested territories. In contrast,
in the period 2006 to 2012, defence spending across EU member states declined in
real terms[15].

###### 2.2.5 Climate Change

The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change[16] (IPCC) predicts
more frequent hot and less frequent cold temperature extremes over most land areas.
According to the IPCC, the impacts of climate change will include a higher risk of
flooding and changes to crop yields. Global mean sea level is expected to continue
to rise during the 21st century due to increased ocean warming and increased loss of
mass from glaciers and ice sheets.

Climate change is likely to result in increasingly violent weather patterns, drought and
natural disasters. This could aggravate existing water and food shortages and increase
the likelihood of regional instability, with resultant humanitarian and economic crises.
Population growth and migration flows will also be influenced by the effects of climate

14 http://www.oecd.org/eco/growth/lookingto2060.htm

15 European Defence Agency Defence Date 2012


-----

change. Climate change will see increased competition for scarce land, water and
food resources, and may have devastating consequences for many states on Europe’s
periphery.

###### 2.2.6 Migration

Irish people have a long history of migrating and have contributed positively to the
growth and development of many countries. Ireland has also benefited from the
positive contribution made by people who have come from abroad and settled in this
State. Free movement of people between member states under the EU treaties has
also contributed positively to economic development.

Inward migration to the EU arises for various reasons including as a response to political
conflict, environmental or economic pressures. In such circumstances, large scale and
illegal migration can raise significant challenges for host countries and for the EU more
generally.

According to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)[17], the smuggling
of illegal migrants is a highly profitable business in which criminals enjoy low risk of
detection and punishment. As a result, the crime is becoming increasingly attractive
to criminals and organised crime syndicates in particular. Furthermore, the distinction
between the smuggling of migrants and human trafficking is often very subtle and


-----

###### 2.2.7 Energy Security

EU countries’ dependency on energy imports increased from 40% of gross energy
consumption in the 1980s to reach 54.3% by 2012[18]. It is projected that the EU will
import 75% of its energy by 2030, making this particular issue one of immediate concern
to EU states. Europe will, therefore, become increasingly dependent on the rest of the
word for its energy supplies – much of which is sourced from Europe’s surrounding arc
of instability from North and West Africa to the Middle East and the EURASIAN states.
Uninterrupted energy supplies are a key factor in both EU and Irish national security,
and require stable, well functioning suppliers. Ensuring that these states continue to
function may necessitate external assistance – both civilian and military. Changing
global energy dynamics and threats to the European Union’s energy security, have
given greater impetus to the development of the EU’s energy diplomacy and to efforts
to strengthen European energy security. The publication of the EU Energy Security
Strategy in May 2014 is an important development in this regard.

###### 2.2.8 Resource Scarcity

Insecurity in the global food chain will impact on all states, and not just on those that
directly experience climate change. Feeding nine billion people by 2050 and increasing
food production by 70%, are among the biggest challenges faced, amid mounting
scientific evidence of climate change and resultant impacts on food security and
poverty.[19] Currently, 1.6 billion people live in countries and regions with absolute water
scarcity and the number is expected to rise to 2.8 billion people by 2025.[20] A particular
cause for concern is that terrorists, international criminal organisations, and militants
may be in a position to use the scarcity of resources to promote their own interests,
and, by doing so, undermine affected governments.

###### 2.2.9 Technological Advances

Advances in technology will continue to present both opportunities and threats.
Societies will become increasingly reliant on such technologies and their usage will
further underpin the basic functioning of key aspects of states, including critical national
infrastructure. Our increased reliance on technology in all facets of our lives and
business processes has created a potential vulnerability that can be exploited by those
who have the means and knowledge to do so. Cyber crime and cyber attacks, both
nationally and internationally, have heightened awareness of these vulnerabilities. The
pace of such change will continue to present difficulties in identifying and developing
appropriate responses to vulnerabilities that others may seek to exploit.

##### 2.3  Security Threats

Following from the previous assessment, this section categorises security threats that
have been identified. However, there is always the scope for the emergence of new
threats that have not as yet been identified and for strategic shocks.

###### 2.3.1 Inter and Intra-State Conflict

Inter-state conflict could range from low level conflict over access to resources,

18 http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics_explained/index.php/Energy_production_and_imports#Imports

19 https://wbi worldbank org/wbi/about/topics/climate change


-----

The potential for widespread disruption to international trade, reduced access to
necessary resources as well as humanitarian and environmental disasters accompany
this threat. The refusal of certain states to adhere to international norms of conduct
can adversely affect regional and multilateral security frameworks, which are a key
contributor to international peace and stability.

Intra-state conflict can be driven by many factors including: ethnic tensions, violent
extremism and political or religious separatism. It can lead to civil war and has been the
source of much conflict over recent decades. Protracted conflict within states can also
be funded or supported by third party rival states. This can make conflicts difficult to
resolve, which in turn generates the risk factor associated with failed states.

###### 2.3.2 Cyber Attacks

In 2013, the World Economic Forum identified cyber related threats as one of the
highest of all global risks from both the perspectives of impact and likelihood[21]. Cyber
attacks have the potential to interrupt and disable critical national infrastructure.
These attacks also have implications for governmental administration, for industry, for
economic wellbeing and for the security and safety of citizens. Information systems
are now part of our everyday working and social lives. While new technology brings
with it considerable opportunities for business advancements, the interconnection of
global networks presents a new source of vulnerability.

Both nationally and internationally, there have been instances in recent years of cyber
attacks on businesses, state institutions and critical national infrastructure. National
security can come under threat from international espionage or attempted sabotage
of the software necessary to run critical infrastructure. The experience gained from
such attacks has heightened awareness of weaknesses in security and has illustrated
greater sophistication in the methods of attack on systems.

###### 2.3.3 Terrorism

This threat can arise from a variety of sources including movements that are well
resourced, connected by electronic networks, and are willing to undertake a range of
disruptive violent actions in order to achieve their aims. Experience has also shown
that the actions of so called “lone wolf” terrorists can also cause significant deaths and
injuries.

According to the UN Secretary General’s High Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change report, A More Secure World: Our Shared Responsibility (2004), “Terrorism
_attacks the values that lie at the heart of the Charter of the United Nations: respect_
_for human rights; the rule of law; rules of war that protect civilians; tolerance among_
_peoples and nations; and the peaceful resolution of conflict”._

###### 2.3.4 Emergencies and Natural Disasters

Not all emergencies constitute a national security concern and are well provided for
within emergency planning fora. However, emergencies can occur that have the
potential to cause serious and protracted disruption to the functioning of a state and
adversely affect its citizens. These could include severe weather events, pandemics or
other natural disasters.

The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, was adopted by 187


-----

Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR), held in Sendai, Japan from 14-18 March 2015. The
Sendai Framework is the global blueprint for disaster risk reduction up to 2030.

###### 2.3.5 Espionage

Espionage, in the form of the clandestine activities of intelligence officers working on
behalf of other states is a threat to national security. Such activity may involve cultivating
sources with a view to gaining confidential information. It may also involve attempting
to influence policy inappropriately in certain areas to the advantage of the country of
origin of the intelligence officer; to obtain confidential sensitive industrial secrets or to
source “dual use goods”[22] for military purposes. Efforts by states to acquire restricted
materials or knowledge are sophisticated, often with several layers of deception in
order to camouflage the intended end user and circumvent sanctions.

###### 2.3.6 Transnational Organised Crime

The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime[23] has estimated that in 2009, transnational
organised crime generated $870 billion, an amount equivalent to 1.5% of global GDP
and close to 7% of the world’s export of merchandise. There are many activities
that can be categorised as transnational organised crime including: drug smuggling,
smuggling of migrants, human trafficking, money laundering and cybercrime as well
as counterfeiting activities. While organised crime is a global threat, its effects can be
felt locally. The adverse effects of such activities, for example, drug addiction, are well

documented and have caused significant suffering in societies throughout the world.

###### 2.3.7 Unknown Future Threats or Strategic Shocks

The future security environment cannot be predicted with certainty. Within the category
of future threats there are those which at present are unknown. As such, there are gaps
in our knowledge – gaps that we cannot yet identify or quantify. Genuine surprises
tend to arise from this category, often in the form of strategic shocks which have
system-wide or transnational impact. That which may seem remote today, can quickly
emerge as an immediate threat to the State’s security interests. The experience of 11
September 2001 provided a stark example of this uncertainty.

Subsequent chapters include consideration of how best to meet the challenge of
identifying, mitigating and managing strategic shocks. This will provide the State with
the preparedness and agility to respond when new information, emergent threats or a
strategic shock requires it.

##### 2.4  Geopolitical Environment Assessment

Conflict and tensions in Eastern Europe, the Middle East, Asia, Africa and elsewhere
will continue to challenge international peace and security. Following a period of
apparent stability, new and serious conflicts have erupted adjacent to the EU which
has challenged perceptions about the stability of the broader European region. The
suddenness of recent crises has once again highlighted the unpredictability of the
security environment. This has reignited concerns that have not been seen since the
end of the Cold War.

22 Materials with an innocent application but which could be put to possible military use.

23 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (2011) Estimating Illicit Financial Flows Resulting from Drug Trafficking and Other Transnational


-----

Ireland is currently assessed as low. However, any potential conflicts affecting member
states of the EU presents serious concerns for Ireland and the future outlook is likely
to remain unpredictable in the coming years. Uncertainty over the future shape of the
external environment, with the continued evolution of non-conventional hybrid threats,
remains a concern.

###### 2.4.1 Europe

Tensions have arisen in the European neighbourhood within and between some
states which were formerly part of the Soviet Union. Russia has sought to re-assert
its influence over these states. Certain of these states have sought greater integration
with the West and others have moved to strengthen links with Russia. The conflict
between Russia and Georgia in 2008 and the conflict that has emerged in Eastern
Ukraine in 2014, have illustrated the potential for the escalation of military confrontation
in the region.

In the Western Balkans, the efforts of the international community have contributed to
the ongoing stability. However, some difficulties remain which need to be addressed,
building on the security achieved so far.

###### 2.4.2 The Middle East and North Africa

The situation in the Middle East is expected to remain volatile for the foreseeable future
and it is reasonable to conclude that current conflicts have little chance of reaching
a quick resolution. The protracted Israeli-Palestinian conflict will continue to fuel


-----

The security situation in Syria, Iraq and Libya and the strength of extremist groups in
each country are also likely to play a major part in the evolution of the transnational
terrorist threat over the next ten years. The number of foreign fighters from all parts of
the world, currently operating in that region, makes it likely that new terrorist groups
and networks will be formed. These groups continue to have a destabilising effect on
Iraq and this trend is likely to continue. There are also concerns that the EU nationals
who have already engaged in jihad in Syria and Iraq may contribute to the evolution of
the transnational terrorist threat to EU nations.

The instability arising from the recent uprisings in North Africa and the Middle East is likely
to continue for some time. This will fuel migration, as recently seen in the Mediterranean,
and the increasing risk of marginalisation of ethnic or religious minorities. The failure
to satisfy the ‘Arab spring generation’ has in many cases resulted in a tightening or
closing down of political space for civil society and advocates of democratic change.
It may also contribute to a potential growth in support for radical groups. A range of
governance failures will also exacerbate security issues in the coming years leading to
increased risks associated with ungoverned spaces. Indeed, this trend is already visible
in the region.

###### 2.4.3 Sub-Saharan Africa and the Great Lakes Region

Sub-Saharan Africa will continue to be one of the world’s least stable regions. The area
has suffered from corruption and weak governance issues, failing democracy, poverty
and organised crime such as piracy. The roots of this instability are complex as is any
potential solution. Separatists and violent extremist movements have flourished in this
environment and a further growth in extremism is likely to be apparent over the next
ten years. Countries such as Mali, Sudan, Nigeria and the Central African Republic
already have significant issues with extremist groups.

Competition for resources is also likely to fuel low-level regional conflict, particularly in
the Great Lakes area of Africa.

###### 2.4.4 Central and Southern Asian Region

Weak governance structures and an increasing threat from non-state actors will continue
to threaten the stability of the Central and South Asian region. The development by
North Korea of nuclear weapons and long-range missiles also has concerns for the
Asian region and further afield. Economic growth and increased military spending,
coupled with territorial disputes are also a cause for further concern.

##### 2.5  Domestic Environment Assessment

###### 2.5.1 Domestic Terrorism

The Good Friday Agreement has delivered a stable peace process that commands
overwhelming cross community support. Nonetheless, there is a real and persistent
threat from groups who are prepared to use violence in order to oppose democracy
and peace. Self appointed so-called ‘dissident’ republican groups remain intent on
disrupting the progress which has been achieved. There are ongoing reviews of the
threat assessment arising from the activities of these groups taking into account
evidence of amalgamation and co-operation between the various groups. Whilst
the threat from these groups to this State remains low, it is still classed as severe in


-----

Ireland. This State has a responsibility to counter any such activities.

###### 2.5.2 Organised Crime

Some security risks that in the past were mainly associated with subversive
paramilitaries are now also associated with criminal gangs. This includes the use of
improvised explosive devices (IED’s) by criminals within the State.

Organised crime groups (both domestic and international) are establishing networks
and connections with paramilitary groups, whose activities are being funded through
organised criminal activity including excise fraud. Such fraud includes the smuggling
and sale of illicit tobacco/cigarettes and alcohol, as well as the laundering, distribution
and sale of oil and diesel. Human trafficking and drug smuggling also connects domestic
and international criminals.

###### 2.5.3 International Terrorism

The threat to Ireland as a target of international terrorism remains under constant
review, taking into account developing security threats including identified common
risks that arise for western democracies generally. The experiences in the USA on the
11 September 2001 and subsequently in Madrid 2004, London 2005, Glasgow 2007,
Stockholm 2010, Norway 2011, Brussels 2015, Paris 2015 and Tunisia 2015, not only
provide stark examples of this uncertainty, but clearly indicate that these attacks might
inspire subsequent plots. The experience in other European countries has shown that
the threat level can escalate rapidly and the source and intensity of that threat can
differ. A threat can also emerge suddenly as a result of factors that lie outside the
control of Government. Events such as these are a continuing concern.

In common with its European partners, Ireland is particularly concerned with the risk
posed by persons travelling to certain conflict zones and the potential threat when
they return. European citizens, including some from this State, have travelled to train
and fight on the side of extremist groups in Syria and Iraq. There is also concern
regarding the process of radicalisation and there are a range of influences, including
the internet, which can enable this process. This process can lead to a potential threat
of self radicalised individuals acting alone – often referred to as “solo terrorism” or
“lone wolves”. In addition, Ireland has a responsibility to seek to prevent transnational
terrorist groups from using the State as a refuge or as a base from which to direct their
activities against targets in other countries.

Ireland has always engaged actively, through the EU, UN and other international bodies
in crisis management and in tackling the root causes of instability. This proactive
approach mitigates security risks in the international environment, which is in Ireland’s
interest. UN and UN-mandated missions, including military missions, are among the
instruments used by the international community in the collective security response.
Active engagement by Ireland in this collective response can, on occasion, lead to an
increase in the threat to Ireland directly or by association, without however, significantly
altering the general security environment that Ireland faces.

###### 2.5.4 Maritime Domain and the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Security of Offshore Infrastructure

Being an island, many of the risks and threats listed in the EU Maritime Security Strategy
are relevant to Ireland’s maritime domain. This includes threats to Ireland’s economic


-----

and destroy marine habitats.

Drilling for oil and gas exploration in Irish waters is expected to increase over the
coming decade. The development of off-shore renewable energy technology will
lead to an increased focus on maritime based energy systems in the coming years.
The future development of infrastructure, necessary to produce oil and gas or harvest
renewable energy from wind, wave and tidal sources, needs to be monitored. Whilst
the current threat to existing infrastructure is assessed as low, the security challenges
that could be posed in the event of a change in the threat assessment will also need
to be continuously reviewed.

###### 2.5.5 Cyber Domain

Ireland, like most of Europe, has a highly developed infrastructure that is, in most cases,
almost entirely dependent on information and communication technologies (ICT). Critical
national infrastructure such as energy, water, social welfare, telecommunications,
banking and healthcare are dependent on ICT not just to operate effectively, but to
operate at all. The cyber threat exists for government and public utilities as well as for
commercial entities and individuals.

###### 2.5.6 Natural Disasters

Our geographic position does not pre-dispose us to the same level of risk of natural
disasters as many other countries. However, the effects of climate change are leading
to changes in weather patterns and there is an increased probability that severe weather
events such as flooding could become more common-place in Ireland.

The possibility of a pandemic remains an ongoing concern with the potential to cause
serious disruption to society. Animal infectious diseases such as Foot and Mouth
disease also have the potential to cause significant economic loss.

##### 2.6  Policy Implications

The threats set out in this chapter require a broad policy response with policy lead roles
resting in a variety of government departments and agencies. Defence policy is one
aspect of this broader policy response. The following chapters focus on the role that
defence policy plays within this framework, both in a lead and a supporting role.


-----

-----

# 3


-----

### Chapter 3 | National Security  Defence Policy Response


##### 3.1  Policy Context

As well as encompassing Ireland’s landmass, the State extends to Ireland’s territorial
waters and territorial airspace. In addition, Ireland has certain sovereign rights that
extend some 200 miles off-shore (our exclusive economic zone) and others that extend
further to the extended continental shelf[24]. Ireland has social, political, economic and
cultural values and interests that define us as a nation and that we wish to promote
and secure. Ireland also has a world view, and engages proactively in addressing the
collective global challenges of preserving peace and security and defending human
rights.

The Government must ensure that there is appropriate planning and capability provision
to mitigate national security risks and defend sovereign interests, and to respond
effectively to those incidents which could have a significant adverse impact on the
State and its citizens. The preceding chapter highlighted that the range of security
threats with the potential to adversely affect national security has broadened, and
encompasses threats in the domestic, regional and global spheres and furthermore,
that these can be extremely fast changing and unpredictable. This chapter considers
the defence policy response to these national security challenges. It does so having
regard to discrete policy considerations, i.e. the requirement to provide for the defence
of the State from armed aggression, our commitment to collective security, in particular
through the UN and EU and domestic security requirements – including large scale
emergencies. The domestic and international security spheres have a broad range of
policy actors. Accordingly, there is a significant cross cutting policy dimension to this
chapter.

##### 3.2  Ongoing Threat Assessment

An accurate and timely assessment of changes in the domestic, regional and global
security environment is a key requirement to underpin the State’s security response.
Intelligence is a key contributor to these assessments. The Government have
considered the current cross-cutting arrangements in place.

In this context, the Government are briefed as appropriate by relevant Ministers and
decisions sought as necessary on a range of issues relating to national security. The
National Security Committee considers threats in a confidential manner and on an
ongoing basis. The National Security Committee does not have political representation.
It is chaired by the Secretary General to the Government and comprises the Secretary
General of the Department of Defence, the Chief of Staff of the Defence Forces, the
Secretary General of the Department of Justice and Equality, the Garda Commissioner,
and the Secretary General of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. It is primarily
concerned with monitoring high level security issues and ensuring that the Taoiseach
and Government are advised of these and the responses to them. The Committee
receives threat assessments from the Garda Commissioner and the Chief of Staff.
In addition to these meetings, the members liaise on an ongoing basis to monitor


-----

international arena. In addition, the Government Taskforce on Emergency Planning
reviews risks relating to terrorism and receives threat assessments in this regard from
An Garda Síochána. It also reviews risks relating to cyber security.

As a necessary foundation for an effective defence policy, the importance of wholeof-government approaches to the security of the State in its international and national
dimensions deserves special recognition. This is given a particular focus through the
existing arrangements. The cross-cutting and inter-linked nature of defence policy
development and implementation is a continuing theme. It is important that the
approach to the assessment of security and associated arrangements governing this
are kept under review. Any necessary measures to enhance these will be taken in the
light of consideration of developments and approaches at national and international
levels.

Military Intelligence will continue to provide regular security assessments to the
Minister for Defence and the Department of Defence in respect of state security and
the safety and security of the Defence Forces’ personnel deployed overseas on peace
support operations. It will also continue to liaise with An Garda Síochána as appropriate
in relation to matters of common concern.

##### 3.3  Defence of the State from Armed Aggression

The previous chapter assessed the probability of a conventional military attack on
Ireland’s territory as low. However, events in the Caucasus in 2008 and more recently in
Ukraine have challenged perceptions about the stability of the broader European region.
This has ignited concerns not seen since the ending of the Cold War and highlighted
the unpredictability of the security environment. In light of the security assessment,
the Government view the requirement to defend the State from a conventional military
attack as a contingency i.e. the requirement to do so is unlikely, but possible.

Ireland is fully committed to and supportive of the United Nations based international
rules system as the principal legitimate means of defusing and responding to interstate conflicts. Article 51 of the UN Charter enshrines the right of members of the UN
to engage in self-defence. It states:

_“Nothing in the present Charter shall impair the inherent right of individual or_
_collective self-defence if an armed attack occurs against a Member of the United_
_Nations, until the Security Council has taken measures necessary to maintain_
_international peace and security. Measures taken by members in the exercise of_
_this right of self-defence shall be immediately reported to the Security Council and_
_shall not in any way affect the authority and responsibility of the Security Council_
_under the present Charter to take at any time such action as it deems necessary in_
_order to maintain or restore international peace and security.”_

The Government have decided that there is a continued requirement to retain armed
forces in order to exercise the right of self-defence, should this be required. The
Government’s recent review of foreign policy confirmed that Ireland will continue to
maintain a policy of military neutrality which is characterised by non-membership of
military alliances and non-participation in common or mutual defence arrangements. In
light of this policy, Ireland must adopt a posture of preparedness and, in the event of an
attack, Ireland must be prepared to act alone until the United Nations Security Council
has taken appropriate measures.

A key challenge in framing a defence policy response is to balance expenditure on


-----

being in a position to respond comprehensively if and when required to do so. This is
compounded by the fact that the generation of military capabilities can have significant
lead times and that supplies of military equipment can become scarce during periods
of high tension or conflict. However, maintaining military capabilities for a worst case
scenario on an ongoing basis would be prohibitively expensive. For this reason, prudent
defence planning involves maintaining an appropriate level of capability that can be
enhanced.

In this context, this White Paper confirms a continuing commitment to relevant
defence measures as an ongoing critical public policy requirement and as one of the
primary responsibilities of Government. The detailed defence policy requirements,
the associated defence roles and the essential defence capabilities are outlined in this
White Paper. The scope and scale of military capabilities required for this purpose will
also be kept under review having regard to the level of threat identified in ongoing
security assessments.

##### 3.4  Global and Regional Security

###### 3.4.1 Policy Context

As outlined in the previous chapters, the threats to international peace and national
security are very different to those considered when the last White Paper on Defence
was published in 2000. These threats are complex, multi-dimensional, interrelated
and transnational in nature. Events in the international sphere can have significant
reverberations in Ireland and the distinction between “internal” and “external”


-----

Ireland has always had a principled interest in global and regional peace and security;
however growing interconnectedness means that our interest is also increasingly
practical in nature “Supporting greater peace, security and development is also in our
_interest as a small country with an open economy in an ever more interconnected_
_and uncertain world[25].”_

Ireland has strategic interests, including economic and trade interests, which depend
on a rules-based world order, a stable and secure global economy, and the free flow of
goods and services. Therefore, from a regional and global perspective and taking into
account our membership of the EU, it is in Ireland’s interest to ensure that the countries
on the borders of the EU, and beyond the European neighbourhood are stable, secure
and prosperous. This allows Ireland, through the EU, to deepen and sustain democracy,
the rule of law and respect for human rights in the wider EU neighbourhood through,
amongst other things, participating in overseas missions that in turn make Ireland
more safe and secure. In the area of international peace and security, Ireland also has
commitments under the United Nations Standby Arrangements System (UNSAS) to
provide personnel in support of UN mandated operations. To address these interests
and obligations, Ireland must have well-trained, capable and interoperable military forces
which are deployable overseas in support of crisis management and humanitarian
operations.

It is now acknowledged that no state acting alone can address the entirety of these
new and emerging security challenges. They require a co-ordinated, collaborative
and integrated collective response, drawing on a wide range of policy instruments at
national level and through multilateral collective security arrangements.

###### 3.4.2 Multilateralism and Collective Security

A feature of Ireland’s policy response to these security challenges is continued strong
support for the multilateral system of collective security represented by the UN and
of the primary role of the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace
and security. In recent years, the UN has increasingly mandated regional organisations
such as the EU, the African Union and NATO to manage operations on its behalf and
under its authority.

Deployment of Defence Forces’ personnel on peace support missions will continue
to be in accordance with relevant legislation, which contains the requirement for
Government, Dáil and UN approval, known as the “triple-lock”. Under the provisions of
the Defence (Amendment) Act 2006, personnel may also be deployed for such reasons
as training and humanitarian operations under the authority of the Government.

The EU is now a major player on the world stage with an increasing capacity to
influence the international security environment using all of the instruments at its
disposal, including economic, diplomatic, political and military instruments, known as
the “comprehensive approach”. Ireland advocates a strong EU contribution to UN
peacekeeping and crisis management. Within the framework of multilateralism and
collective security and in support of international peace and security, Ireland will continue
to contribute to a range of cooperative and collaborative security arrangements within
the EU, the UN, the OSCE and bilaterally with other states.

It is the intention over the period of this White Paper to develop, in concert with
partners and other like-minded states, initiatives that are important to Ireland in


-----

with our principles and values. Full participation in the Common Security and Defence
Policy of the EU (CSDP) linked to our active engagement in the UN and supporting EU
and UN co-operation and collaboration are key to this. Ireland will continue to engage
proactively with the UN, the EU, the OSCE and NATO PfP and other states with a view
to developing and deepening relationships to this end.

###### 3.4.3 Common Foreign and Security Policy

The UN remains the essential framework for the maintenance of international peace
and security. In addition, the EU’s Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) has
become central to the achievement of many of Ireland’s collective security objectives.
The Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) is an integral part of the CFSP.
Article 42 of the EU Treaty provides that EU member states provide the Union with an
operational capacity to undertake missions outside the EU for peace-keeping, conflict
prevention and strengthening international security in accordance with the principles
of the UN Charter. Defence and security in the EU is generally seen as a collective and
shared responsibility. While many EU member states are also members of NATO,
there is full acceptance across the EU that a sovereign state has the right to choose its
own defence policy, which in Ireland’s case is one of military neutrality.

The EU’s CSDP is an integral element of CFSP. The EU now regards military capacity
and “expeditionary potential” – i.e. the capacity to deploy to civilian and military
operations overseas - as a primary area of development within CFSP/CSDP. If
Ireland wishes to safeguard its own security, defend and protect its strategic
interests, exert influence within the EU and continue to play a meaningful role


-----

Ireland in the Union’s CSDP is essential. In keeping with Ireland’s support for the
multilateral system of collective security, Ireland will continue to play a full and
active part in all facets of the EU’s CSDP in accordance with nationally determined
values and principles. Ireland will support greater co-operation among the security
actors within the EU in the context of their specific areas of competence and in
accordance with the EU Treaty provisions.

###### 3.4.4 EU Maritime Security Strategy and EUMSS Action Plan

The EU Maritime Security Strategy (EUMSS) was adopted by Council in June
2014 and the Action Plan to implement the strategy was agreed in December
2014. The EUMSS was developed jointly by the Council, member states, the
Commission and the High Representative and involved all relevant stakeholders
and actors both at EU and at national level. It respects member states’ internal
organisation and competences (regulated by national laws) as well as EU and
national policies and legislation and builds on initiatives by member states and
relevant EU bodies and agencies. The Action Plan is made up of five workstrands;
(1) External action; (2) Maritime awareness, Surveillance and information sharing;
(3) Capability development; (4) Risk management, Protection of critical maritime
Infrastructure and Crisis response; and, (5) Maritime security research and
innovation, education and training. Given our geographic position and maritime
interests, Ireland has a very significant stake in the matters comprehended by the
EUMSS. The White Paper confirms Ireland’s strong support for the EUMSS and
its Action Plan. Ireland will continue to support the internal as well as the external
dimension of maritime security and will continue to stress the importance of the
global aspect of the Action Plan.

###### 3.4.5 Peace Support and Crisis Management Operations

Given the importance that Ireland places on collective security and multilateralism,
the Government are fully committed to contributing to peace support and crisis
management operations. This is a practical demonstration of Ireland’s support to
the UN. This support is not without cost; eighty five members of the Defence
Forces have died while serving overseas in the service of international peace and
one Irish soldier remains missing in action since 1981.

The degree to which Ireland is prepared to share the burden of EU co-operation
and solidarity in the security and defence field, in particular through contributions
to military operations and capabilities, significantly influences perceptions of
Ireland’s credibility and commitment as a member state within the Union. It also
contributes to maintaining our credibility in the UN which is increasingly relying
on regional organisations such as the EU and NATO to provide UN missions with
key enablers, rapid response forces and higher-end military capabilities.

Peace support and crisis management operations have evolved beyond simply
monitoring or imposing peace agreements and separation of forces. This has
required the development of new responses as traditional threats have morphed
into more complicated asymmetric and hybrid formats. There is an increasing
requirement for and emphasis on the “comprehensive approach”. The provision of
modern, professional and interoperable military capabilities for crisis management
operations remains a key policy requirement. However, the rapidly changing threat
environment is demanding a more complex and co-ordinated response across a


-----

cooperation is also an important element in humanitarian response operations
and the UN Office for the Co-ordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA) has
the leading role on co-ordination in this regard.

Such a multifaceted response requires engagement across the whole spectrum
of Government policy, but also a deeper ongoing development of defence
policy initiatives and the delivery of defence capability involving both civil and
military defence personnel. Over the course of the White Paper, the Defence
Organisation will develop both civil and military capabilities and capacity across
the full spectrum of activity including defence policy and administration so as
to support the comprehensive approach to crisis management, post conflict
stabilisation and Security Sector Reform (SSR). It is also the intention over the
period of this White Paper to develop in concert with partner and other likeminded states joint initiatives to this end.

In addition, over the course of the White Paper, Ireland’s declared contribution to
UNSAS and the EU Headline Goal will be reviewed in light of the changing security
environment and the ongoing modernisation and transformation of Defence
Forces’ capabilities. This review will also consider the potential deployability
of the full range of Defence Forces’ capabilities including Army, Air Corps and
Naval Service capabilities and assets on peace support and crisis management
operations.

###### 3.4.6 Bilateral Relationships

While at all times retaining national sovereignty in decision making, the
development of more formal bilateral relations with other states, is becoming an
increasing feature of Ireland’s security, defence and international peacekeeping
and crisis management arrangements. In this regard, joint deployments of a
contingent with Finland to UNIFIL, with Sweden to Liberia, with the Netherlands
to EUFOR Chad, and more recently, with the UK in Mali and Sierra Leone,
demonstrate the evolving nature of bilateral peacekeeping. It is also a feature of
our engagement in CSDP, where many member states share common interests
and perspectives.

Consistent with overall foreign and defence policy, the Department of Defence
will continue to engage in developing and deepening bilateral relations with
potential like-minded partners so as to secure Ireland’s position in current and
future international crisis management operations. Over the lifetime of the White
Paper, options for building on existing bilateral relations through staff exchanges,
exploring the option of Defence Attaché appointments to key EU member
states/third countries where appropriate, developing bilateral Memoranda of
Understanding (MOUs) within the defence sphere, and more regular civil/military
staff to staff engagements, will be progressed.

###### 3.4.7 Interoperability and Capability Development

Positive and proactive participation in the evolving structures, institutions and
arrangements of CSDP, in CSDP operations, and in particular in the European
Defence Agency (EDA), is essential from a defence perspective to the
maintenance of Ireland’s security and defence interests. Participation in CSDP,
the European Defence Agency (EDA) and NATO PfP is consistent with Ireland’s
core values and is positive from Ireland’s point of view It is also essential to


-----

the continued development of Ireland’s ability to participate in the full
range of UN mandated missions, and to the Defence Forces and the wider
defence capability development, modernisation and transformation processes. It
is important to our national interest that we participate proactively and positively
in these institutions so that we can continue to influence developments and
secure support on substantive issues which are important to the maintenance of
Ireland’s national position on security and defence matters.

The changing nature of peace support and crisis management operations, and
particularly the role that EU member states play in supporting the UN, has led
to a demand for multinational peacekeeping forces that are fully integrated in
accordance with recognised international standards for interoperability. These
developments are leading EU member states, including other neutrals, to coordinate more closely and to engage more pro-actively in co-operative and
collaborative arrangements within the EU and with NATO. There is increasing cooperation and sharing among EU and NATO members in order to retain European
military capabilities not alone in terms of national defence capacity but also for
international crisis management operations. Over the period of this White Paper,
Ireland will continue to participate in NATO’s PfP with a view to ensuring that the
Defence Forces have the necessary interoperable capabilities to participate in
modern, demanding peacekeeping operations alongside other European military
forces, in particular those from like-minded states. This will include engagement
with the Connected Forces Initiative (CFI), the Planning and Review Process
(PARP) and the Operational Capabilities Concept (OCC)


-----

sophistication have created challenges for EU member states in developing
and maintaining the military capabilities required for peace support and crisis
management operations. There is a growing need for Ireland to co-operate
bilaterally and multilaterally with partners, on a relatively permanent basis, to
pool and share equipment and resources and to train and plan together in order
to deliver the requisite combined military capabilities for crisis management
operations. To this end, pooling and sharing opportunities to deliver additional
capability/capacity for Defence Forces’ operations will be examined, with a
particular focus on the training area.

Ireland has benefited to date from participation in a number of EDA capability
development projects, which are subject to Government and Dáil approval.
Opportunities will continue to be identified to expand Ireland’s participation in
multi-national capability development projects within the framework of the EDA
in support of Defence Forces’ operations, capacity and capability.

###### 3.4.8 Women in Peacekeeping

In May 2015, on a visit to Ireland, the Secretary General of the United Nations
acknowledged and expressed his appreciation for Ireland’s significant contribution
to international peace-keeping over the last six decades. In commenting on
the multifaceted nature of peacekeeping challenges, he observed the value in
some situations of being able to call on female peacekeepers. He requested that
consideration be given to the contribution of women soldiers to UN operations
and that Ireland might factor this into its approach to such operations.

UNSCR 1325 highlights the vital role that women can play in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution, peace building, post-conflict reconstruction, reform and
governance. This, and subsequent UN Women, Peace and Security (WPS)
resolutions, call on nations to ensure that a gender perspective is included in the
planning and conduct of all military operations. This is an element of an agenda
which the White Paper takes forward in a number of ways. The comprehensive
approach recognises the necessity of tailoring approaches to particular mission
needs and the need for a life-cycle approach to providing interventions and
supports consistent with the particular requirements. In addition, the approach
to training and education seeks to enable responses across the spectrum of
requirements including dealing with gender-based issues.

In the continuing development of the State’s approach to overseas peace support
and in response to the Secretary General’s comments, the Department will
engage with other stakeholders involved in the matters raised by the Secretary
General, including the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Department
of Justice and Equality and An Garda Síochána to explore the contribution of
gender focused measures, particularly in relation to the appropriate deployment
of female personnel.

###### 3.4.9 A Changing World

New or revised global, regional and/or national strategies may require a
refocusing of policies. A new European Foreign and Security Policy Strategy or
the development of further EU regional strategies, such as that already published
relating to the Sahel, may give rise to different focal points, requirements and
responses In the same vein the current review by the United Nations of UN


-----

UN missions operate.

Ireland will contribute to the development of these strategies and policies in order
to ensure that our values and interests are fully considered. This will require clear
articulation of a positive and logical policy approach based on active participation
in the UN, the EU’s CSDP in all its dimensions, the OSCE, NATO’s Partnership for
Peace and other regional organisations and bilateral initiatives.

Ireland’s defence policy, capacity and capabilities will continue to be developed in
a manner such that we have the agility to respond to changing strategic defence
and associated civil and military requirements over the lifetime of the White Paper.
There will be an increased focus on enhancing the skills and expertise available
to address emerging defence and security developments in a pro-active manner.

###### 3.4.10 Development of New Institute for Peace Support and Leadership Training at the Curragh

The Government have authorised an evaluation of a new concept involving the
potential development of a new Institute for Peace Support and Leadership
Training. It is foreseen that the new institute would have international standing
and contribute to the overall development of knowledge and experience in the
areas of peace support and conflict resolution.

The potential for the new approach, particularly in the context of 2016
commemorations, draws inspiration from Ireland’s unique historical experience.
This experience grounded in the development of the Irish State, with our militarily
neutral status, along with our contributions in the international domain, particularly
as a member of the United Nations, is a strong foundation to the approach.

The entry of Ireland into the United Nations in 1955 was a pivotal moment for
the status of the country in the international community. Ireland’s role in the UN
resonates strongly and positively with Irish citizens. It had a very considerable
impact on Ireland’s public administration. For the Defence Forces also it had very
significant implications, as it considerably developed the roles being undertaken.
Ireland has had a continual involvement in UN Peacekeeping Operations from
1958. In the twenty first century, as part of Ireland’s international engagement, the
Defence Forces have participated in UN missions as well as those authorised by
the UN and undertaken on its behalf by the EU and NATO, in peace enforcement,
peacekeeping, disarmament, truce supervision and/or observation, military
training and education, international humanitarian law and human rights law
missions.

The Military College in the Defence Forces Training Centre is the primary education
and training institution of the Defence Forces. It has a number of constituent
schools including the United Nations Training School Ireland, which was founded
in 1993. The Military College and the United Nations Training School Ireland work
in conjunction with all of the other schools in the Defence Forces and currently
has formal partnerships with the National University of Ireland Maynooth in
respect of key aspects of Officer Education and Institute of Technology, Carlow
in respect of key aspects of Non Commissioned Officer education. Education
and training is conducted to the highest international standards with a focus on
continuous improvement.

The White Paper has described the multifaceted nature of the security


-----

being a strong contributor to the system of collective security and the world order
through its active participation in various international fora but particularly as a
member of the United Nations. The need for comprehensive approaches to the
resolution of conflicts and establishment of long term stability in areas of conflict
has been outlined.

The approach to be developed under the ambit of this new initiative is to forge
a new uniquely Irish contribution which draws from our own experience but
capitalises on wider experience and knowledge and international engagement.
The approach recognises that solutions sought in the area of conflict resolution
and peace support cannot be addressed by military means alone and requires
the fusion of civil and military capabilities to comprehensively prepare for conflict
resolution in the twenty first century.

In authorising this examination, the Government foresee the proposal advancing
with the following objectives:

  - To build on the educational partnerships already in place, as appropriate.

  - To forge new educational partnerships with the world’s leading universities
and academic institutions.

  - To develop partnerships with relevant institutes and other appropriate
organisations including strategic leaders in industry.

  - To capitalise on the capabilities of other relevant schools in the Defence
Forces.

The focus of the Institute would be to address national and international needs


-----

in security education and region building in a manner encompassing all
relevant actors engaged in generating a comprehensive approach to conflict
resolution, conflict prevention and peace-building. Implicit in the Institution’s
concept is the retention of inherent flexibility and adaptability, thus while there
would be a core staff, most programme contributors would come from leading
institutions across the world, on a needs basis. The majority of the Institution’s
faculty would be a network. The Institute can therefore seek to keep pace with the
changing nature of conflict by delivering focused programmes with the relevant
partner at the appropriate time. Close co-ordination with the United Nations, EU,
OSCE and other multilateral bodies is essential.

The output of the Institute would be valuable to all of those involved in conflict
resolution and region/nation building from a policy perspective, a practitioner
perspective, a support perspective and academic research. This would include
but is not limited to military personnel, politicians, diplomats, police, civil servants,
non-governmental organisation personnel, business leaders, institutes, academia,
etc. It might be expected that educational courses would be delivered at the
Military College and the United Nations Training School Ireland or at the facilities
of a partner and would be delivered by the organiser or a combination of partners.

Work on the concept will be developed over the next 12 months with a view to
its initial shape being showcased during 2016.


-----

##### y pp

The Department of Justice and Equality and An Garda Síochána have primary
responsibility for the internal security of the State. An Garda Síochána is a
predominantly unarmed police force and as a result the Defence Forces provide,
on request, supports in aid to the civil power (ATCP) of an ongoing and contingent
nature. Historically, the provision of this support has been of critical importance in
maintaining the security of the State.

In certain circumstances, the Government may direct the Defence Forces to
provide security details, as evidenced by the armed guards provided by the
Defence Forces at both Government Buildings and at Portlaoise Prison, which
arise from Government direction rather than an ATCP request from An Garda
Síochána.

Other departments and agencies also have domestic security responsibilities e.g.
Revenue has responsibilities to combat the smuggling of illicit narcotics and other
contraband; the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport has responsibilities
relating to port and airport security; the Department of Communications, Energy
and Natural Resources has lead responsibilities relating to cyber security; the
Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine and the Sea Fisheries Protection
Authority have certain responsibilities relating to the security of maritime
resources.

The review of submissions received in response to the 2013 Green Paper
on Defence, and the subsequent process of consultation with stakeholders,
including relevant government departments and An Garda Síochána, considered
future domestic security requirements. There were no indicators of significant
impending change in the domestic security environment and this is reflected in
the security assessment in Chapter 2. However, the experience in other countries
has also shown that the domestic security environment can change rapidly.

This section considers defence inputs to domestic security including supports
to An Garda Síochána and supports to those other departments and agencies
with security responsibilities as well as areas where Defence has specific
responsibilities.

###### 3.5.1 ATCP Supports 

Army, Air Corps and Naval Service capabilities will continue to be made available,
on request, to assist An Garda Síochána. The Government are committed to
the continued provision of these important supports. The principal duties are
described below.

The Defence Forces will continue to provide security services to the Central
Bank, the cost of which is recouped by the Department of Defence. The Defence
Forces will also continue, on request, to provide prisoner escorts to and from the
courts and hospitals, hospital guard patrols and will also continue to provide ATCP
support to An Garda Síochána in relation to security duties at Shannon Airport.

Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) teams will continue to be available to
respond, on a 24/7 basis, to requests made by An Garda Síochána for assistance
in dealing with suspect explosive devices, unstable chemicals, to provide postblast analysis, and for removal of old ordnance. The Naval Service and its dive
teams will continue to operate in support of An Garda Síochána when requested


-----

A dedicated Garda Air Support Unit (GASU) service has been operating from
Casement Aerodrome, Baldonnel since September 1997. This very effective
service will continue to be operated by An Garda Síochána and the Air Corps in
accordance with arrangements formalised by way of a Service Level Agreement
(SLA). The support provided by the Air Corps to the GASU includes provision
of hangar facilities and pilots for all GASU aircraft and for the servicing and
maintenance of the fixed wing Defender 4000 aircraft. The arrangements in place
for the servicing and maintenance of the Defender aircraft will be reviewed in the
coming years as changes occur to the current composition of the GASU fleet.

An Garda Siochána have sought the assistance of the Defence Forces in relation
to security arrangements for certain visits by Heads of State/VIPs. The Defence
Forces have capabilities that include but are not limited to the provision of
security cordons (land, maritime and air), mobile and static patrols, check-points,
quick reaction forces, Ground Based Air Defence (GBAD), specialist engineer
search teams, diving teams, Explosive Ordnance Disposal Teams and a Crowd
Riot Control (CRC) capability. Future VIP visits or the hosting of major events in
Ireland may result in some or all of these capabilities being requested as ATCP
support by An Garda Síochána.

Although it has been quite some time since the Defence Forces have been
required to respond to a riot or incident of violent disorder in a domestic setting,
the Defence Forces will continue to train for and be in a position to respond to
requests for assistance from An Garda Síochána, if required.

###### 3.5.2 Government Directed Supports

The Defence Forces’ presence at Portlaoise Prison dates back to 1973 when
the then Government authorised the placing of an armed guard at any prison
accommodating subversives. This direction was updated by the current
Government to take account of the changing profile of the prisoner population
at Portlaoise Prison. The Defence Forces will continue to provide this important
security mission. The Defence Forces will continue to provide armed 24/7 security
support to An Garda Síochána at Government Buildings, including the Leinster
House complex.

###### 3.5.3 Aircraft Hijack Incident

The National Civil Aviation Security Committee (NCASC) is the body responsible
for ensuring compliance with Ireland’s civil aviation security obligations. The
NCASC is chaired by the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport which, in
accordance with the Framework for Major Emergency Management (MEM), has
lead responsibility for the response arrangements to be followed in the event of
an aircraft hijack incident in Ireland.

A sub-group of the NCASC, comprising representatives of a number of
departments and agencies including the Department of Defence and the Defence
Forces, has prepared a national plan for responding to an aircraft hijack incident.
The plan provides that An Garda Síochána is the lead agency for responding to
such an incident and that the Defence Forces will, unless directed otherwise
by Government, have a support role. As a contingency, the Defence Forces
will continue to train for and be in a position to respond effectively to any such
i id


-----

###### g

The Joint Task Force on Drug Interdiction (JTF) was established in 1993 as a
Government measure to improve law enforcement in relation to drugs and
consists of members of An Garda Síochána, Revenue and the Naval Service. The
JTF is brought together when the agencies with primary responsibility in this
area, An Garda Síochána and Revenue, review intelligence received and consider
that a joint operation should be mounted.

The Naval Service is legally empowered under the Criminal Justice Act 1994

[as amended by the Criminal Justice (Illicit Traffic by Sea) Act 2003] to engage
in drug interdiction operations. The Naval Service will continue to support other
departments and agencies with primary responsibility in this area. The Air Corps
will also continue to provide air support if required, and on occasion may be
requested to carry members of Revenue in an observational capacity for the
purposes of monitoring vessels suspected of drug trafficking. The Air Corps
provides an important intelligence gathering capability on the request of the JTF.

Intelligence for such drug interdiction operations is provided by An Garda Síochána
and Revenue, and through the international intelligence centre, the Maritime
Analysis and Operations Centre – Narcotics (MAOC-N), of which Ireland is a
member. MAOC-N is an international co-ordination centre with access to national
tasking agencies. Since being established by seven countries (including Ireland)
in 2007, it has led to a greater focus on intelligence exchange amongst countries
to tackle large drug shipments by sea. An Garda Síochána and Revenue have fulltime officers based at the Centre in Lisbon, whilst Naval Service personnel may
travel to the Centre when requested to do so by the Joint Task Force.

The capabilities that the Defence Forces provide in these areas are very important
because the authorities with direct responsibilities in this area (An Garda
Síochána and Revenue) do not have the operational capabilities for the kind of
maritime interventions that the Defence Forces can provide. This joint agency
approach makes sense from a whole of state viewpoint and it is one to which the
Government remain committed.

###### 3.5.5 Protection of Marine Resources

The plan, “Harnessing our Ocean Wealth”, envisages a substantial increase in
maritime based activity and income over the course of this White Paper. Under
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, a coastal state has
exclusive rights within its exclusive economic zone (EEZ) over fishing (although
all EU member states have transferred their competence for conservation and
management of sea fisheries to the EU), the production of energy from water
and wind, the protection of the marine environment, and the conduct of marine
scientific research. A coastal state also enjoys exclusive sovereign rights to
the recovery of oil and gas from the seabed beneath the EEZ, although this is
governed by the separate legal regime of the continental shelf.

There are a broad range of departments and agencies with responsibilities in
the maritime domain, e.g., An Garda Síochána, Revenue, the Department of
Transport and Tourism (including the Marine Surveyor’s Office), the Department
of Agriculture, Food and the Marine, the Sea Fisheries Protection Authority, the
Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources, the Department
of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the Department of Arts, Heritage and the


-----

these Departments in line with Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) and
Service Level Agreements (SLAs).

As the State’s principal sea-going agency, the Naval Service provides
a unique sea-going capability. The Air Corps also has an effective maritime
surveillance capacity. As the White Paper on Defence (2000) recognised, Naval
Service vessels carry with them unique characteristics as an expression of state
sovereignty and political will at sea and in furthering policy objectives in the
maritime domain.

While conducting their primary day-to-day tasking of providing a fishery protection
service, which it is expected shall continue to account for 90% of scheduled
patrol days, all Naval Service vessels will be multi-tasked in the sense that they
will continue to provide general maritime patrolling and will be in a position to
respond to, for example, an aid to the civil power request, a pollution incident, or
a search and rescue or recovery mission.

###### Fisheries Protection

Ireland’s EEZ [or Exclusive Fishery Limits (EFL)] extends to 200 miles offshore
and covers an area of 132,000 nautical square miles. The Sea-Fisheries Protection
Authority (SFPA) is Ireland’s responsible authority for seafood safety and sea
fisheries protection. The Naval Service is responsible for operating the State’s
Fishery Monitoring Centre (FMC). The day-to-day fishery protection outputs of
the Naval Service and the Air Corps are co-ordinated by the FMC, which is based
in the Naval Headquarters at Haulbowline. Officials from the SFPA contribute to
the work of the FMC.

The Naval Service and the Air Corps provide a range of services to assist the
SFPA in securing an efficient and effective enforcement of fisheries protection
legislation and these services are covered under an SLA. Naval Service and Air
Corps personnel are empowered by statute as Sea Fishery Protection Officers to
carry out inspections at sea and to enforce fisheries legislation and regulation In


-----

the Common Fisheries Policy, Naval Service and Air Corps fisheries protection
operations and priorities are set out in an annual control plan agreed between the
SFPA and the Department of Defence. The Naval Service and the Air Corps will
continue to patrol the entire Irish EEZ and periodically, and as agreed in the annual
control plan, patrol beyond these limits to protect specific fisheries in accordance
with international commitments in the areas of the mid-Atlantic governed by the
North East Atlantic Fisheries Commission [NEAFC].

In the past there has been a strong emphasis on the boarding component of
control, and undoubtedly this deterrent effect will continue to have a value in future.
However, as obligations change in the coming years, there will be an increased
emphasis on risk analysis and targeting of high risk categories. Development and
use of new technological solutions will be particularly important in the context of
the changing control regime, such as the ongoing gradual move from a landing
quota to a catch quota, as traditional methods of at sea control may not be as
effective in terms of bolstering compliance levels. However, this will not lead to a
reduction in the fishery protection efforts of the Air Corps and the Naval Service.

###### Extended Continental Shelf

Under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) the
continental shelf is that part of the seabed over which a coastal state exercises
sovereign rights with regard to the exploration and exploitation of natural
resources including oil and gas deposits as well as other minerals and the biological
resources of the seabed. In international law a coastal state is entitled to a juridical
continental shelf of 200 nautical miles breadth regardless of whether the shelf
physically extends that far, subject only to the same rights of its neighbours.

Where the continental shelf physically extends beyond 200 nautical miles (as
it does in Ireland’s case along the west and south coasts) a state is required by
UNCLOS (Article 76) to make a submission to the Commission on the Limits of
the Continental Shelf (CLCS). This submission sets out the coordinates of the
claimed outer limits of the shelf and is accompanied by technical and scientific
data to support the claim. The Commission assesses the limits and data submitted
by the coastal state and makes recommendations, which are final and binding.

Where the continental shelf has been successfully extended in this way, as in
the area of the Porcupine Bank, the State will continue to undertake appropriate
maritime surveillance. The purpose of this is to guard against the theft of natural
resources from the seabed; unauthorised research of, or exploration for, natural
resources in these locations; unauthorised installations or the laying of pipelines
along unauthorised routes, etc. The Maritime Security Act 2004 empowers the
Naval Service, when acting at the request of An Garda Síochána, to counter
unlawful acts against the safety of maritime navigation and fixed platforms,
encompassing the area of the continental shelf. In order to maintain a capability
to respond if tasked, it will occasionally be necessary for the Naval Service to
deploy to these areas of the extended continental shelf to exercise its capability
to respond to any such deployment request.

Where claims have not yet been settled for other areas of the extended continental
shelf, patrolling by air and naval assets is not a necessary requirement for the
purposes of asserting those sovereign claims; however, patrolling can be used
to demonstrate sovereign intent. When necessary, responsible authorities can


-----

###### 3.5.6  Maritime Co-operation and Co-ordination

There is ongoing and close co-operation between Department of Defence and the
Defence Forces, and the other Departments and agencies with responsibilities in
the maritime area and this has developed and deepened since the publication of
the last White Paper in 2000. This close working relationship is reflected, in the
case of the Irish Coast Guard, in a very comprehensive SLA, which was renewed
in September 2013, and which sets out a very broad schedule of support services
and provides for ongoing review.

Recognising the ever changing maritime environment and technological
developments, particularly in the area of satellite information gathering, further
areas of greater synergy will be explored with departments and agencies with
responsibility in the maritime area during the implementation of the White Paper
in order to ensure the best and most efficient use of all state resources.

In addition, the Department of Defence and the Defence Forces will continue to
be represented on the National Maritime Security Committee. The Department
of Transport, Tourism and Sport, as Chair of this Committee, will be asked to
initiate an examination of maritime security arrangements, having regard to
recent developments. The aim would be to examine the current governance
arrangements with a view to bringing forward recommendations, if required, to
enhance the provision of maritime security within the State’s area of interest.

###### 3.5.7  Port Security

The Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport has responsibility for National
Maritime Safety and Port Security. The Naval Service will continue to assist the
Marine Survey Office in carrying out reviews of port security plans and provision
of advice, in accordance with an SLA, which is in place.

##### 3.6  Emergencies/Crises that threaten National Security

There are certain emergencies/crises that could have the potential to disrupt
the functioning of the State very significantly and/or cause mass casualties.
Emergencies/crises such as these can be considered matters of national security
and examples could include: a major cyber attack that causes disruption to
essential services; a pandemic that causes widespread health problems, resource
shortages or deaths; or other types of natural or man-made disasters.

This section considers the defence policy response to these security issues. There
are two distinct areas, firstly, there is the Defence contribution to emergency
planning and secondly, there are the operational supports that may be provided
to other government departments and agencies with lead responsibilities. Civil
Defence is considered separately in Chapter 9.

###### 3.6.1  Emergency Planning

Following the events of 11 September, 2001, the Government established a Task
Force on Emergency Planning, chaired by the Minister for Defence and assisted
by a newly formed Office of Emergency Planning (OEP).

The Government Task Force on Emergency Planning provides strategic direction
d di i f l i I i h i d b h Mi i f


-----

departments and key public bodies. The Task Force also includes senior officers
of An Garda Síochána and the Defence Forces and senior officials from other key
public authorities, which have a lead or support role in government emergency
planning.

A key aspect of Ireland’s preparations for national level emergencies or crises is
a national risk assessment (NRA) and the ability to manage the risks identified
in order to ensure national, regional and local resilience. In December 2012, the
Government Task Force adopted a National Risk Assessment for Ireland, which
was subsequently noted by Government and submitted to the European Union
as part of the required responses by member states under the EU Civil Protection
Mechanism.

With the introduction of new EU Civil Protection legislation in January 2014,
member states have now been asked to review their national risk assessments
and to provide, to the EU Commission, summaries of their NRAs by the end
of 2015. More importantly, this EU legislation also requires member states to
review their assessments of their national risk management capabilities every
three years, following the completion of guidelines to be issued by the EU
Commission in 2015.

A review of Ireland’s NRA, including those emergencies/crises that may threaten
or impact on national security, will be undertaken in late 2015 by a subgroup of
the Government Task Force on Emergency Planning. The results of this work will
serve to inform a revised NRA for the Task Force to recommend to Government
in early in 2016. This process will be repeated at three yearly intervals so as
to capture new and emerging threats and changing trends. The Government
Task Force NRA forms a critical subset of the wider strategic level national risk
assessment process undertaken by the Department of the Taoiseach in 2014 and
2015, which will be updated on an annual basis.

###### 3.6.2  Emergency Management

Emergency/Crisis Management in Ireland is based on the well-tried ‘lead
government department’ concept, whereby planning for and response to an
emergency/crisis is the responsibility of the Minister and his/her department
which has functional responsibility for the matter concerned. When an emergency/
crisis occurs, the lead government department may convene a separate National
Coordinating Group, chaired by the Minister responsible for that department or
a senior official, to ensure a ‘whole of government’ approach is brought to the
national response.

At the Government Task Force on Emergency Planning it was decided in early
2014 that there is a requirement to develop a National Framework for Emergency
& Crisis Management, to ensure an overarching national co-ordination, and define
the roles and responsibilities of government departments in coordinating the
national response to emergencies/crises at a strategic level.

It is envisaged that the National Framework will build on the existing national
arrangements, and will replace the ‘Strategic Emergency Planning Guidelines’
and the ‘Guidelines for coordinating a National-Level Emergency/Crisis Response’
and codify the National Emergency & Crisis Management process in Ireland.


-----

###### g y g

The Office of Emergency Planning (OEP) is a civil-military office within the
Department of Defence, established to support the work of the Government Task
Force on Emergency Planning. The OEP supports the Minister for Defence in his
role as Chairman of the Government Task Force on Emergency Planning. The
Office works with all departments and agencies involved in emergency planning
and it carries out a cross-departmental oversight function, which forms the basis
of a confidential Annual Report to Government.

To support this work, the National Emergency Co-ordination Centre (NECC)
provides a robust and resilient facility where Ministers and others involved in
providing a response to national emergencies / crises can convene to co-ordinate
national responses. OEP continues to manage the NECC on behalf of Government.

The OEP maintains regular contacts with other EU member states through
their emergency planning structures, along with attending various international
seminars and training events. Information emanating from these various
committees, events and contacts are disseminated by the OEP through the
Government Task Force and cover a wide range of areas such as planning for
high visibility events, social media, EU, OECD and national risk assessment and
management.

The future role of the Office of Emergency Planning will be influenced by the
outcome of the National Framework process.

##### 3.7  Defence Supports for National Emergencies / Crises

Under the Framework for Major Emergency Management (MEM) published in
2006, the Defence Forces are identified as having a support role to the relevant
lead PRA in major national and local emergencies and the MEM framework also
provides for their participation in major emergency exercises organised by the
lead agency. The Department of Defence and the Defence Forces will continue
to be represented on the Government Task Force on Emergency Planning, and
its various sub-groups.

Large scale national emergencies which impact on human life, property, national
interests, and which could possibly lead to civil unrest, will naturally give rise to
expectations that the Defence Forces can provide support in a variety of scenarios.
In a national emergency, such as, for example, a medical pandemic, all the
available resources and capabilities of the Defence Forces will be made available
to the National Coordinating Group, chaired by the relevant lead department, for
the purpose of providing assistance where it is not possible for other agencies
and organisations to respond.

Defence policy will continue to ensure that the necessary contingency
arrangements are put in place with the relevant lead agencies which, inter alia,
will ensure that there is clarity in relation to the Defence Forces’ capabilities
in providing support in various national emergency situations. The development
of MOUs and SLAs has provided greater clarity around the defence supports
likely to be sought and provided and is a useful process in clarifying planning
assumptions; this work will be continued.

This section addresses the defence supports to lead government agencies in the
event of large scale national emergencies in the context of the Defence Forces’


-----

and develop capabilities specifically for these types of operations and this will
remain the case.

###### 3.7.1 Cyber Security

The response to cyber threats remains a whole of government challenge, with
the Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources having the
lead role. Across Europe, governments are also sharing information in developing
protection against cyber attacks. Ireland supports international and regional cooperation in the area of cyber security.

The Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has
established a National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) to assist in identifying and
protecting Ireland from cyber attacks. The work of this unit is supported by an
Inter-Departmental Committee on Cyber Security established and chaired by that
Department, which regularly reports on progress and on cyber security issues
to the Government Task Force on Emergency Planning. The Government Task
Force maintains cyber security as a standing agenda item where regular updates
are provided and where issues of common interest may be raised and addressed.

The Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has recently
produced a Cyber Security Strategy for Ireland. The Department of Defence and
the Defence Forces are committed to participating, under the leadership of the
Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources in the delivery of
measures to improve the cyber security of the State, as proposed in the Strategy.

The primary focus of the Department of Defence and the Defence Forces will
remain the protection of Defence networks. In relation to specific assistance from
the Defence Organisation, two members of the Defence Forces are currently
seconded (on a non repayment basis) to the Department of Communications,
Energy and Natural Resources Computer Security Incident Response Team
(CSIRT-IE) and this arrangement will continue.

Also, as in any emergency/crisis situation, once Defence systems are supported,
the Department of Defence and the Defence Forces will provide support to the
CSIRT-IE team in so far as resources allow. Details in this regard will be developed
in an SLA to be agreed between the Department of Defence and the Department
of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources.

###### 3.7.2 Nuclear/Radiation Emergency

The Department of Defence has arrangements in place with the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) and the Department of the Environment, Community
and Local Government (DECLG) which have the lead responsibility for coordinating the emergency response arrangements for radiological incidents in
Ireland. In emergency situations, the Defence Forces will monitor radiation
levels at predefined locations throughout the country and transmit data to the
EPA and where necessary, specialist Chemical Biological Radiation and Nuclear
(CBRN) disposal and decontamination teams will be deployed. The Air Corps will
provide fixed wing or helicopter transportation of assessment teams and in the
event of an incident at sea the Naval Service will transport assessment teams
and will collect surface sea water samples. Civil Defence will conduct radiation
monitoring and collect samples.


-----

###### 3.7.3 Severe Weather Events

Severe weather events such as a prolonged period of heavy snow, serious
flooding or dangerous storms can threaten national interests, be it human life,
property, infrastructure, or transport. As outlined in more detail in Chapter 4,
the Defence Forces are identified as having a support role to the lead agency
in major national and local emergencies in accordance with the Framework for
Major Emergency Management published in 2006.

In the event of a severe weather event, all of the available resources and capabilities
of the Defence Forces will continue to be made available to the Government Task
Force on Emergency Planning (through its Inter Agency Co-ordination Committee
chaired by the relevant lead department).

###### 3.7.4 Fuel Shortage

The national risk assessment submitted to the European Commission in 2013
identified that a disruption to Ireland’s energy supply was one of the potential
hazards likely to have the greatest impact in terms of creating a major national
emergency. With around half of power generation fuelled by natural gas, the
majority of which is imported, this is a particular dependency in the energy
sector. The coming on-stream of Corrib will reduce import dependency and lead
to greater diversity of supplies. Government policy is to progressively increase
renewable energy and increase energy efficiency in power generation which
h ld l h it f l Oil i ti l i t th f i t l


-----

as Ireland develops sustainable and secure alternatives. Existing arrangements
with the Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources for
the Defence Forces to assist, in the event that there is an interruption to the
nationwide distribution of oil by road tankers, will continue in place.

###### 3.7.5 Fire Fighting Support to Dublin Airport Authority

A Service Level Agreement between the Department of Defence and the
Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport provides for a rescue fire fighting
service by the Air Corps to the Dublin Airport Authority (DAA) at Dublin Airport
in the event that the DAA is unable to maintain its normal fire fighting service.
These arrangements will continue in place.

###### 3.7.6 Large Scale Prison Strike

A large scale prison strike sustained over a prolonged period of time would impact
on the interests of the State and could give rise to a potential national emergency.
The Department of Defence and the Defence Forces will continue to engage on
an ongoing basis with the Irish Prison Service in relation to the support that would
be provided by the Defence Forces in the event of industrial action being taken.


-----

# 4


-----

### Chapter 4 | Other Policy Requirements


##### 4.1  Policy Context

In addition to contributing to national security, military organisations are typically required
to provide a range of non-security services to government departments and agencies.

A unique feature of Ireland’s defence policy is the extent to which defence resources are
utilised towards non-security ends. This relates not just to equipment and platforms but
also the expertise that is available within the Defence Organisation. This has significant
benefits to the State in terms of minimising the duplication of service delivery, whilst
also gaining maximum utility from investment in defence. However, capabilities are
primarily developed for security purposes rather than these other ends, and this will
remain the key focus.

##### 4.2  General Supports

Where services are provided to other government departments and agencies on a
regular basis or for routine services, a formal arrangement such as an MOU or an SLA
is agreed between the Department of Defence and the requesting body. The existence
of MOUs and SLAs between the Department and other government departments and
agencies continues to facilitate a planned and efficient response by the Defence Forces
in emergency and other situations. These agreements are reviewed periodically and
updated as required.

The Department of Defence has a number of SLAs in place with other government
departments and agencies which detail the provision of services by the Defence
Forces. For example, one such agreement, with the Irish Coast Guard, details the
support services provided by the Army, Air Corps and Naval Service, within their
available capability, in areas such as search and rescue, pollution control and training.
Generally these types of services are known as aid to the civil authority (ATCA).

The SLA with the Irish Aviation Authority (IAA) provides for the use of Baldonnel and
Gormanston for air navigation assistance in the Dublin Control Area. The Air Corps also
assist in the manning of the Civil/Military Co-ordination Unit at Dublin Air Traffic Control
Centre. This SLA also provides for receipt by the Air Corps of radar data from the IAA.

The SLA with Irish Aid encompasses voluntary engagement by individual members
of the Defence Forces in the Rapid Response Initiative, and also encompasses the
provision of training by the Defence Forces to members of the Rapid Response Corps.
There will be continued co-operation between the Department of Defence, the Defence
Forces and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade on this important initiative over
the life-time of this White Paper. Work will also take place on the preparation on an
SLA relating to participation by members of the Defence Forces in the Emergency Civil
Assistance Team (ECAT) initiative and this is another area of co-operation between the
Departments of Defence and Foreign Affairs and Trade.

Arrangements are also in place with the local authorities in relation to assistance that
is provided by the Defence Forces in the event of a forest or gorse fire. Where a fire
develops beyond the capacity of the local authorities in the region to manage, and


-----

there is a serious threat to life and property, the Defence Forces will provide
support by means of the provision of ground troops to assist and/or the provision
of helicopter support with specialist equipment (e.g. bambi buckets) to battle the fire
from the air.

The Defence Forces will continue to provide a number of other supports to departments
and agencies, some on an ongoing basis, and others on a contingent or infrequent basis.
Where such supports are provided on an ongoing basis, or where as a contingency it
is envisaged that there will be a specific role for the Defence Forces in certain types of
emergency, for example, a radiological incident or nuclear accident, the Department of
Defence will continue to seek to agree a SLA with relevant departments and agencies
to ensure that there is clarity on all sides about the roles of all parties and call-out
protocols.

##### 4.3  Ministerial Air Transport

The Ministerial Air Transport Service (MATS) is operated by the Air Corps. It provides
the President and the Government with an independent and flexible air transport
service to assist in meeting national and international obligations. The service is more
flexible than commercial air travel in that it is not bound to set routes, timetables or
schedules. This flexibility to provide an independent means of international air travel can
be very important in a wide variety of situations and helps Ministers to fulfil all of their
duties, both at home and abroad, to the greatest extent possible. For example, where
EU meetings take longer than originally expected, departure times can be altered as


-----

In addition, the capabilities maintained for this service also provide the ability of the Air
Corp to operate at short notice into regions, access to which may otherwise be denied
to non-military aircrafts (due to conflict, security issues and natural disaster, (including
for Non-Combatant Evacuation Operations (NEO)) at the request of the Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade.

The service is currently provided by a Learjet 45, which was specifically acquired for that
purpose. A Gulfstream IV aircraft which had been part of the service was withdrawn
in 2014 and subsequently sold following a decision relating to the cost effectiveness
of repairs to the aircraft. The Gulfstream IV had transatlantic range and the capacity to
carry 14 passengers. The Learjet 45 has a considerably shorter range and the ability to
carry 7 passengers.

An inter-departmental high-level group of officials, chaired by the Department of
Defence is reviewing the medium to long term options for the future provision of an
independent off-island air transport service for high level delegations.

In the meantime, the MATS will continue to be delivered, primarily by the use of the
Learjet 45 aircraft, supplemented by the use of commercial air taxis where required.

##### 4.4  State Ceremonial Services

The Defence Forces participate in a range of annual state commemorative
ceremonies including the Anniversary of the 1916 Easter Rising at the GPO, the
1916 Commemoration Ceremony in Arbour Hill, the National Famine Memorial
Commemoration, and the National Day of Commemoration. The level of participation
by the Defence Forces is determined by the Department of Defence, in consultation
with the Department of the Taoiseach, and the Department of Arts, Heritage and the
Gaeltacht. In addition to the annual State commemorative ceremonies, the Defence
Forces will play a significant role in many of the events being organised to commemorate
the Decade of Centenaries 2012-2022.

The ceremonial support provided by the Defence Forces to other government
departments, including the rendering of honours to visiting Heads of State for state
visits and presentation of diplomatic credentials ceremonies, are resource intensive
especially for the large state ceremonies given the planning and rehearsals required.
This is an important and valuable service and maintains tradition and protocol within a
changing world. It is a visible demonstration of honour and respect between states.
It also provides an opportunity for the Defence Forces to connect positively with
the general public and develops a strong sense of pride and high morale amongst
personnel, and also amongst the public generally. This was seen to particularly good
effect during the visits to Ireland in 2011 by Queen Elizabeth II and the President of the
United States.

Defence Force participation in local commemorative events is dependent on the scale
of the event in question and the availability of military resources. In considering local
requests, the Department of Defence is conscious that the contribution made by the
military in providing ceremonial input should be limited to events of significant and
national importance, as to do otherwise would diminish the significance of their role in
the more important state occasions.


-----

##### 4.5  Equitation

The Army Equitation School continues to promote the Irish sport horse through
participation, at the highest level, in international competitions on Irish bred horses,
by supporting the national equine industry, and by promoting the Nation, the Defence
Forces and the Irish sport horse industry. Since its foundation in 1926, the Army
Equitation School has discharged this task with considerable distinction through its
participation and numerous successes in equitation events at home and abroad, and
it has successfully promoted the qualities of the Irish sport horse. In addition to its
competition activity, the Equitation School continues to support the Irish horse industry
and it encourages breeders and producers, who may have horses suitable for top-level
competition, to have them assessed by the School with a view to their purchase or
lease.

The Army Equitation School also contributes considerable influence and expertise in
equestrian training and education. The Army Equitation School designed and developed
a coaching and training system that has since been adopted as the national coaching
and training syllabi for the sport horse industry. This coaching system is accepted
as the international standard and is used world-wide by the Fédération Equestre
Internationale (FEI). Similarly, the Equitation School’s training syllabus for grooms has
been adopted by Horse Sport Ireland (HSI) as the national standard. Army Riders also
host demonstrations and clinics for various interest groups in the industry. These
demonstrations are conducted to educate and inform people on breeding, training
and coaching Three annual training bursaries approved by the Minister for Defence


-----

of the bursaries receive training with their own horses from Army Equitation School
riders. These young riders have the potential to be the next generation of international
competitors and the training provided by the Army Equitation School helps develop this
potential.

The Government have decided that the Army Equitation School should continue to
promote, at existing levels, the Irish sport horse through participation in competition
at home and abroad, and to support the sport horse breeding industry. Building on
the good linkages with external stakeholders, it is proposed that the Department of
Defence and the Army Equitation School will develop more formal arrangements with
Horse Sport Ireland, Teagasc, Royal Dublin Society, the National Sports Campus and
the Institute of Sport. It is also proposed that a review of the Army Equitation School will
be undertaken with a view to helping it maximise its utility as a platform for nurturing
talent while promoting professionalism and the Irish sport horse.

##### 4.6  Defence Forces School of Music

The Defence Forces School of Music will continue to provide musical support at a
wide range of annual state ceremonies such as the National Day of Commemoration,
the Easter Sunday 1916 Commemoration at the GPO, the Arbour Hill 1916
Commemoration, and the National Famine Commemoration. In the context of the
Government’s Centenary Programme, there will clearly be a very central and important
role for the School in many of the state events planned.

The School will also continue to participate in other important state occasions such
as Presidential inaugurations, state visits of foreign Heads of State, presentation of
credentials ceremonies to the President by foreign ambassadors, and in a range of
appropriate civilian events such as major national and international sporting fixtures
and annual St. Patrick’s Day parades. The School will also fulfil musical requirements
for military events such as troop reviews, commissioning ceremonies and passing
out parades and will continue to present its very popular educational programme by
visiting a number of primary and secondary schools throughout the State each year.

The Defence Forces School of Music will continue to be developed, including possible
linkages with relevant educational institutions, to enhance its capabilities into the future.

##### 4.7  Air Ambulance

###### 4.7.1 Emergency Aeromedical Service

In June 2012, a MOU was agreed between the Department of Defence and the
Department of Health in relation to the Air Corps’ support of a pilot Emergency
Aeromedical Support (EAS) service operating out of Custume Barracks, Athlone. The
purpose of the pilot service was to assess the level and type, if any, of dedicated
aeromedical support needed to assist the National Ambulance Service, primarily in
the west of Ireland for certain types of patients. The pilot service was focused on
the requirements of the HSE clinical care programmes, such as acute coronary care
and stroke. An evaluation of the pilot service was undertaken in 2013 by an interagency Audit and Evaluation Group which recommended that an EAS service should
be established in the region and that consideration should be given on how best to
provide such a service. A Working Group, chaired by the Department of Health and
also comprising representatives from the Department of Defence, the HSE and the


-----

examine options for the provision of a permanent EAS service into the future.

Based on the outcome of the pilot, and having considered the report of the Working
Group, the establishment of a permanent service was approved by Government in
July 2015. The Government’s decision provided that whilst the current service model
will continue, the service will be subject to ongoing review in the context of ensuring a
sustainable long term service arrangement.

###### 4.7.2 Inter-Hospital Emergency Air Ambulance Service

Separately, the Air Corps will continue to provide an emergency inter-hospital transfer
service within Ireland and to the United Kingdom in support of the HSE. In 2005,
the Department of Defence and the Department of Health completed a SLA which
formalised arrangements for the provision of the inter-hospital air ambulance service by
the Air Corps. This SLA was renewed in October 2011 and provides for inter-hospital
transfer by air for patients with medical conditions that require urgent treatment at a
hospital within Ireland or in the UK. In 2014, there were over 100 inter-hospital missions
completed by the Air Corps.

The inter-hospital service operated by the Air Corps is provided on an “as available
basis” only and is not a dedicated service. This means that fixed wing or rotary aircraft
are not required to be on standby for this purpose. However, if such aircraft and
personnel are available when requested for a mission, they can be deployed, provided
there is no interference with primary Air Corps’ responsibilities.


-----

##### pp j g

As previously outlined, under the Framework for Major Emergency Management
published in 2006, the Defence Forces have a support role to the lead agency in major
national and local emergencies. The Framework also provides for their participation in
major emergency exercises organised by the lead agency. Personnel from the Defence
Forces who are members of the eight regional working groups, established under the
Framework, will continue to act as liaison officers to the Local Authorities.

In a major emergency, such as a severe weather event, all the available resources and
capabilities of the Defence Forces will be made available to the National Coordinating
Group, chaired by the relevant lead department, for the purpose of providing assistance
where it is not possible for other agencies and organisations to respond. In addition, in
local emergency situations, personnel and equipment such as high-axle vehicles, rigidhulled inflatable boats (RhIB) and engineering plant machinery, may be provided on
the request of a PRA in accordance with local liaison arrangements. The Department
of Defence will continue to be the conduit for requests for non-routine supports from
other agencies to assist with a local emergency.

##### 4.9  Engagement with Irish Enterprise and Research Institutions in support of Defence Forces Capabilities

There is an ongoing requirement to examine new and innovative means of improving
capabilities in the security and defence domain so that the Defence Forces are in a
position to undertake the roles assigned by Government. In this context, innovation
refers to novel ways to get additional utility for the State, with minimal additional
costs. The Defence Organisation, through its commitment to continuous training
and education, possesses a wealth of innovative personnel who contribute to the
development of ideas, technology and processes.

Within the EU, the role of well funded research has been identified as one of the drivers of
enhanced capability. The EU is investigating innovative funding mechanisms to support
security and defence research in the face of declining national defence budgets so as
to deliver capability and support industry. In consultation with other national bodies and
departments, the Department of Defence will assess the opportunities arising from
EU funding, to the benefit of Irish enterprise and Defence Forces’ capability. In the
same vein, the Department will also identify opportunities for cooperative-collaborative
engagement between the Defence Forces and Irish-based enterprise and research
institutes, including third level colleges. This will include information exchange and
supporting indigenous industry in product/service development and evaluation where
this contributes to Defence Forces’ capabilities.

The Defence Forces have participated in a wide range of activities with Irish-based
institutions in relation to the development of research, innovation, technology and
education/training initiatives which have the capacity to contribute to Defence Forces’
capability and capacity development.

The primary purpose of these activities is to support Defence Forces’ capability
development for crisis management while leveraging the opportunities which may
arise to support innovation, growth and jobs in Irish based industry and thus contribute
to Ireland’s economic development. There is a significant cross-over between the
ti iti f i d i tit t d i i il it h d th i th


-----

applied directly in the defence domain. This opens up potential additional markets
for those engaged in such research for products and systems for the civilian security
market.

Under the Defence Enterprise Initiative, a joint initiative of the Department of Defence
and Enterprise Ireland, the Defence Forces makes available resources and expertise,
including advice and information etc., to Enterprise Ireland supported companies and
other companies and institutions engaged in research, innovation and product/service
development in the security and defence arena. The support offered by the Defence
Forces includes the evaluation of technology research and innovation, provision of
information on military requirements and the Defence Forces considered views on
trends in specific capability development requirements. The Defence Forces in return
get exposure to new initiatives, evolving technologies and research, and can also
influence and inform the direction of particular technology developments which can
support defence capabilities.

A further area that can assist in the development of military capabilities while also
supporting Irish-based enterprise and research institutes is in securing access
to European Defence Agency (EDA) programmes. Participation in EDA research
programmes by Irish researchers has the potential to lead to spin-off benefits for
the Irish economy through the development of non-military applications arising from
the research. It also has the potential to allow for the further exploitation, in military
applications, of technologies which are already in the process of being developed for
civil applications.

Engagement by the Defence Organisation in innovation, research and product
development is managed and will continue to be managed in the Department through
the Defence Enterprise Committee chaired at Assistant Secretary level and comprising
civil and military personnel and representatives of Enterprise Ireland.

The Defence Enterprise Initiative will be developed further over the course of the White
Paper. This will include the establishment of a Security and Defence Enterprise Group
bringing together enterprise, industry, research and practitioners in the field of security
and defence to identify areas of common endeavour and collaboration. Through the
Security and Defence Enterprise Group, the Department and the Defence Forces, with
Enterprise Ireland, will also seek to support Irish based enterprise in their engagement
with the EDA and in accessing EDA and Horizon 2020 programmes.

While maintaining a very active approach to supporting enterprise and research, the
Department of Defence or the Defence Forces do not have significant capacity or a
stated function in industrial promotion. As such, only existing resources can be utilised
in this area and therefore, such supports have to be closely managed and prioritised
having regard to their congruence with defence capability requirements and benefits.
In the context of ongoing engagement, it will be necessary to resolve the issues of
intellectual property rights and possible endorsement of such products or research.

The Department of Defence and the Defence Forces are also committed to improving
the potential for Irish enterprise to compete for Defence contracts. In consultation
with Enterprise Ireland, the Department and the Defence Forces will examine current
procurement processes with a view to improving the potential for Irish enterprise to
compete for Defence contracts, while recognising that Defence must comply with EU
and national procurement regulations, policies and requirements.


-----

###### p

As the rate of generation of information, knowledge and understanding grows, it is ever
more likely that answers to complex challenges will lie outside organisational boundaries.
There is a fundamental requirement to reappraise how institutions interface so that they
do not sit in isolation from other social systems. Innovation networks offer a dynamic
and flexible approach through which wider benefits for individual organisations can
be obtained. In pursuing its overall goal and consistent with capability requirements,
the Department of Defence will be alive to the potential of such networks and give
appropriate stimulation to these which may include state actors, institutes of higher
education, research centres and progressive entrepreneurial companies.

###### 4.9.2 Irish Maritime and Energy Resource Cluster (IMERC)

The Irish Maritime and Energy Resource Cluster (IMERC) is an alliance between the
Naval Service, Cork Institute of Technology (CIT) and University College Cork (UCC)
which brings together expertise in the fields of energy engineering, maritime operations,
maritime technology and ecosystem governance. This research and commercial cluster
aims to realise Ireland’s economic potential in the global, maritime and energy markets.

The IMERC strategy includes addressing technology challenges in a wide range of areas
including network integration, autonomous vehicles and underwater operations. As the
Naval Service has significant technological end user knowledge, it can bring this valuable
knowledge to researchers and foreign direct investment clients and small and medium
enterprises. Through IMERC, the Naval Service has been involved in various initiatives
with Enterprise Ireland. The goal of IMERC is to participate in the effort to shift Ireland
from its current position, where despite having one of the largest maritime to land ratios
of any EU state, it provides the smallest contribution to GDP at 1% from the Maritime
Sector. In comparison, the UK derives 5%, Belgium 8% and Denmark 11%.

##### 4.10  Defence Contribution to Employment  Support

The Government are committed to a strengthened approach across the economy to
social responsibility. This commitment recognises the benefits more generally to society
from an enlightened approach to fostering targeted interventions which can have both
a positive social impact while also contributing to economic recovery. The generation of
employment opportunities, or the taking of actions which assist individuals’ capacities
to gain employment, are among the most important of these measures.

In mapping out the future for Defence in the period ahead, the Government consider
it important that the Defence Forces contribute to this broader societal objective. It is
clear that the skills and capacities which individuals obtain from service in the Defence
Forces are ones which it would be beneficial to offer more widely. The Government
have, therefore, decided to put in place a new employment support scheme with the
direct involvement of the Defence Forces.

It is foreseen that the essential features of the scheme will be to provide a training
intervention over a number of months drawing on Defence Forces’ skills, capacities
and facilities, for example in the areas of transport and logistics. This will be aimed
at a specific group in the 18-24 year old range. In particular, it is proposed to offer
individuals who might otherwise struggle to break out of cycles of disadvantage the
opportunity to participate in an employment skills focused development programme


-----

in their capacity to participate fully in society as well as their ability to obtain sustained
employment or pursue further education for this purpose.

It is expected that the scheme will involve interventions from a variety of competences
and public sources built around and timed to ensure the successful completion of
the programme by the individuals selected to participate. The Department of Social
Protection will work with the Defence Forces to promote awareness of the scheme
and will authorise the retention of any income support payments for the duration of
the programme. It is expected that successful participation in the scheme will give
participants improved prospects if competing for a career in the Defence Forces, or
the broader workforce.

The scheme will be developed in consultation with key stakeholders and subject to
finalisation of details, an initial pilot involving up to 30-40 participants will take place in
2016.

##### 4.11  Energy Policy

Energy security and energy efficiency are increasingly important elements in the
evolving defence and security environment. Improving energy performance and
reducing Ireland’s carbon footprint across the entire economy and particularly in the
public service, are key government objectives. Energy efficient deployments are now
viewed internationally as a key element in the resilience and effectiveness of military
forces. The Defence Forces is a recognised leader on energy issues in Ireland having
implemented a comprehensive Energy Management System since 2012 and securing
an increase of 15.7% in energy performance from 2009 to 2014. The Defence Forces
also achieved full certification under the international energy management standard
ISO 50001 by 2012, becoming the first armed forces in the world to do so. The
Defence Forces also participate actively in the EDA Working Group on Energy and
the Environment participating in cutting edge research on energy efficient military
forces. The Defence Forces through the Senior Energy Executive will continue to
drive improvements in energy performance at home and on overseas deployments
and work to reduce the carbon footprint by exploring renewable energy solutions.
The Department of Defence will give serious consideration to developing renewable
energy solutions on defence lands and installations.

##### 4.12  The Irish Red Cross Society

Pursuant to the Red Cross Act of 1938, the Irish Red Cross Society was established
by Government Order in 1939 as an independent charitable body corporate with full
power to manage and administer its own affairs. Since 1939, the relevant legislation
had undergone piecemeal changes only, but in April 2012, the Government approved
a number of substantial amendments to the 1939 Order. These represented the most
wide ranging and fundamental set of changes to have occurred since the establishment
of the Society.

In tandem with these changes, and in accordance with a commitment made in the
current Programme for Government, the Department of Defence has reviewed all
Red Cross legislation. As a consequence, the Department will initiate a new Bill which
will revoke all existing Red Cross legislation but which, in accordance with the State’s
commitments under the Geneva Conventions, will provide for the protection of the
national society and the emblems of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent


-----

work of the Society, and may on request, by the Society in accordance with its own
rules, nominate a small number of people to serve on its General Assembly, there
will be no provision for these measures in legislation. These changes are intended to
copper-fasten, to the greatest extent possible, the independence of the Society, which
is one of the seven founding principles of the Red Cross.


-----

# 5


-----

### Chapter 5 | Roles of the Defence Forces


Chapters 3 and 4 have set out the defence policy response to the security challenges
set out in Chapter 2 and other government requirements for defence. They have
also set out, in some detail, the differing tasks that Defence must be capable of
undertaking. The successful completion of these tasks requires a range of inputs from
the Department of Defence and the Defence Forces. This chapter consolidates those
requirements into revised roles for the PDF and the RDF.

##### Roles of the PDF:

         - To provide for the military defence of the State from armed aggression;

         - To participate in multi-national peace support, crisis management and
humanitarian relief operations in accordance with Government direction and
legislative provision;

         - To aid the civil power – meaning in practice to assist, when requested, An
Garda Síochána, who have primary responsibility for law and order, including the
protection of the internal security of the State;

         - To contribute to maritime security encompassing the delivery of a fishery
protection service and the operation of the State’s Fishery Monitoring Centre,
and in co-operation with other agencies with responsibilities in the maritime
domain, to contribute to a shared common maritime operational picture;

         - To participate in the Joint Taskforce on Drugs interdiction;

         - To contribute to national resilience through the provision of specified defence
aid to the civil authority (ATCA) supports to lead agencies in response to major
emergencies, including cyber security emergencies, and in the maintenance of
essential services, as set out in MOUs and SLAs agreed by the Department of
Defence;

         - To provide a Ministerial air transport service (MATS);

         - To provide ceremonial services on behalf of Government;

         - To provide a range of other supports to government departments and agencies
in line with MOUs and SLAs agreed by the Department of Defence e.g. search
and rescue and air ambulance services;

         - To contribute to Ireland’s economic well being through engagement with industry,
research and development and job initiatives, in support of government policy;

         - To fulfil any other tasks that Government may assign from time to time.

##### Roles of the RDF:

         - To augment the PDF in crisis situations;

         - To contribute to state ceremonial events.

Further chapters consider the future capability requirements to undertake the tasks
associated with these roles and to provide a flexible and adaptive response to emerging
demands. The RDF is more fully dealt with in Chapter 8 and Civil Defence is considered
separately in Chapter 9.


-----

# 6


-----

### Chapter 6 | Capability Requirements


##### 6.1  Policy Context

Chapters 3 and 4 have set out a comprehensive set of operational requirements
that the Government require the Defence Forces to be able to undertake. These are
summarised in the roles assigned to the PDF in Chapter 5. In order to undertake these
roles successfully the PDF[26] must be able to undertake a full spectrum of military
tasks that range from supports in peace-time (ATCP, ATCA, fishery protection, MATS),
operations overseas (international peace support operations, humanitarian operations)
to war-fighting (defence of the State).

The PDF are also deployed for a broad range of support tasks and civil contingency
tasks. Whilst military capabilities are not developed specifically for these tasks, their
utilisation for such tasks maximises the utility of defence capabilities and can improve
value for money by reducing the duplication of service provision by the State.

Military capability can be defined as: the ability to attain operational success for a given
scenario, achieving desired effects under specified standards and conditions through
combinations of ways and means. It consists of a conceptual component (the thought
process), a moral component (the ability to get people to conduct operations, originating
from Defence Forces values), and a physical component (the means of conducting
operations). The maintenance and development of military capability requires a broad
range of actions within the Department of Defence and the Defence Forces. These
actions include, but are not limited to; investment in new equipment, education and
training, maintenance and development of infrastructure, ongoing review of military
doctrine, the development of appropriate HR policies and the development of regulatory
frameworks. Flexible, innovative human resources are a cornerstone of meeting the
challenge of a dynamic security environment. Actions under the White Paper seek to
promote this culture (Human Resources are fully considered in Chapter 7).

This chapter sets out important aspects of the capability agenda for the PDF over the
life-time of this White Paper.

##### 6.2  Key Principles

The future is uncertain and while future security developments were considered in
Chapter 2, the type of operations that the Defence Forces may be required to undertake
can change significantly as new threats emerge. Technological advances can also
multiply the effectiveness of existing forces or render existing equipment, platforms
and doctrine obsolete. In this context, there is a balance to be struck between being
overly prescriptive regarding future capability requirements and having sufficient detail
in order to allow for prudential capability planning, particularly for prioritisation and
procurement of major equipment and platform items, which can have a lead time of
several years. Capabilities must therefore be developed and maintained to meet the
challenges of this dynamic security environment.

In broad terms, the Government have decided that the Defence Forces will continue
to retain a range of flexible conventional military capabilities, including Special


-----

uncertainty. These will continue to be vested in the Army, Air Corps and Naval Service,
and augmented in crisis situations by Reserve[27] capabilities. The decisions outlined in
this section follow on from detailed work undertaken by civil-military teams as part of
the White Paper process. Further work will be required in order to identify additional
capability priorities over the life-time of the White Paper, having regard to a dynamic
security environment and the available resource envelope. The processes outlined in
section 6.7 and Chapter 10 will facilitate this work.

###### 6.2.1 Jointness

The Defence Forces must be able to operate jointly - that is to bring elements of the
Army, Air Corps and Naval Service together to deliver effects in operations in a coordinated and cohesive manner. This is increasingly necessary for a broad range of
operations at home and to be able to operate seamlessly with partners overseas.
Jointness requires the capacity to develop and feed into a joint common operational
picture (COP) with appropriate command and control, communications, computers,
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (C4ISR) capacity and these are
considered below.

###### 6.2.2 Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance

The fusion of information from the land, air and maritime domains into a joint COP is an
increasing requirement in order to effectively manage joint operations. The complexity
of the modern military operational environment requires a high degree of co-ordination
of military effort in order to maximise the effectiveness of operations.

Military intelligence plays a key role in maintaining an awareness of threats to the State
and to forces deployed at home and overseas. The Directorate of Intelligence is a
constituent part of Defence Forces Headquarters and delivers threat assessments to
the Minister for Defence, the Department of Defence as well as, through the Chief
of Staff, to the National Security Committee. Liaison is also maintained between the
Directorate and An Garda Síochána.

Section 3.5.6 highlighted the requirement for continued co-operation and co-ordination
of efforts in the maritime domain. The EU’s MARSUR project is one example of a project
that is leading to improved sharing of maritime information. The Defence Forces can
offer a significant contribution to a “Recognised Maritime Picture” through information
from Air Corps Maritime Patrols, which can efficiently cover extensive maritime areas,
and from Naval Service Ships. However, the value of information is largely dependent
on the quality of analysis and interpretation of that information. As outlined in section
3.5.6, a review, engaging all of the relevant national bodies, of current structures for
monitoring, managing and analysing maritime data and information will be undertaken.
The integration of the “Recognised Air Picture” within this COP is also a requirement.

###### 6.2.3 High Level Command and Control

The re-organisation of the PDF in 2012 established a revised two Brigade Army structure.
The Government are satisfied that this structure represents the most effective and
efficient structure within a strength ceiling of 9,500 PDF personnel and that this will
remain in place.

The White Paper process identified a requirement for a review of the Defence Forces


-----

focus on a joint approach to operations. The 2012 re-organisation of the Defence Forces
focused on consolidating Units within a more efficient and effective two Brigade force
structure. Whilst some progress was made as part of that re-organisation in introducing
joint structures at DFHQ level, it is now appropriate that the structures that sit above
the existing Brigades and other Formations are formally reviewed.

The Secretary General of the Department of Defence and Chief of Staff will jointly
undertake a review of the current high level command and control structures in the
Defence Forces having regard to international best practice on military command and
control and drawing upon external expertise. This will include a review of structures
for managing joint operations and intelligence. Recommendations for change will be
brought forward to the Minister for Defence for consideration.

###### 6.2.4 Command, Control, Communication, Computers, Intelligence,  Surveillance and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) and Cyber Defence

Command and Control and situational awareness are highly dependent on IT networks.
There will be continued investment in the development of suitable network enabled
communications in order to meet the challenges of an increasingly complex operational
environment. This is also a priority area for investment if additional funding, beyond that
required to maintain existing capabilities, is made available.

Whilst these new systems bring significant improvements to the management of
operations, they are also prime targets for adversaries in conflict situations. The
ability to effectively defend Defence Forces’ networks from cyber attacks is an
essential capability that must be retained and developed. The key requirement is


-----

for personnel with appropriate cyber security skills sets. The retention of military
personnel with such skills sets is increasingly difficult given the transferability of
such skills to the business environment. As outlined in section 3.6.1, the primary focus
of the Defence Forces will be on retaining the capacity to protect Defence systems.

###### 6.2.5 Interoperability

Interoperability is the ability to train, exercise and operate together coherently, effectively
and efficiently with partners to achieve tactical, operational and strategic objectives.
Interoperable standalone, force packages are deployed to multinational expeditionary
operations overseas and the Defence Forces have the capability to deploy up to
battalion sized units, naval vessels and aircraft when requested.

The Defence Forces also participates in integrated multinational deployments and has
successfully deployed in combined units with Sweden, the Netherlands, Finland, Malta
and the United Kingdom since 2003. Peacekeeping forces, such as the Irish-Swedish
Battalion in Liberia, the Irish-Dutch Battalion and the Irish-Finnish Battalion in Chad, the
Irish-Finnish Battalion in Lebanon, the Irish-Maltese training team in EUTM Somalia and
the Irish-UK training team in EUTM Mali, enable the Defence Forces achieve a more
effective range of deployments than they can achieve alone, including wider force
protection arrangements. Such co-operative arrangements enable the development and
deployment of joint force packages with like-minded and other states on international
peace support operations and enable Ireland to maintain its contribution to a range of
missions in accordance with government policy. Many of these peacekeeping missions


-----

such participation and enabled through the approaches contained in the White Paper
on Defence (2000).

Participation in EU Battlegroups also demonstrates Ireland’s commitment to the
development of EU capabilities in the area of crisis management and contributes to
our overall credibility within the Union. Ireland’s active engagement in EU Battlegroups
enhances our capacity to influence the ongoing development and evolution of the
rapid response capacity of the EU, and in particular, the role that Battlegroups can
play in reinforcing and acting as a strategic reserve for UN operations. From a national
viewpoint and having regard to the need to minimize threats to the safety of personnel,
the Department of Defence will examine an option of maintaining a rapid deployment
capacity, at Company level, to support or reinforce overseas contingents if the situation
so demands.

Quite apart from its role as an alliance, NATO has become the standard-setting
organisation for modern military forces, in effect the de facto “I.S.O.”[28] of the military
world. NATO standards cover everything from the detailed physical characteristics of
equipment, through communications protocols, training standards and operational
procedures. Originally designed to ensure that troops from different members of the
Alliance could operate seamlessly together as a single force, the unique NATO process
of achieving full interoperability has been made available through PfP to partner countries
such as Ireland, Sweden, Finland, Austria, etc. For practical reasons, and given that 22
EU member states are also members of NATO, the EU uses NATO standards and
procedures on its missions. In order to be accepted as a peacekeeping partner, it is
now necessary for the Defence Forces to be trained and equipped to NATO standards.

##### 6.3  Army

The Army will continue to retain all-arms conventional military capabilities, within the
existing two infantry Brigades and the Defence Forces’ Training Centre, including SOF.
The principal aim over the period of the White Paper will be to replace and upgrade,
as required, existing capabilities in order to retain a flexible response for a wide range
of operational requirements, at home and overseas. Measures will be taken to further
enhance the capabilities of the Army Ranger Wing in particular with the aim of increasing
the strength of the unit considerably.

Ireland’s ongoing active participation in a range of peacekeeping and crisis management
missions is a key policy requirement. While each mission has elements of danger, it is
the Government’s position that all actions should be taken to minimise threats to the
safety of personnel. Armoured vehicles provide essential force protection and, in this
context, the following will be progressed over the coming years:

         - The current fleet of Armoured Personnel Carriers (APCs) and associated variants
are essential for a broad range of operations. In order to ensure continued force
protection, a study is currently underway to identify whether a life-extension
programme, replacement programme or another alternative, is the most cost
effective option.

         - Armoured logistic vehicles for overseas missions are a further force protection
requirement and a small number of these vehicles will be procured.


-----

existing capabilities, additional Armoured Personnel Carriers and variants, Light Tactical
Armoured Vehicles and additional air defence capabilities are priorities for the Army.

##### 6.4  Air Corps

The Air Corps will continue to operate a range of rotary and fixed wing aircraft within
existing organisational structures. The principal aim over the lifetime of the White
Paper will be to ensure that the Air Corps can continue to undertake the required
military operations and to deliver a broad range of air supports to other government
departments and agencies in line with MOUs and SLAs. In this context, key equipment
requirements and decisions are set out below. Should additional funding, beyond that
required to maintain existing capabilities become available, the development of a radar
surveillance capability is a priority for the Air Corps.

###### 6.4.1 Maritime Patrolling and ISTAR

The Air Corps currently provides surveillance capacity primarily through two CASA
235 Maritime Patrol Aircraft and five Cessna aircraft. The CASA 235s are due for
replacement in 2019.

The existing CASA 235s primarily undertake maritime surveillance, although
they may also be used for a broader range of tasks. These include, air ambulance
missions, evacuation missions, transport of materiel, search and rescue top cover and
occasionally ministerial air transport. The CASA 235s will be replaced with consideration
of their replacement with larger more capable aircraft. This would enhance maritime
surveillance and provide a greater degree of utility for transport and cargo carrying tasks.
The existing five Cessnas, which are currently due for replacement, will be replaced
with three larger aircraft suitably equipped for ISTAR[29] tasks.

###### 6.4.2 Air Combat

The existing Pilatus PC9 aircraft provide a very limited air to air and air to ground capacity
and these are due for replacement in 2025. The development of a more capable air
combat/intercept capability will be considered as part of the White Paper update (See
Chapter 10).

###### 6.4.3 Air Mobility

The existing EC 135 and AW 139 helicopters will continue to deliver the required
Defence Forces support and other support capabilities over the lifetime of the White
Paper. The CASA 235s and their replacements will continue to provide additional air
transport capacity. As outlined in section 4.1.2, the MATS service is currently being
delivered by a Learjet 45 aircraft, which is due for replacement in 2024. An interdepartmental high-level group of officials, chaired by the Department of Defence is
reviewing the medium to long term options for the future provision of an independent
off-island air transport service for high level delegations and a decision regarding the
replacement of the Learjet 45 will be informed by the recommendations of this group.

##### 6.5  Naval Service

In light of operational demands, the maintenance of a modern eight-ship Naval


-----

programme will have replaced three Offshore Patrol Vessels (OPVs). However, there
is a requirement to replace a further three Naval Service vessels [one Helicopter Patrol
Vessel (HPV) and two Coastal Patrol Vessels (CPVs)] that have, or are reaching the end
of their lifespan in the coming years. These are set out below. In addition, there is a
requirement to maintain and upgrade vessels having regard to emerging operational
requirements and changes in technology.

In the event of additional funding becoming available, beyond that required to maintain
existing capabilities, the acquisition of additional ships is a priority for the Naval Service.

###### Helicopter Patrol Vessels (HPV)

The LÉ Eithne, which is the current flagship and a HPV, will be replaced by a multi-role
vessel (MRV). Whilst this ship will not carry a helicopter, it will be enabled for helicopter
operations and will also have a freight carrying capacity. It is the Government’s intent
that this new vessel will provide a flexible and adaptive capability for a wide range of
maritime tasks, both at home and overseas.

###### Offshore Patrol Vessels (OPVs)

The current ship replacement programme will have replaced three OPVs bringing to
five the number of modern OPVs in the Naval Service flotilla. The final ship in this
current replacement programme is scheduled for delivery in 2016.


-----

###### Coastal Patrol Vessels (CPV)

The two existing Coastal Patrol Vessels, the LÉ Ciara and LÉ Orla, are due for replacement
in the coming years. These ships will be replaced with similar vessels with countermine and counter-IED capabilities. This will provide an enhanced capability for the Naval
Service in meeting a broad range of ongoing requirements and contingencies, including
the protection of Ireland’s vital sea lanes of communication.

##### 6.6  Capability Development Plan

The above sections have set out Government decisions regarding key equipment and
priorities over the lifetime of the White Paper. There are a range of other equipment
requirements that are not set out in detail. The Department of Defence will develop
a detailed capability development plan building on the work completed as part of the
White Paper process. This plan will dovetail with the work of identifying and agreeing
funding requirements as outlined in Chapter 10.

Capabilities are developed through appropriate investment in doctrine, HR policies,
regulatory reform, equipment, infrastructure, organisation, education and training.
Personnel are the key resource and are central to all development. The framework for
the capability development process includes the Strategic Management Committee
(SMC), the Management Advisory Committee (MAC), the General Staff and the High
Level Planning and Procurement Group (HLPPG).


-----

##### p

In the context of maintaining and developing military capability, the term infrastructure
refers to all buildings and permanent installations including, but not limited to barracks,
the airfield, naval base, training lands, medical facilities, stores, ranges, maintenance
workshops, etc., necessary for the support of the Defence Forces.

###### 6.7.1 Achievements during the term of the last White Paper

The consolidation of the Defence Forces formations into a smaller number of locations
has been a major objective in the ongoing Defence modernisation programme for some
time and was a key deliverable in the last White Paper. This programme was made
even more pressing by the economic down turn and was facilitated by the improved
security situation in Border areas. It has brought the number of barracks closed since
1998 to 14 (from a starting figure of 28). In addition to the main barracks, a number of
other smaller properties have also been identified as surplus to military requirements.
Many of these surplus properties have already been disposed of whilst others are in
the process of being prepared for disposal.

In tandem with consolidation, there has been a refurbishment programme of the
remaining barracks and training infrastructure, with a major upgrading of accommodation
and training facilities in most of the main barracks including McKee, Cathal Brugha,
Custume Barracks Athlone and in the Defence Forces Training Centre in the Curragh.
However, this refurbishment programme has been significantly affected by the cuts in
the capital budget since 2008 (i.e. capital expenditure on building infrastructure in 2008
was over €26 million, by 2014 this had fallen to less than €6 million).

The total realised from 1998 to date in terms of sales of surplus property is €108m
approx. A portion of this has been retained and re-invested in providing equipment and
infrastructure for the Defence Forces. The policy of phasing out the provision of married
quarters has also been largely completed with only 27 serving military personnel now
occupying married quarters compared to 386 in 1997.

###### 6.7.2 Future Infrastructure Development

Notwithstanding the very significant consolidation of Defence properties/infrastructure
since 1998, there is an ongoing review of infrastructure requirements to ensure
the most effective use of military resources having regard to the roles assigned by
Government to the Defence Forces.

Much of the existing barrack infrastructure consists of older buildings with high
maintenance costs. Although the consolidation of barrack infrastructure has led to
efficiencies in running costs, many significant infrastructure challenges remain.

The development and maintenance of the necessary operational and training
infrastructure is of course informed not only by financial resources but by the military
operational capability requirements, many of which will change as circumstances
change during the term of the White Paper. Even assuming there is no major change
in policy regarding capability requirements, it is clear given the significant reduction of
capital funding over the past 7 years that developing and maintaining infrastructure will
be very challenging over the lifetime of this White Paper.

There is a requirement to carry out major building refurbishment in a number of areas
including Haulbowline, Casement Aerodrome, McKee Barracks and the Curragh Camp.
The cost of this programme of essential capital projects cannot be met from existing


-----

Accordingly, given the major demands that are on the capital budget and the
complex and time-consuming procurement processes required for major
developments, there is a need to develop within the Department of Defence, a coordinated infrastructure development plan. This development plan will reflect on a
priority needs basis, an approach for all infrastructure development requirements for
the life time of this White Paper. The first step in the completion of such a plan will be
an assessment of the main barracks and facilities across a number of criteria including:

         - Accommodation - both living-in and office

         - Maintenance workshops

         - Medical facilities

         - Training facilities

         - Security

         - Communications infrastructure.

Completion of an assessment of needs for individual barracks/facilities will facilitate
informed decisions on priorities for developments. This will enable a new rolling five
year infrastructure development plan to be produced for the major developments
which will ensure that resources available are used to best effect.

###### 6.7.3 Training Lands – Review of Training Land Portfolio and  Infrastructure Development

Given the re-organisation of both the PDF and the RDF it is necessary to revisit the


-----

lands will form the basis of a review of the current training lands portfolio and the
necessary infrastructure to develop them to meet the standards required by the
Defence Forces over the lifetime of the White Paper.

##### 6.8  Provision of Medical Services

In the context of maintaining military capability, in 2009, PA Consultants recommended
a programme of major change in relation to Defence Forces’ medical services. As
recommended by the consultants, a number of working groups were set up to
progress the various change projects identified. The working groups were tasked with
identifying the practical steps which needed to be taken to achieve implementation of
the PA report recommendations for the medical service. Following the completion of
the work of the working groups, an implementation plan was drawn up to implement
their recommendations.

Arising from the implementation plan, the Central Medical Unit was formally established
in 2012, to enable the detailed structures, processes and personnel to be put in place
to provide for the support, management and delivery of modern medical services for
the Defence Forces. This new Central Medical Unit brings all medical personnel under
one central command. It has responsibility for the management and delivery of medical
services, including the allocation of medical resources across the system, based on
operational requirements and demands.

In relation to specific medical services, it was necessary to undertake a further exercise
to identify the optimal options for service provision. A joint civilian/military standing
committee has been set up and tasked with advancing the development of a sustainable
integrated medical service involving both internal and outsourced service provision to
meet the needs of the Defence Forces as outlined in the PA Report. The Standing
Committee is reviewing each medical service individually, e.g., laboratory services,
mental health services, nursing, pharmacy services, etc., in order to evaluate and make
a recommendation regarding the most appropriate means of delivering the medical
capability to the Defence Forces. For example, a service that is currently delivered by
staff in-house may be outsourced or vice versa. The Government supports the work
of the Standing Committee which is focussed on ensuring that medical services are
delivered in an optimum and sustainable manner.

##### 6.9  Regulatory Framework

The statutory framework for the Defence Forces is provided for in the Defence Acts
and Defence Forces’ Regulations many of which date back to the 1950s. A detailed
review of the legislative framework will be undertaken to ensure it is fit for purpose.


-----

# 7


-----

### Chapter 7 | Defence Human Resources


##### 7.1  Policy Context

The successful delivery of defence outputs in today’s world depends on a range of
issues, but the most fundamental requirement and a critical factor for success is welltrained, motivated, experienced and capable personnel with a wide range of skills and
experience in order to successfully deliver government requirements. The civil and
military personnel working within the Department of Defence and the Defence Forces
bring an essential mix of skills, talent and experience across policy, planning, capability
maintenance and development, procurement, administration and operations, so as to
deliver defence outputs in accordance with assigned roles and responsibilities.

Current human resources management (HRM) strategies across the Defence
Organisation have provided a framework within which human resources (HR) policy,
doctrine and procedures have been developed and implemented to deliver defence
outputs and these strategies have been successful in the achievement of their stated
aims. However, given ongoing developments in the area of HRM coupled with the
changing nature of many of the external realities that affect the delivery of the full
spectrum of defence capability requirements, there will be an ongoing requirement
to continually review and update human resource management strategies for the
Defence Forces, civil service staff of the Department and civilian employees to align
them with evolving organisational demands.

This White Paper puts a premium on ensuring an excellence of approach in relation
to human resources management so that the Defence Organisation is an employer
of choice while also delivering efficient and effective defence outputs. In addition, the
Government’s Civil Service Renewal Plan, where the Department of Defence is leading
on a number of initiatives and taking a very active approach in their implementation,
contains a very strong emphasis on HRM.

HRM strategies across the Defence Organisation will be reviewed to ensure that they
continue to build on what has been achieved already aligned with evolving organisational
requirements and key considerations in this regard are set out below.

Within the Defence Organisation, a key HR enabler is the implementation of a
comprehensive competency framework. There is already a service wide competency
framework in place for civil servants. This is being delivered through the Civil Service
renewal process. In the military sphere, the Defence Forces’ competency framework,
which is currently being developed and covers all ranks in the Defence Forces, will be
implemented during the lifetime of this White Paper. This competency framework will
be used for recruitment, development, performance management, and promotion in
the Defence Forces. This will require the design, development and implementation of
merit based promotion systems at all ranks to support the management of talent, to
develop our people and to succession plan over the period of this White Paper.

##### 7.2  Targeting Expertise

Delivering sustainable capability in defence outputs requires the deployment of
appropriately trained and experienced military, civilian and civil service personnel across


-----

civil and military roles and requirements, there are also a range of roles within the
Defence Organisation that could benefit from the free flow of civil and military
personnel across the organisation as a whole. This is also relevant in the context of the
changing security threat and the changing profile of the international response to security
threats which is best reflected in the European Union’s “Comprehensive Approach” to
international crisis management, which requires the deployment of highly trained and
experienced civil and military personnel on missions. There are also professional skills
that on occasion may not be readily available in the PDF which can be acquired through
alternative means, including civilianisation of technical posts, hiring part-time workers,
entering into contracting arrangements or engagement of members of the RDF with
specialist skills (See Chapter 8). The Defence Organisation is committed to achieving
the optimum personnel and skills profile to address all defence requirements and to
develop its personnel to this end.

In the medium term, a review of civil and military roles/functions will be undertaken
to determine the optimum mix of civil service, civilian and military personnel required
to address both operational and support roles within the Defence Organisation. In
addition, a gap analysis of skill-sets within the PDF will be conducted to identify the
frequency of such gaps and to identify appropriate measures to address them

##### 7.3  Defence Forces Human Resource Management

The recruitment, training and development, and retention of suitable military personnel
are essential factors in developing the military capabilities required in order to


-----

the importance of a continuous recruitment strategy for the Defence Forces so as
to ensure a lower age profile. The Defence Forces will continue to have an objective
of ensuring an appropriate age profile through continuous recruitment and congruent
manpower planning, training and development, and career management strategies.

Having regard to the capability and professional competency requirements of the
modern Defence Forces, a review of HR policies in relation to recruitment, training and
education, performance management, reward systems, and retention and retirement
policies alongside age profiles for personnel across the Defence Forces will be
conducted in the medium term. The Defence Forces HR policies will build on what has
been achieved already and key considerations in this regard are set out below:

###### 7.3.1 Defence Forces Recruitment

Continuous recruitment is the lifeblood of the Defence Forces providing young,
motivated and enthusiastic personnel to replenish military formations for operational
deployments. Over the course of the White Paper the Government are committed
to maintaining a PDF establishment of at least 9,500 serving personnel. To this end,
the Defence Forces will review and develop rolling medium term manpower planning
requirements so as to deliver an effective and efficient workforce mix in terms of age
profile, skills, competencies and experience, and current personnel policies to support
this will be further developed and implemented.

As a matter of policy, the Government believe that the military forces of the State
should appropriately reflect and integrate the demographic of the population as a whole.
Given the changing ethnicity in Irish society, it is government policy that the Defence
Forces should therefore raise awareness and attract recruits from all backgrounds,
including the new Irish, so that the Defence Forces, both Permanent and Reserve,
reflect the society that they serve. This requires the Defence Forces to continually
update recruitment and selection policies to embrace and encourage the participation
of persons from a diverse background into the organisation. The Defence Forces will
continue to engage in this area in positive and proactive ways and the effects of the
ongoing initiatives will be assessed in the medium term. Gender is considered in
section 7.3.6.

###### 7.3.2 Defence Forces Training and Education

The primary function of training and education in the Defence Forces is to develop and
maintain capabilities. The primary focus of the Defence Forces, when not engaged on
operations, is training and preparation. The appropriate training for all Defence Forces’
formations and units is based on conventional military doctrine to prepare them to
fulfil the roles laid down by Government. The Defence Forces conducts training and
education under four broad categories namely; leadership, skills, career and collective
training.

         - Leadership training is the medium through which the Defence Forces ensures
that personnel are prepared for exercising command authority across the full
range of military functions both at home and overseas in international operations.

         - Skills training is the medium through which the Defence Forces ensures that its
personnel have the requisite individual, specialist, and crew skills to permit the
development of organisational capabilities.

         - Career training and education provides the organisation with the necessary pool
of leaders and commanders at all levels from Section Commander to Chief of


-----

  - Collective training allows military personnel to use their individual, crew, specialist
and career training together. This moulds Sub-Units, Units and Formations into
integrated and coherent combat forces. As a reflection of the defence and
security environment, emphasis is placed on joint and combined exercises
stressing interoperability, procedures and doctrine. This provides the Defence
Forces with the capabilities required to fulfil its roles and missions, both at home
and overseas.

Individual and collective training provides the core skills and capabilities required by
the organisation. Training is for predictable events but education is required to adapt
to unpredictability. The quality of the learning experience and the learning environment
for military personnel is designed to foster a spirit of inquiry and a strong sense of the
value of learning among Defence Forces’ personnel. It equips them with the essential
foundations as adaptive, creative, rounded thinkers and shapes the future development
of the Defence Forces. The Defence Forces values and promotes education for the
enhanced operational capability it brings to the individual and to the organisation. In
this context the Defence Forces support the concept of “life-long learning” whereby
individuals are encouraged to continuously up-skill and re-skill so that they can adapt to
the complex and changing demands of missions and deliver effective military capability.

The Defence Forces deliver military programmes and modules meeting national
and international standards encompassing both academic and military best practice.
The Defence Forces also engage with external national and international educational
institutions, military and civilian, so as to ensure that Defence Forces training and
education is in line with international best practice. This commitment ensures that
the Defence Forces continue to maintain interoperable staffs and forces at home and
abroad.

External accreditation and verification of capabilities ensures that the educational
and training outputs of the Defence Forces are in line with best international
practice. Accreditation will be pursued where it is appropriate to military skills and
capability requirements since the primary intended outcome is improved operational
effectiveness. However, accreditation is also aimed at making the Defence Forces
more attractive as a career and increasing retention rates as personnel gain higher
awards the longer they stay in the Defence Forces and the further along the career
path they advance, thus rewarding members for their participation in lifelong learning.
Accreditation is also of benefit to individuals when they leave the Defence Forces as
they have either a nationally or an internationally recognised qualification which may
assist them in finding suitable future employment.

The appropriateness of external accreditation will be reviewed during the currency of
this White Paper to ensure that an appropriate balance is achieved between maintaining
capability and retention and retirement/exit objectives. In addition the Department of
Defence will continue to review training and education policy and implementation to
ensure the most effective use of the resources available and value for money. Procedures
for expenditure planning, procurement and general governance will be included in this
continuous review process. In addition, the current system of undertakings will be
continuously reviewed during the currency of the White Paper to ensure its continued
effectiveness in retaining expertise and/or recovering the investment made in the
individuals concerned in the event of them leaving the organisation before completion
of their service undertakings.


-----

###### g

The rapid pace of development and an ever-changing operational environment places
a constant pressure on the Defence Forces to continue to refresh the core skill sets
of its personnel to ensure that they can meet emerging operational requirements. The
emphasis for the Defence Forces on learning, development and innovation is now
greater than ever. This will require proactive management of talent and employee
capability development and the linking of advancement to performance.

In this regard, the development and leverage of talent in the Defence Forces will be
informed by the new Integrated Competency Framework for the Defence Forces
which will link advancement to performance. This system will enable personnel to
realise their full potential across all ranks and services. The Defence Forces will review
its performance management and annual appraisal systems to ensure that they fully
support the Defence Forces capability requirements consistent with the new Integrated
Competency Framework for the Defence Forces. Existing initiatives in this area will
be given greater impetus, specifically to develop and map talent for the top tier and
specialist posts.

It is recognised that there is a wealth of talent within the enlisted personnel of the
Defence Forces which could be further harnessed in support of Defence Forces’
capability. In this regard, an ongoing scheme of commissioning officers from the ranks
will be developed and incorporated as part of the career advancement programme for
enlisted personnel so as to leverage talent from the enlisted personnel. In addition, a
scheme to enable lateral career moves within the Defence Forces across the three
services of the Army, Air Corps and Naval Service and will also be considered as
part of this process. Succession planning and smoother processes for filling key


-----

Impediments to promotion where they exist will be examined to ensure that the
maximum number of personnel are qualified for promotion consistent with their service
and performance.

###### 7.3.4 Reward Systems (Pay, Terms and Conditions)

It is essential that the Defence Forces have a remuneration and reward system which
supports the strategic HR policies of the Defence Forces on the recruitment and
retention of essential skills to meet operational and support requirements. Defence
Forces’ personnel in line with other public service employees are primarily rewarded
for performance through pay and allowances, promotion and training and development
opportunities.

Arising out of the Croke Park and Haddington Road Agreements and Government
decisions on allowances in the Public Service, certain allowances in the Defence Forces
are currently the subject of an ongoing review. As part of this process the Department
of Defence is also committed, in accordance with the Government decision on
allowances, to undertake a review of the overall pay and allowance structures with
a view to the simplification and standardisation of the remuneration system in the
Defence Forces. This review will be completed early in the term of the White Paper.
In addition, a programme of reviews of the terms and conditions applying across the
services, ranks and technical staff will also be conducted over the term of the White
Paper, with a view to greater standardisation within the overall system.

###### 7.3.5 Retention and Retirement

As a general rule and subject to the need to manage and retain key skill requirements,
continuous turnover of personnel is essential to maintain the required lower age profile
across the PDF. PDF personnel will be supported as they exit the organisation, creating
new opportunities for recruitment and maintaining turnover commensurate with
achieving the necessary age profile.

To this end, a range of systems, procedures and scheduled training will be implemented
to ensure that PDF personnel are prepared for transitioning to civilian life when they
complete their military service. The Defence Forces will continue to have an objective
which is to ensure that that all members of the PDF will have qualifications which will
enhance their job prospects on leaving the Defence Forces.

We will also endeavour to ensure that administration of recruitment, training, education,
pay and superannuation arrangements support the Defence Forces human resource
management processes and exit strategies over the period of the plan.

The Government acknowledge the contribution and service of personnel leaving
the PDF and actively supports their transition into civilian life. A programme is being
established which has to date elicited support from the employer organisation IBEC
and the American Chamber of Commerce Ireland. A career platform or portal will be
developed for existing personnel to give them a direct bridge to employers, to assist
them in making the transition to a career in civilian life. This portal / platform will, subject
to their consent, give the full career details of each exiting member.

Defence Forces Human Resources Branch will create a career portfolio for interested
exiting members of the PDF. This will list their military qualifications alongside the level
of the qualification on the national framework of qualifications (NFQ), where relevant.
Support in Curriculum Vitae (CV) preparation will also be provided by Human Resources


-----

###### q y y

The Government are committed to the principles of equal opportunity in all its
employment policies, procedures and regulations and currently the Defence Forces
operate in accordance with the Equality Acts. In this context, the Equality Policy along
with Defence Forces’ Regulations will be reviewed on an ongoing basis to ensure
compliance with best practice and to maintain a working environment that treats all
members of the Defence Forces in a manner consistent with equal opportunities
irrespective of gender, ethnicity, or sexual orientation.

###### Gender

The number of women serving in the PDF at 31 December 2014 amounted to 563,
which represents 6.1% of the overall strength of the PDF at that date. The number of
women serving in the AR and NSR as at 31 December 2014 amounted to 363, which
represents 16.8% of the effective strength at that date.

The Government are committed to a policy of equal opportunity for men and women
throughout the Defence Forces and to the full participation by women in all aspects
of Defence Forces activities. The Defence Forces have no restrictions as regards the
assignment of men or women to the full range of operational and administrative duties.
All promotions and career courses are open to both genders on merit.

A key impediment in achieving greater numbers of women serving in the Defence
Forces is the lack of women recruitment applicants relative to men. This may be as a
result of societal perception and attitudes to female soldiers and officers. There have
been a number of recent initiatives to encourage greater female participation. Over
the course of the White Paper, further initiatives will be developed to encourage more
women to apply for the Defence Forces and to increase female participation at all
ranks. This will include a survey to identify any impediments to the advancement of
women in the PDF, including the impact of the requirements of career courses and
overseas service on female retention and advancement.

###### Diversity

Increasing diversity must also be actively managed by the Defence Forces. In this
context a Diversity and Inclusion Strategy, building on the existing policies in relation
to ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation and equality, will be developed to underpin a
supportive and challenging workplace environment where individuality and diversity is
respected by all.

###### 7.3.7 Action Plan on Women Peace and Security

The Women, Peace and Security (WPS) agenda recognises both the particularly adverse
effect of conflict on women and girls, as well as their critical role in conflict prevention,
peace negotiations, peacebuilding, and governance. The Irish approach to the WPS
agenda brings together multiple perspectives through cross government collaboration
and co-operation achieved through:

         - The experience of the Defence Forces in participating in UN and UN mandated
overseas peace operations provides valuable insight and awareness of this issue.

         - Ireland’s policy for international development One World, One Future identifies
gender inequality and gender-based violence (GBV) as priorities to address.

         - Ireland has direct domestic experience of conflict and post-conflict reconciliation.


-----

conflict situations, ensure that a gender perspective is incorporated into Ireland’s
engagement in all overseas activities and leverage Ireland’s participation in global and
regional fora to champion the implementation of this agenda.

There are a number of actions within the Plan for which the Department of Defence
and the Defence Forces have responsibility. These actions include:

         - Promote best practice in effective training.

         - Continue to undertake measures to improve the recruitment, retention and
advancement of women within the Defence Forces.

         - Actively support the Irish Consortium on Gender Based Violence.

         - Increase and improve training for Defence Forces personnel who serve overseas
who may be investigating cases of gender-based violence.

         - Advocate for the inclusion of a gender perspective into EU Common Security and
Defence Policy operations plans and crisis management concepts for missions
and operations including, where appropriate, separate reporting.

         - As a member of the Partnership for Peace (PfP), advocate for the NATO Action
Plan on UN Security Council Resolution 1325 and associated resolutions.

The Department of Defence and the Defence Forces fully support the Second National
Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security and will continue to monitor and ensure
the implementation of those actions, outlined in the Plan, for which the Department
and the Defence Forces have responsibility.

###### 7.3.8 Work-Life Balance

It is accepted that the achievement of an effective balance by members of the Defence
Forces between the demands of the workplace and the home is of crucial importance
to the long-term welfare and development of the Defence Forces. Family-friendly
working conditions and operational effectiveness are neither contradictory nor mutually
exclusive. The Defence Forces will continue to develop appropriate work-life balance
initiatives to assist in retaining experienced and trained personnel and maintaining
higher levels of motivation and productivity in a manner which will ensure continued
defence capability. Operational requirements, overseas postings, training courses,
career courses and the availability of development opportunities will be reviewed to
ensure that they do not discriminate on the basis of gender or familial responsibility,
while retaining the integrity of the course and training requirement.

###### 7.3.9 Dignity in the Workplace 

All members of the Defence Forces have a right to be treated with respect and dignity
and to carry out their duties free from any form of harassment, sexual harassment, or
bullying. Unacceptable behaviour is contrary to the ethos and values of the Defence
Forces and the policies and procedures in place underpin the principles and objectives
of the Dignity Charter for the Defence Forces.

The Third Report of the Independent Monitoring Group (IMG) which presents a
review of progress made by the Defence Forces since the publication of the IMG’s
Second Report in 2008, was published in 2014. The Third Report makes a total of
35 recommendations, one of which is that a further independently chaired review of
progress in the context of workplace dignity, bullying, harassment, sexual harassment
and discrimination in the Defence Forces be conducted within a period of 5 years from


-----

full implementation of all recommendations arising from the Third Report of the IMG,
including completion of the next review by the IMG in 2019.

###### 7.3.10 Review of Redress of Wrongs

The Second Report of the Independent Monitoring Group (IMG) considered the
Redress of Wrongs complaints process in the Defence Forces and recommended
that a review of this process take place. A draft Report has been prepared and will
be finalised during 2015. This Report will then be forwarded for discussion with the
Defence Forces Representative Associations.

###### 7.3.11 Personnel Support Services and Pastoral Care 

The Personnel Support Service (PSS) is a central aspect of human resource
management that provides a confidential information, training and education support
and referral service. The Service is designed to give Defence Forces’ personnel access
to information and services from within and outside the military community. There is
a PSS office in every major installation, with one or more qualified Barrack Personnel
Support Service Officer(s) (BPSSO(s)). In addition, as part of the PSS, civilian social
workers are available to support Defence Forces’ personnel and their families.

The role of the BPSSO includes providing information, assistance and counselling on
a range of matters including interpersonal problems, stress, bereavement, housing,
education, taxation, social welfare and retirement. The work of the PSS also includes
collaboration in pre-deployment training for overseas missions and briefings on stress
management are mandatory for overseas contingents.

It is recognised that the PSS has extended the range of services in keeping with
emerging workplace needs and that the PSS continues to develop a comprehensive
strategy of communication with personnel through the BPSSOs, supported by the
intranet and a range of internal publications. This work will continue over the life of the
White Paper.

Separate to, but complimentary to the PSS, the Chaplaincy Service provides pastoral
and spiritual support to Defence Forces’ personnel both at home and abroad. While the
Defence Forces Chaplaincy Service caters for military personnel and their families who
are predominantly Roman Catholic, there is one part-time Church of Ireland chaplain.
Provision is also made to provide for the spiritual needs of all other faiths. The Chaplaincy
Service respects the traditions and practice of those of other faiths and those of secular
beliefs and ensures that the integrity of all these groups within the Defence Forces is
respected. The Government are committed to the Chaplaincy Service remaining a core
part of the welfare structure for Defence Forces’ personnel.

##### 7.4  Defence Forces Pensions

It is widely accepted that the Defence Forces have very different personnel policy
requirements than all other public service groups. One key element is the provision
of appropriate superannuation arrangements that support and complement ongoing
personnel policy objectives.

Given the unique and demanding nature of military life, there is understandably a very
high level of turnover among military personnel. For example, during the years 20102014, more than 2,900 personnel exited the PDF for all reasons, with some 1,000
personnel retiring on pension in the 12 months prior to expiry of the 29 February 2012


-----

2014 have reduced to somewhat below 2009 levels of circa. 500 a year, realistically,
the PDF will continue to experience relatively high personnel turnover into the future.

As previously outlined, the Government will, as resources permit, maintain its existing
policy of regular, ongoing recruitment within approved strength levels. This brings in
the required ‘new blood’ that a dynamic, modern professional military force needs
on an ongoing basis if it is to perform its obligations. This in turn helps to maintain the
age profile of personnel as close as possible to the appropriate levels for all ranks. The
average age of serving PDF members is currently 35, all ranks, while 68% of personnel
are under age 40[30].

Compulsory retirement ages for all PDF ranks are already considerably lower than in
other public service areas. Retirement ages and/or upper service limits of Defence
Forces’ personnel of all ranks will continue to be kept under review and determined
in accordance with key considerations such as manpower policy requirements,
operational needs and international best practice.

The requirement for certain groups of public service employees, such as military
personnel, to have ‘fast accrual’ occupational pension arrangements, together with
earlier retirement ages and/or ‘minimum pension ages’, is a product of HR policy for
the Defence Forces and operational needs. Internationally, it is common practice that
military personnel have special pension arrangements that set them apart from the
wider public service.

Operational effectiveness is, and will continue to be, the driver of military pension
scheme terms. The defence policy objective is to ensure that the pension terms
applicable to military personnel continue to complement the Defence Forces’ HR and
manpower policy requirements (as outlined earlier).

In the context of public service age-related pension reforms generally, the last
decade or so has seen fundamental and far-reaching changes to PDF superannuation
arrangements. For new entrants joining the PDF since April 2004, the pension
arrangements introduced in accordance with the Public Service Superannuation
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2004 involved:

  - the abolition of provision for the payment of immediate pension benefits on
retirement after relatively short periods of service and regardless of age ;

  - moving to a system under which preserved retirement benefits (e.g. at age 60
for those who joined between April 2004 and December 2012) is the norm if
retiring before age 50, with immediate pension benefits payable on retirement
only to those personnel who serve to age 50, the ‘minimum pension age’.

Those pension scheme changes brought the Defence Forces more into line with other
areas of the public service, while retaining certain key concepts such as accelerated
accrual of retirement benefits and lower minimum pension (and preservation) ages
than the norm. These concepts, which are critical tools in the implementation of PDF
manpower policy and a support for its operational needs, have been copper-fastened
in the Public Service Pensions (Single Scheme and Other Provisions) Act 2012. Under
this new pension scheme, retirement benefits of all new entrants to the public service
from 1st January 2013 onwards will be based on ‘career average earnings’, rather
than final salary at retirement. However, specifically in the case of the Defence Forces,
key features for post 1 January 2013 new entrant PDF personnel include a minimum


-----

recruited since April 2004; along with an accelerated pension accrual rate[31].

Occupational pension arrangements generally for new entrants, while largely settled
for the foreseeable future under the terms of the 2012 Act, will be kept under review
during the term of the White Paper. The 2012 Act does not alter military retirement
ages for future or serving military personnel generally, or upper service limits where
applicable. These will continue to be determined by the Minister for Defence, following
consultation with the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform.

##### 7.5  Defence Forces Employee Participation and Representation

The Department welcomes and values the participation of staff and their representative
associations in the ongoing development and transformation of the Defence Forces
including through their engagement in the various formal and informal civil and military
mechanisms for discussion and dialogue. Continuous employee participation and
positive engagement between Defence management and employee representatives
has been a key driver in the implementation of reform and productivity measures in the
Defence Forces while maintaining industrial peace.

The Defence Forces’ Conciliation and Arbitration (C&A) scheme provides a range of
consultation and engagement mechanisms for Defence management to discuss with
the Representative Associations for the PDF, i.e., PDFORRA (Permanent Defence
Force Other Ranks Representative Association) and RACO (Representative Association
of Commissioned Officers), matters within the scope of representation. The Scheme
provides a means for both sides to discuss issues which are of importance to them
and to arrive at mutually acceptable resolutions or to bring them to dispute resolution.
Over the term of this White Paper an objective will be to maintain a well managed
industrial relations environment and to enhance well developed communication
channels seeking to resolve problems through the Scheme mechanisms at the earliest
opportunity. Military management will continue to engage on a bilateral basis with the
Associations on service matters through the military forum mechanism.

Progress will continue to be made on the ongoing programme of modernisation
and reform which includes the implementation of our strategic objectives and the
implementation of the various public service agreements and central government
reform measures in consultation with the representative associations as appropriate.
This will also include implementation of the measures contained in this White Paper on
Defence. We will continue to enhance internal communications processes and ensure
transparency in the conciliation process for all stakeholders in a spirit of openness and
co-operation.

The Department of Defence will continue to interact with the Irish Nurses and Midwives
Organisation (INMO) which represents members of the Army Nursing Service on
issues which affect them.

31 In addition, for most new entrants under the Single Scheme, preserved benefits will be payable from the State Pension age of 68.
However exceptionally where compulsory retirement / discharge from the Defence Forces (other than medical grounds cases) is before


-----

##### p and Representation

The Reserve Defence Force Representative Association (RDFRA) represents members
of the RDF who are volunteers[32], unless they are called up on active service by the
Government in accordance with the Defence Acts. The Government recognise the
valued public service given by volunteer men and women of the RDF to the State. To
this end, as part of the supports offered to members of the RDF, Defence management
holds regular meetings with RDFRA to discuss issues that affect members of the RDF.
The Department commits to providing financial support by way of an annual subvention
to the Association. Contact points are established and provided within the Department
and the Defence Forces to deal with issues as they arise. The Minister meets with the
Association as required.

Defence management will continue to engage in a spirit of openness and transparency
with RDFRA and to develop and implement RDF capabilities in line with the approach
outlined in Chapter 8.

##### 7.7  Veterans Policy

Defence Forces’ personnel have served Ireland and the Defence Forces in defending,
protecting and supporting the citizens and sovereignty of the State since its foundation.
They have also contributed to Ireland’s profile in the area of international peace and
security because of the commitment of Defence Forces’ personnel by successive Irish
Governments to UN mandated and authorised operations.

While there are a range of ex-service associations, including comrades associations,
officer and enlisted personnel associations, the Department of Defence formally
recognises only two veterans’ organisations that represent all former personnel,
namely, the Irish United Nations Veterans Association (IUNVA) and Óglaigh Náisiúnta na
hÉireann (ONE, the Organisation of National Ex-Servicemen and Women). As a matter
of policy, similar to other public service retired staff organisations, both associations as
a common endeavour recognise the service of Defence Forces’ personnel irrespective
of rank and simply based on service. The Department engages with other retired staff
associations from time to time, and in this regard, the Department recognises the
role of the Association of Retired Commissioned Officers (ARCO) in relation to those
specific issues of relevance to its members. The Department will continue to meet
with ARCO in this context. This policy approach, while recognising the role of ARCO,
will not extend to a formal SLA or alter the principle that IUNVA and ONE are the
formally recognised representative bodies for retired Defence Forces’ personnel with
which the Department continues to engage. This policy will continue over the course
of the White Paper.

The Government recognise the valued public service given by former servicemen and
women of the Defence Forces to the State, alongside all members of the Public Service.
To this end, as part of the supports currently offered to veterans, the Department has
entered into a formal SLA with IUNVA and ONE. As part of this SLA:

         - Regular meetings are held with the organisations to discuss issues that affect
veterans

32 Unless required to attend for training or undertake service in accordance with the Defence Acts members of the Reserve undertake


-----

at fundraising launches and commemoration ceremonies organised by the
organisations

  - The Department commits to providing financial support by way of annual
subventions to the official veterans’ organisations

  - Contact points are established and provided within the Department and the
Defence Forces to deal with medals, medical records, pensions and service
matters

  - The veterans organisations are included on a list of organisations to be consulted
in relation to the Departments Customer Service charter

  - Ministerial attendance at significant veteran events is co-ordinated by the
Department as required

  - A commitment is given in relation to invites to the veteran organisations to
specific commemoration ceremonies.

While the current SLAs are regarded as a positive step, the Government are of the
view that there is scope during the currency of this White Paper to further develop
the supports available to exiting personnel and veterans. This will include the following
elements:

  - The Department and the Defence Forces working together will further develop
the annual Veteran’s Day that seeks to honour the service of both living and
deceased Defence Forces’ veterans, recognising that such events are important
in facilitating the continued relationship between serving and former personnel.

  - Subject to agreement with other relevant Departments and state Institutions,
representation from the recognised veteran associations will be incorporated


-----

Forces’ occasions where this is appropriate.

         - Improving current arrangements in the case of personnel retiring from the
Defence Forces to include appropriate training, CV development and interview
skills so as to facilitate transition to civilian employment.

         - Introduction of appropriate training systems to ensure that a member of the
Defence Forces who wishes to receive training, will not exit the Defence Forces
without an appropriate recognised civilian qualification consistent with their
capability.

         - Ensuring that exiting personnel can acquire recognised qualifications and
applicable vocational skills so as they can secure employment post discharge
from the Defence Forces.

         - Continued development of the current comprehensive pre-retirement courses
for personnel who are due to retire on age grounds.

The Department will ensure that veterans will continue to have access to the
Ombudsman for the Defence Forces in relation to complaints concerning actions
which occurred while they were a serving member of the Defence Forces.

Furthermore, if a member of the Defence Forces is currently availing of the external
independent counselling service at the date they leave the organisation, they will be
entitled to finish out the counselling sessions (subject to the maximum of 6 sessions).

In regard to the above, whilst it is recognised that the resources are not available to
provide specific medical treatment and counselling services that are available to serving
members of the Defence Forces, to veterans, every effort will be made to facilitate the
transition to civilian life, drawing on existing support networks where appropriate. It is
recognised that in limited circumstances additional supports may be required and the
representative bodies for retired members of the Defence Forces have an important
role in this regard.

##### 7.8  Irish Language Policy

In accordance with the Official Languages Act 2003, separate Irish language schemes
are published by the Department of Defence and the Defence Forces. Progress on the
implementation of the schemes is monitored by Oifig an Choimisinéara Teanga.

The Department of Defence is committed to fulfilling the obligations set out in the
Official Languages Act (2003) with regard to the level of service provided through
Irish. The Department’s third Irish Language Scheme (An Roinn Cosanta Scéim 20142017) came into effect on 3 March 2014. The Scheme sets out the Department’s
commitments regarding the services it will provide in Irish or bilingually.

The Defence Forces will continue to play a role in promoting the Government policy of
bilingualism and ensuring that the Defence Forces can provide a quality service through
Irish. At present this policy is implemented under the Defence Forces’ Scheme 201417 under Section 15 of the Official Languages Act 2003 (Scéim Óglaigh na hÉireann
2014-17). The Defence Forces will continue to prioritise implementation of this policy
through the Defence Forces Language Council (Comhairle na Gaeilge Óglaigh na
hÉireann).


-----

joint Implementation Plan for the 20-Year Strategy for the Irish Language 2010-2030.

##### 7.9  Department of Defence Human Resource Management

This section refers to the civil service staff of the Department of Defence. In line with
developments in broader civil service HRM, there will be continued devolution of dayto-day HR matters to local line managers. The Department has a total of 364 staff,
equivalent to 341.5 whole time staff, assigned to 17 branches, attached to Newbridge,
Galway, Roscrea and Dublin. This number will reduce further as additional administrative
and transactional services transfer to shared service arrangements.

Key issues in ensuring that Departmental personnel have the capabilities to fully support
all aspects of the Department’s business are; recruitment and selection procedures,
promotions policies, training and development, equality policies, and our terms and
conditions of employment. The overall objective is planning and ensuring that “the
right people are in the right place at the right time”, while working within budget.
These issues will be addressed as part of the Department’s HR strategy, drawing
from the agreed Civil Service renewal process. In this context, it is foreseen that the
Department will commence an organisational capability review within the next twelve
months based on the approach being developed centrally.

###### 7.9.1 Recruitment and Mobility

In its selection procedures, the Department adheres to best practice principles as set
out in the Code of Practice for Appointment to Positions in the Civil and Public Service
drawn up by the Commission for Public Service Appointments. Recruitment to the
Department will continue to be through panels established by the Public Appointments
Service. The Department recognises that the movement of personnel to different
work areas within the Department, known as mobility, is important in promoting
change, exchanging ideas and allowing people to develop to their full potential. It is
also a necessary management tool in order to ensure we have “the right people, in
the right place, with the right skills, doing the right job”. An effective mobility policy
therefore facilitates the efficient conduct of the business of the Department and
assists in the personal development of staff. A number of factors, including length
of service, suitability to the post under consideration, work force planning and many
others, are taken into account when implementing the Department’s mobility policy.
The Department is committed to continuing to implement its mobility policy.

###### 7.9.2 Training and Development

The Department will continue to identify and provide training and development
opportunities through the PMDS system both to equip staff to perform well in their
current jobs and prepare them for further progression in their careers. With the advent
of the “Comprehensive Approach” the requirement for defence personnel with
appropriate education, training and experience to support overseas missions through
the provision of administrators, administrative support, civilian advisers and policy
advisers is increasingly coming to the fore.

The Civil Service Renewal Plan puts an increased emphasis on learning and
development and the Department will build on this to enhance its own approaches. A
Training and Development Plan will continue to be produced annually by the Training


-----

training needs identified in staff members’ personal development plans. The plan will
continue to strive to achieve a balance between individual needs and the priorities of the
branch in which they work and the Department as a whole. The induction programme
for new members of staff will also be further refined in light of changing demands.

In light of the “Comprehensive Approach” and the potential for increased joint civil/
military operational deployments, the Department will explore opportunities for joint
training with Defence Forces’ personnel particularly on leadership courses, modules
on the Junior and Senior Command and Staff Courses, pre-deployment qualification
course and training and induction courses.

###### 7.9.3 Performance Management

The internal promotions systems in the Department assess candidates on the basis
of merit. Selection processes are carried out in accordance with clear, transparent and
objective criteria. Competitions for promotions are structured and competency-based.
The Department is fully committed to equality of opportunity.

The Department has well developed performance management systems for staff at
all levels. The Department will continue to contribute to the ongoing centrally-driven
review of the PMDS system being undertaken in the context of the Civil Service
Renewal Programme and will implement agreed recommendations.

###### 7.9.4 Work Life-Balance

A wide-range of flexible working options is available to staff to assist them to achieve an
appropriate work-life balance. Staff who wish to avail of these options are facilitated to
the greatest extent possible. Nevertheless, it should be understood that these options
are not a right but a privilege which may be granted, on application, where consistent
with business needs and in keeping with the resource needs of the Department at any
given time. The Department realises the positive benefits of the availability of these
options to staff.

###### 7.9.5 Dignity in the Workplace

The Department is committed to protecting dignity and respect for all staff through
implementing all relevant policies including the Dignity at Work policy. These policies
provide redress procedures and mechanisms should a member of staff feel their right
to dignity at work is being compromised in contravention of their rights. A new role of
“Designated Person” has been introduced to encourage the use of informal resolution
methods and the use of mediation as often and as early as possible during disputes
involving bullying, harassment or sexual harassment. The Department is committed
to this initiative and is mindful that it should lead to the fastest possible resolution, be
the least stressful process for those involved and lead to the least disruption in the
workplace.

###### 7.9.6 Employee Assistance Service

The Employee Assistance Officer (EAO) provides a confidential, independent,
professional counselling service to employees offering information, support and
assistance on matters of concern to them either work related or non-work related.
In addition to providing assistance in dealing with personal problems such as
bereavement, financial difficulty, stress and addictions the EAO is an important source
f d i b d f i i l di h l h d i l lf i l


-----

confidential. This is recognised by HR as being a valuable asset to Department staff.

Under new arrangements, the Civil Service Employee Assistance Service (CSEAS)
operates as a shared service under central management with a regionalised delivery of
service to suit a decentralised environment. EAOs work together with all the benefits
of mutual support and sharing of expertise that this offers. The CSEAS officers are
committed to continuing to provide a valuable resource for both staff and management
in the changing and challenging climate that lies ahead.

###### 7.9.7 Employee Participation through Partnership/Departmental Council

Partnership is defined as a management-union-employee relationship based on common
interests and responsibilities. Partnership involves the transfer of organisation change
issues to a forum that is co-operative and non-adversarial. Within the Department,
partnership has fostered a climate of involvement and affords staff an opportunity to
influence, and consequently have ownership of, their own work practices and design,
HR policy and change developments generally.

Department council was established under the Scheme of Conciliation and Arbitration
for the Civil Service. It consists of a Chairman, nominated by the Minister, official side
representatives, including an official side secretary, and staff side representatives,
including a staff side secretary. This mechanism will continue to allow for issues to be
resolved quickly in a spirit of openness and co-operation.

##### 7.10  Civilian Employees Human Resource Management

In line with the commitment to develop new HRM strategies for civilian employees the
Department of Defence will conduct a review, in consultation with key stakeholders, to
examine ways of delivering a more flexible, responsive and efficient model of service
delivery.

###### 7.10.1 Recruitment & Mobility

The Department has approximately 510 civilian staff employed at various military
installations throughout the country to support the upkeep and maintenance of military
infrastructure and equipment. The grades are spread across a wide spectrum and
include craftsmen (electricians, carpenters, plumbers, fitters, welders etc,) and services
(general operatives). In addition clerks and storemen as well as certain specialist staff
(archivists, aircraft inspector/instructor, technicians, medical specialists, social workers,
quantity surveyors, draughtsmen) are also employed at various locations.

The number of civilians employed has dropped considerably over the years and at
its current level is well below the employment control framework (ECF) numbers. In
addition the age profile of employees is rising with large numbers due to retire over the
next ten years. The Department will implement a phased approach to addressing any
shortfalls in service delivery. In the short term a programme of targeted recruitment
will address priority vacancies. In the medium term, given the changing nature of the
work environment with more sophisticated infrastructure and equipment and taking
into account the large numbers retiring over the next ten years, emphasis will be placed
on identifying those areas that are most in need.

Accordingly, following publication of the White Paper, a planning group, consisting
of representatives of Civilian HR and the military authorities will be established to
undertake in terms of the civilian employee workforce a gap analysis to identify supply


-----

The review group will also examine the existing service delivery model and will make
recommendations on a service delivery framework that will meet the existing and
emerging needs of the organisation.

Where appropriate, where vacancies exist within the civilian employee workforce, and
surplus staff in that particular area are identified, the filling of those vacancies will, in the
first instance, be addressed by redeployment. In line with the Department’s general
mobility policy transfers across the organisation will also be considered taking account
of the operational requirements.

###### 7.10.2 Training and Development

The development of capabilities/skills of any workforce is a major platform for any
successful organisation, particularly so for civilian employees with their diverse and
atypical roles. Current training practices in relation to health & safety, manual handling/
lifting etc., will continue so that employees have the required knowledge to perform
their duties in a healthy and safe environment. In addition, skills training and career/
management training will be provided for civilian employees where required, so that
the full potential of the workforce can be realised.

###### 7.10.3 Performance Management

The Performance Management Development System (PMDS) was introduced for
civilian employees in 2003. The system focuses on the contribution that each individual
makes to the work of the Department. It is based on clearly identifying roles and the
range of skills that each person needs to fulfil their role. The system is designed to
ensure greater clarity in terms of individual roles and provides for employee involvement.

The system is seen as an important tool in the ongoing development of the individual
employee and for the organisation as a whole. It is intended to continue to promote the
use of performance management across all grades of the civilian employee service.

###### 7.10.4 Equality/Work-Life Balance

The Government is committed to the principle of equal opportunity for all. Whilst the
number of female civilian employees is relatively small the Department will continue to
encourage and facilitate the employment of female civilian workers.

A wide range of work-life balance options are available to employees and staff who
wish to avail of these are facilitated to the greatest extent possible. These options will
continue to be made available subject to the operational and business needs of the
Department of Defence and the Defence Forces.

###### 7.10.5 Dignity in the Workplace

As previously outlined, the Department is committed to protecting dignity and respect
for employees in the work place. All employees have the right to be treated with respect
and dignity and to be allowed carry out their duties free from any form of harassment
and bullying. This commitment will continue through the ongoing implementation of
existing policies and the recently published Dignity at Work policy.

###### 7.10.6 Employee Assistance/Support Services

Support services are and will continue to play an important role in the working life
of civilian employees The Department currently has a number of schemes in place


-----

screening programme, audiology testing and a confidential counselling service
(Carecall). These are considered vital support services and demonstrate a commitment
to providing best possible support to employees. With rapidly changing workplace
needs the provision of such services will continue to be monitored and where required
developed for the ongoing benefit of the civilian employee workforce.

###### 7.10.7 Employee Participation

The Department is committed to ensuring that we engage fully with civilian employees
and provide opportunity for civilian employees to feed into policy insofar as relevant
and practicable. The Department will develop an agreed and consultative approach to
deliver on this commitment.

##### 7.11  Litigation

The Department’s Litigation Branch manages cases taken against the Minister
for Defence. The management of all personal injury claims both within Ireland and
overseas, has been delegated to the State Claims Agency (SCA). All employment based
claims against the Minister are managed by the Chief State Solicitor’s Office. These
cases include Judicial Review, Plenary Summonses and Civil Bills. Each case is dealt
with on its own merits. In cases where the State is considered liable or which involve
an apportionment of liability as between the State and the claimant, both the State
Claims Agency and the Chief State Solicitor’s Office’s approach is to settle such cases
expeditiously in so far as it is possible and to do so on reasonable terms. However, in
cases where liability is fully disputed by the State, all necessary resources are applied
to defending such claims robustly.

Given the diverse range of activities that form part of the daily routine for members of
the Defence Forces both at home and overseas, it is inevitable that from time to time
accidents/injuries will occur or issues will arise in the course of employment that will
result in cases being made against the Minister. Proactive risk management, coupled
with early identification of potential litigation risk and the development of mitigation
strategies have the potential to reduce the number of claims being made.

Over the lifetime of this White Paper on Defence, the Department’s Litigation Branch
will work with its civil and military colleagues, the State Claims Agency, the Chief State
Solicitors and the Office of the Attorney General;

         - To process litigation claims efficiently and effectively and provide relevant
information and reports as required by the State Claims Agency and/or the Chief
State Solicitors Office in respect of all types of litigation cases.

         - To develop and co-ordinate policy in relation to claims management.

         - To maintain an overview of litigation trends in order to identify potential litigation
risks across the Defence Organisation, take lessons learned from cases by way
of post case review and develop mitigation strategies and/or limit litigation risks.

         - To consult with experts both nationally and internationally in terms of specific
litigation/potential litigation risks in order to develop litigation/risk mitigation
strategies and ensure that the Department of Defence and the Defence Forces
maintain up to date information on best practice in areas identified through
litigation or potential litigation risks.


-----

###### pp g p p Injury incurred in Service

It is an unfortunate fact of military life that occasionally a member of the Defence
Forces will suffer a catastrophic injury during their service. At present, a member of
the Defence Forces seeking recognition for injury incurred and resulting loss in such
circumstances is obliged to litigate. The existing approach where a catastrophic injury
is incurred will be examined by the Department of Defence in consultation with the
State Claims Agency and drawing on best practice in other common law jurisdictions.
The objective will be to create a less adversarial system in such cases.


-----

-----

# 8


-----

### Chapter 8 | The Reserve Defence Force (RDF)


##### 8.1  Policy Context

The Defence Forces in Ireland consists of the Permanent Defence Force (PDF) and
the Reserve Defence Force (RDF). The RDF, comprising the First Line Reserve,
Army Reserve and Naval Service Reserve, is a very important component of Ireland’s
defence arrangements. The PDF retains the capabilities to deliver all day-to-day
military operational outputs, both at home and overseas and to respond to a range of
contingencies. When not engaged in operations the primary focus is on training and
preparedness. As the PDF is a full time professional force, its personnel are the first
choice for operational deployments.

Notwithstanding the ability of the PDF to undertake day-to-day operations and to deal
with a range of contingencies, there are circumstances where operational demands
could exceed the capacity of the PDF. These include: a significant deterioration in the
international security environment resulting in a conventional military attack on this
State, a large scale security event at home, certain civil contingencies that could require
large scale Defence Forces’ support, e.g., a major pandemic, events that require a
sustained effort over an extended period or events that require specialist capabilities
beyond those retained within the PDF. As such, a key policy and planning challenge is
to balance the risk of being unable to meet operational requirements in such situations,
with the cost of retaining larger permanent forces.

Reserve Forces can offer a cost effective means of mitigating this risk and Ireland has
retained a Reserve Defence Force in one form or another since the foundation of the
State. The Government recognise the important role that the First Line Reserve (FLR),
Army Reserve (AR) and Naval Service Reserve (NSR) have played in contributing to
Ireland’s defence capability, and in particular to, the spirit of voluntary service that has
been the hall-mark of members of the Reserve. The RDF also provides an important
link to society. The Government appreciate the service of the members of the Reserve
and have decided that there is a continued requirement to retain and develop the RDF.

Since the publication of the White Paper on Defence (2000) the RDF has undergone a
period of significant change. The development and maintenance of effective Reserve
capabilities has presented significant challenges. This remains an ongoing challenge
and this chapter sets out the current position and plan for the future development of
the Reserve.

###### 8.1.1 2012 Review of the RDF

As previously outlined, the RDF consists of the First Line Reserve (FLR), the Army
Reserve (AR) and the Naval Service Reserve (NSR). Until 2005, the AR was known as
an Fórsa Cosanta Aitiúil (FCA) and the NSR was known as an Slua Muirí.

The FLR is comprised of former members of the PDF who have undertaken to, either
voluntarily or on foot of a contractual commitment, complete a period of service in the
FLR. The AR and NSR are comprised of individuals, from a broad variety of backgrounds,
who undertake Reserve training in their spare time. Members of the FLR, AR and NSR
are liable to be called out on permanent service or service in aid to the civil power in


-----

out as part of the cross-governmental programme of Value for Money Reviews. The
Review was published In November 2012. This Review raised fundamental questions
regarding the efficiency and effectiveness of the RDF at that time.

Key findings of the Review included:

         - The strength of the Reserve had been in decline over the period examined in the
Review (2005 – 2012).

         - Recruitment over the period 2006-2009 was insufficient to maintain the strength
of the Reserve, with on average twice as many personnel leaving as being
recruited. This was not caused by restrictions on recruitment.

         - The key efficiency issue centered on the fact that the organisational structures
and support framework for the Reserve were too large for the organisation
strength.

         - The turnover of personnel was causing inherent inefficiency in the Reserve
training system. In the period 2006 to 2009, on average 56% of recruits remained
active after year one and on average 35% remained active after year two.

         - Reserve Units were under-strength and, within this strength, significant numbers
were not meeting training targets. This raised significant questions about the
capacity of Reserve Units.

         - There were questions about the currency of skill sets in the FLR given that
members of the FLR were not being required to participate in annual training
and that many had not served for an extended period.

The Review Steering Committee, which comprised civil and military personnel,
considered the role assigned to the RDF. As the PDF could meet all day-to-day
operational requirements, the Steering Committee did not identify a requirement for
Reserve inputs to tasks other than in crisis situations and did not identify any operational
requirement that required an expansion in the role of the RDF. They concluded that the
fundamental rationale for retaining the RDF was to provide a capacity to augment the
PDF in crisis situations.

They also concluded that the usage of members of the RDF in a paid capacity (i.e. in
circumstances where members of the PDF could undertake the tasks) could not be
justified due to the additional costs arising. The Review also highlighted that other
voluntary organisations such as Civil Defence were not paid for undertaking aid to the
civil authority type activities. This was also a limiting factor to utilising the RDF in a
paid capacity for such tasks. However, the Steering Committee noted that the same
difficulties did not arise if members of the RDF were willing to undertake such tasks in
a voluntary unpaid capacity.

###### 8.1.2 Review Recommendations

The Government accepted the recommendation, arising from the Review, that the
retention of the RDF was a prudential measure in order to ensure the availability of
additional capacity to support the PDF in crisis situations. However, this recommendation
was subject to the implementation of significant reform in order to ensure that the RDF
could discharge this role.

A range of measures designed to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the
RDF were also recommended. These were accepted by Government and their full
implementation is ongoing. This is a key element in developing the RDF over the
coming years These were:


-----

approximately 4,000 personnel. This required the consolidation of under-strength
Units into a smaller number of larger Units.

         - That the military authorities should critically review recruitment policy and
practice in the AR and NSR with a view to improving selection and, in turn,
retention rates.

         - That the military authorities should critically examine the approaches to the
delivery of AR and NSR training to better facilitate an efficient and effective
training regime for members of the RDF.

         - That a cap be placed on length of service in the FLR coupled with further
consideration of how FLR skill sets could be better maintained.

         - That there was scope to utilise the Reserve in a voluntary unpaid capacity,
particularly in aid to the civil authority duties similar to members of Civil Defence.
There was also scope for members of the Reserve to assist the PDF for unarmed
duties or through contribution of “professional” civilian expertise to assist the
PDF, in a voluntary unpaid capacity.

##### 8.2 First Line Reserve

The VFM review raised concerns regarding the currency of skill sets within the FLR. As
at 31 December 2014 there were 253 personnel serving in the FLR. The Government
recognise the value in harnessing the skills of former members of the PDF for a period
of Reserve service. The Government have decided to retain the FLR. The terms and
conditions of FLR membership will be revised to include capping the length of service
of members of the FLR, reactivating annual paid training for the FLR and introducing
criteria for retention as an effective member of the FLR. The case for the current
gratuity will also be examined.

The regulatory changes and service criteria required to underpin these changes will be
developed in consultation with all stakeholders.

##### 8.3  Role of the RDF

###### 8.3.1 Primary Role

As previously outlined, the Review Steering Committee did not identify a requirement
for the PDF to be augmented by members of the RDF within the day-to-day operational
profile. However, they did note that members of the FLR with watch-keeping
qualifications had augmented the Naval Service during the summer leave period, but
this had not been a feature in recent years. The White Paper Working Groups also did
not identify a requirement, within the roles undertaken by the Defence Forces, for the
deployment of Reservist to augment the PDF on day-to-day basis.

Having regard to the findings of the VFM Review and more recent considerations, the
Government have decided that the primary role of the Reserve is:

         - To augment the PDF in crisis situations.

In non-crisis situations, the main focus will be on training to prepare for this role. This
approach is currently underpinned by sections 87, 88, 90, 92 and 93 of the Defence Act
1954 and associated regulations. However, the types of tasks that the RDF could be
required to undertake in crisis situations are varied. These could include:


-----

         - ATCP support, including port security tasks.

         - ATCA support.

         - Barrack security or other supports that facilitate the release of members of the
PDF for operational duties.

The Department of Defence will undertake a review of the provisions of the Defence
Acts and bring forward proposals for any changes to the Defence Acts that may be
required in order to reflect the possible crisis situations, where activation of members
of the Reserve is appropriate.

###### 8.3.2 State Ceremonial Role

Members of the RDF continue to play an important role in contributing to state
ceremonial events. The Government value this contribution and have decided that it
should be assigned as a formal role for the Reserve as follows:

         - To contribute to state ceremonial events.

##### 8.4  RDF Organisational Structures

At end March 2013, new organisational structures were introduced for the AR and
NSR. A new “Single Force” structure abolished the previous stand alone AR Brigades
and established Army Units with both Permanent and Reserve elements. This reorganisation reduced the number of Reserve Units and revised the establishment of


-----

200 personnel, whilst retaining a nation-wide geographic footprint. Ongoing monitoring
of the implementation process has indicated that the establishment of the NSR should
be revised to 300 personnel (75 per Unit) and this will be implemented. This will revise
the overarching establishment of the AR and NSR to 4,169 personnel.

The broader RDF organisational structures will be kept under ongoing review by the
Department of Defence.

##### 8.5  AR and NSR Human Resources

Human resources are the key component of Defence Forces’ capability. In addition
to the re-organisation of the AR and NSR, a range of HR focused measures are being
progressed in line with the recommendations of the VFM Review.

###### 8.5.1 Strength

As at 31 December 2014 the effective strength of the AR (2,159 personnel) and
NSR (143 personnel) was significantly below the current establishment of 3,869 and
200 respectively. A major recruitment campaign in 2014 did not achieve the desired
outcome and following an after-action review, alternative approaches to improve
recruitment rates are being trialed. The recruitment and retention of personnel to fill
vacant posts in the establishment will remain a key challenge for the coming years.
Accordingly, approaches to recruitment and retention will be kept under ongoing
review having regard to their success rates and the key goal of having an efficient and
effective Reserve. In this context, the current organisational structures will also be kept
under review.

###### 8.5.2 Training

The identification of appropriate levels of capability having regard to the role of the
RDF and associated training that is attainable for members of the AR and NSR in light
of work and family commitments, is an ongoing challenge. Whilst there are individual
members of the Reserve with personal circumstances that enable them to undertake
significant training, both paid and unpaid, there are many who have tighter constraints
on their ability to undertake training by work-life issues. This can result in individuals of
comparable rank within AR and NSR Sub-Units having significantly differing levels of
skill and competence. The capacity of a Sub-Unit is a function of the competence of all
members, not just the higher trained members and this is a key consideration. In this
context, consideration will be given to activating Reserve Sub-Units for short periods of
training with PDF Units or other support tasks.

There is a balance to be struck between directed levels of capability, individual and
collective training requirements to meet those capability levels and the availability of
members of the RDF to undertake that training. The focus will be on achieving a level
of capability that can quickly and safely undertake ATCP supports, ATCA supports and
Barrack Duty and associated supports. This will provide the flexibility to respond to a
broad range of crisis situations. The development of higher levels of capability such as
for conventional military operations in defence of the State will require an appropriate
extended training lead time.

###### 8.5.3 Specialist Reserve

As outlined in section 7.2, there may be professional skills that on occasion may not


-----

members of the FLR, professional military skills, have the competence to undertake
such specialised tasks. These could include ICT, medical, ordnance and engineering
professionals.

The Government have decided that a panel of such professionally qualified members
of the Reserve, to be known as the Specialist Reserve should be established. A skills
survey will be conducted to identify those individuals in the FLR, AR and NSR with
relevant professional qualifications and their potential availability. Having regard to the
findings of the gap-analysis referred to in section 7.2 and the skills survey, the Defence
Forces will also seek to encourage individuals with required skills to join the AR, NSR
or FLR as appropriate. These specialist members of the RDF will be placed on a panel
which will outline their skills and, subject to their personal availability, these individuals
will be considered as one of the options to meet specialist skills shortages.

The Department will identify the options available to underpin the engagement of those
specialist members of the Reserve, whose personal circumstances would allow them
to undertake required tasks, including on overseas missions. The additional cost of
engaging such members, including pension costs where applicable, will be met from
within the existing Defence Forces’ pay allocation.

###### 8.5.4 Unpaid Service by other Members of the RDF

The Steering Group that undertook the Value for Money Review of the RDF highlighted
that there was potential to utilise the Reserve in a voluntary unpaid capacity for aid to the
civil authority type tasks. They also concluded that there was also scope for members
of the Reserve with specialist skills to assist the PDF in a voluntary unpaid capacity.
This will be further progressed in consultation with the Representative Associations.

###### 8.5.5 Opportunities for Paid Service

Opportunities for enhanced training alongside members of the PDF, has provided a
mechanism for members of the Reserve to gain enhanced military skills and certain
members of the RDF have made significant commitments in this regard. In recognition
of the effort that those members of the RDF make in developing such skills, the
Government have decided that a small number of suitably qualified members of the
RDF, with personal circumstances that allow them to do so, should be afforded the
opportunity to undertake operational duties, at home and overseas. This is viewed as
a motivational measure that will provide a realistic goal for those members of the RDF
that can commit to meeting the requirements and are available for such duties. The
Secretary General in conjunction with the Chief of Staff will bring forward proposals for
the operation of such a scheme.

###### 8.5.6 Classification of Members of the RDF

The introduction of revised criteria for remaining an effective member of the AR and
NSR and the posting of such individuals to a non-effective list has meant that positions
that were filled by “inactive” members of the AR and NSR are no longer blocked.
This facilitates the progressions of members of the RDF through the ranks. The term
effective will be replaced by the term active.

Consideration will also be given to establishing a database of former members of the
AR, NSR, FLR and PDF who could be called upon to volunteer in a crisis situation, by
listing these as an “Inactive Reserve”.


-----

##### g

The Government are satisfied that the successful implementation of the measures
outlined in this chapter will lead to a stronger and more vibrant RDF, which will be more
capable of augmenting the PDF in crisis situations. However, it is also clear that the
implementation of the findings of the 2012 Review will take longer than anticipated in
that Review. In this context, the Government have decided that the review of progress
originally envisaged will be incorporated into the overarching review process (see
Chapter 10).


-----

# 9


-----

### Chapter 9 | Civil Defence


##### 9.1  Policy Context

Civil Defence is a volunteer based organisation that supports the PRAs (i.e. An Garda
Síochána, the Health Service Executive and local authorities), government departments
and state agencies during national, regional and local emergency and non-emergency
events.

It was originally established by Government decision in 1951, as part of the national
defence structure as the necessary civil response to potential hazards which might
arise in a war situation against a backdrop of the threat of nuclear war. Civil Defence
has since modernised in response to changing requirements. With the ending of the
Cold War in the 1990s, the focus of Civil Defence shifted towards its current twin roles
of supporting the emergency services and also providing community supports. Much
of Civil Defence’s activity in recent years has involved assisting at community, sporting
and charity events.

##### 9.2  Management and Organisation

Civil Defence policy is set down by the Minister for Defence through the Civil Defence
Branch of the Department of Defence, based in Benamore, Roscrea, Co. Tipperary.
Civil Defence services are delivered at local level by the relevant Local Authority. The
life-blood of Civil Defence is provided by some 4,000 volunteers who give freely of
their time and commitment. Civil Defence services are administered by a Civil Defence
Officer (CDO) who is a full time employee of the local authority. The Civil Defence Branch
of the Department is responsible for the strategic management and development of
Civil Defence at national level. As well as grant aid, policy advice and support, the
Department provides other supports to local Civil Defence units such as central training
for local instructors in a “train the trainer” system through the Civil Defence College
in Roscrea. The Department also supplies vehicles, uniforms and personal protective
equipment for volunteers and a wide range of other equipment to local authorities for
Civil Defence use.

The CDO is responsible for the day-to-day management of Civil Defence matters in
their local authority area. The CDO acts as the link between the volunteer, community,
local authority and the Department nationally. The CDOs are assisted in the day-to-day
management of Civil Defence training and operations by a key team of instructors,
qualified in a range of disciplines. Apart from the payment of expenses for travel and
subsistence, in certain circumstances, Civil Defence members make themselves
available for training, exercises or operations on a voluntary basis.

##### 9.3  Development of Civil Defence

The Government are committed to the continued development of Civil Defence.
The volunteer ethos of Civil Defence is a hallmark of great pride and one which
the Government wish to cherish and support into the future. The Government also
recognise the important role of Local Government in the management of Civil Defence
and wish to support the continued role of local authorities in fostering the contribution


-----

objective of supporting the PRAs in a variety of emergency and non-emergency
situations. This embraces the large number of support roles under the Framework for
Major Emergency Management (MEM) including assistance in dealing with a wide
range of emergencies at national and local level, including severe weather, flooding
and searches for missing persons. All of the foregoing are referred to as core services.

The Civil Defence Act 2012, provides statutory underpinning to the preparation of local
Civil Defence Plans. These provide the means for each local authority, under the policy
oversight of the Minister for Defence, to have a strong local plan consistent with local
needs. A feature of Civil Defence in recent years has been the development of more
regionally based approaches built around inter-local authority co-operation. This regional
approach will be developed further to capitalise on the strengths and capacities in
different local authority areas.

The principal legislation governing Civil Defence dates back to 1939. While there has
been some amending legislation over the years, there is a need to provide a more
modern aggregated piece of governing legislation. New legislation will be progressed
in this regard over the life-time of the White Paper.

In order to enhance liaison under the MEM and guide the continued development
of Civil Defence in response to evolving requirements, the Government propose to
establish a new Inter-agency Guidance Team (IGT) led by the Department of Defence
(Civil Defence Branch) and otherwise comprising representation from the National
Directorate for Fire and Emergency Management in the Department of the Environment,
Community and Local Government, An Garda Síochána, the Defence Forces, the HSE
and local authorities through the participation of the County and City Management
Association and the Civil Defence Officers’ Association. It is foreseen that the new
IGT will help to ensure that Civil Defence services and capabilities are developed in
the light of the needs of the PRAs under the MEM. It will provide additional support to
national leadership from Civil Defence Branch across the entire organisation in relation
to emerging standards and address issues of common concern to Civil Defence and
the PRAs.

Over the years, Civil Defence volunteers have been utilised in a variety of community
support roles at local level. While recognising that Civil Defence volunteers are drawn
from the local community and have a long and proud history of assisting at community
events, there are limits to the support that can be provided, within available resources.
Where resources permit and with the agreement of the local authority, Civil Defence
will continue to support appropriate community events. These events can provide
an opportunity for Civil Defence volunteers to practice their skills while contributing
to the community. They also raise the profile of the organisation and may be useful
for recruiting volunteers. However, in the continued development and support of
Civil Defence, the White Paper places emergency support as the priority task of Civil
Defence.

Civil Defence will continue to work closely with other volunteer-based organisations
involved in emergency supports such as Mountain Rescue, the Irish Red Cross, St
John’s Ambulance, the Order of Malta and sub-aqua clubs.

##### 9.4  Capabilities 

Civil Defence derives its capabilities from its core services of Casualty, Search &
Rescue, Auxiliary Fire Service, Radiation Monitoring, Welfare and Communications.


-----

services remain relevant to changing needs at national, regional and local level and that
Civil Defence remains an effective volunteer based emergency support organisation.
Existing MOUs and SLAs will be reviewed and, where relevant, updated. Opportunities
for further SLAs will also be explored.

The Department, through Civil Defence Branch, will communicate clearly, to all
stakeholders, the Civil Defence capabilities that are available in emergency and nonemergency response. This is to ensure that capabilities are not just developed but are
promptly called upon in emergency situations.

The Government recognise the importance of the training provided at the Civil Defence
College. It is a recognised training centre of the Pre-Hospital Emergency Care Council.
Civil Defence volunteers are trained to recognised national and international standards.
Civil Defence will continue to develop its high quality Casualty Service.

Civil Defence will continue to develop its search and rescue capability in support of
An Garda Síochána. This will include the expansion of its Remotely Piloted Aircraft
Systems (RPAS) capability and continued joint training with An Garda Síochána. This
service will also encompass any approved future Urban Search & Rescue capability.

Civil Defence will continue its support to local authorities, primarily their fire services,
in times of severe weather including for flood response operations, the movement of
water and other support roles.

A very effective feature of the work of Civil Defence’s volunteers is in the supply of
certain welfare services in emergency situations including the capacity to deal
with displaced persons and set up feeding and rest centres. This capability will


-----

operations and those of the PRAs and other agencies in the event of national, regional
or local emergencies.

Civil Defence will maintain and further develop its capacity for radiation monitoring,
both on a national or regional basis, to collect samples, take radiation readings and to
deliver such samples/data to the Environmental Protection Agency for further analysis.

Civil Defence has a well developed radio communications system. This operates on
a national, regional and local level. Civil Defence also has a range of command and
control facilities which it makes available in support of the PRAs. These services will be
maintained and further developed according to need.

The Civil Defence Branch will utilise, if feasible and where it makes sense, technical
assistance from the Defence Forces in the context of avoiding replication of scarce
skills within the Defence Organisation.

##### 9.5  Personnel and Training

The Civil Defence organisation has approximately 4,000 active members listed on the
Civil Defence volunteer register. This is a very significant national resource with its
own unique local footprint. The Government will ensure that a strong focus will be
maintained on fostering this volunteer ethos into the future.

In order to provide for the best future management and deployment of Civil Defence,
the Government authorise a process through which each local authority under their
Civil Defence Plans, in conjunction with the Department of Defence, will determine an
appropriate volunteer strength for each of its services. These volunteers will be trained
to reflect roles and priorities.

Civil Defence volunteers will continue to be trained in various skills such as casualty,
search and rescue, flood response, radiation monitoring, welfare and communications.
Health and safety requirements will inform approaches to training and equipment
plans. The Department will maintain and develop the training programmes and skill
sets within the organisation to national and international standards and best practice.
The Civil Defence College will organise specific training across all core services.
This training will continue to be provided to national and/or internationally accredited
standards. Civil Defence will identify and make use of national synergies in training
and operational capacities to make best use of financial resources and shared services
including the development of further links with third level institutions.

##### 9.6  Equipment and Infrastructure

Civil Defence will utilise new technologies that assist in delivering its core services. For
example, civil Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) are being utilised in missing
persons’ searches. Civil Defence has also acquired a large number of TETRA radios
allowing for efficient communications with the PRAs during emergencies.

The Department of Defence will continue to provide the resources and supports
necessary to fulfil the mission of Civil Defence, including fit-for-purpose equipment,
uniforms and Personal Protective Equipment. Within available funding, a programmed
approach will be taken to the ongoing replacement of older equipment, including
vehicles and boats, with obsolete equipment being withdrawn from service.

Responsibility for the accommodation of local Civil Defence Units will remain
with the relevant local authority Most local authorities have provided good quality


-----

Units could be improved. The Department will work pro-actively with local authorities
to ensure that appropriate accommodation is provided for all Civil Defence Units. The
Department of Defence will continue to provide high quality infrastructure for Civil
Defence at a national level, including any necessary improvements to the facilities of
the Civil Defence College.

##### 9.7  Funding

Civil Defence plans prepared by local authorities under the Civil Defence Act 2012, require
adequate resources for their implementation in respect of national and local elements.
Aside from strong local political and management leadership and commitment, these
resources include the Personnel, Training, Equipment and Infrastructure required to
enable all core services operate at the appropriate level.

Civil Defence training and operations are funded by a combination of a central
Exchequer grant from the Department of Defence and a contribution from the relevant
local authority. In addition to the administrative costs of the Civil Defence Branch of the
Department of Defence, and central training and equipment expenditure, some €2.75m
is being provided in 2015 for Civil Defence funding to local authorities. Expenditure
incurred by Local Authorities on Civil Defence is grant-aided to the extent of 70% by
the Department of Defence. The Department also supplies vehicles, uniforms and
personal protective equipment for volunteers and a wide range of other equipment to
local authorities for Civil Defence use. This can be supplemented by local authorities.
While accommodation for local Civil Defence Units is the responsibility of the relevant
local authority, the Department of Defence has provided some funding for the upgrading
of accommodation where resources have permitted.

Consistent with Defence funding overall, the Government intend that financial
allocations will be maintained in order to underpin Civil Defence development and
in particular to retain necessary capabilities into the future. Additional funding will be
provided for new training courses as required, updating and replacing equipment and
uniforms and also for any necessary upgrading of the infrastructure at the Civil Defence
College. The Department will promote synergies with other agencies to make best use
of financial resources.


-----

# 10


-----

### Chapter 10 | White Paper Implementation


##### 10.1  Introduction

This chapter sets out the approach to implementation of the White Paper. The
White Paper is aimed at securing a robust and sustainable approach to defence for
the period ahead. The arrangements for implementation involve some significant
innovations directed at achieving this. The principal elements relate to civil and military
management, defence review arrangements, funding and implementation frameworks.
The Government will ensure that the necessary actions are taken to deliver the range
of initiatives and continued development of policy and approaches contained in the
White Paper.

##### 10.2  Defence Management Issues

###### 10.2.1 Civil-Military Management

The Government recognise the exemplary approach taken by the Defence Organisation
in furthering reform and addressing the particular challenges following the economic
collapse.

With reduced personnel and financial resources, domestic and international defence
outputs have been maintained to a very high standard. The manifestation of this is there
to see in a very practical way. It is reflected in the continuing quality of the effective
engagement in the international sphere at defence policy level, carried through, inter
alia, in practical terms by successful overseas peace support operations in a number of
“high-end” missions. It can be seen across the full spectrum of defence outputs from
fishery protection to aid to the civil power through to the often highly colourful and
popular ceremonial tasks undertaken by the Defence Forces. It is visible in the continuing
contribution of Civil Defence nationwide based on very modest central management
and funding. It is observable by virtue of the independently bench-marked high quality
payroll, finance and pension services provided to existing and former members of the
Defence Forces.

The Department’s Strategic Management Committee (SMC) remains the central
forum for management and oversight of civil and military matters. It provides the
means by which senior civil and military managers can engage in policy development
and oversight of implementation while respecting the separate lines of authority within
the Department’s civil and military structures. Considerable attention has been given
in recent years to the ongoing development of civil and military management matters.
The fruits of this are apparent in the recognition of the Defence Organisation being at
the forefront of reform.

The effective management of defence, including the implementation of the White
Paper, will require sustained close collaboration of civil and military management under
the direction of the Minister for Defence. Through the leadership of the Secretary
General and Chief of Staff, the various actions required will be progressed in respect
of the civil and military branches of the Department and the Defence Forces. The
Secretary General and the Chief of Staff are the respective heads of the civil and
ilit b h f th D t t A h th t th i i l li d i


-----

working relationship between the Minister, the Secretary General and the Chief of
Staff is a key ingredient to the successful management of defence. In this context, the
Secretary General and the Chief of Staff have access to the Minister individually, and
jointly as sought by the Minister, in the conduct of their respective roles. In the context
of public management reforms, there is a greater recognition of the need to ensure
that there is a sufficiently structured approach to leadership processes. Accordingly,
to further facilitate the role of the Minister as head of the Department and to provide
an enhanced opportunity for strategic direction by the Minister, it is intended that the
Minister will convene as necessary, but no less than quarterly, meetings of the senior
civil-military leadership of the Department.

The White Paper provides the scope to build on the successes achieved to date, in
facing the new challenges ahead. In the new environment, this will require new levels
of flexibility and pro-activity to keep pace with new challenges and to maintain a high
state of preparedness to deal with as yet unknown risks. To further assist this process,
new types of joint civil-military working will be considered. The Secretary General
and the Chief of Staff will develop a plan for this which will seek to optimise mutual
synergies and consider further models of integrated working between the various civil
and military branches of the Department. This will build on the success of the Office
of Emergency Planning, within which civil and military personnel work together in a
single branch.

The Defence Organisation’s engagement at international level is of increasing
importance especially in the UN, EU and NATO PfP contexts. It has at present only
a basic capacity to participate in the many fora associated with Ireland’s membership
of these bodies. Ireland also has increasingly important bilateral relationships which
support our defence stance and capabilities. The Secretary General, in conjunction
with the Chief of Staff, will have prepared a specific short-term review to assess the
increased capacity required in staffing, civil and military in these areas. The review will
consider also how best to promote and develop these relationships in practical ways.

###### 10.2.2 Civil-Military Training

The Department and the Defence Forces have a common interest in training and
education, particularly in developing and enhancing a common training and education
agenda. Building on the new induction course, further joint civil-military training
initiatives will be put in place. These will be based on the identification of specific
common training goals and experiences which would be helpful to both elements
of the Defence Organisation and which would help further integration of civil-military
approaches. These initiatives could include, inter alia, training opportunities to meet
common civil and military needs in cyber security, the increasingly multi-faceted peace
support operations and financial management and procurement. There is scope also
for complementary participation by civil and military personnel on training measures
provided separately within the Defence Organisation. The Defence Forces have highly
developed command and leadership education and training that will be examined for its
suitability and application across the Defence Organisation. Similarly, the civil branches
have significant professional competence to share in public management and policy
development which is likely to be beneficial for the Defence Forces.

###### 10.2.3 Civil Service Renewal

The Defence Organisation has managed to maintain outputs despite the severely


-----

into the future. The Department of Defence has shown a strong commitment to reform
and will take forward this reform agenda further under the ambit of the Civil Service
Renewal process. In doing so, it will maintain a strong process of engagement with
staff associations and through partnership structures, in addition to engagement with
members of staff directly.

The Civil Service Renewal plan has put a premium on an enhanced approach to human
resource management. This acknowledges the centrality of the best management of
the civil service workforce to harness skills, competence, experience and commitment
to serve the public and ensure pride of work. The Renewal Plan’s commitment to
elaborated approaches to human resources management and learning and development
is an important reinforcer to and multiplier of the Department’s own commitment to this
area. As instanced earlier in the White Paper, the Government will see this approach
developed, underpinned and propelled further by the Civil Service Renewal process, to
ensure that the Department has the right people with the right skills in the right place
at the time required.

###### 10.2.4 Shared Services

The Defence Organisation has made a strong contribution to the delivery of the
Government’s shared services agenda. The Department’s Renmore office in Galway
was selected as one of the three locations nationwide for the establishment of the
Payroll Shared Service Centre (PSSC). It has commenced operations in relation to
some payrolls and will develop further as additional payrolls and pensions payments,
including those for the Defence Forces, transfer into the Renmore PSSC centre. The
focus of the programme is on consolidating and developing an integrated Payroll Shared
Service Centre (PSSC) across the Civil Service and designing an appropriate operating
model with standardised end to end processes on a common technology platform in
order to replace the current 18 payroll centres geographically dispersed throughout the
country. The experience and expertise of the Department’s Renmore finance and ICT
staff have been an important component element of the successful implementation
and delivery of this project. The Renmore office has also been identified as a location for
the potential delivery of Financial Management Shared Services (FMSS). Subject to the
relevant procurement and evaluation processes and future Government consideration,
the Department will ensure successful delivery of the defence component of this.

The development of shared services, if taken to full potential, will result in the transfer
of a large element of the Department’s Renmore-based staff to the Department of
Public Expenditure and Reform’s shared services office. This will change considerably
the overall profile of the Department’s organisation as the bulk of transactional work in
HR, payroll and possibly eventually finance, will no longer be present.

###### 10.2.5 Civil Management Resource

The civil service branches of the Department of Defence have reduced steadily in size
over the last 20 years. Changes in approaches, increased use of technology and less
administration, along with delegation of some functions to the Defence Forces have
all played a role. Meanwhile, the policy range of the Department has expanded very
considerably. Based on the scale of its present resourcing, the Department will be
extremely challenged to deal with the range of issues being presented. Implementation
of shared services may result in time to the transfer of some 75 personnel including
those who have already moved from early 2015 through to those who would transfer to


-----

shared services in the period 2017-18. While the re-sizing of the Department will
permit a new concentration on policy-based work around defence provision, it will
result in a depleted overall resource and highlights the need for further enhancement
of policy and analysis capacities.

The Department of Defence is unique among Departments of State in having its
headquarters outside Dublin, and aside from the small Office of Emergency Planning,
the civil service element is fully decentralised in offices in Newbridge, Renmore and
Roscrea. The Government recognise that there are inefficiencies associated with
this. The expected further reductions in staffing, with the transfer of functions to the
DPER shared services centre, will further reduce personnel numbers and add to the
fragmentation across these four geographic locations. Taking account of a forthcoming
organisational capability review of the civil service branches, under the ambit of Civil
Service Renewal, to be commenced in early 2016, along with the definitive outcome
and timing of further shared services developments, the future geographical layout will
be assessed. It is likely that this will involve the creation of a stronger Dublin presence
for the Department in respect of its more strategic functions.

The security environment and the associated defence requirements in the period ahead
will require a sustained and developed approach to building and maintaining defence
capabilities. The recent economic crisis has reinforced the viewpoint that strategic
planning and systems to generate better foresight are an absolute requirement for
Civil Service management. The planned organisational capability review will provide
an early opportunity to assess the civil service branches’ capacity to deliver on the


-----

to international and domestic security issues, defence capability development, cyber
defence and new defence technologies, enterprise support, and issues that may arise
in the fast developing maritime and aviation contexts.

###### 10.2.6 Defence Forces Senior Management Arrangements

The Defence Forces, in common with most military forces internationally are organised
into their land, air, and maritime elements with appropriate support structures. A
significant requirement in military management, including command and control, is
the requirement to achieve appropriate “jointness” between the different services
comprehending the forces for land, air and sea operations. This was a theme that
occurred through the White Paper consultation process, especially in the international
engagement and is common the world-over. Issues arise in relation to best planning,
optimal organisation and management of joint operations.

Arrangements exist for joint operations, and the Defence Forces execute these very
successfully, although the circumstances in which these are required on a large scale
tend to be limited. However, the requirement for joint operations is likely to increase
in the future, especially in the overseas domain. In recognition of this trend, and based
on lessons learned from the White Paper process, it is proposed to consider the scope
to enhance “jointness” across the military organisation. This was not dealt with as
part of the more recent re-organisation of military structures. As outlined in Chapter 6,
the Government have decided that the Secretary General and Chief of Staff will jointly
undertake a review of the current high level command and control structures in the
Defence Forces having regard to international best practice on military command and
control and drawing upon external expertise. This will include a review of structures
for managing joint operations and intelligence. Recommendations for change will be
brought forward to the Minister for Defence for consideration.

###### 10.2.7 Civilian Employees

The civilian employees of the Department, mainly employed in Defence Forces’
installations, play a vital role in the delivery of Defence outputs. There is a need for
a specific civil-military review to ensure a consistent, strategic and modern approach
to the management of the civilian employee workforce and to ensure best in class
approaches are taken. This will include, inter alia, an examination of recruitment,
redeployment and management matters. This will be combined with ongoing targeted
redeployment and recruitment to fill immediate gaps. This will ensure a sufficiently
strategic approach to meeting long-term needs and will ensure that this component of
the White Paper is progressed effectively.

##### 10.3 White Paper Implementation and Review

The overall planning period for this White Paper is foreseen as ten years. This builds
on the successful approach adopted by successive administrations in respect of the
previous White Paper. This took account of the need to provide sufficient stability for
policy and planning purposes given the particular nature of defence. It is well recognised
that defence policy development should seek to adopt as long a planning horizon as
possible. This is sensible given its complex and multi-faceted nature, and in view of its
connectedness to a variety of other policy areas, such as foreign and security policies
which have their own unique long-term properties.

Defence capability development is understood internationally to be a relatively long


-----

equipment – have very long delivery times compared to many other sectoral initiatives.
The process of determination of capabilities based on policy requirements and the
identification of appropriate equipment choices through to the procurement of these and
their acceptance and full operationalisation into service, is one of many years. Making
the right decisions on a timely basis is, therefore, especially acute in the defence policy
area. This presents a particular difficulty for Ireland as typically this country is procuring
items in relatively small quantities with specific tailored requirements. Defence
equipment generally has this feature of tailoring to particular national requirements.
However, in Ireland’s case this can present a particular challenge given the relatively
small quantities purchased and usually the need for equipment to span a number of
roles. Therefore, the quality and timeliness of decision-making processes are critical.

Notwithstanding the overall goal of maximising policy certainty and endurance over
as long a planning horizon as possible, such endurance can only be assured by the
continuing relevance of policy approaches. The White Paper implementation process,
therefore, must include appropriate review mechanisms to provide for policy revision
or recalibration.

The Government intend to put in place a new fixed cycle of defence reviews. These
are common practice internationally and give reassurance that policy remains up to
date and relevant to changing future circumstances. Each three years there will be a
White Paper update – this will consider progress made up to that time and consider any
revisions required. It will commence in the second-half of the third year of the cycle.
Each alternate three-year review will commence in the first half of the third year of that
cycle and be more comprehensive in nature and be styled a strategic defence review.
Under this programmed approach, the first White Paper update would commence in
July 2018 and the strategic defence review would commence in early 2021. These
new review processes will inform strategy statement preparation. This approach will
be further calibrated in the light of the ongoing monitoring of the security environment
and any associated developments, as envisaged in Section 3.2 of this White Paper.

The essential ingredients of the White Paper defence review process will be to ensure
a full updated security assessment and a fresh consideration of the implications of this
assessment for overall policy requirements, associated tasks, capability development
and resourcing. The importance of bringing certainty and regularity to the process of
defence planning is as important as the content of these plans.

The Government wish to give these defence review processes a new standing in
public management terms. Defence matters should ideally attract all party support.
Indeed, the Government acknowledge that there is a strong tradition within the
chambers of the Oireachtas of support for national interest defence issues. In this
spirit, the Government intend to engage in a process of all-party consultation to seek
to put in place these proposals for defence review on a consensual basis. Subject
to appropriate refinement through these consultations, consideration will be given to
putting the review process on a statutory footing.

Defence requirements, in extremis, require the marshalling of national effort in a shared
response to an emergency. As outlined earlier in the White Paper, emergencies with
national impact can come in a variety of forms. Some of these, while not originating
from a security threat, can result in security impacts for which defence capabilities are a
necessary response. The Government Task Force on Emergency Planning will remain
as the principal vehicle through which the planning and response to these emergencies
will be co-ordinated based on the lead-department model However this approach and


-----

generally of national security architecture and the production of a national framework
for emergency management which is in development.

##### 10.4  Defence Funding

###### 10.4.1 Level of Spend

Consideration of defence expenditure often does not take account of the wider social,
economic and other benefits of investment in defence. Frequently, defence is seen
purely as consumption expenditure and the connectivity between defence provision
and the proper functioning of civil society is not well understood or immediately obvious.
Defence provision, as a foundation element of national security, remains critical and
fundamental to the success and operation of most other public policies. It ought,
therefore, have an appropriate call on public investment by the State relative to other
funding requirements. The fuller social, economic and other national benefits which
flow from adequate defence need to be more strongly articulated and recognised.
This White Paper emphasises Government commitment to necessary resourcing of
defence into the future.

Ireland’s investment in defence is low relative to international comparison and as with
other areas of government expenditure has been reduced very considerably in the
period since 2008. The White Paper on Defence (2000) identified a ratio of 70% to
30% as being the appropriate pay to non-pay ratio for defence expenditure. A level
of 30% for non-pay would have been regarded, in the current context of advanced
technology and essential reliance for most operations on heavier duty equipment, as
the absolute minimum ratio. In 2015, the pay to non-pay ratio is 73:27. The 27% nonpay element provides for all of the standing costs of the Defence Forces, the ongoing
costs of operations and the renewal and maintenance of military equipment. The future
ambition is to maintain the stability of the pay element while simultaneously increasing
the non-pay element.

In the past, Ireland has found itself on occasion, without the defence capabilities that
it needed to respond to deterioration in the security environment or other defence
challenges. The situation at the time of the Second World War, the capacity in depth to
provide for international peacekeeping into the 1960s and the commencement of the
Northern Troubles all brought unwanted and to a degree partly avoidable challenges
to our limited defence capacities. Successful defence is achieved based on adequate
foresight, sufficient preparation and flexibility and poise and adequate funding. Ongoing policy has sought to ensure that these are in place. This White Paper seeks
to ensure that the necessary arrangements are in place, consistent with standing
Exchequer budgetary processes, to provide optimal financial resources to respond to
emergent challenges in the security environment and to assure foresight, flexibility and
poise and thus preparedness.

###### 10.4.2 Procurement and Funding Modalities and Requirements

The long-term nature of defence planning and the building of new approaches have
been outlined in the preceding section. The corollary of this planning context is that
potential problems and threats of varying degrees of probability (for which defence
capabilities are required) often do not appear as urgent matters in current terms. Thus,
investment in defence is prone not to be prioritised in the absence of immediate and


-----

new defence review arrangements to elevate discussion and debate in a way which
ensures that, notwithstanding other pressing demands for resourcing, investment in
defence is given the appropriate consideration which its place in public policy (and
in addressing relevant risks) demands. The intention is to assure a more strategic
approach to better inform the existing budget and estimates process.

Procurement of defence equipment has unique features that present particular
challenges. Significant capital investment programmes (such as the acquisition of
Armoured Vehicles or Ships or Aircraft) represent significant investment which can
have a life expectancy in excess of 30 years. A key aspect of defence procurement is
the length of time the procurement process takes from the initial decision to procure
through to the acceptance of the final product – a timeframe of several years is not
unusual. It is evident that military procurement inflation and the role of technological
innovation on military hardware will have an increasing impact on defence planning
and procurement activities. For example, the small number of Remotely Piloted
Aircraft Systems (RPAS) acquired over a decade ago were a significant technological
advance for the Defence Forces. Such technology is now in common civilian use
and will continue to increase in capability. In the military sphere, most comparable
organisations have moved to later generation RPAS while first generation equipment
has become increasingly more difficult to maintain. There is a requirement to provide
for replacement and upgrade of defence equipment and to address obsolescence. A
multi-annual resource planning and procurement system is required to optimise this
process. The key elements of the capability requirements are described in Chapter 6.

The Government consider it essential that the Defence Forces should have the
capabilities including equipment, necessary to undertake operations successfully taking
account of the inevitable risks associated with military tasks. A prudent approach will be
maintained to the funding of equipment by continuing to adopt, where appropriate, the
approach of “last move advantage” rather than early mover in equipment choices to
achieve the optimal result. Procurement approaches will be developed further through
more robust planning, more collaborative/joint procurement through direct engagement
with other countries or through the European Defence Agency and increased recourse
to direct purchasing on a Government to Government basis (whether it be to secure
the latest and emerging developments or simply to acquire generic military goods on
a second-user basis).

When establishing the Office of Government Procurement (OGP), the Government
acknowledged that procurement on defence equipment and services was a specialised
area and would not fall under a centralised procurement model. The complexity of
the defence procurement sector is also recognised at European level with the recent
introduction of the EU Directive (2009/81/EC – relating to the award of contracts dealing
with defence and security) for the procurement of military goods and services. Ireland
implemented the transposition of this Directive, by way of implementing Regulations
(S.I. No 62 of 2012). The Defence Organisation will continue to avail of framework
contracts developed by or under the aegis of the OGP for all generic non-military goods
and services.

The development of more integrated civil-military working practices will include
consideration of a central procurement cell within the Defence Organisation. While
innovative approaches to procurement have a role to play, the practical position is that
defence is under-resourced in context. Over recent years, the renewal of essential
equipment has been progressed within a significantly reduced funding envelope. It has


-----

desirable. This has required the prioritisation of equipment that is essential to maintaining
ongoing operational outputs to the detriment of contingency requirements. There is a
continued need to provide for essential equipment replacement as existing equipment
reaches the end of its useful life. Not securing the funding to replace this essential
equipment will result in key capabilities being eroded. This also has implications for
force protection and the health and safety of personnel.

Investment will continue to be required in buildings infrastructure. While investment
has taken place over the years, many Defence Forces’ buildings are old with an ongoing
need for maintenance and renewal. Funds have been insufficient to prevent deterioration
of some buildings. A major investment project is underway around the Naval Base at
Haulbowline involving commercial, educational and tourism development. This will be
leveraged to maximise the benefit to the Naval Service and development of the Base.

Based on preparatory work carried out in relation to the White Paper, significant additional
funding is required simply to maintain existing levels of capability and associated
operational outputs. The lead time required to procure certain major equipment items
would suggest that it may not be possible to initiate expenditure in the short term.
As such, there would be a requirement to develop a procurement strategy and align
requirements and lead times with future expenditure profiles. This must take account
of the considerable difficulty of estimating procurement costs given the nature of the
products being purchased involving a limited number of suppliers with unique cost
factors driving pricing.

###### 10.4.3 Defence Funding Models and Approach

Ireland’s financial position remains extremely difficult. The Government continue to give
priority to assuring the stability of the public finances as a key component of sustained
recovery. This has meant that it is not possible to respond to all of the pressing and
extremely worthy areas for which public funds, in form of the taxpayers’ money, could
be applied.

However, the Government have resolved that Ireland’s investment in defence, over
the lifetime of the White Paper, must be on a sustainable footing taking account of
long-term national interest. Any new approach must take cognisance of the realities
of the state of the public finances. In this context, the Government are establishing a
specific defence funding study to capture in a new way the expected long-term costs
of meeting Ireland’s defence requirements using a ten year planning horizon linked
to the proposed new framework of fixed cycle reviews. The study, to be completed
by year end, will provide the evidence base to establish a more evolved approach to
defence funding. Current medium term budgets have been set by the existing envelope
provided by the Comprehensive Review of Expenditure (CRE). The assumptions and
decisions flowing from the CRE need to be more fully tested now in the light of this
White Paper. In addition, a more comprehensive approach, linked to the new defence
review architecture, needs to provide a fully elaborated picture for Government on
the choices and resource implications associated with these. There is also scope to
explore new funding models potentially involving public—private partnerships, leasing
and lease-back or other sources such as the European Investment Bank. A developed
funding framework needs to be available to provide for step changes in defence
provision should a changed security assessment warrant this.

In maximising the use of resources, the Department has over recent years disposed of
surpluspropertiesfromwithintheDefenceestate Someofthesepropertieshavebeen


-----

A benefit for defence is that scarce resources are no longer tied up in the securing and
maintenance of properties surplus to requirements. The Government have decided
that 100% of any such receipts are to be reinvested in the defence capital programme
and necessary adjustments will be made in financial provisions.

Elsewhere in this White Paper the direct engagement by defence in social and economic
interventions has been described. These will continue to deliver tangible benefits to
individuals and enterprises across the country. They are not a rationale for defence
provision but they are a beneficial outcome and are an added return on investment
from defence which needs to be taken into full calculation.

###### 10.4.4 Superannuation Costs

The White Paper has set out a new Veterans Policy. An important element of the
ongoing commitment to veterans and their families is the payment of pensions.
Specific superannuation arrangements have been an important element of HR policy
particularly in relation to supporting sufficient levels of personnel turnover, which is an
essential requirement to maintain an appropriate age profile for the Defence Forces.
Over the last number of years, there has been a particular funding gap in relation to
meeting the cost of military pensions. The number of individuals in receipt of military
superannuation payments has increased from 11,000 to over 12,000 from 2007 to the
present. The uncertainty over the timing and number of retiring personnel has stretched
the existing financial provision contained in Vote 35. This additional cost has been met
by savings from the Defence Vote, mainly through pay savings. The Government
recognise that this is not a sustainable approach and that adequate provision needs to
be made to meet the cost of pensions of veterans.

##### 10.5  Implementation Frameworks

Implementation of the White Paper will involve the utilisation of the various new and
existing management frameworks. The programmed regular defence planning review
process will be the most significant outer framework governing this. As described,
this will evolve in the light of political consultation and the elaboration of wider
approaches for national security architecture. Implementation of most elements of
the White Paper will be a matter for the civil and military management working under
the direction of the Minister for Defence. It will be a regular feature for oversight and
review by the Department’s Strategic Management Committee. However, the matters
for implementation in the White Paper in very many cases link with wider spheres of
policy in relation to foreign relations, security, enterprise and public management. The
roles of other Departments with responsibilities in these areas will be critical. New
inter-Ministerial or Departmental fora will be considered to progress particular issues
in this context. It is an absolute necessity of any White Paper that it is “owned” by all
government stakeholders and that policy is implemented from a whole of government
perspective.

On-going consultation will also be important with wider stakeholders. Civil and military
management will take an active approach to relevant consultation with external and
internal, especially staff, interests in this regard. Partnership and conciliation and
arbitration machinery will be used to engage appropriately with staff interests and a
premium will be put on ensuring regular communication of progress and matters for
consideration.


-----

-----

##### pp

 White Paper on Defence Steering Group

         - Mr. Des Dowling (Assistant Secretary) (Chairman).

         - Rear Admiral Mark Mellet DSM (Deputy Chief of Staff Support)) – replaced Major
General Ralph James (Deputy Chief of Staff (Operations)) on the Group in April
2015.

         - Mr. Robert Mooney (Principal, Planning & Organisation Branch).

         - Col. Kevin Cotter (Director, Strategic Planning Branch) – replaced Col. Michael
Meehan on the Group in November 2014.

         - Mr. Stephen Hall (Assistant Principal, Planning & Organisation Branch) (Secretary
to the Steering Group).

##### White Paper on Defence Civil and Military Working Group A

         - Mr. Robert Mooney (Principal, Planning and Organisation Branch) (Chairman).

         - Col. Kevin Cotter (Director, Strategic Planning Branch) – replaced Col. Michael
Meehan on the Group in November 2014.

         - Mr. Cathal Duffy (Principal, Executive Branch).

         - Ms. Clare Tiernan (Principal, International Security and Defence Policy Branch) –
replaced Ms. Teresa Sydenham on the Group in February 2015.

         - Col. Philip Brennan (Director of Operations).

         - Col. Barry Hanan (Chief of Air Staff-Support).

         - Cdr. Brian Fitzgerald (OIC Planning & Policy, Naval Service).

         - Mr. Stephen Hall (Assistant Principal, Planning and Organisation Branch)
(Secretary to the Group).

##### White Paper on Defence Civil and Military Working Group B

         - Mr. Robert Mooney (Principal, Planning and Organisation Branch), (Chairman).

         - Ms. Teresa Sydenham (Principal, International Security and Defence Policy
Branch).

         - Ms. Aileen Nolan (Principal, Defence Forces Personnel Policy Branch).

         - Mr. Michael O’Boyle (Principal, Finance Branch).

         - Mr. Jason Kearney (Principal, Contracts Branch).

         - Lt. Col. Paul Whelan (Executive Officer, Strategic Planning Branch) - replaced Lt.
Col. Patrick Flynn on the Group in October 2014.

         - Capt. David Barry (Officer Commanding Naval Operations Command).

         - Lt. Col. David Dignam (OIC Planning Section, Operations and Plans Branch).

         - Lt. Col. Rory O’Connor (OC No.1 Operations Wing, Air Corps).

         - Comdt. Cormac Mangan (SO Policy and Plans, Strategic Planning Branch) –
replaced Comdt. Mark Prendergast on the Group in July 2014.

         - Mr. Stephen Hall (Assistant Principal, Planning and Organisation Branch)
(Secretary to the Group).


-----

##### pp

 White Paper on Defence - Ministerial Advisory Group

         - Mr. John Minihan (Chairman);

         - Mr. Karl Croke;

         - Ms. Marie Cross;

         - Commodore Frank Lynch (Retired)

###### Ministerial Advisory Group Terms of Reference:

The Group will meet to support the Minister in his deliberations on the White Paper on
Defence. In this context, the Group will:

         - Provide advice to Departmental officials on matters the Group considers to be of
relevance in the production of the White Paper

         - Engage with the White Paper Civil-Military Steering Group as required

         - Arrange for the Chair or members of the Group to prepare any material which
the Group wishes to put before the Department for its consideration in its work
on the White Paper

         - Give consideration to and provide observations on draft White Paper material as
produced by the Department and authorised by the Minister.


-----

##### pp

 List of organisations and individuals who made submissions as part of the White Paper public consultation process

Association of Retired Commissioned Officers (ARCO)

Bord Iascaigh Mhara

British Irish Chamber of Commerce

Captain Noel Carey (Retired)

Civil Defence Officers Association

Cllr. Catherine Clancy, Lord Mayor of Cork

Coastal and Marine Research Centre, University College Cork

Col. Dorcha Lee, (Retired)

Comdt. Michael Rowan (Retired)

Commander (GS) Pasi Staff

Commander Brian Fitzgerald

Commissioners of Irish Lights

Commodore Frank Lynch (Retired)

Councillor Jim Finucane

D’Amico Tankers Ltd.

Department of Public Expenditure and Reform

Dr. Brendan Flynn

Dr. Anthony Grehan

Dr. Geoff King, Director, Pre-Hospital, Emergency Care Council

Dr. Paul O’Connor

Dr. Aoife O’Donoghue

Dr. Kiran Sarma

Dr. Ian Speller

Dublin Port Company

Engineer’s Ireland

Espion Group

European Fisheries Control Agency

Fianna Fáil

Fishing for Justice

Flying in Ireland magazine

Halpin Centre for Research & Innovation at NMCI

Institute of International and European Affairs (IIEA)

Institute of Technology, Carlow

Irish Chamber of Shipping

Irish Maritime and Energy Resource Cluster, (IMERC)


-----

Irish National Committee of the Blue Shield

Irish Planning Institute

Irish Ports Association

Irish United Nations Veterans Association (IUNVA)

Killybegs Fishermen’s Organisation Ltd.

Lt. Col. Peter G. Gibbons (Retired)

Marine Renewables Industry Association (MRIA), Atlantic Ocean Energy
Alliance (OEA) and National Offshore Wind Association of Ireland
(Collective submission)

Maritime Analysis and Operations Centre (Narcotics) MAOC (N)

Maritime Institute of Ireland

Messrs. Sean A. Flood, Michael Murphy, Seamus O’Carroll, Peter
McKenna and Harry Whelehan. (Collective submission)

Mountain Rescue Ireland

Mr. Brian Ahern

Mr. Maurice Ball

Mr. James Bourke

Mr. Charles E. Breslin

Mr. Tony Brown

Mr. Donal Burke

Mr. Brian Cassidy

Mr. Hugh Conlon

Mr. Peter Thomas Conlon

Mr. John B. Dillon

Mr. Arnaud Disant

Mr. Joseph Doherty

Mr. Christopher Dorman-O’Gowan

Mr. Mark Egan

Mr. Declan Fleming

Mr. Barry Foley

Mr. Jim Forde

Mr. David France

Mr. Conor Galvin

Mr. Damien Gaumont

Mr. Robert Gilbey

Mr. Anthony Gurnee

Mr. Edward J. Jacob

Mr. Jack Kavanagh

Mr. Neville Keery

Mr. John Kelly

Mr. Peter Kennedy


-----

Mr. Michael Kennelly

Mr. Liam Kenny

Mr. Charles J. Lawn

Mr. Paul MacDonald

Mr. John Maguire

Mr. Tom McBennett

Mr. Michael McGrath, T.D.

Mr. Andy McSharry

Mr. Raymond Molony

Mr. John Morris

Mr. Eddie Mulligan

Mr. Paul Murphy

Mr. Timothy F. Murphy

Mr. Liam Nolan

Mr. Brian O’ Neill

Mr. Ger O’Connor

Mr. Gerard O’Halloran

Mr. Martin Riordan, County Manager, Cork County Council

Mr. Peter Savage

Mr. Eoin B. Scarlett

Mr. Horst Siedschlag

Mr. Pat Sweeney

Mr. John Treacy

Mr. Seamus Wall

Ms. Margaretta D’arcy

Ms. Elizabeth Smith

National Maritime College of Ireland (NMCI)

National Standards Authority of Ireland (NSAI)

Organisation of National Ex-Servicemen and Women

Peace and Neutrality Alliance (PANA)

Permanent Defence Force Other Ranks Representative Association
(PDFORRA)

Port of Cork Company

Pride of Ireland Trust

Professor Stephen Cusack

Professor Ray Murphy

Representative Association of Commissioned Officers (RACO)

Reserve Defence Forces Representative Association (RDFRA)

Reserve Defence Forces Representative Association (RDFRA) Naval
Service Reserve Committee

Sea Fisheries Protection Authority (SFPA)


-----

Syncreon Transport & Forwarding, Ireland

The Edward M. Kennedy Institute for Conflict Intervention, NUI Maynooth

The Federation of Irish Fishermen

The Irish Institute of Master Mariners

The Irish Maritime Forum (x 2)

The Mobile & Marine Research Centre (MMRRC), University of Limerick

The Nautical Institute (Ireland Branch)


-----

##### y y

APC Armoured Personnel Carrier

AR Army Reserve

ARW Army Ranger Wing

ATCA Aid to the Civil Authority

ATCP Aid to the Civil Power

BPSSO Barrack Personnel Support Service Officer

C4ISR Command and Control, Communications,
Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance and
Reconnaissance

C&A Conciliation and Arbitration

CBRN Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear

CDO Civil Defence Officer

CFI Connected Forces Initiative

CFSP Common Foreign and Security Policy

CIT Cork Institute of Technology

CLCS Commission on the Limits of the Continental
Shelf

CNI Critical National Infrastructure

COP Common Operational Picture

CPI Consumer Price Index

CPV Coastal Patrol Vessel

CRC Crowd Riot Control

CRE Comprehensive Review of Expenditure

CSDP Common Security and Defence Policy

CSEAS Civil Service Employee Assistance Service

CSIRT-IE Computer Security Incident Report Team –
Ireland

DAA Dublin Airport Authority

DF Defence Forces

DFHQ Defence Forces Headquarters

DRR Disaster Risk Reduction

EAO Employee Assistance Officer

EAS Emergency Aeromedical Support

ECF Employment Control Framework

EDA European Defence Agency

|APC|Armoured Personnel Carrier|
|---|---|
|AR|Army Reserve|
|ARW|Army Ranger Wing|
|ATCA|Aid to the Civil Authority|
|ATCP|Aid to the Civil Power|
|BPSSO|Barrack Personnel Support Service Officer|
|C4ISR|Command and Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance|
|C&A|Conciliation and Arbitration|
|CBRN|Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear|
|CDO|Civil Defence Officer|
|CFI|Connected Forces Initiative|
|CFSP|Common Foreign and Security Policy|
|CIT|Cork Institute of Technology|
|CLCS|Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf|
|CNI|Critical National Infrastructure|
|COP|Common Operational Picture|
|CPI|Consumer Price Index|
|CPV|Coastal Patrol Vessel|
|CRC|Crowd Riot Control|
|CRE|Comprehensive Review of Expenditure|
|CSDP|Common Security and Defence Policy|
|CSEAS|Civil Service Employee Assistance Service|
|CSIRT-IE|Computer Security Incident Report Team – Ireland|
|DAA|Dublin Airport Authority|
|DF|Defence Forces|
|DFHQ|Defence Forces Headquarters|
|DRR|Disaster Risk Reduction|
|EAO|Employee Assistance Officer|
|EAS|Emergency Aeromedical Support|
|ECF|Employment Control Framework|


-----

|EEZ|Exclusive Economic Zone|
|---|---|
|EFL|Exclusive Fishery Limits|
|EOD|Explosive Ordnance Disposal|
|EPA|Environmental Protection Agency|
|ESS|European Security Strategy|
|EU|European Union|
|EUFOR|European Union Force|
|EUMSS|European Union Maritime Security Strategy|
|EUTM|European Union Training Mission|
|FCA|Fórsa Cosanta Aitiúil|
|FEI|Fédération Equestre Internationale|
|FLR|First Line Reserve|
|FMC|Fishery Monitoring Centre|
|FMSS|Financial Management Shared Services|
|GASU|Garda Air Support Unit|
|GBAD|Ground Based Air Defence|
|GBV|Gender Based Violence|
|GDP|Gross Domestic Product|
|HLPPG|High Level Planning and Procurement Group|
|HPV|Helicopter Patrol Vessel|
|HR|Human Resources|
|HRM|Human Resources Management|
|HSE|Health Service Executive|
|HSI|Horse Sport Ireland|
|IAA|Irish Aviation Authority|
|IBEC|Irish Business and Employers Confederation|
|ICT|Information Communications & Technologies|
|IED|Improvised Explosive Device|
|IGT|Inter-agency Guidance Team|
|IMERC|Irish Maritime and Energy Resource Cluster|
|IMG|Independent Monitoring Group|
|INMO|Irish Nurses and Midwives Organisation|
|IPCC|UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climat Change|
|ISO|International Organisation for Standardisation|


ISTAR Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition
and Reconnaissance


-----

-----

|IUNVA|Irish United Nations Veterans Association|
|---|---|
|JTF|Joint Task Force|
|MAC|Management Advisory Committee|
|MAOC-N|Maritime Analysis and Operations Centre - Narcotics|
|MATS|Ministerial Air Transport Service|
|MEM|Major Emergency Management|
|MOU|Memorandum of Understanding|
|NATO|North Atlantic Treaty Organisation|
|NCASC|National Civil Aviation Security Committee|
|NCSC|National Cyber Security Centre|
|NEAFC|North East Atlantic Fisheries Commission|
|NECC|National Emergency Co-ordination Centre|
|NEO|Non-Combatant Evacuation Operations|
|NGO|Non-Governmental Organisation|
|NRA|National Risk Assessment|
|NSR|Naval Service Reserve|
|OCC|Operational Capabilities Concept|
|OECD|Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development|
|OEP|Office of Emergency Planning|
|OGP|Office of Government Procurement|
|ONE|Organisation of National Ex-Servicemen and Women|
|OPV|Offshore Patrol Vessel|
|OPW|Office of Public Works|
|OSCE|Organisation for Security & Co-operation in Europe|
|PARP|Planning and Review Process|
|PDF|Permanent Defence Force|
|PDFORRA|Permanent Defence Force Other Ranks Representative Association|
|PfP|Partnership for Peace|
|PMDS|Performance Management Development System|
|PRA|Principal Response Agency|
|PSS|Personnel Support Service|


-----

|PSSC|Payroll Shared Service Centre|
|---|---|
|QQI|Quality and Qualifications Ireland|
|RACO|Representative Association of Commissioned Officers|
|RDF|Reserve Defence Force|
|RDFRA|Reserve Defence Force Representative Association|
|RhIB|Rigid-hulled Inflatable Boat|
|RPAS|Remotely Piloted Aircraft System|
|SCA|State Claims Agency|
|SFPA|Sea Fisheries Protection Agency|
|SLA|Service Level Agreement|
|SMC|Strategic Management Committee|
|SOF|Special Operations Forces|
|SSR|Security Sector Reform|
|UAV|Unmanned Aerial Vehicle|
|UCC|University College Cork|
|UN|United Nations|
|UNCLOS|United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea|
|UNIFIL|United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon|
|UNODC|United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime|
|UNSAS|United Nations Standby Arrangements System|
|VFM|Value For Money|
|WPS|Women, Peace and Security|


-----

-----

-----

