## Department of Defence and Defence Forces


# Strategy Statement 2008 - 2010


-----

Parkgate, Infirmary Road, Dublin 7.

Tel: (01) 804 2000 Fax: (01) 670 3399

Lo-Call: 1890 251 890


© 2008 Copyright Department of Defence and Defence Forces

ISSN: 1649-1203

PRN: A8/1354


Cover Image: Parkgate


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces


## FOREWORD


I welcome the publication of this new strategy statement for the period 2008 2010. It sets out the high level goals for Defence and outlines key strategies
and outputs, on a programme basis, over this timeframe.

My main objective is to ensure that we have flexible, modern Defence Forces
with the capabilities to meet all roles assigned, at home and overseas, by
Government. The significant progress in developing and modernising Defence
over the past decade has been widely acknowledged. These advances are a
model of successful public sector reform and have been achieved through the
dedication of our staff, both civil and military. It is also critical that we
continuously strive for further improvements and greater value for money and
this strategy statement incorporates relevant provisions from Towards 2016
and the public service modernisation agenda.

Over the period of this Strategy Statement, I intend to initiate a
comprehensive review of the capacity of the Defence Organisation to meet
emerging and future challenges within the defence and security environment
and within the broader public service environment generally. This review will
inform the development of the next White Paper on Defence, which will
encompass the period 2011-2020. The implementation of the OECD review
recommendations, the decentralisation to Newbridge and the Curragh, and the
continued development and implementation of the Management Information
Framework, provide a catalyst and an opportunity for improved management,
greater integration, and for the further modernisation and transformation of
the Defence Organisation as a whole.

The Government decision of 8th July 2008 has set out a requirement for payroll
and other savings that must be achieved. This will present certain challenges
for the Defence Organisation. It will be necessary to delay certain Defence
commitments in the Programme for Government. The Government remains
fully committed to implementing these commitments within the timeframe of
the Programme for Government i.e. 2007 – 2012, and action on these
commitments will be kept under review during the period encompassed by this
Strategy Statement.

Consistent with Ireland’s traditional policy of military neutrality and Ireland’s
longstanding commitment to the primacy of the United Nations in
international relations, the provision of up to 850 Defence Forces personnel in
support of UN authorised Peace Support Operations will continue. The
Government is committed to continuing Ireland’s participation in the
development of European Security and Defence Policy under the Common
Foreign and Security Policy. The recent deployment of the Defence Forces to
the UN mandated EUFOR mission to Chad and the Central African Republic, is
indicative of this continued commitment and highlights the important role of
the EU in supporting UN mandated Peace Support Operations.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

The measures set out in this Strategy Statement for the Office of Emergency
Planning underline the importance that the Government places on Emergency
Planning. As Chairman of the Government Task Force on Emergency Planning, I
have responsibility for the coordination and oversight of emergency planning.
The goal continues to be that State Bodies will react quickly and effectively to
any large-scale emergency and that response arrangements must continue to
be characterised by effective management of all aspects of emergency
planning. The opening of the National Emergency Coordination Centre as a
dedicated facility, which is available at all times to the Government and the
Agencies of the State, for managing major emergencies, represented the
culmination of much hard work. It is a key facility within the overall
architecture being put in place by Government to ensure a high readiness
response capacity within the State’s overall emergency framework and to
support public confidence in the State’s emergency arrangements.

This Strategy Statement covers both the Department of Defence and the
Defence Forces. Achieving the outlined high level goals will require a
concerted effort from all staff, both civil and military, in the Defence
Organisation. I am confident that this will be achieved under the leadership of
the Secretary General and the Chief of Staff and they have my full support
with its implementation.

**Willie O’Dea T.D.**
Minister for Defence

August 2008


**Willie O’Dea T.D.**


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces


## INTRODUCTION


This Strategy Statement sets out the Vision and Mission
of the Department of Defence and Defence Forces for
the next three years:

**Vision:**

In the period 2008-2010 we will continue to work
to develop and sustain our vision of a defence
organisation that formulates and implements
effective policy, provides timely and accurate
advice and is capable of deploying a modern,
interoperable, sustainable force that can deliver
flexible military capabilities at home and abroad.

**Mission:**

To provide for the military defence of the State,
contribute to national and international peace
and security and fulfil all other roles assigned by
Government.


**Michael Howard**

_Secretary General_


**Lt. General Dermot Earley**

_Chief of Staff_


Embracing our Vision and achieving our Mission will require great effort and
dedication in the next three years. The environment in which we operate is
dynamic and challenging. Meeting the needs of Government and the public
will require that all elements of the organisation, civil and military, develop
and maintain a very broad range of capabilities and deliver a variety of services
and other outputs, both at home and overseas. This calls for flexibility,
adaptability, innovation and hard work from all our staff.

The Strategy Statement sets targets that we are confident can be achieved.
Our confidence is based on the track record of the defence organisation and
the knowledge that we have the people and the structures to deliver.
Notwithstanding this, we will continue to further improve the organisation as
set out in the White Paper on Defence and the Programme for Government.

Defence is an organisation in which all staff, civil and military are expected and
enabled to achieve their full potential and where merit and effort are
acknowledged. We will maintain these values and continue to support our
staff in the work they do.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

Decentralisation will be a major challenge for us in the lifetime of this Strategy
Statement. We will complete the relocation of civil and military staff from
Dublin to Newbridge and the Curragh in line with Government policy.

We look forward to working with colleagues, civil and military, as we face the
challenges of the coming years.

**Michael Howard** **Lt. General Dermot Earley**
_Secretary General_ _Chief of Staff_

August 2008 August 2008


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces


## CONTENTS


**Section 1:** Defence – Vision, Mission Statement, High Level Goals 6

**Section 2:** Security and Defence Environmental Analysis 9

**Section 3:** Achieving our Goals – strategies and outputs 2008-2010 19

Contingent Capabilities 19

On-Island Security and Support to other Agencies 20

International Peace and Security 21

Defence Policy, Military Advice
and Corporate Support Services 22

**Appendix 1:** Defence – legislative background, structure, roles 32

**Appendix 2:** Defence Forces Personnel Serving Overseas 38


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces


## SECTION 1: DEFENCE[1] – VISION, MISSION STATEMENT, HIGH LEVEL GOALS


### VISION

**In the period 2008-2010 we will continue to work to develop and sustain our**
**vision of a defence organisation that formulates and implements effective**
**policy, provides timely and accurate advice and is capable of deploying a**
**modern, interoperable, sustainable force that can deliver flexible military**
**capabilities at home and abroad.**

### MISSION STATEMENT

**To provide for the military defence of the State, contribute to national and**
**international peace and security and fulfil all other roles assigned by**
**Government.**

### HIGH LEVEL GOALS

To provide for the defence of the State against armed aggression, by
maintaining and developing appropriate military capabilities.

To contribute to on-island security and stability by providing, on request,
aid to the civil power (ATCP), aid to the civil authority (ATCA) and other
emergency and non-emergency services.

To contribute to the maintenance of international peace and security
through participation in approved UN-mandated peace support, crisis
management and humanitarian relief operations.

To provide the best possible defence policy advice and military advice to
the Minister in order to support management of all aspects of defence
provision and facilitate planning for future needs.

The primary role of the Department is to support the Minister as Head of the
Department, in particular by providing policy advice and support on defence
matters. This includes assistance with policy formulation and the
implementation of policy as set out in the Programme for Government and as
directed by the Minister.


1 The terminology used in this Strategy Statement is as follows: the term “defence” is used to refer
in a broad sense to defence provision in Ireland comprising civil and military elements; “defence
organisation” refers to the civil and military organisation; the “Defence Forces” refers to the
military organisation.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

In addition to the commitments in the Programme for Government the White
Paper on Defence (2000) is the key policy document on defence. As well as
articulating defence policy, it deals with structural, organisational and funding
issues for the period up to 2010. The goal of the White Paper is to ensure an
appropriate level of defence capability, having regard to the changing defence
and security environment. The White Paper has been of central importance in
informing the strategic objectives of the Department of Defence and the
Defence Forces since its publication. The roles of the Defence Forces are set out
in the White Paper:

to defend the State against armed aggression; this being a contingency,
preparations for its implementation will depend on an ongoing
Government assessment of the security and defence environment;

to aid the civil power (meaning in practice to assist, when requested, the
Garda Síochána, who have primary responsibility for law and order,
including the protection of the internal security of the State);

to participate in multinational peace support, crisis management and
humanitarian relief operations in support of the United Nations and
under UN mandate, including regional security missions authorised by
the UN;

to provide a fishery protection service in accordance with the State’s
obligations as a member of the EU; and

to carry out such other duties as may be assigned to them from time to
time, e.g. search and rescue, air ambulance service, Ministerial air
transport service, assistance on the occasion of natural or other disasters,
assistance in connection with the maintenance of essential services and
assistance in combating oil pollution at sea.

The Office of Emergency Planning (OEP) was established as a joint civil/military
office in the Department in 2001. The function of the OEP is to take the lead
role in supporting emergency planning. This includes ongoing co-ordination of
the responses of various agencies and exercising an oversight role in relation to
peacetime planning, in order to ensure the best possible use of resources and
compatibility between planning requirements. Responsibility for specific

### 7

emergency planning and response functions remains with the relevant lead
Government Departments and agencies.

The White Paper, together with the Review of Implementation (April 2007)
and the Programme for Government, are of central importance in guiding
defence strategic and business planning. Consistent with this, the key
strategies fundamental to the success of the defence organisation are the


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

development and maintenance of appropriate military capabilities and
commitment to the ongoing analysis of the defence and security environment
to facilitate planning for the future and ongoing investment in equipment,
infrastructure and training.

Delivering on the Mission Statement and achieving the High Level Goals
require the development and maintenance of a very broad range of
capabilities and the delivery of a variety of services and other outputs, both at
home and overseas. This is achieved through the civil and military elements of
the defence organisation acting in concert. It is important also that the
defence organisation continues to provide an input to the wider Government
agenda, in conjunction with other Government Departments. Section 3 of this
Strategy Statement sets out the strategies, outputs and actions that will be
pursued in the period covered by this Strategy Statement. This approach
comprehends the full range of defence activities and outputs.

The structure and organisation of the Department of Defence and the Defence
Forces are set out in Appendix 1.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces


## SECTION 2: SECURITY AND DEFENCE ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS


### POLICY CONTEXT

Ireland has been an active contributor to UN and UN-mandated peace keeping
and peace enforcement operations for the past fifty years. Ireland’s experience
in these operations has enabled us to play an active part in the development
of European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP). Ireland participates where
appropriate, and on a case-by-case basis, in humanitarian and crisis
management operations in the military and civil areas, including ESDP
operations, subject to the requirements of UN authorisation and Government
and Dáil approval (the ‘Triple-lock’). Such participation is consistent with
Ireland’s policy of military neutrality.

Defence policy and the resourcing and implementation of that policy are
grounded on a realistic and ongoing assessment of the defence and security
environment. Many factors, both national and international, can influence the
delivery of the defence mission. Chief among these are the defence and
security situations at home and abroad.

### DOMESTIC SECURITY SITUATION

While dissident republican paramilitaries continue to pose a low-level threat in
terms of capability and intent, there is no intelligence or indication giving
reasonable cause to foresee any significant paramilitary action in the State. In
addition, the assessment is that loyalist paramilitaries do not pose a security
threat to the State. The threat level in respect of the domestic security
environment is assessed as low.

Notwithstanding these assessments, the Defence Forces continue to provide
static security and ATCP services. In the case of significant events requiring
increased levels of security, support is provided, on request, to An Garda
Síochána up to Brigade level in strength. This usually involves military
protection tasks, riot control teams, Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) teams
and air and maritime operations.

At present, in terms of significant damage and/or casualties, it is considered
that the main international threat to domestic security will arise from a
terrorist act or an accidental disaster (nuclear accident/medical epidemic).
However, the direct threat to Ireland as a target of international terrorism is
currently assessed as low. On the other hand, it is clear that Ireland could be
used as a base by terrorist organisations. The asymmetric nature of the terrorist
threat requires all security agencies to reflect on current counter-terrorism
strategies and to develop a fully integrated approach both on island and with
international partners.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

Military Intelligence provides regular assessments, reports and briefings to the
Chief of Staff and the Minister for Defence on any threats to the security of
the State and the national interest from internal or external sources. The
National Security Committee meets on a regular basis and receives security
briefings. Its role is to ensure that the Taoiseach and Government are kept
informed of high-level security issues and the State’s response to them. It
receives threat assessments from the Garda Commissioner and the Chief of
Staff. The Committee comprises the Secretaries General to the Government,
and of the Departments of Justice, Equality and Law Reform, Foreign Affairs,
and Defence, the Garda Commissioner and the Chief of Staff.

OEP supports the Minister as Chairman of the Government Task Force on
Emergency Planning. The Task Force is the top-level structure providing policy
and direction. It co-ordinates and oversees the emergency planning activities of
Government Departments and public authorities. A key area of activity for the
OEP is the ongoing development of the oversight function in order to improve
and develop the process and to increase public confidence in emergency
planning.

The Public Information and Awareness Campaign on Emergency Planning was
launched at the National Emergency Coordination Centre on the 14th April
2008. The main focus of the Campaign was the publication and countrywide
distribution of a handbook – ‘Preparing for Major Emergencies’.

Emergency planning will remain a key element of security strategy and must
be informed by ongoing risk assessment. The scale of international terrorist
attacks in the past has shown that the full range of national resources is often
called upon to respond to such outrages. The defence organisation has a vital
role to play in planning for, and responding to, emergency situations.

### INTERNATIONAL SECURITY SITUATION

The European Security Strategy (ESS) adopted by the EU Council in 2003
identified that the EU faced security threats “which are more diverse, less
visible and less predictable”. These threats include:

### 10 Terrorism – movements that are well resourced, connected by electronic

networks and are willing to use unlimited violence to cause massive
casualities.

Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction – potentially the greatest
threat to European security.

Regional Conflicts – particularly those on the borders of Europe.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

State Failure – an alarming phenomenon, that undermines global
governance and adds to regional instability.

Organised Crime – cross-border trafficking in drugs, women, illegal
migrants and weapons accounts for a large part of the activities of
criminal gangs.

The report of the UN Secretary General’s High Level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change entitled ‘A More Secure World: Our Shared
Responsibility’ (2004) emphasises the need for collective security and for
security to be addressed at the global, regional and national level. The report
identifies six clusters of threats:

Economic and social threats, including poverty, infectious disease and
environmental degradation.

Inter-State conflict.

Internal conflict, including civil war, genocide and other large-scale
atrocities.

Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN) weapons.

Terrorism.

International organised crime.

In its recent publication (November 2006) on a long-term vision for European
Security and Defence Policy (ESDP), the EU identified a number of key drivers
that will impact on the global context in which ESDP will operate in the future.
Seven key areas were identified:

Environment: There will be an increased need to train for and conduct disaster
relief and/or humanitarian relief operations most of which will be conducted in
demanding climatic conditions. Healthcare for participating personnel will
become increasingly important. Environmental legislation will have to be taken
into consideration when planning and conducting ESDP operations.

### 11

Demography: The increasingly young population within the developing world
linked with poor economic prospects, unfulfilled aspirations and uneven
regional and local wealth distribution are likely to lead to inter-state/intrastate, inter-communal and inter-ethnic conflict. Military organisations will face
a serious recruitment problem as a result of near static population growth, an
ageing population, disease and direct competition with the commercial sector.
Extended full-time education and changing social aspirations will also impact
on recruitment.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

Economy: Limited financial resources will impact on military capability
development. In order to gain more financial flexibility core military tasks will
have to be identified and then possibilities, constraints and conditions for
outsourcing will have to be identified. International criminality will cross
national boundaries to an ever-increasing extent.

Energy: Political instability in oil production regions is likely to force developed
countries to seek political and/or other solutions to improve stability. The
spiralling cost of energy may ultimately affect all Government spending,
including spending on defence capabilities. The need for reducing both fuel
consumption and carbon dioxide emissions will impact on armed forces.
Alternative liquid fuel and fuel cell solutions are likely to be imposed on
defence equipment. This will necessitate equipment retro-fit and will impact
on the development of new military capabilities.

Science and Technology: Military capabilities will be considerably enhanced
through the provision of new power sources, Enhanced Blast Explosives,
Directed Energy Weapons, advances in autonomous systems, developments in
the field of material sciences and many more areas. However, there are also
potential new threats associated with all these emerging technologies. The
emergence of biological warfare agents developed by asymmetric opponents
with lower ethical standards is but one example.

Society and Culture: Troops will increasingly need to be able to cope with
multicultural societies including the integration of immigrants into armed
forces and be equipped to negotiate in complex situations with many different
actors. Changing cultural norms and values, ethnically mixed society, pressures
on public spending and the lack of a tangible threat may lessen public
willingness to provide scarce resources for defence purposes. There will be a
greater need to justify the demand for capabilities to be developed and
maintained.

Global Governance: Future conflicts will involve a more complex set of actors
with blurred distinctions between combatants and non-combatants. Irregular
actors will include terrorists, insurgents, criminals, armed followings, gangs,
semi-official militias and private military and security companies. The
proliferation of CBRN weapons possession beyond the existing holders,
particularly to weak and unstable States, will increase risks.

### 12

All three reports clearly indicate that the global security situation is becoming
more interdependent, complex and potentially unstable resulting in a new and
challenging security and defence environment.

The primacy of the United Nations continues to be a cornerstone of Ireland’s
foreign policy. A commitment to collective security through the development
of international organisations and regional co-operation is also a central
element of that policy.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

**PEACE SUPPORT OPERATIONS**

A key element of Ireland’s contribution to international peace and security is
the commitment of personnel to international peace support operations (PSOs)
under UN authority. In recent years the Defence Forces have enhanced their
military capabilities enabling them to participate effectively in UN Chapter VII
peace enforcement missions. In the area of logistics, there has been a shift
away from traditional reliance on UN support for deployed contingents, to an
arrangement whereby the Defence Forces deploy self-sustaining units to green
field sites. These developments reflect the increasing capability and capacity of
the Defence Forces. Inevitably, these missions are becoming increasingly
expensive to mount and to sustain and are placing greater demands on
personnel, logistics and finance.

An increasing element of Ireland’s engagement in UN operations is the
deployment of combined contingents with like-minded nations. UNMIL and
UNIFIL II are examples of this development and of the increasing need to cooperate with partners in our international peace support operations.

Ireland’s ongoing engagement with NATO/PfP, in the Partnership Goal process
and with the Planning and Review Process (PARP), is a key factor in supporting
interoperability and capability development enabling Ireland to contribute
high-end capabilities to UN operations in partnership with other like-minded
States.

New missions bring new challenges for the Irish Peacekeeper. PSOs now have
more robust rules of engagement while the peacekeeper remains subject to
Irish Law, the Laws of Armed Conflict and International Human Rights Law.
Personnel are also required to have an understanding of the complex issues of
cultural diversity affecting both the host nation and troops from other
contributing nations. These challenges are reflected in the training and
preparation of units prior to their deployment.

The main overseas missions currently are in Chad, Kosovo and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Details of current overseas missions are given in Appendix 2.

**EUROPEAN SECURITY AND DEFENCE POLICY (ESDP)** **13**

ESDP is an integral part of the Common Foreign and Security Policy, which
encompasses the EU’s international obligations to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Military capabilities are just one element
among a wide range of instruments that the EU can deploy in this regard.
These include economic, political, administrative and rule of law. The ability of
the EU to contribute to conflict prevention, peacekeeping and crisis
management continues to be of primary importance to Member States and is
carried out within the context of ESDP.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

Based on the provisions of the Treaty of European Union, Ireland continues to
participate in the ongoing development of EU military and civilian crisis
management capabilities under ESDP. Participation in ESDP takes place within
the framework of Ireland’s commitment to the primacy of the United Nations
in the maintenance of international peace and security and Ireland’s policy of
military neutrality. The two main structures for the development and
implementation of ESDP are the Political and Security Committee (PSC) and the
EU Military Committee (EUMC). These bodies are supported by the Council
Secretariat and the EU Military Staff respectively. Ireland is represented at
ambassadorial level in the PSC and by a Brigadier General, representing the
Chief of Staff, within the EUMC. Defence personnel, based in Ireland’s
Permanent Representation to the EU, work proactively in furthering Ireland’s
national interests within the Union in association with colleagues from the
Department of Foreign Affairs.

**MILITARY CAPABILITIES DEVELOPMENT - EU HEADLINE GOAL**

In May 2004, during the Irish Presidency, the Member States adopted new
capability targets - known as Headline Goal 2010. This takes into account the
European Security Strategy and changes in the international environment,
including new threats and challenges, as well as the lessons learned from the
first EU-led operations.

Member States have committed themselves to be able, by 2010, to respond
with rapid and decisive action, applying a fully coherent approach to the
whole spectrum of crisis management operations covered by the Treaty of the
European Union. This includes joint disarmament operations, humanitarian and
rescue tasks, military advice and assistance tasks, conflict prevention and peacekeeping tasks, tasks of combat forces in crisis management, including peacemaking and post conflict stabilisation. All these tasks may contribute to the
fight against terrorism, including by supporting third countries in combating
terrorism on their territories.

**EU RAPID RESPONSE / BATTLEGROUPS**

### 14

A key element of Headline Goal 2010 is the capability to deploy forces at high
readiness. The EU Battlegroup Concept, which is a specific form of rapid
response, complements the wider Rapid Reaction Force concept. As of January
2007, the EU has achieved full operational capability, which means that two
Battlegroups are continually on standby for a period of 6 months at a time.
Ireland successfully participated in the Nordic Battlegroup (NBG) for a sixmonth period from the 1st January 2008. Sweden, as framework nation, took
the lead role in the NBG formation. Ireland’s contribution consisted of an
Explosive Ordnance Disposal/ Improvised Explosive Device Disposal (EOD/IEDD)


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

component with its own security detail together with staff posts at the
Operational Headquarters (OHQ) (Northwood, UK) and Force Headquarters
(FHQ) in Enkoping, Sweden.

The total number of Irish personnel involved was just under 100. This level of
commitment would only have arisen should the NBG have been called on to
undertake an operation. The number of personnel deployed in the standby
period was 10, based at the OHQ and FHQ. Joint training of the NBG took
place in Sweden.

**THE EU AND NATO**

Co-operation with NATO was foreseen since the outset of ESDP. Indeed, of the
27 Member States of the EU, 21 are members of NATO. The relationship with
NATO is based on the need for the EU to have access to certain NATO assets
and capabilities (e.g. strategic lift, headquarters) for crisis management and
peacekeeping missions. Permanent arrangements between the EU and NATO,
known as ‘Berlin Plus’, have evolved in accordance with principles specified by
successive European Councils since Feira in 2000. These principles include full
respect for the autonomy of EU decision-making, recognition of the different
natures of the EU and NATO, and no discrimination against Member States of
either organisation. It is also accepted that the two organisations have only
one set of military forces to draw on for operations.

**NATO PARTNERSHIP FOR PEACE (PfP)**

Ireland joined Partnership for Peace (PfP) on 1 December 1999. Participation in
PfP is entirely voluntary and is based on the principle of self-differentiation,
that is, a state selects for itself the nature and scope of its participation in PfP
activities. Ireland’s engagement in PfP is supported through Ireland’s
Partnership Liaison Office in Brussels.

Ireland’s five priority areas of interest are:

Co-operation on International Peacekeeping;

### 15

Humanitarian operations;

Search and Rescue;

Co-operation in the protection of the Environment; and,

Co-operation in Marine Matters.

Ireland’s annual Individual Partnership Programmes (IPP) under NATO PfP focus
on the enhancement of skills and expertise in such areas as operational and


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

generic planning for peacekeeping and peace support, communications,
command and control, operational procedures and logistics. Activities include
training courses, seminars, workshops, conferences, staff exercises and tabletop
exercises.

Ireland, in common with other neutral EU Member States who are members of
PfP, also participates in the PfP Planning and Review Process (PARP) mechanism
for planning in relation to peace support operations. Ireland’s involvement in
PARP is focused on enhancing interoperability so that Defence Forces
personnel can operate efficiently and effectively in a multi-national
environment.

**EUROPEAN DEFENCE AGENCY (EDA)**

Ireland joined the EDA when it was established during the Irish Presidency in
2004. The Steering Board of the Agency comprises EU Defence Ministers of the
participating Member States.

The EDA’s main aim is to support Member States in the area of capability
development and to support greater efficiency and competition in the
European defence equipment market. Ireland is supportive of developments
that improve market efficiencies, potentially yielding economies of scale for
equipment procurement for the Defence Forces and providing opportunities
for Irish enterprise, given the convergence in the research activities of both the
civil security sector and the military sector. Ireland participates in the
framework of the Agency and contributes to its operational budget.

We will continue to support Irish participation in EDA Programmes on a case
by case basis, supporting those programmes that contribute to capability
development in the Defence Forces and provide opportunities of interest to
Irish-based enterprises and researchers. We will work closely with Enterprise
Ireland to exploit potential research and commercial opportunities arising.

### ORGANISATIONAL ANALYSIS
 16

As outlined above, the Programme for Government and the White Paper on
Defence set out the policy context for Defence. The White Paper has also made
a number of recommendations, primarily focused on the Defence Forces, in the
area of funding, structures, organisation, training, etc. A detailed review of
progress in implementing the White Paper was carried out and published in
April 2007. The review found that very good progress has been made and
recommended a number of areas upon which to focus in the period to 2010.
Many of these are now comprehended in the Pay Agreement and
Modernisation Agenda for the Defence Forces agreed in the context of


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

At the same time, the Department continues to meet the challenge of change
and modernisation arising from the Public Service Modernisation Agenda and
the Action Plans under successive Social Partnership Agreements (currently
_Towards 2016). There have been significant achievements in strategic and_
business planning, financial management, human resource management and
customer service. The focus now is to sustain these advances through a period
of significant change including decentralisation.

The defence organisation has many strengths. These include:

Proven capacity for change and flexibility as illustrated by the variety of
services provided and the success of the organisational reform process
set out in the White Paper and the Public Service Modernisation Agenda.

Proven record in meeting Government’s national and international
security related commitments.

An international reputation and acceptance of the Defence Forces as a
professional force capable of delivering an effective response across a
broad spectrum of peace support operations.

A robust tradition of supporting civil control of the Defence Forces.

Positive relationships with our national and international customers
ranging from An Garda Síochána, various Government Departments and
Agencies and Local Authorities, to the UN, EU and OSCE.

High levels of professionalism and a commitment to providing life long
military education across all ranks in the Defence Forces; the resilience of
individual and collective morale, unquestioned loyalty and a recognised
dedication and service to the State.

Proactive and open approach to complex human resource issues such as
interpersonal relationships, successful development of the partnership
process, and health and safety standards.

An emphasis on Capability Development over the longer term (out to 10
years) in order to ensure that the Defence Forces remain well positioned

### 17

to address the complex and challenging defence and security
environment in the future.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

Key challenges facing the Defence Organisation include:

Responding to the demands of continued Defence Forces participation in
overseas missions. Missions are becoming increasingly demanding on our
personnel and more expensive to prepare and sustain. The challenge is
to deliver the required capability, develop our training and human
resources practices and secure the necessary funding in order to deliver
the required capabilities.

At the same time, we must continue to maintain an on-island contingent
capability and provide ongoing support for all of the services delivered
by the defence organisation.

Maintaining the 70:30 pay to non-pay ratio.

Address key infrastructural issues, including military training lands to
ensure operational efficiency, value for money and training imperatives
are met.

Continue to plan for and provide the capability and flexibility necessary
to respond to the evolving terrorist threat.

Continue to support our own people, civil and military, through whom
all defence services are delivered.

Support the continued implementation of the Public Service
Modernisation Agenda and Towards 2016.

Successfully manage the decentralisation of Civil and Military elements
of the Department of Defence to Newbridge and the Curragh, Co.
Kildare in line with Government policy.

This Strategy Statement identifies the key strategies and actions required to
address these challenges and, in so doing, continue the work of implementing
the White Paper on Defence and address the commitments in the Programme
for Government.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces


## SECTION 3: ACHIEVING OUR GOALS – STRATEGIES AND OUTPUTS 2008-2010


The strategies and outputs are described here at a high level, appropriate to a
Strategy Statement, under four programme headings:

1. Contingent Capabilities

2. On-Island Security and Support to other Agencies

3. International Peace and Security

4. Defence Policy, Military Advice and Corporate Support Services

The work required in implementing these strategies and delivering outputs is
set out in detail in the annual business planning cycle in both the Department
of Defence and the Defence Forces.

### CONTINGENT CAPABILITIES

Defence provision is about preparing for and dealing with contingencies. The
defence organisation must prepare and maintain the capability to respond to
contingencies and threats, based on an assessment of the risks to the security
of the State in its broadest sense. When not actually engaged in operations,
the focus for the Defence Forces is on training and preparation. The objective
is to maintain an appropriate level of defence capability, in the light of the
legitimacy of, and the necessity for, a military response to certain situations.
This response must have regard to the current and prospective defence and
security environment.

Capabilities are delivered by the Defence Forces supported by appropriate
investment in equipment, infrastructure, and training. Personnel are the key
resource. The challenge for the defence organisation is to ensure that our
human resource and corporate support systems, civil and military, provide our
personnel with the requisite supports as and when required. We must ensure
that our planning systems produce capabilities that are developed within an
appropriate framework and have the appropriate equipment and
infrastructure at the right time.

The strategies to be pursued in this area are:

The continued implementation of the recommendations of the White
Paper on Defence as reviewed in the Review of Implementation (April
2007). Work will continue towards providing the best possible
organisation and structure for the provision of defence and the
development of our key resource – our human resources.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

In that context, we will implement best-practice human resource
strategies in the organisation, civil and military; implement the Defence
Forces Training Concept 2004-2009; continue to support the
Representation process and the Partnership process in the Defence
Forces; ensure that the ongoing programme of legislative and regulatory
reform is continued; continue implementation of relevant provisions of
the civil and military Action Plans agreed in the context of Towards
_2016._

Continue the ongoing policy of annual recruitment and maintain the
strength of the Permanent Defence Force at 10,500. The commitment in
the Programme for Government for an additional provision of up to 350
troops in training at any given time will be kept under review during the
timeframe of this Strategy Statement.

Implementation of multi-annual equipment and infrastructure plans.

Continue the implementation of the Reserve Defence Force Review
Implementation Plan. This will include a commitment to a public
awareness and recruitment campaign.

Further development of Special Operations Capabilities; continued
development of Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN)
capabilities; development of Defence Forces Intelligence Organisation
and continued work of Defence Forces Doctrinal Committee.

To enhance and build on progress already made in the area of joint
operations between the Army, Air Corps and Naval Service by ensuring
commonality of doctrine, inter-service training and exercises, improved
coordination and integration at the command, operational and tactical
levels. A replacement programme for Naval Service vessels will be a key
enabler in this context and will further enhance the utility of new Air
Corps equipment already provided.

### ON ISLAND SECURITY & SUPPORT TO OTHER AGENCIES
 20

Activities under this heading involve the development and deployment of
capabilities for ATCP and ATCA operations. Typical outputs are Cash & Prisoner
Escorts, Explosive Ordnance Disposal teams, Ceremonial Services, Fishery
Protection Patrols, Ministerial Air Transport Services and Air Ambulance flights.
In addition, it encompasses preparing for and responding to industrial disputes
in essential services.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

The key strategies to be pursued here are:

Development, maintenance and delivery of the capabilities required to
meet approved requests for ATCP and ATCA operations.

Negotiation and monitoring of Memoranda of Understanding (MOU)
and Service Level Agreements (SLA). In line with the Programme for
Government, we will assess how we can contribute to the promotion of
greater co-operation and knowledge sharing between the Coast Guard,
the Naval Service and the Air Corps.

Maintenance and delivery of the capabilities required to meet agreed
MOU and SLA targets.

Continue our participation in inter-agency planning exercises and
evaluations; continued liaison with Local Authorities and other agencies
in relation to services provided by Defence.

Continue to support the Civil Defence Board in accordance with the Civil
Defence Act, 2002.

### INTERNATIONAL PEACE AND SECURITY

The primacy Ireland attaches to the role of the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security is a cornerstone of Ireland's
foreign policy and is consistent with our traditional policy of military
neutrality. Collective security through the development of international
organisations and regional co-operation are also important elements of that
policy. Government policy and decisions in relation to Ireland’s contribution to
international peace and security are framed within this overall policy context
and Ireland’s policy of military neutrality. Our continued level of participation
in peace support operations under UN authority is the key driver in the
increase in demand on defence resources.

Key strategies to be pursued are:

### 21

To provide appropriate defence resources including personnel,
equipment, logistics support and funding to fulfill Ireland’s commitments
to overseas peace support, crisis management and humanitarian
operations under UN authority.

Continue representation by defence personnel, civil and military, to the
PSC and EUMC, and associated working groups, working proactively to
advance national interests within the Union, together with colleagues
from the Department of Foreign Affairs.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

Continue to engage positively, in the framework of ESDP, in the
ongoing development of military and civilian crisis management
capabilities, including EDA capability development initiatives.

Continue our active participation in the EU Rapid Response / Battlegroup
Concept. Conduct a review of our participation in the NBG to identify
lessons learned.

Continue our positive engagement with NATO/PfP, in the Partnership
Goal process and with PARP in order to enhance Defence Forces
interoperability in multi-national operations and to contribute to the
development of military capabilities in accordance with international
standards.

To further develop appropriate military capabilities required to
implement these strategies.

### DEFENCE POLICY, MILITARY ADVICE AND CORPORATE SERVICES

#### POLICY / ADVICE

This area comprehends the work of civil and military personnel in the
formulation of defence policy and military advice. It also includes the corporate
support functions for the defence organisation and the support provided by
the OEP to the Government Task Force on Emergency Planning. Clearly, the
policy and advice functions feed back directly into the development and
maintenance of capabilities discussed above.

The key strategies and outputs here are:

Ongoing review of the defence and security environment and the
provision of timely and relevant advice to the Minister and to
Government, including advice in respect of international security, peace
support and defence developments generally. In this context, the
National Security Committee continues to meet on a regular basis and
receives security briefings from the Garda Commissioner and the Chief of

### 22

Staff.

In line with the Programme for Government we will prepare a new
White Paper on Defence for the period 2011- 2020.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

Develop and maintain a capability planning process and multi-annual
equipment and infrastructure plans. In line with the Programme for
Government, ensure that investment in the Defence Forces continues to
grow, with the full commercial value of all defence property disposals to
be invested in capital projects and new equipment

Pending publication of the new White Paper on Defence as set out in
the Programme for Government, we will continue implementation of
the current White Paper and seek to advance the recommendations of
the Review of the White Paper (April 2007). Many of the
recommendations in the Review are now included in the Pay Agreement
and Modernisation Agenda for the Defence Forces, agreed in the
context of Towards 2016.

Emergency Planning – continue to provide the necessary supports to the
Government Task Force on Emergency Planning, chaired by the Minister
for Defence and the Inter Departmental Working Group on Emergency
Planning; oversee the Emergency Planning arrangements in Government
Departments and public authorities under their aegis; co-ordinate the
publication of an annual review of emergency plans; continue the
annual programme of major simulated exercises and support sustained
public awareness and reassurance.

#### CORPORATE AND SUPPORT SERVICES

**DECENTRALISATION**

We are committed through the mechanism of the Defence Decentralisation
Implementation Group (Military/Civilian) to implementing the Government
decision on decentralisation. This is being progressed as quickly as possible in
conjunction with the Office of Public Works (OPW). We will support
Government policy in implementing energy-efficient and environmentallyfriendly initiatives and will take the opportunity afforded by the provision of
new buildings under decentralisation to implement these initiatives in
consultation with the OPW.

### 23

**VALUE FOR MONEY (VFM) AND POLICY REVIEWS**

The Department of Defence and the Defence Forces are fully committed to
ensuring value for money in defence expenditure. The broadening of the
former Expenditure Review Initiative (ERI) to include other policy reviews that


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

impact on value for money is particularly welcome. This is consistent with the
approach that has been taken over recent years in Defence, where the White
Paper on Defence and other significant reviews (Air Corps, Naval Service) were
recognised as elements of the ERI.

The approach we have taken is to continuously monitor the defence and
security environment to ensure the continued relevance of White Paper
objectives. Allied to that, we continuously monitor and report on
implementation targets (e.g. a detailed review of White Paper Implementation
was published in 2007). This approach is complemented by VFM and other
reviews of specific sub-elements of the major programmes in order to seek out
further VFM improvements and engender a culture of continuous evaluation.
In that context, the two remaining VFM Reviews in the current Programme
approved by Government will be completed on schedule by the end of 2008.
These relate to Naval Service Vessel Maintenance and the use of Military
Training Lands.

**CUSTOMER SERVICE**

Given the nature of the activities we are engaged in, the defence organisation
does not provide services to external ‘customers’ in the classic sense. For
example, there are no public offices, public counters or call-centres where the
individual citizen can request services on demand. Indeed, services are typically
provided to the community collectivley rather than to citizens as individuals.

Notwithstanding this, we are committed to the provision of a quality customer
service to those individuals and organisations with whom we deal. The current
Customer Charter and Customer Service Action Plan were published in 2004.
We believe that it is our duty to serve the people of Ireland to the best of our
ability and that customers are entitled to expect high standards. These values
have shaped successive Strategy Statements and the annual planning process.
Following approval of this Strategy Statement work will commence
immediately on a revised Customer Service Action Plan. The results of customer
Focus Groups held earlier in the year will provide valuable input to this,
together with the Fitzpatrick Associates report “Evaluation of Customer
Charters”.

### 24

Consistent with the policy of enhancing the customer service ethos in the
wider public service, we will support the development of a Customer Charter
and Customer Service Action Plan for the Civil Defence Board. Defence will
actively participate in the Task Force on Customer Service.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

**FINANCE SERVICES**

Finance services are provided through the Department’s Finance Branch,
located in Galway. The emphasis here will be on a continuation of quality
service provision to all internal and external customers, including the
preparation of payrolls for all employees, both military and civil, granting and
payment of pensions and gratuities to retired members of the Defence Forces
and the dependants of deceased personnel, formulation and development of
pensions policy, payment of all accounts for goods and services provided to the
Defence Forces and the Department, maintaining financial records, preparing
the Department’s annual Appropriation Accounts and supporting the
Management Information Framework (MIF).

**MIF - Implementation of Phase 2 of the Management Information Framework**
will be completed throughout the Department and the Defence Forces during
the lifetime of this Strategy Statement. The focus in Phase 2 is on enhancing
the management reporting aspects of systems implemented in Phase 1 and
using MIF to support performance management and evidence-based decision
making.

**INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGIES (ICT’s)**

ICT in the defence organisation operates within a highly controlled and
structured framework, the chief elements of which are the joint military/civil IT
Steering Committee, which co-operatively develops agreed hardware, software
and telecommunications policy across the Defence Forces and the Department.
We will continue to invest in the upgrading and modernisation of the ICT
infrastructure with a planned programme of replacement of hardware across
the Department and the implementation of the latest versions of key software
applications. ICT future proofing forms an important part of the overall
planning for decentralisation.

The Department has implemented the ISO7799 Standard for ICT Security and
achieved full certification. We will focus also on the strategic use of technology
and online services.

### 25

**REGULATORY REFORM**

An appropriate and effective legislative and regulatory framework is an
important facilitator for continuous improvement in the delivery of defence
services. The defence organisation will continue with a programme of work on
the simplification and reform of legislation and regulations. Elements of this


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

are included in the Pay Agreement and Modernisation Agenda for the Defence
Forces and the Towards 2016 Action Plan for civil staff. As regards Regulatory
Impact Analysis (RIA), the Department of Defence is not a regulatory authority
as commonly understood. The Defence Acts and Regulations made thereunder
are, for the most part, focused on the Defence Forces only and do not apply to
the ordinary citizen or to business. Notwithstanding this, the Department
applies the principles set out in the RIA Guidelines where appropriate.

**PARTNERSHIP AND CONCILIATION & ARBITRATION**

Building on the progress made to date, the Department and the Defence
Forces will continue to invest time and resources in the development of
partnership structures. There are active partnership structures in place
involving civil service staff, the Department’s civilian employees and the
Defence Forces. Benefits of the process include a greater shared understanding
of the business of defence and how that can be progressed, better internal and
external communications, the development of customer service planning and
implementation, better environmental planning, and the creation of fora in
which issues of concern can be resolved in a bilateral and non-confrontational
way.

The aim is to continue to build on the progress made, principally on internal
and external communications and customer service.

The Defence Forces Conciliation and Arbitration (C&A) Scheme provides a
range of fora for Defence management to discuss with the Defence Forces
representative associations, within the scope of representation, the impact of
the implementation of our strategic objectives, including implementation of
the White Paper, elements of which are now comprehended in the Pay
Agreement and Modernisation Agenda and associated Action Plan agreed in
the context of Towards 2016.

**TOWARDS 2016**

### 26 The Department will fully cooperate with the implementation of Towards 2016

and the associated Action Plan agreed through the Partnership Process and will
provide timely and accurate reports to the Civil Service Performance
Verification Group (CSPVG).

The Department and the Defence Forces are also committed to implementing
the Pay Agreement and Modernisation Agenda and associated Action Plan for
the Defence Forces.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

**THE HUMAN RESOURCES STRATEGY**

The Human Resources Strategy for civil service staff of the Department will be
reviewed in 2009 in line with ongoing developments in the public sector. This
strategy will support the organisation’s high level goals and will address the
issues that emerge from the changing staffing profile of the Department postdecentralisation. The integration of the Performance Management and
Development System with HR Policies and Processes was implemented from 1
January 2007 in accordance with General Council Agreement 1452. The
implementation of this agreement will be monitored to ensure ongoing
compliance and effectiveness.

**TRAINING & DEVELOPMENT**

The Department will revise its Training Strategy for civil service staff in 2008. In
addition to ongoing investment in our people, we will seek to develop
initiatives to identify training and development opportunities that enable
participation from both the civil and military sides of the Department, leading
to enhanced cooperation in this area. We will work to retain the ISO 9001:2000
accreditation achieved by the Training & Development Section.

The Excellence Through People (ETP) scheme is run by FÁS as Ireland’s National
Human Resource Management Standard. The Department was first awarded
the standard in 2000 and has been successful in having it renewed since then.

The scheme has been revised since our last award and now comprises an
assessment across the full range of Human Resources functions. In December
2007 the Department achived accreditation at Standard level for a further two
years.

The ETP Standard is also an organisational priority for the Defence Forces to
attain during the coming years in that it benchmarks Defence Forces Human
Resource practices against evolving best practice in the Private and Public
sectors within the State.

FÁS consider the Cadet School to be at the leading edge nationally (the best
applicant assessed in 2006), with a number of other units achieving a very high **27**
standard in their applications and results of the FÁS assessments. To date,
nineteen units/sub-units of the Defence Forces have applied for and/or been
granted ETP recognition. Over the lifetime of this Strategy Statement it is
anticipated that all units will attain the standard.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

**EQUALITY ISSUES**

Disability - The Defence Organisation is committed to the implementation of
the codes of practice on accessibility and the employment of people with
disability in the public service, in so far as they relate to the staff of the
Department and the Defence Forces.

The Department will continue to meet or exceed the Government 3% target
for the recruitment and employment of people with disabilities and to provide
training and development appropriate to the needs of all staff including those
with a disability. We will carry out access audits to ensure that services are
accessible for people with disabilities. [The Defence Forces are excluded from
Part 3 of the Disability Act, 2005.] The Department’s role in relation to Part 3
of the Act relates to the civilian employees employed by the Department on
behalf of the Defence Forces and to the civil staff of the Department together
with the staff of the Civil Defence Board, Office of the Ombudsman for the
Defence Forces, Coiste An Asgard and the Army Pensions Board.

**AGE AND GENDER**

As outlined in this Strategy Statement both the Department of Defence and
the Defence Forces are committed to implementing best practice Human
Resource Strategies and Policies. This will support us in maintaining an
environment that guards against age and gender related discrimination in the
workplace.

**INTERNAL AUDIT**

The Department’s Internal Audit Section is an independent unit reporting
directly to the Secretary General. The Section works to an annual programme
of audits, approved by the Secretary General. Its work is reviewed on an
ongoing basis by the Department’s Audit Committee. The Section has
facilitated the introduction of the risk assessment process that is now an
integral part of the annual business planning cycle. Both the Internal Audit

### 28 Section and the Audit Committee operate in accordance with the standards

outlined in the Mullarkey Report.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

**DATA/STATISTICS STRATEGY**

Given the nature of its activities, the defence organisation is not a significant
producer of data/statistics and does not have a significant requirement for
data/statistics from external sources. Internal data needs tend to be specific
and narrowly focused. The improvement of internal data systems and
capabilities has been the priority for the Department and Defence Forces to
date. This will continue to be the focus in the period comprehended by this
Strategy Statement with particular focus on systems supporting the MIF. Where
relevant, internal data sources that can be made available will be classified and
coded in line with Central Statistics Office recommendations to enhance
standardisation and compatibility, facilitate analysis, and ensure that the
potential of such data is harnessed. Where needs are identified through PMDS,
support will be provided to develop the statistical competence of staff.

**OFFICIAL LANGUAGES ACT, 2003**

In accordance with the Act, schemes have been published for both the civil and
military elements of the defence organisation. During the lifetime of this
Strategy Statement, we will continue to focus on meeting the commitments set
out in these schemes.

**CROSS-DEPARTMENTAL ISSUES**

There are important cross-departmental dimensions to the work of the defence
organisation and mission success is often critically dependent, for example, on
the inputs and co-operation of other Departments and State Agencies. It is
sometimes the case also that the mission success of other Departments and
Agencies is equally dependent on the inputs and co-operation of the defence
organisation. As outlined above, these interdependent relationships are
increasingly being expressed in SLAs and MOUs. We will continue to develop
this framework where appropriate.

Part of the success of the modernisation process in the Department of Defence
and the Defence Forces to date can be attributed to the good working **29**
relationships with the Department of the Taoiseach and the Department of
Finance. The support of both in relation to the rebalancing of resources and
the development and support of equipment and infrastructure programmes
was particularly important. It is, of course, equally important that the non-pay
funding generated by pay savings and asset sales is protected in future years
and that the improvement in capabilities and services is consolidated. There are
also important procurement projects imminent e.g. ship replacement. We will


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

continue to work closely with both Departments on these matters and in
relation to defence modernisation and the wider public service modernisation
programme.

Ireland’s contribution to international peace and security has been outlined in
detail in Sections 2 and 3 above. Our relationship with the UN, EU, NATO,
OSCE etc. is an evolving one. We will continue to work very closely with the
Department of Foreign Affairs in this area. We will continue to support the
Department of Foreign Affairs in implementing other aspects of Ireland’s
foreign policy and the specific commitments in the Programme for
Government.

The Office of the Attorney General is an important enabler in ensuring that
our work takes place within a sound legal and constitutional framework.
During the lifetime of this Strategy Statement we will consider, together with
the Attorney General’s Office, whether there is scope for enhancing the
working relationship of that Office with the Department. The question of
protocols along the lines agreed with other Government Departments will be
considered.

A key cross-organisational area of activity for the Department and the Defence
Forces, on which we will continue to focus, is the work of the Government
Task Force on Emergency Planning and the Interdepartmental Working Group
(IDWG) on Emergency Planning. This is an important area of Government
policy, highlighted in the Programme for Government.

Planning for the 1916 Centenary commemoration is also proceeding on a crossDepartmental basis. The defence organisation has a key role to play and is
committed to working with others to develop and implement a successful
commemorative programme. It is anticipated that the All-Party Oireachtas
Consultation Group that had met in the lifetime of the 29th Dáil will be reestablished and will continue consideration of the centenary commemoration.
There are a number of long-term projects currently being pursued as part of
the centenary commemorations. The military history archives project will be
progressed.

The Department will actively participate in the cross-departmental
arrangements for implementing the National Women’s Strategy 2007-2014.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

**IMPLEMENTING THE STRATEGY STATEMENT**

The Department and the Defence Forces are determined to implement this
Strategy Statement and will continue to report on progress annually to the
Minister as required under the Public Service Management Act and to publish
those reports.

We believe that our objectives, strategies and performance indicators are
results-focused and specific so that implementation can be more easily
measured and corrective action taken, if necessary. In many cases they are set
out in formal agreements with our customers (e.g. MOUs and SLAs). Our
objectives, strategies and indicators are specified in greater detail in the annual
business planning process, civil and military. Key aspects of this include the
preparation of annual business plans in consultation with staff interests,
approval at Secretary General or Chief of Staff level as appropriate, the
ongoing monitoring and review of progress, and regular reporting to the
Minister. The drafting of annual plans will proceed against the background of
the ongoing assessment of the defence and security environment as outlined
above.

|KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS (KPIs)|Col2|
|---|---|
|Programme:|KPI:|
|Contingent Capability|Implementation of White Paper targets.|
||Meet capability development targets.|
|On Island Security & Support to other Agencies|Meet all ATCP/ACA approved requests.|
||Meet all SLA & MOU commitments.|
|International Peace & Security|Meet all Government requirements for overseas peace support.|
||Meet Mission Sponsor’s standards and requirements.|
|Defence Policy, Military Advice & Corporate Services|Provide high quality and timely defence policy advice and military advice.|
||Provide high quality corporate services.|
||Complete decentralisation to Newbridge and the Curragh.|


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces


## APPENDIX 1 DEFENCE – LEGISLATIVE BACKGROUND, STRUCTURE, ROLES


### STATUTORY FRAMEWORK

The Constitution of Ireland vests the right to raise and maintain military or
armed forces exclusively in the Oireachtas and expressly prohibits the raising
and maintenance of any other military or armed force for any purpose
whatsoever.

The Department of Defence was established by the Ministers and Secretaries
Act, 1924 and the Act assigns to the Department “the administration and
_business of the raising, training, organisation, maintenance, equipment,_
_management, discipline, regulation and control according to law of the_
_military defence forces”._

The Act provides that the Minister is ‘Head’ of the Department. The Minister is
assisted in discharging his functions by the civil and military elements of the
Department. The Secretary General is the “principal officer” of the Department
and is also appointed by the Minister for Finance as the Accounting Officer for
all defence expenditure in accordance with the Exchequer and Audit
Departments Act 1866. The authority, responsibility and accountability of the
Secretary General are further elaborated in the Comptroller and Auditor
General (Amendment) Act, 1993 and the Public Service Management Act, 1997.
The 1997 Act also requires the Secretary General to prepare a Strategy
Statement for the Minister’s approval and an annual report on performance.

The Defence Acts 1954 to 2007 provide the legislative basis for the Defence
Forces (Óglaigh na hÉireann). The legislation provides that Defence Forces
Headquarters (DFHQ) is the military element of the Department of Defence.
The Chief of Staff of the Defence Forces heads DFHQ. As provided for in the
Act the Minister has assigned duties to the Chief of Staff. The Chief of Staff is
directly accountable to the Minister for the performance of these duties, which
include responsibility for the military effectiveness, efficiency, organisation and
economy of the Defence Forces. As provided for in the Act and with the
approval of the Minister, the Chief of Staff has, in turn, delegated
responsibility for certain duties to the Deputy Chief of Staff (Operations) and
to the Deputy Chief of Staff (Support).

The Act also provides for delegation by the Minister of military command to
General Officers Commanding the Brigades, the Defence Forces Training
Centre, the Naval Service and the Air Corps. In practice, matters relating to
command are normally channelled through the Chief of Staff. In effect, this
means that day-to-day operational control of the Defence Forces rests with the
Chief of Staff for which he is directly responsible to the Minister.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

### THE WHITE PAPER ON DEFENCE 2000

The White Paper was approved by Government and published in February
2000. It deals with all aspects of defence provision and organisation and sets
out the policy on defence for the period to 2010. The objective of the White
Paper is to ensure an appropriate level of defence capability, having regard to
the changing defence and security environment. The White Paper has been of
central importance in informing Department of Defence and Defence Forces
strategic objectives since its publication.

The White Paper sets out the roles of the Defence Forces as follows:

to defend the State against armed aggression; this being a contingency,
preparations for its implementation will depend on an ongoing
Government assessment of the security and defence environment;

to aid the civil power (meaning in practice to assist, when requested, the
Garda Síochána, who have primary responsibility for law and order,
including the protection of the internal security of the State);

to participate in multinational peace support, crisis management and
humanitarian relief operations in support of the United Nations and
under UN mandate, including regional security missions authorised by
the UN;

to provide a fishery protection service in accordance with the State’s
obligations as a member of the EU; and,

to carry out such other duties as may be assigned to them from time to
time, e.g. search and rescue, air ambulance service, Ministerial air
transport service, assistance on the occasion of natural or other disasters,
assistance in connection with the maintenance of essential services,
assistance in combating oil pollution at sea.

### THE PROGRAMME FOR GOVERNMENT

 33

The commitments in relation to defence in the Programme for Government
provide that we will:

Prepare a second White Paper on Defence for the period 2011- 2020. The
Second White Paper will consider expanding the roles of the Air Corps
and the Naval service. This will include increasing the size of the navy
flotilla and developing an Air Corps’ airlift capability.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

Remain firmly committed to maintaining Irish neutrality and opposing
any changes to the triple lock as enshrined in our law. In accordance
with this, we will ensure that participation by the Defence Forces in any
overseas peace support missions continue to be based on the triple-lock
mechanism of UN mandate, Government and Dáil approval.

Ensure that investment in the Defence Forces continues to grow, with
the full commercial value of all defence property disposals to be received
by the Department of Defence for investment in capital projects and
new equipment.

Continue the ongoing policy of annual recruitment and maintain the
present establishment. This will enable the Permanent Defence Forces to
maintain a strength of 10,500 fully trained personnel with an additional
provision from 2008 onwards for up to 350 troops to be in training at
any given time.

Fast-track the civilianisation of all outstanding agreed posts.

Ensure that our troops have the most modern and effective range of
protective equipment, weaponry and training available.

Fully execute the Reserve Defence Forces (RDF) implementation plan by
the 2009 target, including improving RDF interoperability with the PDF,
and the introduction of procedures to allow suitably qualified RDF
personnel serve on overseas duties.

Continue the ongoing policy of recruitment to the RDF through regular
and targeted recruitment campaigns.

Develop the role and contribution of the Medical Corps and expand its
capacity to deliver a range of medical facilities on UN mandated
missions.

Develop the Commissioning From the Ranks programme, both for
enlisted personnel under 28 by way of the cadet programme and by way
of regular CFR competitions for NCOs.

### 34

Conduct regular reviews of the operation of the equality and antibullying measures in the military.

Ensure the Defence Forces are intrinsically involved in all future 1916
commemorations.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

Provide annual subventions to support and encourage the excellent
work of the officially recognised veterans groups ONET and IUNVA.

Continue to support the excellent work of Civil Defence through the
ongoing provision of new equipment and encourage increased
membership of Civil Defence through regular and targeted recruitment
programmes.

Ensure that the Office of Emergency Planning coordinates the
publication of an annual review of the emergency plans of each
functional department, outlining achievements and improvements across
all sectors.

Continue the annual programme of major simulated exercises and use
these structured exercises to support sustained public awareness and
reassurance.

Promote greater cooperation and knowledge sharing between the Coast
Guard, the Navy and Air Corps to ensure that the water surrounding this
island are safe for seafarers and coastal communities.

### ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURES

**DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE**

The Department of Defence comprises civil and military elements with a total
of 650 personnel. Of this number 380 (whole time equivalents) are civil
servants and 270 are military personnel. The military personnel constitute
Defence Forces Headquarters. In addition, in the order of 850 civilian
employees are employed throughout the Defence Forces. These civilian
employees provide a range of general operative, trades and other services in
military installations.

The primary role of the Department is to support the Minister as Head of the
Department, in particular by providing policy advice and support on Defence
matters. This includes assistance with policy formulation and the

### 35

implementation of policy as directed by the Minister. The Secretary General is
the Minister’s principal defence policy advisor and the Chief of Staff is the
Minister’s principal military adviser.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

**DEFENCE FORCES**

The Defence Forces are organised on conventional military lines providing a
sufficiently flexible structure to carry out all the roles assigned by Government.
The Defence Forces consist of a Permanent Defence Force (PDF) and a Reserve
Defence Force (RDF). The former is a standing force and provides the primary
capabilities for military operations at home and military peace support
operations abroad. The RDF provides the necessary contingent conventional
military capability to augment and assist the PDF, when necessary.

### PERMANENT DEFENCE FORCE

The Permanent Defence Force consists of the Army, the Air Corps and the
Naval Service. The authorised Permanent Defence Force strength is 10,500. The
Programme for Government contains a commitment to the maintenance of an
additional 350 troops in training at any one time.

**ARMY**

The Army is structured into three all-arms brigades, consisting of combat,
combat support and combat service support elements. Each brigade is
designated a territorial area of responsibility with specific garrison locations.
The Defence Forces’ Training Centre (DFTC) and Defence Forces’ Logistics Base
in the Curragh, Co Kildare support the training and logistics functions for the
Permanent Defence Force (PDF) and the Reserve Defence Force (RDF).

**AIR CORPS**

The Air Corps, based at Casement Aerodrome, Baldonnel, Co. Dublin, consists
of an operational headquarters, two operational wings, two support wings,
the Air Corps Training College, and a Communication and Information Services
Squadron. The operational wings consist of a training/light strike squadron,

### 36 helicopter squadrons, a maritime squadron, a transport squadron and a fixed

wing reconnaissance squadron. The support wings are tasked with specialist
maintenance of the aircraft fleet and administration and logistical support for
the Air Corps.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

**NAVAL SERVICE**

The Naval Service, based at Haulbowline, Co. Cork, has a flotilla of eight ships,
an operational headquarters, an operations command, a logistical support
command and a Naval Service College. The flotilla consists of a helicopter
patrol vessel squadron, large patrol vessel squadron, an offshore patrol vessel
squadron and a coastal patrol vessel squadron. The support command is
responsible for personnel and all logistical, engineering, and maintenance
functions. FORMATION GEOGRAPHIC DEPLOYMENTS

### RESERVE DEFENCE FORCE

The RDF is at present undergoing reorganisation and reform under Phase 2 of
the Reserve Defence Force Review Implementation Plan (RDFRIP). The RDF
consists of the Army Reserve and Naval Service Reserve:

**ARMY RESERVE**

The Army Reserve will be organised into integrated and non-integrated
elements. A reserve brigade has been established in each PDF brigade area,
mirroring the PDF brigade.

**NAVAL SERVICE RESERVE**

The Naval Service Reserve is divided into two groups known as the Eastern
Group and the Southern Group. Each group consists of two companies: Dublin
and Waterford in the Eastern Group and Cork and Limerick in the Southern
Group.


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces


## APPENDIX 2 MEMBERS OF THE PERMANENT DEFENCE FORCE SERVING OVERSEAS AS OF 01 JULY 2008


### 1. UN MISSIONS

(i) **UNIFIL (United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon) HQ** 7

(ii) **UNTSO (United Nations Truce Supervision**
Organisation) - Israel, Syria and Lebanon 12

(iii) **MINURSO (United Nations Mission for**
the Referendum in Western Sahara) 3

(iv) **UNMIK (United Nations Interim**
Administration Mission in Kosovo) 4

(v) **MONUC (United Nations Mission in**
Democratic Republic of the Congo) 3

(vi) **UNOCI (United Nations Mission in Ivory Coast)** 2

**TOTAL** 31

**UN MANDATED MISSIONS**

(vii) **EUFOR (EU-led Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina)** 47

(viii) **EUFOR TCHAD/RCA (EU-led Operation in CHAD and**
the Central African Republic) OHQ - Paris 18

**EUFOR TCHAD/RCA (EU-led Operation in CHAD**
and the Central African Republic) FHQ - Chad 21

**EUFOR TCHAD/RCA (EU-led Operation in CHAD**
and the Central African Republic) 97th Inf Battalion 371

(ix) **KFOR (International Security Presence**
in Kosovo) Framework Nation 61

**KFOR (International Security Presence in Kosovo) HQ** 11

**KFOR (International Security Presence in**
Kosovo) 38th Inf Group 214

(x) **ISAF (International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan)** 7

**TOTAL NUMBER OF PERSONNEL SERVING WITH UN MISSIONS** **781**


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces

### 2. ORGANISATION FOR SECURITY AND CO-OPERATION IN EUROPE (OSCE)

(i) OSCE Mission to Bosnia & Herzegovina 2

(ii) OSCE Mission in Belgrade - Serbia 1

(iii) OSCE Mission in Skopje - Macedo 1

(iv) Staff Officer, Higher Level Planning Group, Vienna 1

**TOTAL NUMBER OF PERSONNEL SERVING OSCE** **5**

### 3. EU MILITARY STAFF

Brussels 7

New York 1

### 4. HQ EU NORDIC BATTLEGROUP 12

 5. MILITARY REPRESENTATIVES/ADVISERS/STAFF

(i) Military Adviser, Permanent Mission to UN, New York 1

(ii) Military Adviser, Irish Delegation to OSCE, Vienna 1

(iii) Military Representatives to EU (Brussels) 4

(iv) Liaison Office of Ireland, NATO/PfP (Brussels) 2

(v) Military Representative to NATO/PfP Co-ordination Cell/Supreme
Headquarters Allied Powers Europe (SHAPE), Mons, Belgium 1 **39**

**TOTAL NUMBER DEFENCE FORCES**
**PERSONNEL SERVING OVERSEAS** **815**


-----

Strategy Statement 2008 – 2010 | Department of Defence & Defence Forces


-----

