# DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE AND DEFENCE FORCES

 STRATEGY STATEMENT 2015 - 2017

#### An Roinn Cosanta Óglaigh na hÉireann
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE                    DEFENCE FORCES IRELAND

© 2015 copyright

Department of Defence and Defence Forces

Station Road, Newbridge, Co. Kildare.

Tel: (045) 49 2000 Fax: (045) 49 2017

Lo Call: 1890 251 890

1


-----

**DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE AND DEFENCE FORCES STRATEGY STATEMENT 2015 – 2017**

**Section 1:** **Introduction, Overview and Mandate**

       - **Introduction**

       - **Policy Context**

       - **Mandate**

       - **The Defence Organisation**

**Section 2:** **Environmental Analysis**

       - **Domestic Security Environment**

       - **International Security Environment**

       - **Peace Support Operations**

       - **Economic Environment**

       - **Organisational Analysis**

**Section 3:** **Achieving our Goal: Strategies 2015 – 2017**

       - **Defence Policy**

       - **Ensuring the Capacity to Deliver**

       - **Defence Forces Operational Outputs**

       - **Other Organisations with which we work to achieve Our Goals**

**Section 4:** **Our Capacity to Deliver**

       - **Human Resources**

       - **Infrastructure**

       - **Public Service Reform**

**Section 5:** **Reporting Progress**

       - **Strategic Dimensions, Outputs and Key Performance Indicators**

**Appendices**

**Appendix 1:** **Defence Commitments in the Programme for Government**

**Appendix 2:** **Defence Capability Framework**

**Appendix 3:** **List of Memoranda of Understanding and Service Level Agreements**

2


-----

**MINISTERIAL FOREWORD**

#### I welcome the publication of this Strategy Statement which provides a strategic framework for the Department of Defence and the Defence Forces for the period from 2015 to 2017. A key focus of the Strategy Statement is to ensure that the Defence Organisation retains the capacity to fulfil all roles assigned by Government. A new White Paper on Defence will be published later this year. This will set out the Defence Policy Framework for the next decade and will inform strategic priorities.
 Since my appointment as Minister for Defence I have had the opportunity to witness the important ongoing work of our Defence Forces, both at home and overseas. Much of this work, such as explosive ordnance disposal, maritime patrols, armed prison guards, air support, capability development etc., is unseen by the general public but is an integral part of the State’s security framework.  The accomplishments of the Defence Forces on overseas missions over the course of more than half a century have made a tangible contribution to international peace and security. The engagement by civil and military personnel from the Department and the Defence Forces in international fora along with our active participation in international peace support operations reflects Ireland’s continued commitment to fulfilling our international obligations. 
 This Strategy Statement addresses the challenges facing the Defence Organisation in maintaining the required Defence capabilities and operational outputs. It charts a way forward that builds on the significant modernisation that has been achieved by the entire Defence Organisation over an extended period of time. 
 The publication of this Strategy Statement comes at a pivotal time for the country. We are emerging from an unprecedented economic crisis.  Economic recovery has begun, financial stability has been restored and there is a return to job creation and economic growth. Ireland can now look to the future with confidence. The Defence Organisation will continue to contribute to the maintenance of a secure environment, a key factor that underpins economic growth. In addition, the Defence Organisation will continue to support the Government’s jobs initiative. 

3


-----

#### Finally, I look forward to working closely with the Secretary General, the Chief of Staff and their respective personnel, both civil and military, whose combined efforts will be required to achieve the Defence High Level Goal.

SIMON COVENEY, T.D.
MINISTER FOR DEFENCE
March 2015

4


-----

#### FOREWORD
 This Strategy Statement encompasses the Department of Defence and the Defence Forces, which have distinct but complementary roles. This is reflected in the fact that the collective Defence Organisation shares a common High Level Goal, which is:
 To provide for the military defence of the State, contribute to national and international peace and security and fulfil all other roles assigned by Government.
 In order to achieve this goal the Defence Organisation will pursue a range of actions under three broad strategic dimensions: Defence policy, ensuring the capacity to deliver, and Defence Forces’ operational outputs.  
 A new White Paper on Defence, which is due to be published later this year, will set out an updated defence policy framework for the next decade. It will chart a course that situates this Strategy Statement within a longer strategic timeframe.
 The immediate priority is to ensure that the Defence Organisation can continue to meet the requirements of Government across all roles assigned. The Defence Organisation has undertaken significant steps in recent years in order to maintain and develop capabilities within a reduced resource envelope. We now need to build on this solid foundation that has been established through the rationalisation and reorganisation process to ensure appropriate capabilities are maintained and developed. The development of shared services will also see further significant changes. Implementation of the Civil Service Renewal Plan will provide a further impetus to ensuring the highest standards of service delivery and the Public Service Reform Plan will continue to provide a framework for ongoing change that complements ongoing initiatives within the Defence Organisation.
 The Defence Organisation is tasked with a broad and diverse range of duties. On a daily basis, personnel of the Department and the Defence Forces can deal with matters of local, national and international dimensions. The Defence Forces undertake a range of operations both at home and overseas as well as providing capabilities to support Government Departments and Agencies in emergency situations. Much of this work is unseen by the general public.
 The successful achievement of the Defence Organisation’s High Level Goal requires the inputs of a broad range of stakeholders, particularly the civil and military personnel of the Defence Organisation. We would like to acknowledge the

5


-----

#### significant efforts of those personnel over recent years and look forward to working closely together over the coming years. 

Maurice Quinn Lt. Gen. Conor O’Boyle

Secretary General Chief of Staff

March 2015 March 2015

6


-----

**SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION, OVERVIEW AND MANDATE**

**Introduction**

This Strategy Statement sets out the overall High Level Goal of the Department of Defence and
the Defence Forces, key strategies for implementation over the period 2015 to 2017 and maps
out the strategic direction for the Defence Organisation[1]. It has been developed following
consultation with a range of Government Departments and agencies and with staff throughout
the Defence Organisation.

**Policy Context**

The High Level Goal of the Defence Organisation is:

_To provide for the military defence of the State, contribute to national and international peace_
_and security and fulfil all other roles assigned by Government._

The civil and military elements of the Defence Organisation work collaboratively to achieve this
high level goal having regard to their distinct but complementary roles.

The White Paper on Defence (2000) sets out the defence policy framework and outlines the
policy requirements for Defence. It states:

“Having regard to the defence and security environment, the Government’s policy for defence
will be aimed at ensuring that the following requirements are met:

  - To maintain a military force structure that provides a basis for responding to any major

change in Ireland’s strategic circumstances in the medium to long term, as well as
demonstrating an appropriate commitment to national defence.

  - To maintain a military force structure capable of responding to requests to provide aid to

the civil power and in that context, contributing to the prevention of security challenges
from abroad including terrorism and arms smuggling.

  - To fulfil Ireland’s international and regional responsibilities arising from membership of

the UN by providing a range of military capabilities that can effectively be employed to
participate in a broad range of multinational peace support and humanitarian relief
operations.

  - To demonstrate Ireland’s commitment to European security by having a suitable range of

military capabilities that can be used to make appropriate contributions to regional
security missions authorised by the UN.”

In addition, the White Paper outlined the Government’s decision to utilise Defence capabilities to
deliver a broad range of other services, which maximises the value for money accrued from such
capabilities. These include provision of a Fishery Protection Service, the provision of an Air

1 In this Strategy Statement, the Defence Organisation refers to the Department of Defence and the Defence Forces.

7


-----

Ambulance Service to the HSE and the provision of support to the civil authorities across a wide
range of contingencies, including assistance to local authorities during severe weather crises such
as flooding.

A new White Paper on Defence is currently being developed. When published, it will provide an
updated Defence policy framework for the period ahead.

**Mandate**

The Constitution of Ireland vests the right to raise and maintain military or armed forces
exclusively in the Oireachtas and expressly prohibits the raising and maintenance of any other
military or armed force for any purpose whatsoever.

The Department of Defence was established by the Ministers and Secretaries Act, 1924 and the
Act assigns to the Department _“the administration and business of the raising, training,_
_organisation, maintenance, equipment, management, discipline, regulation and control_
_according to law of the military defence forces”._

The Act provides that the Minister is ‘Head’ of the Department. The Minister is assisted in
discharging his functions by the civil and military elements of the Department. The Secretary
General is the “principal officer” of the Department and is also appointed by the Minister for
Finance as the Accounting Officer for all defence expenditure in accordance with the Exchequer
and Audit Departments Act, 1866. The authority, responsibility and accountability of the
Secretary General are further elaborated in the Comptroller and Auditor General (Amendment)
Act, 1993 and the Public Service Management Act, 1997. The 1997 Act also requires the
Secretary General to prepare a Strategy Statement for the Minister’s approval and an annual
report on performance.

The Defence Acts 1954 to 2011 provide the legislative basis for the Defence Forces (Óglaigh na
_hÉireann). The legislation provides that Defence Forces Headquarters (DFHQ) is the military_
element of the Department of Defence. The Chief of Staff of the Defence Forces heads DFHQ.
As provided for in the Act, the Minister has assigned duties to the Chief of Staff for which he is
directly responsible to the Minister. Also provided for in the Act and with the approval of the
Minister, the Chief of Staff has, in turn, delegated responsibility for certain duties to the Deputy
Chief of Staff (Operations) and to the Deputy Chief of Staff (Support).

The Act also provides for delegation by the Minister of military command to General Officers
Commanding the Brigades, the Defence Forces Training Centre, and the Air Corps. Flag Officer
Commanding the Naval Service has been delegated similar responsibilities in respect of the
Naval Service. In practice, matters relating to command are normally channelled through the
Chief of Staff. In effect, this means that day-to-day operational control of the Defence Forces
rests with the Chief of Staff for which he is directly responsible to the Minister.

8


-----

**The Defence Organisation**

The Defence Organisation has civil and military elements, which work collaboratively to ensure
that the Minister and Government’s requirements for Defence are delivered. The elements of the
Defence Organisation and their associated roles are outlined below.

**Department of Defence**
The Department of Defence comprises civil and military elements with distinct but
complementary roles. The primary role of the civil element of the Department is to support the
Minister as Head of the Department, in particular by providing policy advice and support on
Defence matters. The civil element of the Department of Defence is central to the oversight and
management of the Defence Votes, the drive for efficiency and the process of change,
formulating Defence policy, representing Ireland at EU and international engagements in
Defence, defending against litigation and providing a range of services critical to the outputs of
the Defence Forces. The civil element also provides liaison between the Defence Forces and
other Government Departments, public authorities, the EU and public representatives. The
Secretary General is the Minister’s principal policy adviser.

Defence Forces Headquarters (DFHQ) is the military element of the Department of Defence. It
is headed by the Chief of Staff, who is the Minister’s principal military adviser. It is focused on
planning, managing, formulating military advice, development, and major strategic issues
affecting the Defence Forces, including ongoing modernisation and transformation. DFHQ
comprises a range of military staffs, which have responsibilities ranging from Defence Forces
Strategic Planning to Operations, Logistics and Human Resource Management.

The Department also has responsibilities in relation to Emergency Planning and Civil Defence.
The Office of Emergency Planning (OEP) is a joint civil/military office within the Department of
Defence. The OEP supports the Minister in his role as Chairman of the Government’s Task
Force on Emergency Planning, which oversees the emergency planning preparations in
Government Departments and the public authorities under their aegis. The OEP supports
sustained public awareness and reassurance regarding a “whole of Government” approach to
emergency planning and responses to national level emergencies/crises. The OEP is responsible
for reviewing Ireland’s National Risk Assessment and liaises both nationally and at an
international level on risk and best practices in emergency planning. The OEP prepares an annual
report, presented by the Minister for Defence to Government, on Emergency Planning. The OEP
is also responsible for the operation of the National Emergency Coordination Centre (NECC).

Civil Defence is a statutory volunteer based organisation with Units located in each local
authority area. The Civil Defence organisation is managed and developed at national level
through the Civil Defence Branch of the Department. It provides second-line support to the
principal response agencies and other State bodies for a broad range of operations and events. It
also supports a large number of community based events. There are approximately 4,500 trained
and active volunteers in Civil Defence.

9


-----

**Defence Forces**
The White Paper on Defence (2000) sets out the roles of the Defence Forces as follows:

  - _to defend the State against armed aggression; this being a contingency, preparations for_

_its implementation will depend on an ongoing Government assessment of the security and_
_defence environment;_

  - _to aid the civil power (meaning in practice to assist, when requested, the Garda_

_Síochána, who have primary responsibility for law and order, including the protection of_
_the internal security of the State);_

  - _to participate in multinational peace support, crisis management and humanitarian relief_

_operations in support of the United Nations and under UN mandate, including regional_
_security missions authorised by the UN;_

  - _to provide a fishery protection service in accordance with the State’s obligations as a_

_member of the EU; and,_

  - _to carry out such other duties as may be assigned to them from time to time, e.g. search_

_and rescue, air ambulance service, Ministerial air transport service, assistance on the_
_occasion of natural or other disasters, assistance in connection with the maintenance of_
_essential services, assistance in combating oil pollution at sea._

The Defence Forces are organised on conventional military lines providing a sufficiently flexible
structure to carry out all the roles assigned by Government. The Defence Forces consist of a
Permanent Defence Force (PDF) and a Reserve Defence Force (RDF).

The PDF is a standing force and provides the primary capabilities for military operations at home
and military peace support operations abroad. The RDF provides a contingent conventional
military capability to augment and assist the PDF in crisis situations where such additional
capabilities are required.

In addition, civilian employees, engaged under the provisions of the Defence Act 1954, are based
at military locations around the country. The majority of these employees are made up of the
craft, general operative and related grades involved mainly in the maintenance of military
installations and the Naval Service flotilla. Other employees carry out clerical or storekeeping
duties including those engaged to provide professional and specialist support to the Defence
Forces.

**Permanent Defence Force**
The Permanent Defence Force (PDF) consists of the Army, the Air Corps and the Naval Service.
In Budget 2012, the Government decided to stabilise the strength ceiling of the Permanent
Defence Force at 9,500 personnel.

10


-----

**_Army_**
Following the implementation of the re-organisation of the Defence Forces, the Army is now
structured into two all-arms brigades, with PDF and RDF components. Each brigade is
designated a territorial area of responsibility with specific garrison locations. The Defence
Forces’ Training Centre (DFTC), based in the Curragh, Co. Kildare, supports the training,
logistics and maintenance function for the Defence Forces. The Army also has a Special Forces
unit known as the Army Ranger Wing (ARW).

The Army provides the land component of the State’s defence capabilities. On a day-to-day basis
the Army provides a broad range of operational outputs. These include activities such as prison
security and those in support of An Garda Síochána, such as providing armed escorts and
explosive ordnance disposal. The Army provides deployable land forces for overseas peace
support, crisis management and humanitarian operations, augmented by personnel from the Air
Corps and Naval Service. The Army also undertakes tasks in support of the civil authorities, such
as the provision of assistance in severe weather crises and is an integral part of the State’s
response to many contingencies.

**_Air Corps_**
The Air Corps is based at Casement Aerodrome, Baldonnel, Dublin and consists of an
operational headquarters, two operational wings, two support wings, the Air Corps Training
College and a Communication and Information Services Squadron.

As the air component of the Defence Forces, the Air Corps provides air support capabilities to
the other components in carrying out their roles. On a day-to-day basis the Air Corps undertakes
Army Support, Fishery Protection Patrols, provides a Ministerial Air Transport Service and
operates an Air Ambulance Service. The Air Corps also undertakes tasks such as providing air
cover for armed escorts and pilots and technical support for the Garda Air Support Unit. In
addition, the Air Corps undertakes approved operations in support of the civil authorities.

**_Naval Service_**
The Naval Service is based at Haulbowline, Co. Cork. The Naval Service has a flotilla of eight
ships, an operational headquarters, an operations command, a logistical support command and a
Naval Service College.

The Naval Service provides the maritime component of the State’s defence capabilities. It is the
State’s principal sea-going agency and is tasked with a variety of defence and other roles. The
Naval Service undertakes tasks related to security, safety and surveillance, port security, drug
interdiction, pollution control, and search and rescue.

On a day-to-day basis, the primary activity of the Naval Service is providing fishery protection
services based on outputs agreed with the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine and
the Sea Fisheries Protection Authority. The Fisheries Monitoring Centre at the Naval Base is the
designated national centre with responsibility for monitoring all fishing activity within the Irish
Exclusive Fishery Limits and all Irish fishing vessels operating around the world.

11


-----

The Diving Section within the Naval Service routinely undertakes a range of operations in
support of An Garda Síochána and the civil authorities. The Naval Service is also a partner at
the National Maritime College and the Irish Maritime and Energy Resource Cluster (IMERC) at
Cork. In addition, Naval Service vessels have, on occasion, undertaken supply and
reconnaissance missions in support of overseas peace support operations and participated in
foreign visits in support of Irish trade and diplomacy.

**Reserve Defence Force**
The Reserve Defence Force (RDF) consists of the First Line Reserve, the Army Reserve and the
Naval Service Reserve. These provide a capacity to augment the PDF in its contingent Defence
role and in other crisis situations. The RDF is now organised alongside the PDF within the
Single Force Structure. On a day-to-day basis, the Army Reserve and Naval Service Reserve
undertake training in preparation to assist the PDF when required.

12


-----

**SECTION 2: ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS**

Defence policy and the resourcing and implementation of that policy are grounded on a realistic
and ongoing assessment of the defence and security environment. Many factors, both national
and international, can influence the delivery of the Defence High Level Goal. Chief among these
are the defence and security situations at home and abroad. A security environment assessment
was set out in the Green Paper on Defence, which was published in July 2013. This is available
[to view on the Department of Defence website (www.defence.ie). Key elements of this](http://www.defence.ie/)
assessment, updated as appropriate, are set out below. A new security assessment is currently
being prepared and will be published in due course in the new White Paper on Defence.

Since Ireland’s last White Paper on Defence was published in 2000, a broader range of issues
have been recognised in the international sphere as posing security threats. Many of the new
threats are transnational in nature and require a collective response with a broad range of policy
instruments. Globalisation - that is, growing trade and other links between countries - has also
led to increased interdependence among countries. Global trade is highly reliant on new
technologies and transport links and this fact has led to new vulnerabilities. Ireland, as an island
nation, is highly reliant on air and sea transport links and trade with other countries, particularly
the UK. This interdependence means that events abroad can have significant reverberations in
this State.

There is always the scope for the emergence of new threats that have not as yet been identified
and for strategic shocks. Whilst recognising that uncertainties exist, the following sections set
out key security challenges and other environmental issues.

**Domestic Security Environment**

The Good Friday Agreement has delivered a stable peace process that commands overwhelming
cross-community support. Nonetheless, there is a real and persistent threat from groups who are
prepared to use violence in order to oppose democracy and peace. There are ongoing reviews of
the threat assessment arising from the activities of these groups, taking into account evidence of
amalgamation and co-operation between the various groups. Whilst the threat from these groups
to this State remains low, it is still classed as severe in Northern Ireland. Planning or logistical
support activities in this State by such groups can, through the attacks that they facilitate,
adversely affect the threat level in Northern Ireland. This State has a responsibility to counter any
such activities.

The threat to Ireland as a target of international terrorism remains under constant review, taking
into account developing security threats including identified common risks that arise for western
democracies generally. In common with its European partners, Ireland is particularly concerned
with the risk posed by persons travelling to certain conflict zones and the potential threat when
they return. There is also concern regarding the process of radicalisation and there are a range of
influences, including the internet, which can enable this process. This process can lead to a
potential threat of self-radicalised individuals acting alone – often referred to as “solo terrorism”
or “lone wolves”. In addition, Ireland has a responsibility to seek to prevent transnational

13


-----

terrorist groups from using the State as a refuge or as a base from which to direct their activities
against targets in other countries.

The Defence Forces continue to provide armed support to An Garda Síochána, for example in
prisoner escorts and in providing security at Portlaoise prison and for occasional cash escorts.
The use of improvised explosive devices by criminals within the State requires a major ongoing
response from Defence Forces Explosive Ordnance Disposal teams. Naval and Air support is
also provided to An Garda Síochána in the areas of maritime drug interdiction and the Air Corps
continues to support the Garda Air Support Unit (GASU).

There is an increasing awareness of the security threat that many States face from cyber attacks.
Cyber attacks have the potential to interrupt and disable Critical National Infrastructure (CNI).
These attacks also have implications for Governmental administration, for industry, for
economic wellbeing and for the security and safety of citizens.

The Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has the lead role in relation
to the whole of Government response to the cyber threat. The Defence Forces and An Garda
Síochána provide inputs in the security domain. The Government Task Force on Emergency
Planning, chaired by the Minister for Defence, maintains cyber security as a standing agenda
item. The Defence Forces also leverage information sharing within the European military
community.

**International Security Environment**

The conflict that arose in the Crimean region of Ukraine in 2014, following on from the events in
Georgia in 2008, has challenged perceptions about the stability of the broader European region.
Notwithstanding these developments, the probability of a conventional military attack on
Ireland’s territory from another state is currently assessed as low. However, any potential
conflicts affecting member states of the EU present serious security concerns for Ireland and the
future outlook is likely to remain unpredictable in the coming years.

Tensions in Asia and the Middle East and regional conflicts in Africa and elsewhere will
continue to challenge international peace and security. Piracy and criminality off the African
coasts have disrupted aid distribution and the flow of international trade. Climate change and the
proliferation of and use of Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN) weapons are
also major concerns to the international community.

The defence and security environment will continue to change rapidly and unpredictably. No one
country acting alone can respond adequately to the collective threats in the defence and security
environment. States must collaborate in defining the shared threats to security as well as in the
collective response. Co-operative and collaborative security arrangements are deepening and
Ireland must remain an active participant in the evolving collective security response to new
threats in the defence and security environment.

14


-----

**Peace Support Operations**

Ireland’s commitment to collective security is pursued through global and regional institutions
such as the United Nations (UN), European Union (EU) and NATO Partnership for Peace
(NATO/PfP). Ireland has accorded central importance to the United Nations since it became a
member in 1955 and, within the UN system, has supported effective international action in areas
such as disarmament, peacekeeping, development and human rights. It has also been a strong
defender of the primary role of the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace
and security. In recent years the UN has increasingly relied on regional organisations such as the
European Union, NATO and the African Union to lead UN-mandated peace support missions on
its behalf.

A key element of Ireland’s contribution to international peace and security is the commitment of
personnel to international peace support operations (PSOs) under UN authority. The nature of
UN-mandated missions has changed in recent years. There is now a requirement for more robust
Chapter VII peace enforcement operations and Defence Forces capabilities have been enhanced
to enable effective participation in such missions.

New missions bring new challenges for the Irish Peacekeeper. PSOs now have more robust rules
of engagement, while the peacekeeper remains subject to Irish Law, the Laws of Armed Conflict
and International Human Rights Law. Personnel are also required to have an understanding of
the complex issues of cultural diversity affecting both the host nation and troops from other
contributing nations. These challenges are reflected in the training and preparation of units prior
to their deployment.

The development of bilateral relations has been a key enabler for Ireland’s participation in recent
overseas operations where we have participated in multinational or combined units with other
countries. Ireland’s participation in the EU’s Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) and
EU operations, in EU Battlegroups and in NATO/PfP and the Partnership Goal process has
supported the development of increased interoperability with other like-minded and EU member
States. The MINURCAT mission in Chad and, more recently, the UNIFIL mission in Lebanon
are examples of this development. Ireland has also participated in multi-national EU
Battlegroups.

**Crisis Management Co-operation**

Co-operation between the EU and other international actors, particularly the UN, in the area of
crisis management, has also developed substantially into a diverse network of co-operation and
interaction, spanning virtually the entire range of EU external relations. Ireland continues to
encourage and promote the ongoing development of EU-UN co-operation in the area of
humanitarian action, crisis management, peacekeeping and conflict prevention, with a particular
emphasis on EU action in support of UN operations.

15


-----

**Economic Environment**

The economic downturn and its associated impact on the public finances have required firm and
decisive action by Government in recent years. A flexible and adaptive approach from all public
organisations is still required, including ongoing transformation in the delivery of public
services. The new White Paper on Defence will set out an updated policy framework, including
decisions relating to resourcing of Defence and associated priorities, for the next decade.

The Public Service Stability Agreement 2013 – 2016, Haddington Road Agreement (HRA),
contains elements relevant to both the civil and military elements of the Defence Organisation. It
acknowledges the major process of change, modernisation and transformation which has been
underway in the Defence Organisation since the 1990s. The associated Defence Sector
Collective Agreement is designed to ensure that the Defence Forces remain fit for purpose and
will be able to continue to fulfil all of their functions. Action Plans under the Agreement are in
place for both the civil and military elements of the organisation and the ambitious targets in
these plans are being met.

The Department of Defence will continue to co-operate fully with central initiatives under the
Public Service reform agenda in the area of shared services. The Department currently provides
financial shared services to the Defence sector and has a long experience and an excellent track
record in the provision of such services. The Department’s office in Renmore, Galway has been
selected as a site for both the Payroll Shared Services Centre (PSSC) and the Financial
Management Shared Services Centre (FMSSC). Work on transferring payrolls to the PSSC is
underway.

**Organisational Analysis**

A major process of change, modernisation and transformation has been ongoing within the
Defence Organisation since the 1990s. The organisation has delivered a significant reduction in
the numbers of civil servants, military personnel and civilian employees over this period. There
has also been significant rationalisation of military installations.

Recently, there has been a major re-organisation of the Defence Forces, both Permanent and
Reserve. The modernisation programme within Defence ensured that operational outputs could
be maintained within the prevailing resource envelope.

The Defence Organisation has consistently displayed many strengths. These include:

  - a proven aptitude for ongoing change and flexibility.

  - a respected international reputation for the Defence Organisation and acceptance of the

Defence Forces as a professional force capable of delivering an effective response across
a broad range of peace support operations. The Defence Forces continue to be widely
regarded as partners of choice in international peace support operations.

16


-----

  - a proven record in fully meeting Government’s national and international security-related

commitments.

  - the provision of essential domestic supports at times when regular service providers were

unavailable.

Key challenges facing the Defence Organisation include:

- _The defence and security environment will continue to evolve. The key challenge will be to_

_ensure that the Defence Organisation retains and develops appropriate capabilities in order_
_to meet Government requirements._

- _Ensuring that our own people, civil and military, through whom all defence services are_

_delivered, have the requisite skills to perform their duties efficiently and effectively._

- _Maximising the usage of electronic systems and shared services to support business_

_functionality._

This Strategy Statement identifies the key strategies and actions to address these challenges.

17


-----

**SECTION 3: ACHIEVING OUR GOAL – STRATEGIES 2015 – 2017**

The High Level Goal of the Defence Organisation is:

_To provide for the military defence of the State, contribute to national and international peace_
_and security and fulfil all other roles assigned by Government._

Achieving this High Level Goal requires outputs in distinct but complementary strategic
dimensions. These are as follows:

  - Defence Policy

  - Ensuring the Capacity to Deliver

  - Defence Forces Operational Outputs

**Defence Policy**

The White Paper on Defence (2000) has provided the policy framework for Defence for the past
decade. The defence and security environment has changed appreciably over this period,
particularly in the international domain, and this has required a flexible and responsive approach
from the Defence Organisation. A key requirement of the policy function is to ensure that
appropriate policy responses are formulated in response to changes in the defence and security
environment. Defence policy, including policy responses to changes in the defence and security
environment, is informed by a range of inputs, including military advice. As previously outlined,
the preparation of a new White Paper on Defence is underway. When published, it will provide
an updated Defence policy framework for the period ahead.

The defence policy framework encompasses the domestic sphere and includes, inter alia, the
work of the Office of Emergency Planning and the development of Memoranda of
Understanding and Service Level Agreements with other Government Departments and State
Agencies across a diverse range of roles. There is ongoing collaboration with other Government
Departments and Agencies in this regard.

The defence policy framework also includes, in collaboration with the Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade, Defence policy inputs to global and regional defence and security policy,
including the ongoing development of the EU’s Common Security and Defence Policy.

The Government’s Jobs Initiative includes targeted measures to develop and grow the Irish
economy. The Defence Organisation will continue to play a part in Ireland’s economic recovery,
particularly by contributing to the maintenance of a secure environment, one that supports
investment and growth. We will also continue, in consultation with Enterprise Ireland, to
support, within available resources, Irish industry and research institutions in product/service
development and evaluation.

18


-----

The key strategies to be pursued are:

- _A continuous review of the defence and security environment to ensure the provision of timely_

_and relevant policy and military advice to the Minister and to Government, including advice_
_in respect of security, peace support and defence developments generally._

- _Publication and implementation of a new White Paper on Defence._

- _Ensure that appropriate responses in the delivery of defence services are identified and_

_pursued in response to changes in the defence and security environment._

- _Continue to formalise the provision of defence services and conduct ongoing monitoring of_

_service provision through the development of Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) and_
_Service Level Agreements (SLAs)._

- _Work proactively to advance national interests and continue to contribute actively to the_

_development of international peace and security policy in international fora, together with the_
_Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, notably in relation to the EU’s Common Security_
_and Defence Policy and NATO/PfP._

- _Continue to provide the necessary supports to the Government Task Force on Emergency_

_Planning._

- _Continue to support the Government’s Jobs Initiative._

**Ensuring the Capacity to Deliver**

Successfully achieving the High Level Goal of the Defence Organisation requires the combined
efforts of the civil and military elements of the organisation. This section, coupled with the next
chapter, describe how this will be achieved over the lifetime of this Strategy Statement.

Defence policy determines and informs the development of military capabilities. There are five
essential pillars to military capability: operational viability, sustainability, readiness,
_interoperability and deployability. This is further explained in Appendix 2._

There are a broad range of inputs to the Capability Development Process. The procurement of
military equipment, the maintenance of infrastructure and ongoing development of regulatory
and governance structures are tasks which entail both civil and military inputs. There are also
capability development activities that fall exclusively in the military domain such as the
development of doctrine, training and education of military personnel who are one of the key
components of military capability. The capacity to sustain operations is a key element of military
capability and equally applies to domestic security and contingencies.

19


-----

This strategic dimension is a key factor in ensuring that Defence Organisation outputs are fit for
purpose and that military capabilities are maintained at an appropriate state of “readiness” for
operational requirements.

The key strategies to be pursued in this area are:

- _Publish and implement a new White Paper on Defence._

- _Maintenance and development of conventional all arms military capabilities across the_

_complete spectrum of military operations[2] at targeted readiness states to meet contingent and_
_ongoing operational requirements, including United Nations Standby Arrangements System_
_(UNSAS), European Union Headline Goal (EUHG) and EU Battlegroup commitments._

- _Enhance and build on progress already made in the area of joint operations between the_

_Army, Air Corps and Naval Service through inter-service training and exercises and_
_improved co-ordination, integration and situational awareness at the command, operational_
_and tactical levels._

- _Develop Reserve Defence Force capabilities in line with the recommendations of the Value_

_for Money Review of the RDF as part of the Single Force Structure._

- _Continue to engage positively, in the framework of Common Security and Defence Policy_

_(CSDP), in the ongoing development of military and civil crisis management capabilities,_
_including the European Defence Agency (EDA) capability development initiatives._

- _Continue our positive engagement with NATO/PfP, in the Partnership Goal process and with_

_the Planning and Review Process (PARP) in order to enhance Defence Forces_
_interoperability in multi-national operations and to contribute to the development of military_
_capabilities in accordance with international standards._

- _Continue to promote and develop Civil Defence as an effective volunteer-based organisation_

_providing emergency response and community support services._

- _Implement the transformational agenda across the Defence Organisation._

- _Ensure that the Defence Organisation develops and implements best practice human_

_resources, governance and management frameworks (this is considered in detail in the_
_following section, Our Capacity to Deliver)._

- _Implement the Civil Service Renewal Plan._

- _Complete implementation of the Defence Forces Medical Services Review as resources allow_

_in line with the commitments in the Programme for Government._

2 The complete spectrum of military operations means military operations in the environments of Peace (i.e. ATCP),
Conflict (i.e. International Peace Support Operations) and War (i.e. Defence of the State).

20


-----

**Defence Forces Operational Outputs**

Military capabilities are used in operations across the diverse roles assigned to the Defence
Forces. The operational outputs for these roles are delivered by the Defence Forces and are
drawn from a fixed pool of resources. The sustainability of operations requires sufficient
capacity and capabilities in order to rotate personnel and replace equipment e.g. for overseas
operations.

In contrast to many other nations, the Defence Forces provide a comprehensive range of
operational outputs, on a day-to-day basis. This maximises the utility of defence capabilities.
While internal security is primarily a matter for An Garda Síochána, the Permanent Defence
Force is called upon to provide ongoing assistance in the provision of armed security, explosive
ordnance disposal and air and maritime support including drug interdiction. The Defence Forces
also provide other support to the civil authorities which include fishery protection patrols, air
ambulance flights, ministerial air transport services, maintenance of essential services and
ceremonial services.

A key element of Ireland’s contribution to international peace and security is the commitment of
personnel to international peace support operations under UN authority. Participation by Ireland
in such operations is subject to our national sovereign decision-making procedures - this means
the “Triple Lock” of a UN Mandate and Government and Dáil approval, as appropriate, in
accordance with the Defence Acts.

Ireland has offered, through UNSAS, to provide up to 850 military personnel to meet UN and
other peace support and humanitarian commitments at any one time. It maintains the same
mutual commitment in relation to both EU and NATO-led peace support operations.

The key strategies to be pursued are:

- _Deploy Defence Forces capabilities to approved Aid to the Civil Power operations._

- _Deploy Defence Forces capabilities to approved Aid to the Civil Authority operations._

- _Conduct operations in accordance with Memoranda of Understanding/Service Level_
_Agreements targets._

- _Deploy Defence Forces capabilities to overseas peace support missions in accordance with_
_Government requirements._

- _Provide personnel to support Security Sector Reform and capacity building initiatives in_
_accordance with Government requirements._

21


-----

**Other Organisations with which we work to achieve our Goals**

There are important cross-departmental dimensions to the work of the Defence Organisation and
success in achieving our policy goals is often critically dependent on the inputs and co-operation
of other Departments and State Agencies. Equally, the success of other Departments and
Agencies can be dependent on the inputs and co-operation of the Defence Organisation.
Department officials and Defence Force personnel are represented on a number of
Interdepartmental Groups and Committees which consider a range of cross-cutting issues that
impact on Government.

The Defence Organisation has pioneered the use of MOUs and SLAs covering services delivered
to a range of other Government Departments and Agencies. These are defined and may include
objective output targets for the Defence Forces. We will continue to develop this framework
where appropriate. These are outlined in Appendix 3.

The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade is a key strategic partner. The Defence
Organisation will continue to work closely with that Department regarding Ireland’s contribution
to international peace and security including our relationship with the UN, EU, NATO,
Organisation for Security Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), etc.

As a member of the Interdepartmental Committee on Development, the Defence Organisation is
committed to integrating an international development perspective into the work of the Defence
Organisation and contributing to the Government’s international development objective to
reduce poverty, inequality and exclusion.

The Defence Organisation will continue to contribute to the Interdepartmental Groups focused
on the development of a second National Action Plan for the implementation of UN Security
Council Resolution 1325, and implement as appropriate the recommendations that are applicable
to the defence and security arena.

The Department of Defence will also continue to work closely with the Departments of the
Taoiseach, Finance, and Public Expenditure and Reform in relation to the transformation of
public services and the implementation of the action plan under the Haddington Road Agreement
on these matters and in relation to defence modernisation and the wider public service
modernisation programme.

The Finance Branch of the Department will continue to participate in a number of crossdepartmental groups which address common issues that arise from time to time.

The Department of Defence will continue to work with the Office of the Attorney General to
ensure that our work is completed within a sound legal and constitutional framework. The
Defence Organisation will further develop our positive relationship with the Office of the
Ombudsman for the Defence Forces.

The Defence Organisation will continue to support the work of the Government Task Force on
Emergency Planning and the Office of Emergency Planning and where appropriate provide

22


-----

assistance during national emergencies/crises to the lead Government Departments and
participate in inter-agency structured exercises. The Government Task Force will oversee the
development of a National Framework for Emergency Management, having regard to national
and international best practice, to support and improve the State’s response to national level
emergencies/crises.

Planning for the commemoration of the Centenary of the Easter Rising, in 2016, continues on a
cross-departmental basis. The Defence Organisation has a key role to play and is committed to
working with others to develop, implement and participate in a successful commemorative
programme. A key element of the programme is the Military Service Pensions (1916-1923)
Collection project which continues to be progressed and there have been two releases from the
Collection to date with further releases planned before April 2016. The Defence Organisation
will also continue to provide substantial input to annual State ceremonies such as the National
Day of Commemoration and the National Famine Commemoration, and will continue to
organise the annual Arbour Hill 1916 Commemoration which is hosted by the Minister for
Defence.

23


-----

**SECTION 4: OUR CAPACITY TO DELIVER**

As previously outlined, the achievement of our High Level Goal requires the development and
maintenance of a broad range of capabilities within the Defence Organisation. This Chapter
considers a broad range of actions that are required to underpin these capabilities.

**Human Resources**

The Defence Organisation will continue to work to create a supportive and positive culture that
permits all members to contribute to the organisation to the best of their ability with all human
resource policies being informed by and aligned with current best practice in the workplace.

The objective of the Defence Forces Human Resources Strategy will be to enhance the military
capabilities of the Forces, on land, at sea and in the air through the timely provision of
appropriately qualified and highly motivated individuals to all areas of the Forces. In that
context, best practice Human Resource Strategies will be implemented across the Forces in the
areas of recruitment, selection, continuous development, retention, exit and career management.

The Human Resources Strategy for civil service staff of the Department will be reviewed in line
with ongoing developments in the public sector, including the implementation of the Public
Service Stability Agreement 2013-2016 (HRA). The Strategy will support the Defence
Organisation’s High Level Goal. We will continue to implement robust and effective
performance management through the Performance Management and Development System
(PMDS) to ensure delivery of organisational objectives and to ensure that personnel are
supported to carry out their roles.

There will be a continued focus on making effective use of the contribution of the civilian
employee workforce to ensure that the Defence Forces derive maximum benefit from this
valuable resource. In this regard, a programme of targeted recruitment of civilian personnel is
being progressed so that essential vacancies are filled.

**Review of Medical Services**

In accordance with the commitment made in the Programme for Government 2011-2016
regarding the implementation of the Defence Forces Medical Services Review, the Central
Medical Unit was formally established in 2012. Options for outsourcing Defence Forces medical
services to a civilian medical provider have been reviewed and consideration is now being given
to outsourcing options on a per service basis, e.g. physiotherapy services, laboratory services,
pharmacy services. Arrangements for existing services which are already outsourced are also
being regularised, e.g. GPs, dental services.

**Partnership and Conciliation & Arbitration**

Building on the progress made to date, the Defence Organisation will continue to invest time and
resources in partnership. There are partnership structures in place involving the Department’s
civil service staff and civilian employees, and the Defence Forces. Benefits of the process

24


-----

include a greater shared understanding of the business of defence and how that can be
progressed, better internal and external communications, the development of customer service
planning and implementation, better environmental planning, and the creation of fora in which
issues of concern can be resolved.

The Defence Forces Conciliation and Arbitration (C & A) Scheme provides a range of fora for
defence management to discuss with the Defence Forces Representative Associations, within the
scope of representation, the impact of the implementation of our strategic objectives. This
includes implementation of the White Paper on Defence 2000, elements of which are
incorporated in the context of the Public Service Stability Agreement 2013-2016 (HRA), and the
associated Defence Sector Collective Agreement. This will further enhance our ongoing
modernisation agenda. We will continue to enhance internal communications processes and
ensure transparency in the conciliation process, increasing access to current agreements and
understandings for all stakeholders.

**Training and Development**

The Defence Organisation will continue to invest in its people. It will seek to develop initiatives
to identify training and development opportunities that enable participation from both the civil
and military elements of the Defence Organisation, leading to enhanced cooperation in this area.
The Organisation will continue to review training and development policy and its
implementation with a view to ensuring effective use of all resources available.

The Defence Forces will continue to prioritise the training and education of its personnel in order
to maintain essential capabilities needed to face future challenges. Such training must be robust
and challenging for both individuals and units. Success in this important area will permit the
Defence Forces to develop the necessary capabilities required to ensure success in future robust
Peace Support Operations. It will also ensure that the flexibility exists to complete contingent
and domestic tasks as they arise.

**Gender, Equality and Diversity**

The Defence Organisation is committed to the implementation of the codes of practice on
accessibility and the employment of people with disabilities in the public service.

The Department will continue to meet or exceed the Government 3% target for the recruitment
and employment of people with disabilities and to provide training and development appropriate
to the needs of all staff, including those with a disability. It should be noted that the Defence
Forces are excluded from Part 3 of the Disability Act, 2005. The Department's role in relation to
Part 3 of the Act relates to the civilian employees employed by the Department on behalf of the
Defence Forces and to the civil staff of the Department, together with the staff of the Office of
the Ombudsman for the Defence Forces and the Army Pensions Board.

The Defence Organisation is committed to implementing best practice Human Resource
strategies and policies. This will support us in maintaining an environment that guards against
age and gender related discrimination in the workplace and embraces diversity. The Defence

25


-----

Forces will continue to develop and promote positive work relations and a secure and supportive
working environment for all members of the Defence Forces by the introduction of initiatives
aimed at enhancing diversity, inclusion and individuality awareness by further building
personnel support initiatives. The Independent Monitoring Group (IMG) continues to provide
external validation in this regard.

In respect of the implementation of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325, the
Defence Organisation will implement, as appropriate, the recommendations that are applicable in
the defence and security arena.

**Infrastructure**

The Defence Organisation will continue to provide the Minister with the best policy advice and
support in relation to the management of the Defence property and infrastructure portfolio with
particular regard to the provision of an appropriate level of property holdings to support the
accommodation, training and operational requirements of the Defence Forces.

In line with Government policy and the National Heritage Plan and National Biodiversity Plan,
the Department of Defence and the Defence Forces are committed to employing best practice to
ensure the protection of Ireland’s natural environment and heritage resources. Our main focus on
environmental issues is concentrated on the conservation of Defence lands, pollution prevention,
energy conservation, recycling and waste disposal, and environmental enhancement generally.
The preservation, protection and restoration of natural resources while fulfilling Defence training
and operational requirements are key issues.

We will continue to support Government policy in implementing energy-efficient and
environmentally-friendly initiatives throughout the Defence Organisation.

**Equipment Planning**

One of the major objectives of the White Paper on Defence (2000) was the re-equipping of the
Defence Forces from what was objectively identified as an extremely low base. This allowed for
the development of the Defence Forces capabilities required to fulfil all roles assigned by
Government and meet changing demands. The High Level Planning and Procurement Group
(HLPPG) will continue to prioritise equipment in order to maintain the operational capabilities
required.

**Public Service Reform**

**Better Regulation**

Arising from the successful modernisation agenda that has been pursued in the Defence
Organisation, a culture of change and continuous improvement is now firmly embedded. We will
continue to place the Public Service Reform Plan 2014-2016 at the core of our work. A highlevel Defence Organisation Integrated Reform Delivery Plan for 2014-2016 is being

26


-----

implemented. This Plan will assist the Organisation to manage the delivery of Public Service
Reform at the strategic level.

We will continue, in line with the provisions of the Public Service Stability Agreement 20132016 (HRA), to innovate and transform structures, systems and processes so as to maintain
capabilities and services.

**Civil Service Renewal Programme**

The recently launched Civil Service Renewal Programme incorporates a vision and a three year
action plan to renew the Irish Civil Service. The renewal plan delivers on a key Programme for
Government commitment and represents a fundamental new vision and direction for the Civil
Service. The civil element of the Department of Defence is committed to the process of renewal
and will engage fully with implementation of the Plan which involves driving change through 25
specific actions.

**Regulatory Reform**

The Department’s programme of work on the simplification and reform of both primary and
secondary legislation will continue. As regards Regulatory Impact Analysis (RIA), the Defence
Acts and Regulations made thereunder are, for the most part, focused on the Defence Forces only
and do not apply to the ordinary citizen or to business. Notwithstanding this, the Department
applies the principles set out in the RIA Guidelines where appropriate.

**Shared Services**

The Programme for Government includes a commitment to rationalise core processes that are
duplicated across the public service, by establishing shared back office operations for
information technology, human resource management, payments and entitlement applications,
business inspections and procurement. This builds on the OECD Review of the Public Service
(2008) which suggested that the Irish Public Service is on a sound path to modernisation but
identified a number of areas for further development including greater use of shared services.
The Department of Defence will proactively engage in the implementation of shared services
arrangements. The Department’s office in Renmore, Galway has been selected as a site for both
the Payroll Shared Services Centre (PSSC) and the Financial Management Shared Services
Centre (FMSSC). Work on transferring payrolls to the PSSC is underway.

**Customer Service**

Given the nature of the activities we are engaged in, the Defence Organisation does not provide
services to external ‘customers’ in the classic sense. Indeed, services are typically provided to the
community collectively rather than to citizens as individuals. In delivering these services the
Department of Defence and the Defence Forces interact with Government Departments, State
Agencies and International Organisations in defining service delivery targets. Memoranda of
Understanding and Service Level Agreements are mechanisms that are used to define and

27


-----

monitor service delivery at this level. In addition, the Defence Organisation also interacts with a
smaller pool of organisations and individual customers.

The Defence Organisation is committed to the provision of a high standard of quality customer
service to Government and to those individuals and organisations with whom we interact. The
Department of Defence and the Defence Forces Customer Charter and Customer Service Action
Plan for the period 2013-2015 sets out the service standards to be achieved in that period. The
Defence Organisation will evaluate our performance against the commitments in our Customer
Charter and use feedback received to improve on service delivery. A report on performance will
be included in the Department of Defence and Defence Forces Annual Report. The results of the
measurement of performance will form the basis for the preparation of a new Charter
commencing in 2016.

**Official Languages Act 2003**

In accordance with the Act, separate schemes are published for both the civil and military
elements of the Defence Organisation. Progress on the implementation of the schemes is
monitored by Oifig an Choimisinéara Teanga. The Department’s third scheme under the Act
encompasses the period 2014-2017.

The Defence Forces Language Scheme for 2014-2017 came into effect in April 2014. The
Defence Forces continue to make progress in the promotion of the Irish Language within the
organisation by implementing the undertakings of the Language Scheme, monitoring compliance
with the provisions of the Defence Forces Official Languages Policy, the ongoing education of
personnel in the Irish language and the Irish language training of participants in the annual
Campa Gaeilge. All matters pertaining to the Irish language are organised, supervised and
monitored by An Chomhairle Gaeilge on behalf of the Chief of Staff. All necessary steps will be
taken to maintain this progress during the lifetime of this Strategy Statement.

**Financial Services**

The Finance Branch of the Department, which is located in Galway, is the financial shared
service centre for the Department, the Defence Forces, the Office of the Ombudsman for the
Defence Forces and the Army Pensions Board. The Branch acts as a proactive business partner to
management and business units and will continue to provide financial services and oversee
policy on accounting and financial management and deliver timely and accurate management
information.

The emphasis will continue to be on the provision of effective and efficient service to all internal
and external customers, including the preparation of payrolls for all employees, both military and
civil. The granting and payment of pensions and gratuities to retired members of the Defence
Forces and the dependants of deceased personnel will continue, as will the formulation and
development of pensions policy. The payment of all accounts for goods and services provided to
the Defence Forces and the Department, maintaining financial records, preparing the
Department’s annual Appropriation Accounts and supporting the Management Information
Framework (MIF) will remain a priority.

28


-----

**Management Information Framework (MIF)**
The Management Information Framework project supports policy analysis and formulation
through financial and asset management, reporting, management information and improved
business processes and procedures.

The MIF project has progressed beyond the originally-defined project implementation into a
developmental and enhancement phase. A comprehensive range of standard and customised
reports has been delivered to date, in addition to business intelligence capabilities. Further
developments are planned in the areas of costing and output analysis with a view to enhancing
performance management and evidence-based decision making.

**Internal Audit**

The Department’s Internal Audit Section is an independent unit reporting directly to the
Secretary General. The Section works to an annual programme of audits, approved by the
Secretary General. Its work is reviewed on an ongoing basis by the Department’s Audit
Committee. The Section reviews the risk assessment process which is an integral part of the
annual business planning cycle. Both the Internal Audit Section and the Audit Committee
operate in accordance with the standards outlined in the Report of the Working Group on the
Accountability of Secretaries General and Accounting Officers, 2002 (the Mullarkey Report).

**Information and Communications Technologies (ICTs)**

The joint civil/military IT Steering Committee oversees the development of hardware, software,
and security, and telecommunications policy in support of the work of the Department of
Defence and the Defence Forces. Within the resources available, we will seek to maximise the
contribution of ICT to our work.

The Defence Organisation will focus also on the strategic use of technology and identifying
opportunities to deploy technology that will maximise value for money from investment in terms
of increased productivity, greater efficiency and effectiveness. The cyber security of our ICT
systems and capabilities remains a key priority. The Defence Organisation will also facilitate the
migration of certain shared strategic applications to central shared services platforms and
continue to support specific in-house applications which would not form part of common
systems.

Due to the nature of our business the Defence Organisation has limited direct contact with the
general public; consequently, there is a limited scope for the provision of on-line services.
However, the utilisation of e-recruitment for the Defence Forces and blended training
opportunities in Civil Defence demonstrates how ICTs can be used to good effect in establishing
linkages with the general public. The Defence Organisation is committed to the goals and
approaches outlined in the eGovernment strategy 2010 and will participate in ICT initiatives
arising from broader strategic plans as promoted by the Office of Government Chief Information
Officer.

29


-----

### SECTION 5: REPORTING PROGRESS

The Defence Organisation will implement this Strategy Statement and continue to report on
progress annually to the Minister as required under the Public Service Management Act 1997
and to publish those reports.

**Implementation of Our Strategy**

The Defence Organisation believes that our objectives, strategies and performance indicators are
results-focused and specific so that implementation can be more easily measured and corrective
action taken, if necessary. In many cases they are set out in formal agreements with our
customers (e.g. MOUs and SLAs). Our objectives, strategies and indicators are specified in
greater detail in the annual business planning process, civil and military. Key aspects of this
include the preparation of annual business plans, the ongoing monitoring and review of progress,
and regular reporting to the Minister. The drafting of Annual Plans will proceed against the
background of the ongoing assessment of the defence and security environment as outlined
above.

**The Annual Report**

In accordance with the Public Service Management Act, 1997, an Annual Report will be
submitted to the Minister, detailing progress in achieving the Defence High Level Goal. It will
include a full review of the Programme and where appropriate, furnish detailed output data for
both the Department of Defence and the Defence Forces.

**Key Performance Indicators**

Crucial to reporting progress is the identification and monitoring of Key Performance Indicators
for the Defence Organisation. They provide a verifiable mechanism to analyse performance in
the achievement of the High Level Goal identified in this Strategy Statement. The Key
Performance Indicators, Outputs and associated Strategic Dimensions are listed below.

30


-----

### KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS (KPIS)

#### Outputs

Policy Advice on all aspects of defence and - Timely and accurate policy advice.
associated supports to Minister for Defence. - Timely and accurate military advice.

Military Advice to the Minister for Defence. 
Implement reform in accordance with defence sector action plans and whole of Government
initiatives. 
Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) and Service Level Agreements (SLAs) with regard to the Comprehensive Review of Expenditure.
provision of Defence Services. 
Support to Government Task Force on Emergency Emergency Planning.
Planning. 
Proactive contribution, together with colleagues from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, to the development of international peace and security policy in the EU and in other international development of Civil Defence.

Policy advice and support to local authorities on
Civil Defence.

Flexible and adaptive conventional land, sea and air military capabilities, capable of operating jointly - Attain planned Force Readiness states.
and interoperable with like-minded states. - Defence Regulations updated.

Ongoing reform and modernisation of the Defence - Risk mitigation strategies implemented.
Organisation. 
Ongoing Financial Management of Defence Votes. 
                       financial reports.

31

|Strategic Dimension|Outputs|KPI|
|---|---|---|
|Policy| Policy Advice on all aspects of defence and associated supports to Minister for Defence.  Military Advice to the Minister for Defence.  Implement reform in accordance with defence sector action plans and whole of Government initiatives.  Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) and Service Level Agreements (SLAs) with regard to the provision of Defence Services.  Support to Government Task Force on Emergency Planning.  Proactive contribution, together with colleagues from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, to the development of international peace and security policy in the EU and in other international fora.  Policy advice and support to local authorities on Civil Defence.| Timely and accurate policy advice.  Timely and accurate military advice.  Completion of policy papers including the White Paper on Defence.  Ongoing assessment of possible and actual Defence Forces deployments and demands on military capability.  Completion of MOUs and SLAs with Defence customers.  Ongoing advice on the implementation of the outcome of the Comprehensive Review of Expenditure.  Provision of required support to the Government Task Force on Emergency Planning.  Development of CSDP in accordance with Ireland’s interests.  Engagement with UN and other international fora.  Timely and accurate financial services to the Defence Sector.  Provision of effective support and advice to local authorities on the development of Civil Defence.|
|Ensuring the Capacity to Deliver| Flexible and adaptive conventional land, sea and air military capabilities, capable of operating jointly and interoperable with like-minded states.  Ongoing reform and modernisation of the Defence Organisation.  Ongoing Financial Management of Defence Votes.| Achievement of Capability Development Targets.  Attain planned Force Readiness states.  Defence Regulations updated.  Risk mitigation strategies implemented.  HR, Customer Service and MIF development plans implemented.  Programmed Internal Audit reviews completed.  Management of Estimates Process and production of required financial reports.|


-----

|Defence Forces Operational Outputs| Defence Forces operations in support of An Garda Síochána and other State Agencies.  Defence Forces Overseas Peace Support, Crisis Management and Humanitarian Operations.| Meet all ATCP/ATCA approved requests.  Meet all SLA & MOU commitments.  Meet requests arising from emergencies and crises within means and resources.  Meet all Government requirements for overseas peace support.  Meet Mission Sponsors’ standards and requirements.|
|---|---|---|


32


-----

### APPENDIX 1

 DEFENCE COMMITMENTS IN THE PROGRAMME FOR
 GOVERNMENT – (GOVERNMENT FOR NATIONAL
 RECOVERY 2011- 2016)

The Programme for Government contains the following commitments where the Defence
Organisation has lead responsibility:

  - We will implement the Defence Forces Medical Services Review as resources allow.

  - We will initiate a detailed legal review of the basis, structures and governance of the Red

Cross in Ireland to improve its functioning in the light of changing circumstances.

The Defence Organisation will also fully contribute to a broad range of cross-cutting
commitments provided for in the Programme for Government.

In accordance with the Statement of Government Priorities 2014-2016

  - We will systematically publish details of all appointments to State Boards.

**Progress Made during the lifetime of Strategy Statement 2011 – 2014**

**Commitment** **Status**

The implementation of the Defence Forces Medical In line with the recommendations of the Defence Forces
Services Review as resources allow. Medical Services Review, the Central Medical Unit was

formally established in 2012. Options for outsourcing
Defence Medical services to a civilian medical services
provider have been reviewed and consideration is now
being given to outsourcing options on a per service basis
e.g. physiotherapy services, laboratory services,
pharmacy services. Arrangements for existing services
which are already outsourced are also being regularised
e.g. GPs, dental services.

**Commitment** **Status**

The initiation of a detailed legal review of the basis, The Department is continuing work on the review in
structures and governance of the Irish Red Cross to consultation with the Irish Red Cross Society. The
improve its functioning in the light of changing review mainly relates to the codification and updating of
circumstances. the various legal instruments on the Red Cross which

date from 1938. It is anticipated, subject to Government
approval, that a Red Cross (Amendment) Bill will be
published during the lifetime of the Government.

33

|Progress Made during the lifetime|of Strategy Statement 2011 – 2014|
|---|---|
|Commitment|Status|
|The implementation of the Defence Forces Medical Services Review as resources allow.|In line with the recommendations of the Defence Forces Medical Services Review, the Central Medical Unit was formally established in 2012. Options for outsourcing Defence Medical services to a civilian medical services provider have been reviewed and consideration is now being given to outsourcing options on a per service basis e.g. physiotherapy services, laboratory services, pharmacy services. Arrangements for existing services which are already outsourced are also being regularised e.g. GPs, dental services.|
|Commitment|Status|
|The initiation of a detailed legal review of the basis, structures and governance of the Irish Red Cross to improve its functioning in the light of changing circumstances.|The Department is continuing work on the review in consultation with the Irish Red Cross Society. The review mainly relates to the codification and updating of the various legal instruments on the Red Cross which date from 1938. It is anticipated, subject to Government approval, that a Red Cross (Amendment) Bill will be published during the lifetime of the Government.|


-----

### APPENDIX 2

 DEFENCE CAPABILITY FRAMEWORK

A broad range of actions within the Defence Organisation are required in the development of
appropriate military capabilities. These actions include investment in new equipment and
infrastructure, military doctrine, HR policies and regulatory reform. Where appropriate,
opportunities under the EU’s Pooling and Sharing Initiative will be considered. These efforts are
coordinated by enhanced senior management structures such as the Strategic Management
Committee, High Level Planning and Procurement Group, etc.

The Defence Capability Framework outlines plans and associated activities relating to capability
development. These plans are established for the various functions and force packages and
include training activity targets for the Defence Forces. The five essential components of military
capabilities are met through implementation of these plans. It is important to note that this
framework is a work in progress and is continuously evolving in terms of the changing security
environment and requirements of the Defence Forces. Likewise, the outcomes of the process of
meeting the quantitative and qualitative targets will feed back into strategic considerations on an
ongoing basis.

**Military Capability**

There are five essential pillars to military capability: operational viability, sustainability,
readiness, interoperability and deployability.

a. _Operational Viability_ is concerned with ensuring that a given force package can

prevail in an operational situation. It is achieved through the synthesis of personnel,
equipment, military doctrine, organisation, training and command, control and
communications.

b. _Sustainability is concerned with ensuring that the capability continues to be_

operationally viable. It entails ensuring that a given force package can maintain a
mission tasking, at the required operational tempo, for the duration required.
Consequently this pillar pertains to the continued provision of trained personnel and
logistical and maintenance support.

c. _Readiness is the immediate ability of a given force package to execute a designated_

mission while balancing the constraints of time and capability. It is a combination of
current levels of personnel, training, equipment, command, control, communications
and intelligence. Readiness must be underpinned by appropriate doctrine and should
be continually shaped by lessons learned. In addition, readiness levels are based on
risk assessments of the Defence and Security environment and when necessary,
selective elements or the entire Force can be brought to a higher readiness level.

34


-----

d. _Interoperability is concerned with ensuring that the force elements that constitute_

force packages can operate “jointly” and successfully with other force elements or
“combined” with other military organisations or civilian authorities. It entails
familiarity with others’ operational procedures. Consequently, this requires suitable
equipment, personnel, systems and infrastructure programmes, policies and
procedures.

e. _Deployability is concerned with ensuring that a given force package can deploy to a_

mission area in a given time frame. Essentially, it entails raising force elements to
deploy nationally and/or internationally with the required training, preparation and
equipment in place.

Figure 1 overleaf illustrates the Defence Capability Framework and indicates the various
enablers currently in place that facilitate the delivery of Defence Forces Capability.

35


-----

**FFiigguurree** **11..** **DDEEFFEENNCCEE** **CCAAPPAABBIILLIITTYY** **FFRRAAMMEEWWOORRKK** - RM Strategy

                                                          - nnual Trg Directive

Defence Force Doctrine - eception Staging, Onward Movement & Integration

(RSOMI)

- nnual Trg Directive - cquisition & Cross Service Agreements

- nfrastructural Plans - tatus of Force Agreements (SOFA’s)

- quipment Procurement - Memoranda of Understanding

- nnual Operational Assessments - echnical Agreements

- nnual Naval Inspections - mplementation Arrangements

- Operational instruction for the use of military - ilateral Agreements

                                      - ir Maintenance Management System (MMOE)

- ir Regulations Framework. - Power by Hour" Air Fleet Agreements

- fter Action Reviews - aval Ship Maintenance Policy

                                             - quipment Maintenance Contracts

                                                - quipment Procurement

                                                   - ational Support Elements

**OPERATIONAL** **SUSTAINABILITY**

                                                           - IF



- artnership Goals

- ARP: Planning & Review Process

- U Scrutiny and Assessment Process

- TANAGS

- rg Equipment & Staff Tables for PSO
Bn

- RM Strategy

- nnual Trg Directive

- quipment Procurement

- oint Naval Exercises

- oint Air Corps Exercises

- ommand, Control, Communications C3


Strategic Lift Tender Process

 - tand-by contract (Air
Ambulance)

 - quipment Procurement

 - nfrastructural Plans

 - RM Strategy

 - nnual Trg Directive

 - SOMI

 - aval Logistical Support
Air Corps Logistical Support

36


**ENABLERS**

**ENABLERS**

**READINESS**

- ational: Alert System – Defence Forces 2012

    - nternational: Defence Forces OPPLAN

01/2007

             - ational Hijack Plan

         - ission Readiness Exercises

           - nnual Naval Patrol Plan

          - nnual Naval Inspections

             - aval Fleet Exercises

              - ir Corps Exercises

               - RM Strategy

             - nnual Trg Directive

     - ommitment to Headline Goal 2010


-----

## APPENDIX 3

#### LIST OF CURRENT MEMORANDA OF UNDERSTANDING and SERVICE
 LEVEL AGREEMENTS

 Nature of MOU/SLA Dept/ Agency involved:

Provision of services between the Naval Service and the
Marine Institute Marine Institute

Provision of services between the Naval Service and
MEDICO – Cork HSE / MEDICO – Cork

Air Accident Investigation Unit (Dept of

Provision of services by the Defence Forces to the AAIU Transport, Tourism and Sport)

Provison of services by the Defence Forces to IRCG Irish Coast Guard

Provison of meteorological observations between the Naval
Service and Met Eireann Met Eireann

Provision of an Air Ambulance Service by the Air Corps Dept of Health

Provision of assistance in routine or emergency situations to Marine Surveyors Office (Dept of Transport,
the Marine Surveyors Office Tourism and Sport)

Provision of Air Transport Service by the Air Corps to the
Office of the Garda Síochána Ombudsman Commission Garda Síochána Ombudsman Commission

Co-ordination procedures to ensure the efficient and flexible
use of Irish airspace Irish Aviation Authority

Provision of Aviation Services by the Air Corps for Garda Air An Garda Síochána and the Department of
Support Unit Justice & Equality

Provision of services by the Air Corps to OPW Office of Public Works

Provision of a range of support services by the Defence Forces
regarding the Rapid Response Initiative. Dept of Foreign Affairs & Trade (Irish Aid)

Provision of support services by the Air Corps to Dublin
Airport Authority at Dublin Airport Department of Transport, Tourism & Sport

Provision of services to assist SFPA in securing an efficient &
effective enforcement of SFPA legislation Sea Fisheries Protection Authority

Provision of assistance in routine or emergency situations to
the Dept of Agriculture, Food & the Marine Dept of Agriculture, Food and the Marine

Provision of assistance in routine or emergency situations to
the Dept of Transport Dept of Transport, Tourism & Sport

Provision of assistance in routine or emergency situations to
the Dept of Health and the HSE Dept of Health

37

|Nature of MOU/SLA|Dept/ Agency involved:|
|---|---|
|Provision of services between the Naval Service and the Marine Institute|Marine Institute|
|Provision of services between the Naval Service and MEDICO – Cork|HSE / MEDICO – Cork|
|Provision of services by the Defence Forces to the AAIU|Air Accident Investigation Unit (Dept of Transport, Tourism and Sport)|
|Provison of services by the Defence Forces to IRCG|Irish Coast Guard|
|Provison of meteorological observations between the Naval Service and Met Eireann|Met Eireann|
|Provision of an Air Ambulance Service by the Air Corps|Dept of Health|
|Provision of assistance in routine or emergency situations to the Marine Surveyors Office|Marine Surveyors Office (Dept of Transport, Tourism and Sport)|
|Provision of Air Transport Service by the Air Corps to the Office of the Garda Síochána Ombudsman Commission|Garda Síochána Ombudsman Commission|
|Co-ordination procedures to ensure the efficient and flexible use of Irish airspace|Irish Aviation Authority|
|Provision of Aviation Services by the Air Corps for Garda Air Support Unit|An Garda Síochána and the Department of Justice & Equality|
|Provision of services by the Air Corps to OPW|Office of Public Works|
|Provision of a range of support services by the Defence Forces regarding the Rapid Response Initiative.|Dept of Foreign Affairs & Trade (Irish Aid)|
|Provision of support services by the Air Corps to Dublin Airport Authority at Dublin Airport|Department of Transport, Tourism & Sport|
|Provision of services to assist SFPA in securing an efficient & effective enforcement of SFPA legislation|Sea Fisheries Protection Authority|
|Provision of assistance in routine or emergency situations to the Dept of Agriculture, Food & the Marine|Dept of Agriculture, Food and the Marine|
|Provision of assistance in routine or emergency situations to the Dept of Transport|Dept of Transport, Tourism & Sport|
|Provision of assistance in routine or emergency situations to the Dept of Health and the HSE|Dept of Health|


-----

|Provision of assistance by the Department and the Defence Forces to the Dept of Foreign Affairs in routine or emergency situations|Dept of Foreign Affairs & Trade|
|---|---|
|Provision of assistance in routine or emergency situations to the Dept of Environment, Community & Local Government|Dept of Environment, Community & Local Government|
|Provision of a pilot Emergency Aeromedical Support service (EAS)|Dept of Health|
|Terms of Service between Civil Defence and the Irish Coast Guard in relation to emergency incidents on the waters of Ireland|Irish Coast Guard|
|Terms of Service between Civil Defence and An Garda Síochána in relation to emergency incidents|An Garda Síochána|


38


-----

