## Strategy Statement 2003-2005


-----

# Foreword


My overall objective as Minister for Defence is
the creation of modern Defence Forces capable
of meeting the needs of Government and
which deliver value for money. That is also the
focus of the White Paper on Defence, which I
published in 2000, the Programme for
Government and this Strategy Statement.

The modernisation process is well underway,
involving reorganisation and major investment
based on a rebalancing of Defence resources.


Difficult decisions had to be taken but the
payback can now be seen. Defence Force
numbers were reduced and properties surplus
to requirements were sold and the payroll
savings and the proceeds from property
sales were used to fund a major investment
programme in badly needed barracks
refurbishment and new equipment right across
the Defence Forces. A number of organisational
initiatives were taken also, some of which will
come to fruition in the period to end - 2005.

A lot has been achieved but there is a lot more
to do. My main priorities as we go forward are
to deliver on the Programme for Government
and White Paper commitments for a new
Army organisation, an Integrated Personnel
Management System for the Defence Forces
and the Implementation Plan for the Reserve.


Hearing loss has been a major issue but I hope
to see almost all outstanding claims finally
dealt with by early - 2004 and at a cost to the
taxpayer which will be considerably lower than
originally estimated.

Finally, it is important to mention emergency
planning which is a new role for Defence. The
new structures and arrangements, including
the Office of Emergency Planning, which we
put in place have developed well and a lot of
good work is being done. I have ensured that
there is an increased awareness of emergency
planning and response issues at the political,
strategic and operational levels. We have
worked with other Departments and agencies
to coordinate responses and to ensure a high
level of preparedness for all Government
emergency response arrangements. We will
continue this work.


I hope to continue with significant equipment
and infrastructure investment programmes but
these will reflect financial realities and the
need to spread costs over longer timescales. I
intend also to seek to find additional resources
for reinvestment through the completion of
property sales on hands and the identification
for disposal of any other properties surplus to
military requirements.


As I have often said, the Defence organisation
has had a proud record of achievement in
recent years and I know that it has the people,
the resources and the will to build on these
successes in the period to 2005.

Michael Smith T.D.
_Minister for Defence_


May, 2003


-----

# Introduction


In this Strategy Statement we commit
ourselves to the following high level goals:

_(i) the creation of a modern civil and military_
_organisation capable of achieving its_
_mission and fully discharging its mandate_
_and roles;_

_(ii) the creation of a high performance_
_organisation in which people are expected_
_and enabled to achieve their full potential_
_and where merit and effort are_
_acknowledged;_

_(iii) achieving value for money through the_
_best use of the financial, material and_
_human resources entrusted to us._

These goals reflect the broad vision behind the
modernisation process in Defence in recent
years and that of the White Paper on Defence
which was published in 2000.

The White Paper, which deals with all aspects
of defence provision and organisation, is one of
the most significant events in the history of the
Department and the Defence Forces. The
implementation of the White Paper is critical
to the future success of the Defence
organisation. This Strategy Statement takes
the implementation process forward and a
number of major milestones are to be
completed in the period to end - 2005.


In preparing the Strategy Statement, we were
greatly assisted by the work of a specially
convened Focus Group which was
representative of managers and staff across
the Department. The Focus Group made
a number of recommendations about the
strategic planning process and how to
improve the linkages between that and
the Department’s business planning and
Performance Management and Development
System which is now well established in the
Department. These recommendations are
reflected in the Strategy Statement and will
also be carried through to the implementation
of the document.

David J O’Callaghan
_Secretary General_

May, 2003


-----

# Contents


Executive Summary 4

Section 1: Mandate, mission and high level goals 6


Section 2: Organisation structures, roles and resources 7

Section 3: Environmental factors and customer focus 10


Section 4: Objectives, strategies and performance indicators 12

The Security Objective; 12

The Emergency Planning Objective; 16

The Civil Defence Objective; 17

The White Paper Objective; 19

The Policy Advice and Support Objective 21


Section 5: Cross-organisational issues and implementing the Strategy Statement 33

Appendix 1: Details of projected Defence Vote expenditure for 2003 by category 35


Appendix 2: Major investment projects 1997 - 2002 36


-----

# Executive Summary


### Introduction

In drafting Strategy Statements, Departments
have to use technical terms and phrases
which, while necessary, can create a barrier to
readers who are not familiar with these terms.
In this summary, which follows the headings
used in the Strategy Statement, we use these
technical terms but we try to explain these in a
way that we hope the reader will find useful.

### Section 1: Mandate, mission and high level goals

The mandate describes the business of the
Department which in simple terms has to do
with the overall management of Defence and
advising the Minister for Defence in relation to
Defence business, including the Department’s
new responsibilities in relation to emergency
and peacetime planning in the aftermath of
September 11, 2001.

The mission statement, which gives
expression to the purpose and values of
the organisation, is:

_to provide value for money military_
_services which meet the needs of_
_Government and the public and_
_encompass an effective civil defence_
_capability and to coordinate and oversee_
_the emergency planning process._

The Department’s high level goals (broad
statements of intent) are also set out:

_(i) the creation of a modern civil and_
_military organisation capable of achieving_
_its mission and fully discharging its_
_mandate and roles;_


_(ii) the creation of a high performance_
_organisation in which people are expected_
_and enabled to achieve their full potential_
_and where merit and effort are_
_acknowledged;_

_(iii) achieving value for money through the_
_best use of the financial, material and_
_human resources entrusted to us._

### Section 2: Organisation structures, roles and resources

This describes the structure of the Department,
the respective roles of civil servants, civilian
employees and the Defence Forces in the
business of the organisation and how the
organisation is managed. Details are given also
of the Defence budget, numbers employed and
lands, buildings, equipment and other assets.

### Section 3: Environmental factors and customer focus

The security, defence and public service
environment in which the Department must
operate and the issues which it needs to take
account of in its planning for the next three
years are set out. Key points are that while
Ireland faces a generally benign security
environment, account has been taken of the
new threats posed by international terrorism
and the possible escalation of international
tensions in the aftermath of September 11
and more recent events. The Defence
organisation and the wider emergency
planning community will need to continue
to develop comprehensive plans to deal
with all possible contingencies arising.


-----

The organisation’s commitment to the
protection of the natural environment and to
customer service is described also.

### Section 4: Objectives, strategies and performance indicators

This Section sets out the broad actions we
intend to take over the next three years to
carry out the business of Defence successfully
and how we intend to measure our progress.


The Strategic Objectives are:

_To contribute to the security of the State_
_principally against the threat of armed_
_aggression and thus contribute to political_
_and economic well being (the Security_
_Objective);_


_To provide the Minister for Defence with_
_the best policy advice and support in_
_relation to the management of Defence_
_(the Policy Advice and Support Objective)._

Each of these objectives is described in detail.
For each objective, a detailed list is set out of
the specific actions or tasks (referred to as
_strategies) which are necessary to ensure that_
the objective is achieved. Performance
_indicators, which help to measure whether or_
not the actions or tasks have been completed
successfully, are given in each case. In many
cases, the indicator is a target date for the
completion of a particular task or action.


_To promote the co-ordination of_
_emergency planning functions across all_
_Government Departments and agencies_
_and to oversee the emergency planning_
_process in general (the Emergency_
_Planning Objective);_

_To facilitate through the Local Authorities_
_Civil Defence responses for emergency_
_relief and support to ensure the operation_
_of vital services and the maintenance of_
_public life and to provide all other_
_supports as directed by Government_
_(the Civil Defence Objective);_


### Section 5: Cross-organisational issues and implementing the Strategy Statement

This is the final Section of the Strategy
Statement. It outlines the importance of the
inputs of other organisations, including
international bodies, to the success of the
work of the Department and the importance of
maintaining and developing good relations
with these organisations. The Section also
outlines the Department’s determination to
implement the Strategy Statement and to
report progress annually.


_To continue the modernisation of the_
_Defence Forces by implementing the_
_White Paper on Defence and related_
_modernisation initiatives (the White_
_Paper Objective);_


-----

# Section 1: Mandate, mission and high level goals


### Mandate

The Department has civil and military elements and
was established by the Ministers and Secretaries
Act, 1924, which assigns to it “the administration
and business of the raising, training, organisation,
maintenance, equipment, management, discipline,
regulation and control according to law of the
military defence forces”. The Act provides that the
Minister is head of the Department and the
Secretary General is the “principal officer” of the
Department. As such, the Secretary General is the
Minister’s principal policy adviser. The Secretary
General is also the statutory Accounting Officer for
all defence expenditure.

Following the events of September 11, 2001 the
Government decided on the establishment of an
Office of Emergency Planning in the Department
which would:

- take the lead role in emergency planning to
meet the new threat from international
terrorism and from any escalation in
international tensions, including coordination of
the responses by the various agencies involved;

- exercise an oversight role in relation to
peacetime planning in order to ensure the best
possible use of resources and compatibility
between the different planning requirements.

It was also decided that the lead responsibilities for
specific emergency planning functions would remain
with the relevant Government Departments and that
all Government Departments and agencies would
give their full cooperation to the new Office.

The Minister established the new Office and
assigned to it senior civil and military staff. The
Office became the first joint civil-military area of the
Department.


### Mission Statement and high level goals

The mission statement has been expanded to reflect
the additional emergency planning responsibilities
given to the Department:

_to provide value for money military services_
_which meet the needs of Government and the_
_public and encompass an effective civil defence_
_capability and to coordinate and oversee the_
_emergency planning process._

Each element of the mission statement is important.
Firstly, the basic business is to provide military and
emergency planning services and to ensure an
effective civil defence capability. Providing these
services and ensuring that capability is quite a
complex undertaking involving a broad range of
activity and outputs. Secondly, the basic business is
carried out for a purpose; to meet the needs
identified by Government acting on behalf of the
community.

The mission statement also commits us to providing
the taxpayer with value for money.

In line with the mission, the Department’s high level
goals are:

_(i) the creation of a modern civil and military_
_organisation capable of achieving its mission_
_and fully discharging its mandate and roles;_

_(ii) the creation of a high performance organisation_
_in which people are expected and enabled to_
_achieve their full potential and where merit and_
_effort are acknowledged;_

_(iii) achieving value for money through the best use_
_of the financial, material and human resources_
_entrusted to us._


-----

# Section 2: Organisation structures, roles and resources


As a result of an ongoing modernisation
process, accelerated by the White Paper on
Defence published in 2000 and detailed in
successive Strategy Statements and Annual
Reports, Defence organisation structures and
roles, both civil and military, are now better
aligned with the mandate, mission and high
level goals.

The individual contributions made by the
Department’s civil and military elements are
outlined below. Each element has different
roles but it is important to note that it is the
combined effort of both that ensures mission
success.


### The role of the civil element

The primary role of the civil element of the
Department, with a total staff of 466, is to
support the Minister as head of the
Department and in particular to provide policy
advice and support on Defence matters,
including assistance with policy formulation
and the implementation of policy as directed
by the Minister.


of Ireland’s commitments in the area of
international security and peacekeeping, are
also coordinated by the civil element. The civil
element, jointly with the military, also has
important new responsibilities in relation to
emergency planning in the aftermath of
September 11, 2001.

The civil element also discharges financial
management and audit functions in
connection with the Secretary General’s role as
Accounting Officer and provides administrative
support services to the Defence Forces,
including payroll and major procurement and
infrastructural programmes. It might be noted,
however, that there has been a significant
degree of delegation of financial authority to
the Defence Forces in recent years, particularly
in the area of the procurement of goods and
services.


The civil element also has a number of other
specific roles. In addition to the management
of legal, regulatory and litigation policy and
related matters on behalf of the Minister and
the management of a range of human
resources and industrial relations matters, the
civil element coordinates the delivery of
security, emergency and community services
by the Defence Forces and provides liaison
between the Defence Forces and other
Government Departments, public authorities,
the EU and public representatives. Policy in
respect of overseas operations, in furtherance


Finally, the civil element is responsible for the
administration of military pensions and has a
range of responsibilities in relation to Civil
Defence (in particular to the 6,000 volunteers
country-wide), the Irish Red Cross Society and
Coiste an Asgard.

### Military element and command arrangements


The Department’s military element consists of
Defence Forces Headquarters which is headed
by the Chief of Staff who is directly responsible
to the Minister for the overall management of
the Defence Forces, including responsibility for
the effectiveness, efficiency and military
organisation and economy of the Defence
Forces. Legislative provision has been made to
enable the Chief of Staff to delegate duties to


-----

the Deputy Chief of Staff (Operations) and
Deputy Chief of Staff (Support). The Chief of
Staff is the Minister’s principal military adviser.

Military command is delegated by the Minister
directly to the General Officers Commanding
(GOCs) each of the three territorial brigades
(Eastern, Southern and Western), to the GOCs
of the Defence Forces Training Centre and the
Air Corps and to the Flag Officer Commanding
the Naval Service. Each of these officers is
responsible to the Minister for the exercise of
the command delegated to him. In practice,
matters in relation to command are normally
channelled through the Chief of Staff. In effect,
this means that day to day operational control
of the Defence Forces rests with the Chief of
Staff for which he is directly responsible to the
Minister.

### Defence Forces’ roles and strength

The Defence Forces’ roles are:

- to defend the State against armed
aggression; this being a contingency,
preparations for its implementation will
depend on an ongoing Government
assessment of the security and defence
environment;

- to aid the civil power (meaning in practice
to assist, when requested, the Garda
Síochána, who have primary responsibility
for law and order, including the protection
of the internal security of the State);

- to participate in multinational peace
support, crisis management and
humanitarian relief operations in support
of the United Nations and under UN


mandate, including regional security
missions authorised by the UN;

- to provide a fishery protection service in
accordance with the State’s obligations as
a member of the EU; and,

- to carry out such other duties as may be
assigned to them from time to time, e.g.
search and rescue, air ambulance service,
Ministerial air transport service, assistance
on the occasion of natural or other
disasters, assistance in connection with
the maintenance of essential services,
assistance in combating oil pollution
at sea.

When not engaged in operations at home
or overseas, most defence organisations
concentrate on training and preparation
and not on the provision of identifiable
services to individual citizens. However, the
roles require that the Defence Forces will
continue to provide services to other
Government Departments and organisations
and to the public.

The Defence Forces consist of the Permanent
Defence Force (PDF) and the Reserve Defence
Force (RDF). The PDF, which consists of Army,
Air Corps and Naval Service components, had
a strength of 10,559 at end - December, 2002.

The White Paper provides for an authorised
strength of 10,500 plus the option of having
250 recruits in training at any one time.

The RDF, comprising the First Line Reserve, the
FCÁ (the second-line Army reserve) and An Slua
Muirí (the second-line Naval reserve), had a
strength of 13,743 at end - December, 2002.


-----

The table gives a breakdown of these numbers.


### Defence resources

People


PDF


Army 8,620

Naval Service 1,034

Air Corps 905

Total 10,559


RDF


First Line Reserve 453

FCÁ 12,963

Slua Muirí 327

Total 13,743

In addition to PDF and RDF personnel, the
organisation also employs some 1,075 civilian
employees who are attached mainly to military
installations throughout the country. The
civilian employees provide a range of general
operative, trades and other services.


When account is taken of the PDF, the RDF,
civilian employees, civil servants and civil
defence volunteers, the Defence organisation
has a total of over 30,000 people. The
organisation also commands considerable
financial, lands and buildings and equipment
resources.

Financial resources


For 2003, gross expenditure under the Defence
Estimates is projected at €731m. with
projected gross expenditure under the Army
Pensions Vote of €153m. Details of projected
Defence Vote expenditure by category are set
out in Appendix 1.

Lands and buildings


### Strategic Management Committee

The Strategic Management Committee (SMC)
provides an important forum for the discussion
of major policy and management issues.
The SMC members are the Secretary General
(Chairman), the Chief of Staff, the two
Deputy Chiefs of Staff and the two Assistant
Secretaries of the Department. The General
Officer Commanding the Air Corps and the Flag
Officer Commanding the Naval Service attend
in respect of matters affecting their services.
The Minister chairs quarterly meetings of
the Committee.


Defence manages a large property and land
portfolio of 8,500 hectares (made up mainly
of lands at the Curragh and the Glen of
Imaal) with 28 permanently occupied
military installations. Amongst these military
installations are the aerodrome at Baldonnel
and the Naval Service base at Haulbowline in
Cork Harbour.

Including leased or rented premises used by
the Reserve Defence Force, Defence personnel
are based in some 300 locations countrywide.


Military equipment and stocks

The Defence Forces have military equipment
and stock assets valued at about €381m.


-----

# Section 3: Environmental factors and customer focus


### Environmental factors

Environmental factors, particularly the defence
and security situation at home and abroad, the
Programme for Government commitments in
respect of the White Paper on Defence, the
ongoing modernisation of the public service,
socio-economic factors and the public finances,
exert an influence on, and can be influenced
by the conduct of Defence business.

Defence policy and the implementation and
resourcing of that policy must be grounded on
a realistic assessment of the defence and
security environment. In this regard, our
assessment is that:

- Ireland faces a generally benign security
environment;

- However, in the aftermath of September
11 and more recent events, account has
been taken of the new threats posed by
international terrorism and the possible
escalation in international tensions. In the
period ahead, the risks to international
stability seem more likely to come from
terrorism and the possible use of weapons
of mass destruction than from
conventional military threats;

- The direct threat to Ireland from
international terrorist attack is currently
assessed, in early 2003, as low. However,
the Defence organisation and the wider
emergency planning community will need
to continue to develop comprehensive
plans to deal with all possible
contingencies.



- European security is in a process of
transition. Increasingly, proactive and
preventive approaches, which entail a
range of co-ordinated techniques (political,
diplomatic, humanitarian, policing and
military), in the form of regional
peacekeeping and crisis management, are
seen as necessary to ensure stability and
to defend against threats to security in the
European sphere. The reality is that no one
state or institution can deal by itself with
the multifaceted challenges to
international security;

- Broader security challenges have emerged
both in the global and European contexts.
The European Union (EU), while
acknowledging the primary role of the
United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, is
developing the range of instruments
available to it to respond to international
crises. This conflict prevention and crisis
management capability is being developed
under the European Security and Defence
Policy (ESDP) in support of the Common
Foreign and Security Policy. Ireland is
actively involved in the development of
both;

- The on-island security environment has
been transformed. While some threats to
peace remain, the Good Friday Agreement
provides the basis for a lasting peace.

The defence and security environment and the
other environmental factors mentioned above
have been taken into account in framing the
objectives and strategies set out in Section 4.


-----

### The natural environment and heritage resources

In line with Government policy and the
National Heritage Plan and National Diversity
Plan, the Department and the Defence Forces
are committed to employing best practice in
the protection of Ireland’s natural environment
and heritage resources. Our main focus
is concentrated on the conservation of
defence lands, pollution prevention, energy
conservation, recycling and waste disposal,
and environmental enhancement generally.
The preservation, protection and restoration
of natural resources while fulfilling Defence
training and operational requirements are
key issues.


### Customer focus

Our mission statement reflects our belief that
we exist to serve the Government and the
public and that they are entitled to expect
the very best from us in terms of what we do,
how we do it, and how well we manage the
resources entrusted to us. This is what we
mean by customer focus.


We are conscious too that the office
environment is demanding on many resources,
including energy, water, paper, equipment and
other consumables. In this regard, as part of
the Department’s green housekeeping policy,
we place particular emphasis on conservation
and demand management. Our purchasing
policies give priority, where possible, to
environmentally-friendly goods and services.

We have approached this on a partnership
basis with the Department’s Partnership
Environment sub-Committee playing a key
role in the formulation of environmental
management plans incorporating waste
minimisation, green purchasing and
recycling policies.


Those values have shaped successive Strategy
Statements, our business planning process, the
White Paper on Defence, our Customer Service
Action Plan 2001 to 2004 and this Statement.
Ultimately, we believe that the quality of our
customer service is dependent on how well we
implement all of these.

As regards our Customer Service Action Plan,
our focus is on applying the revised principles
of quality customer service as approved by
Government in our day to day dealings with all
of our customers, internal and external. As
provided in the plan, we have mainstreamed
quality customer service into our ongoing
business planning process and we will
continue to report on progress annually.


We believe that environmental efficiencies are
cost effective and will lead to economic gains.


-----

# Section 4: Objectives, strategies and performance indicators


### Objectives

The Defence objectives encompass the outputs
we must deliver, the actions we must take and
the capacities we must create and manage if
we are to carry out our mandate, meet our
high level goals and achieve our mission.
These objectives are:

_To contribute to the security of the State_
_principally against the threat of armed_
_aggression and thus contribute to political_
_and economic well being (the Security_
_Objective);_

_To promote the co-ordination of_
_emergency planning functions across all_
_Government Departments and agencies_
_and to oversee the emergency planning_
_process in general (the Emergency_
_Planning objective);_

_To facilitate through the Local Authorities_
_Civil Defence responses for emergency_
_relief and support to ensure the operation_
_of vital services and the maintenance_
_of public life and to provide all other_
_supports as directed by Government_
_(the Civil Defence Objective);_

_To continue the modernisation of the_
_Defence Forces by implementing the_
_White Paper on Defence and related_
_modernisation initiatives (the White_
_Paper Objective);_

_To provide the Minister for Defence with_
_the best policy advice and support in_
_relation to the management of Defence_
_(the Policy Advice and Support Objective)._


### Strategies and performance Indicators

For each of the objectives we set out strategies
and performance indicators. These are resultsfocused and specific so that implementation
can be more easily measured and corrective
action taken, if necessary. These objectives,
strategies and indicators will be mainstreamed
into our ongoing civil and military annual
planning processes, key aspects of which
include the preparation of annual plans for
approval at Secretary General or Chief of Staff
level as appropriate, the ongoing monitoring
and review of progress, and regular reporting
to the Minister.

### The Security Objective: To contribute to the security of the State principally against the threat of armed aggression and thus contribute to political and economic well being.

The security of the State is fundamental and
has national (or internal) and international
aspects, including concerns arising from
international terrorism or from escalating
international tensions.

Internal security

On a day to day basis, internal security is
primarily the responsibility of the Minister for
Justice, Equality and Law Reform and the Garda
Síochána. Defence, however, plays a key role in
providing, on request, aid to the civil power. It
is essential that the Defence Forces are in a
position to respond to such requests. It is


-----

essential also that the cross-cutting
dimensions of security are recognised and
that the structures and arrangements
currently in place at Government level, at
inter-Departmental level and at operational
level between the Gardaí and the military
authorities are maintained to ensure
integrated service planning and delivery.

In this regard, there has been a reduction
in the internal threat to national security
emanating from republican and loyalist
paramilitary groupings. However, as this
threat reduced, the potential threat from
international terrorism increased (although
that threat is currently assessed as low) and
this has implications for the internal security
situation. Against this background, a detailed
review of the various Defence Forces aid to the
civil power (ATCP) activities was completed in
2002 and adjustments were made and some
resources reallocated. An ongoing review of
ATCP roles in the context of the continuing
assessment of the changing security
environment will continue and changes
will be made as appropriate.


International security

The Minister for Foreign Affairs has overall
responsibility for international security policy.
The Minister for Defence and the Defence
organisation supports this policy and has
an increasing role through the ongoing
development of the European Security and
Defence Policy (ESDP). The international
defence and security context continues to be
defined by our policy of military neutrality, our
active political and operational role in support
of the UN and our involvement in the ESDP.


The international environment continues to
be marked by regional conflicts, human rights
abuses and other issues. Participation in crisis
management is a priority of Irish foreign policy
as a concrete expression of our commitment to
international peace and security.

The elaboration of the EU’s Common Foreign
and Security Policy strengthens the EU’s
capability to undertake conflict prevention,
humanitarian and crisis management tasks
under the ESDP. Our voluntary offer to the
Helsinki Headline Goal (HHG) under the ESDP
is for up to 850 members of the Defence Forces
to assist in possible ‘Petersberg Tasks’
missions. Ireland’s participation in any such
armed mission will be subject to a ‘triple lock’
mechanism whereby participation will be for
decision by the Government and the Dáil on a
case by case basis and is subject, in all cases,
to prior UN authorisation. Our involvement
in ESDP is consistent with and mutually
reinforcing of our existing commitment to the
United Nations Standby Arrangements System
(UNSAS). Ireland is also a member of the
Partnership for Peace (PfP) and participates
in the PfP Planning and Review Process (PARP).
This voluntary framework gives Ireland an
opportunity to enhance our capacity to
contribute to crisis management missions.
It is a function of defence policy to facilitate
the provision and maintenance of military
forces to meet these commitments.


To this end, we intend to continue our positive
participation in the ESDP and to ensure that
the development of ESDP reflects Ireland’s
interests and priorities. We also intend to
continue to enhance the capacity of the
Defence Forces for crisis management
through PfP.


-----

Ireland has a long and historic commitment
to UN peacekeeping. In the context of the
ongoing changes at UN level in the
organisation and structures of international
peacekeeping operations, in particular the
move towards more regional structures and
taking into account Ireland’s commitments
to the United Nations Standby Arrangements
(UNSAS) and the Helsinki Headline Goal, there
is a need to develop Defence Forces capabilities
so that they can rapidly respond to emerging
demands in the areas of crisis management
and humanitarian tasks.

The provision of these capabilities has been
a key focus of the ongoing Defence
modernisation programme.

The Interdepartmental Committee on
Peacekeeping, chaired by the Department of
Foreign Affairs, is currently reviewing ongoing
developments in relation to international
peacekeeping. The outcome of this review will
inform future decisions in relation to Defence
Force participation in overseas missions.

In the meantime, preparations are underway
for the changing of the composition of our
forces in the UN Mandated missions in KFOR
(International Security Presence in Kosovo)
and SFOR (Stabilisation Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina) from a Transport Company and
MP Company respectively to a light infantry
company in KFOR of up to 250 personnel,
which represents an overall increase in our
commitment. It is also intended to complete
our commitment to UNMEE (United Nations
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea) by mid - 2003.


Threat assessment

Within this general national and international
context, and in the light of the events of
September 11 and more recent events, the
high level National Security Committee
continues to analyse the threat at the
national and international levels. The
Defence organisation is committed to
providing, within a sustainable level of overall
resources, defence capabilities appropriate to
the threat situation, recognising that other
policy responses, political, diplomatic, civil,
or economic, will also be appropriate. This too
was a key focus of the White Paper on Defence
and is a key element in ensuring that the
security objective can be achieved.

The approach taken will ensure that the
Minister for Defence has the best possible
information available to him on current and
emerging developments in the defence and
security environment, so that appropriate
decisions about defence provision can
be made.

### Strategies and performance indicators

The strategies and performance indicators
associated with the Security Objective are
set out in the table.


-----

### The Security Objective


Strategies

Review Defence Force commitments and capabilities in
relation to emergency plans and maintenance of essential
services and develop requisite procedures and protocols in
respect thereof.


Performance indicators

Completion of initial review by mid - 2003.


Define protocols in relation to the Defence Forces providing
support to the civil authority, particularly in the area of
marine environment protection and pollution control.

Agree Service Level Agreements (SLAs) with principal Naval
Service and Air Corps customers as follows:


Agreement on procedures and protocols by
mid - 2004.

Agreement on procedures and protocols by
mid - 2004.


Department of Communications, Marine and Natural
Resources on fishery protection;


Department of Justice, Equality and Law Reform on Air
Corps support for the Garda Air Support Unit;

Department of Communications, Marine and Natural
Resources on Air Corps support for Search and Rescue;

Department of Health and Children and Health Boards
on provision of Air Ambulance service by the Air Corps.

ESDP:
Defence Forces contribution to Headline Goal;


Definitive SLA in place by end - 2003
(Interim SLA currently in place).

Interim SLA in place by May, 2003.
Definitive SLA in place by May, 2004.

Interim SLA in place by end - 2003.
Definitive SLA in place by end - 2004.

Interim SLA in place by end - September, 2003.
Definitive SLA in place by end - June, 2004.


Available from end - 2003.

Continued active involvement.


ESDP policy formulation and development of ESDP.

Planning for Ireland’s Presidency of the EU in the first six
months of 2004.


Defence contribution to the success of the Presidency.

Completed by end - 2003.


PfP:
2002 - 2003 Individual Partnership Programme (IPP);

Further programmes;


Preparations for participation in multi-national peace
support operations.


Completed as required.

Increased efficiency and effectiveness of participation
and improvements in interoperability.


UN peacekeeping:
Inter-Departmental Committee on Peacekeeping;

Reorganisation of Ireland’s military contribution to SFOR
and KFOR;


Effective participation.

Completed by September, 2003.


Withdrawal from UNMEE.

Provision of defence capabilities appropriate to defence and
security and other environmental factors.


Completed by mid - 2003.

Implementation of the White Paper
(See under the White Paper Objective).


Ongoing review of the defence and security environment.


Provision of timely, relevant and quality advice to the
Mi i t f D f d th G t


-----

### The Emergency Planning Objective: To promote the co-ordination of emergency planning functions across all Government Departments and agencies and to oversee the emergency planning process in general.

This Objective and the Security Objective are
closely linked.

The Department’s new mandate in respect of
emergency and peacetime planning was
described in Section 1.

As part of the response to the events of
September 11, 2001 the Government
established a Task Force on Emergency
Planning, chaired by the Minister for Defence
and assisted by the Department’s new Office of
Emergency Planning (OEP) and an
Interdepartmental Working Group on
Emergency Planning.

The Task Force meets regularly to review the
various emergency planning and response
issues, to report to Government and to ensure
a coordinated and effective response to large
scale emergencies. The Minister as chairman of
the Task Force reports regularly to
Government.

The existing lead roles of Departments in
respect of specific emergency planning
arrangements continue and existing
emergency plans have been reviewed in the
light of current developments under Task Force
and Working Group auspices. The process has
been notable for the very high level of
cooperation between all Government
Departments and agencies, the Department of
Defence and the Defence Forces.


In addition to providing support to the Task
Force, the OEP coordinates the work of the
Interdepartmental Working Group and is
developing its oversight role by working with
the relevant Government Departments and
agencies to quality assure the various
Government emergency planning functions. In
this regard, the European Union has developed
a quality assurance technique called the
Common Assessment Framework, which is
being employed to support the oversight role.
The preparatory work has been substantially
completed and engagement with individual
Departments and agencies is, and will be, a
major focus of work of the OEP.

Another key focus is to ensure that the
information being presented to both the media
and the public is aimed at developing an
understanding of the issues and the likely
responses that any emergency may require.

### Strategies and performance indicators

The strategies and performance indicators
associated with the Emergency Planning
Objective are set out in the table.


-----

### The Emergency Planning Objective


### The Civil Defence Objective: To facilitate through the Local Authorities Civil Defence responses for emergency relief and support to ensure the operation of vital services and the maintenance of public life and to provide all other supports as directed by Government.

The Department is responsible for policy
development and the general direction of the
Civil Defence volunteer organisation through
the Local Authorities. It is responsible also for
the administration, training (mainly through
the Civil Defence School – the national Civil
Defence Training Centre), financing and
equipping of the Civil Defence organisation.


Expenditure incurred by Local Authorities on
Civil Defence is grant-aided to the extent of
70% by the Department while the Department
also fully funds capital equipment such as
transport vehicles and ambulances which
are purchased and then loaned to the
Local Authorities.

The Civil Defence organisation has
approximately 6,000 volunteer members who
are very dedicated and highly committed to
the idea of community service and to working
in a structured and disciplined way under the
direction of the Local Authority Civil Defence
Officers. The volunteers are trained in various
skills, such as first aid, rescue, fire fighting,
emergency feeding, evacuee care, land and
water search and radiation monitoring.


-----

Since 1992 and the launch of the development
programme “Towards 2000”, the aim has been
to develop Civil Defence as a top class secondline emergency service. The organisation
operates in close support of the front-line
emergency services. This has allowed the Civil
Defence organisation to focus on serving the
needs of local communities. The White Paper
on Defence provides that this trend will be
continued and developed.

The Civil Defence volunteer force is very costeffective and it has retained its voluntary ethos
even while working side by side with full and
part-time professional emergency services
personnel. In addition to the staffing costs of the
Department’s Civil Defence Branch, total
expenditure by the Department in 2003 is
estimated at €4.3m. It is proposed to maintain
this level of expenditure over the period to 2005.

Following the enactment of the Civil Defence
Act 2002, responsibility for the management of
Civil Defence at national level was passed in

### The Civil Defence Objective


2003 from the Department to a management
Board appointed by the Minister for Defence
under the Act. The Board is representative of
all of the principal stakeholders and also has
external expertise. Under the Act, the Board is
obliged to prepare and submit to the Minister
a strategic development plan for the future of
Civil Defence not later than nine months after
its formal establishment. Civil Defence policy
will, however, remain the responsibility of the
Minister for Defence.

In accordance with the decision of the
Government, the Civil Defence function is in the
course of being decentralised to Roscrea and
this is expected to be completed by end - 2003.

### Strategies and performance indicators

The strategies and performance indicators
associated with the Civil Defence Objective are
set out in the table.


-----

### The White Paper Objective: To continue the modernisation of the Defence Forces by implementing the White Paper on Defence and related modernisation initiatives (the White Paper Objective).

The White Paper, which deals with all aspects
of defence provision and organisation was
published in February 2000, and sets out the
policy on Defence for the period to 2010 with
a view to ensuring an appropriate level of
defence capability having regard to the
changing defence and security environment
both at home and abroad.


The White Paper emphasises the need to
ensure that Ireland has conventionally
organised Defence Forces which are affordable
and sustainable and which are capable of
carrying out the revised roles set by
Government.

To meet the new situation, a restructuring
process was mapped out for the Defence Forces
with the following key goals:


These goals require the creation of a balanced
and flexible military organisation which has
sufficient depth in terms of personnel,
doctrine, training, organisation and equipment
to meet expected future needs. The then
organisation was seen as a strong starting
point but a process of continuous change is
necessary to ensure that the State has effective
and efficient defence capabilities relevant to its
needs.

The White Paper sets out major new plans for
the development of the Defence Forces. This
involves the provision of a Permanent Defence
Force of 10,500 personnel (plus the option of
having 250 recruits in training at any one time)
and the investment of the pay savings arising
from the reduced strength level in new
equipment and infrastructure. The current
strength figures lie within that range.



- To provide a light infantry based force with
an appropriate level of all-arms capability;

- To provide sufficient forces and capabilities
to meet needs at home and to make a
significant contribution abroad;



- To put in place a more cohesive and better
equipped force than existed in 2000;

- To provide significant additional resources
for equipment and infrastructure broadly
within the 2000 level of financial
allocation.


The payroll savings achieved, plus resources
generated from the sale of properties which are
surplus to military requirements, have funded
an unprecedented investment programme in
new equipment, buildings and related
infrastructure. Details of this investment
programme are set out in Appendix 2.

The changed economic situation has resulted
in the postponement of the major medium lift
helicopter project and the slowing down of a
number of other projects. However, a number
of major projects are proceeding, including
certain barracks refurbishment works,
additional Armoured Personnel Carriers
and the acquisition of trainer aircraft.


The completion of these projects, together
with the investment which has already taken
place and the anticipated scope for investment


-----

in the period ahead should ensure that the
Defence Forces have the necessary equipment
and infrastructure to carry out their roles.

The White Paper envisages new organisation
plans for the Permanent Defence Force based
on the new overall numbers.

Arising from the special study of the Air Corps
and the Naval Service undertaken by Price
Waterhouse, and reflecting the policy
parameters laid down in the White Paper,
implementation plans were drawn up for the
Air Corps and the Naval Service, including new
organisation structures. These plans have
largely been implemented. The Chief of Staff’s
proposals for a new Army organisation are also
being implemented. A review will be carried
out in 2004.

The White Paper recognises the importance of
offering rewarding and challenging careers to
Defence Forces personnel. In this regard, it
provides for the preparation of an updated and
very comprehensive integrated personnel
management plan for an Integrated Personnel
Management System (IPMS) to address this
and related issues.


The Chief of Staff has submitted a proposed
IPMS and this is being considered by the civilmilitary Strategic Management Committee
(SMC). It is hoped to finalise the IPMS in 2003.
A key feature will be a continuation of the
policy of regular recruitment which is now in
place in order to achieve an improved age
profile in the Permanent Defence Force.

The White Paper provides also that the overall
strategy for the development of the Reserve
Defence Force will be based on the report of
the special Steering Group which reported in
1999. The recommendations of the report have
been broadly accepted as providing a general
foundation on which the future development
of the Reserve can be built. A draft
Implementation Plan has been prepared by the
Chief of Staff and approved in principle by the
Minister. It is expected that implementation
will require about six years to bring to
completion.

### Strategies and performance indicators

The strategies and performance indicators
associated with the White Paper Objective are
set out in the table.


-----

### The White Paper Objective

Strategies

Review of Army organisation.

Complete and implement the IPMS.

Reorganisation of the Reserve.

Defence Forces Investment Programme:

2003 Equipment and Infrastructure Programme

2004 Programme

2005 Programme

### The Policy Advice and Support Objective: To provide the Minister for Defence with the best policy advice and support in relation to the management of Defence.

The Department and the Defence Forces
provide advice and support to the Minister to
assist him with the discharge of his
responsibilities. This includes, within a
constitutional and statutory framework and
through an active business planning process,
the management of the Department and the
Defence Forces, the provision of policy advice,
assistance with policy formulation and
development, the implementation of policy
and the command of the Defence Forces.


The key focus is to assure the Minister and the
Government that, within the broad policy,
legislative and resource framework in which
we operate, Defence is well managed,
resources are properly utilised and that the
capacities required to properly discharge the
functions and roles are maintained. On the
policy side, the key focus is on providing
timely, relevant and quality advice on all
matters pertaining to the Minister’s
responsibilities.

There is necessarily a degree of overlap
between this strategic objective and the other
strategic objectives set out above. This is
particularly true in relation to the national and
international security arena, emergency


-----

planning and White Paper implementation
where many of the outputs take the form of
policy advice and support.

### White Paper issues

The White Paper identified the key issues
facing the civil side of the Department as
follows:

- The development of a policy-led
Department which is capable of advising
the Minister on all defence matters,
executing the specific tasks allocated to
the civil service branches, and generally
managing its business on a value for
money basis.

- Managing at the policy level the ongoing
reform and development of the Defence
Forces to ensure that there are sustainable
and affordable Defence Forces in place to
fulfil the roles laid down by Government.

### Department and Defence Forces management structures and arrangements

The White Paper stated that addressing these
key issues required a review of branches, the
creation of a three division structure for the
civil element of the Department, including the
creation of a new Corporate Services Division
and a review of staffing levels with a view to a
10% reduction in current civil service staff
numbers.

As reported in the previous Strategy
Statement, a three division structure has been


put in place. As implementation of this
Strategy Statement proceeds, we will keep
the new structure under review to ensure its
continued relevance to achieving our mission.
The required reduction in staff numbers is
expected to be achieved by end - 2004 but this
is dependent on a reduced requirement for
staff in the Claims Branch and the extent of
staffing requirements arising in the context of
the Irish Presidency of the EU.

The present top management structure of the
Defence Forces is based on legislation enacted
in 1998 arising from the implementation of the
Defence Forces Review Implementation Plan.
The new structure is working well.

The Strategic Management Committee (SMC) is
described in Section 2 above. As provided for in
the White Paper, the role of the SMC has been
enhanced through a greater emphasis on
strategic planning and on policy formulation
and review with quarterly meetings chaired by
the Minister. The SMC will have an active role
in ensuring that the Strategy Statement is
implemented in full.

### Partnership and conciliation and arbitration

In developing our strategic approach in recent
years, we have invested time and resources in
consulting civil and military staff and in the
development of partnership structures.

There are active Partnership structures in place
involving civil service staff, the Department’s
civilian employees and, more recently, the
Defence Forces. Benefits of the process include
a greater shared understanding of the business


-----

of Defence and how that can be progressed,
better internal and external communications,
the development of customer service planning
and implementation, better environmental
planning, and the creation of fora in which
managers and staff can resolve issues of
concern in a bilateral and non-confrontational
way at the lowest possible level. In summary
there have been benefits for managers and
staff and for the people we serve.

The aim is to continue to build on the progress
made, principally on internal and external
communications and customer service, since
the commencement of the process in 1998 and
to achieve similar progress through the new
Partnership structures recently agreed in the
Defence Forces.


### Human Resources Development (HRD) strategy

As previous Strategy Statements and the White
Paper have pointed out, the management and
development of staff are critical to creating
organisational capacity. The Department and
the Defence Forces have given special
attention to this issue in recent years.


The Defences Forces Conciliation and
Arbitration (C&A) Scheme provides a range of
fora for Defence management to discuss with
the Defence Forces representative associations,
within the scope of representation, the impact
of the implementation of our strategic
objectives, particularly the implementation of
the White Paper. The modernisation agenda
encompassed in the White Paper is relevant in
the context of Sustaining Progress which
encompasses the implementation of the
Report of the Public Service Benchmarking
Body and the implementation of a new
pension scheme for new entrants to the
Defence Forces arising from the report of the
Commission on Public Service Pensions.


For the civil side, the principal elements of a
new human resources strategy emerged from a
detailed consultative process involving all staff.
Many of these elements are already in place.
Selection for promotion among civil service
staff is now done through a competitive
process including interview. The Performance
Management and Development System (PMDS)
is now in its third year of operation in Defence
and there has been a major investment in
training and development to ensure that
staff are given the opportunity to reach their
full potential.

The Department of Defence was the first
Government Department to receive the
_Excellence Through People Award in 2001 and_
has retained it for 2003. FÁS developed this
Irish Standard to encourage organisations to
develop the full potential of their employees
and so maximise their contribution to the
organisation. The award gives recognition to
organisations that have achieved this aim. We
are committed to retaining the award for
future years.


The consolidation of these important
developments, together with an increased
emphasis on senior management training and
development and an increase in the training
and development budget, are priorities for the


-----

Department and are at the centre of
preparations for the updating of the
Department’s human resources development
strategy.

The planned extension to civilian employees of
the PMDS will provide benefits for the staff
concerned and for the organisation.

The ongoing development of the Integrated
Personnel Management System (IPMS) for the
Defence Forces was outlined above (see under
the heading The White Paper Objective) and is
of critical importance.

### Equality

It is our policy that all personnel are accorded
equality of opportunity and treatment and
we will continue to promote equality and to
support the initiatives undertaken to achieve
equality of opportunity in the public
service. The IPMS mentioned above and
the Department’s updated human resources
development strategy will reflect this policy
position. That strategy, which is being prepared
in consultation with staff interests, will include
also a programme of affirmative action
(overcoming obstacles to career progression)
to address such issues as the implementation
of the Government target whereby one-third of
posts in the grade of Assistant Principal should
be filled by women within 5 years.

We believe that our broad approach not only
recognises and guarantees the equal rights of
all of our staff but also ensures that we give
them the opportunity to achieve their full
potential and make the optimum contribution
to the success of the organisation.


A key commitment in our Customer Service
Action Plan is to take all reasonable steps to
provide equality of access to all our customers.

### Harassment and bullying in the Defence Forces – the Doyle Report

Following the publication in March 2002 of
the Doyle report into the incidence of sexual
harassment, harassment and bullying in the
Defence Forces, the full implementation of
the report’s recommendations is a priority.
An independent Monitoring Group chaired
by Dr. Eileen Doyle and which comprises the
Deputy Chief of Staff (Support), an Assistant
Secretary of the Department and the General
Secretaries of the Representative Associations
is tasked with the co-ordination and
management of the implementation process,
including the drafting of a full implementation
plan to give effect to the fundamental reforms
which the report has recommended.

Significant progress has been made to date.
An Equality Steering Group has been charged
with examining the legislation, statutory
instruments, practices, procedures and
administrative instructions in the Defence
Forces taking account of relevant equality
legislation and best practice, the particular
requirements of the military environment,
and the Doyle report.

An independent Confidential Helpline and
Counselling Service for serving Defence Forces
personnel as recommended in the report was
launched early in 2003, while an independent
body has been engaged to design, administer,
distribute and analyse an Exit Interview
Questionnaire for personnel retiring or


-----

resigning from the Defence Forces to establish
their views on their experiences of military life.

A further External Survey will be conducted
in Spring 2004, the results of which will be
published, and this will involve a thorough
revisiting of all the aspects covered in
the report.


Total Defence expenditure (including military
pensions) will amount to about €884m in 2003.

Management Information Framework


### Finance services and financial management

Finance services


Finance services are provided through the
Department’s Finance area where the customer
service ethos is well established. The emphasis
will be on a continuation of quality service
provision to all internal and external
customers, including the preparation of
payrolls for all employees, both military and
civil, the granting and payment of pensions
and gratuities to retired members of the
Defence Forces, Veterans of the War of
Independence and the dependants of
deceased personnel, the formulation and
development of pensions policy, the payment
of all accounts for goods and services provided
to the Defence Forces and the Department,
maintaining financial records and preparing
the Department’s annual Appropriation
Accounts, and helping to meet the
information needs of the Department.

There will be greater emphasis on this latter
aspect during the currency of this Strategy
Statement and particularly in the context of
the ongoing Management Information
Framework project.


Work on the installation of new financial
management and accounting systems has
been ongoing throughout the civil service in
the context of the Management Information
Framework (MIF).

In line with this, the development of MIF in the
Department of Defence and the Defence Forces
is under way, with project management
structures and professional staff now in place
across the organisation. Planning for the next
phase, specifying and selecting the appropriate
systems for delivery of the project, is at an
advanced stage. The rollout of the MIF will
deliver substantial benefits in terms of
improved accounting and management
information systems. The systems will also
enable performance measurement by reference
to realistic agreed indicators and will provide a
solid platform on which to base value for
money expenditure reviews.


The Department’s Internal Audit Section is an
independent unit which reports directly to the
Secretary General. As a service provider, the
Section follows closely the Professional


The MIF programme will require a significant
commitment of financial, human and ICT
resources, right across the Defence
organisation, both civil and military.
The organisation intends to make that
commitment.

### Internal Audit


-----

Practice Standards set down by the Institute of
Internal Auditors by providing to management,
both civil and military, an independent and
objective assurance and consulting activity
which is designed to add value and improve
the Department’s operations through
the evaluation and improvement of the
effectiveness of the risk management, control
and governance process in the Department.

The Section works to an annual programme
of audits which is approved and reviewed by
the Department’s Audit Committee, which
comprises the Secretary General, the two
Assistant Secretaries, the Head of Corporate
Services, the Professional Accountant and the
Deputy Chief of Staff (Support).

### Information and Communications Technologies (ICTs) and the Information Society

ICT programme in Defence

One of the priorities identified for the
organisation by the White Paper is to make
maximum use of ICTs. We have invested
substantial resources in the modernisation of
our ICT infrastructure and are continuing to
build on this sound technological base. Major
applications in the financial and administrative
areas, such as payroll and accounting systems,
compensation claims, inventory management
and human resources support systems have
been developed and now underpin many of
the business processes. The support for and
development of these and other missioncritical applications will continue to command
significant financial and human resources.


The EU Presidency in 2004 will increase the
demands on IT resources. We are already
planning for this extra requirement and will
take steps to ensure that adequate resources
are in place.

IT security has always been a priority for
Defence. We have already implemented
security arrangements on our networks and
on our systems generally and will continue
to enhance these over the next three years.
This must also be balanced with the need for
accessibility of information in accordance
with the e-Government agenda, and for
web-enabled business applications and
future workflow design.

In line with the recommendations of the
Working Group on the Management of
Information Technology, the Department’s
civil-military IT Steering Committee is focused
on the alignment of ICT strategy with both
strategic and day to day business. This greatly
enhances organisational effectiveness and
promotes IT awareness.

The Information Society and e-Government

In March 2002, the Government published its
new Action Plan for the Information Society,
_New Connections. This addresses the priorities_
and strategies to take us forward in terms of
infrastructures, applications and supporting
frameworks. Under the modernisation remit
of that document, the Department’s
_e-Government Action Plan was published in_
May 2002. It identifies particular e-Government
activities such as e-Cabinet, e-Procurement,
e-Recruitment, and electronic payment
projects, to be delivered in line with the
timescale of central government initiatives.


-----

In support of this, the Government Virtual
Private Network (VPN) has now been put in
place and the Department has commenced
a significant technical process to change and
enhance telecommunications links. Over
the coming years, this will facilitate our
participation in e-Government developments
at the most economical rates available.

Further developments, such as the goal of
overall e-enablement of the public service,
through the development of shared services
and common automated processes, will be
part of an ongoing process, delivered in
modules over the coming years. We are already
represented on Interdepartmental groups in
these areas and will, through this mechanism,
continue to make our contribution to the
success of this initiative.


### Property management

Successfully managing the Department’s
property portfolio is, and will continue to be,
a major challenge and is of critical importance
to the achievement of the Policy Advice and
Support Objective, the White Paper Objective
and the Security Objective.


The Department’s own Intranet (DNet) has been
redesigned to enable its use as an interactive
workspace and to support web-enabled
business processes for future rollout, e.g.,
online helpdesk support. This development
will continue. The Department’s website
_www.defence.ie has been launched, built on_
best practice in relation to design, search
facilities and accessibility guidelines. It will be
a truly interactive medium, e.g. for Freedom
of Information queries, providing information
services and query facilities. The updating and
maintenance of accurate website content is an
ongoing process and further planned
developments will enable business transactions
on the website, in accordance with Government
initiatives.


In this regard, there is a focus on providing
the Minister with the best policy advice and
support in relation to the management of
Defence property and on ensuring the provision
of an appropriate level of property holdings
to support the accommodation, training and
operational requirements of the Defence Forces.

In the previous Strategy Statement reference
was made to the fact that the Government
had decided that there should be a rigorous
examination of the necessity for properties
outside of the permanently occupied military
barracks and posts and that only those required
for essential defence purposes would be
retained. In this regard, a policy of phasing-out
most married quarters is being implemented
with quarters located outside barracks being
sold-off. Where married quarters are being
retained, an ongoing review of rents will ensure
a system which more accurately reflects the
market value of such property and help to
maximise revenue for reinvestment purposes.


Other properties will be identified for disposal
by sale or otherwise and the proceeds, along
with the revenue from the existing programme
of barrack disposals, will form a key part of the
Defence Forces equipment and infrastructure
investment programmes. This policy has been
pursued successfully and will continue in the
period to 2005.


-----

Progress will also be made in the streamlining
of property management systems generally,
having regard to the need to monitor
maintenance and overall stewardship of the
portfolio, including disposals and to improve
management information systems.

In line with Government policy and the
National Heritage Plan and National Diversity
Plan, the Department and the Defence Forces
are committed to employing best practice to
ensure the protection of Ireland’s natural
environment and heritage resources. Our main
focus on environmental issues is concentrated
on the conservation of defence lands, pollution
prevention, energy conservation, recycling
and waste disposal, and environmental
enhancement generally. The preservation,
protection and restoration of natural
resources while fulfilling Defence training
and operational requirements are key issues.

The implementation of the report of the
Curragh Task Force on the future management
and development of the Curragh having regard
to the immense archaeological, cultural,
environmental and historical significance
of the area will be a key focus in the period
ahead. The Curragh is now classified as a
Recorded Monument and is in the process of
being designated as a Natural Heritage Area.

One of the main recommendations of the Task
Force was the transfer of the management of
the Curragh of Kildare, with the exception of
the Curragh Military Camp, to a new statutory
authority to be established under the aegis of
the Department of Defence. The Government
have approved this proposal and the necessary
arrangements are being made to develop and
submit detailed proposals to Government.


The implementation of the Task Force’s
recommendations is being considered also in
the context of a report commissioned by
Kildare County Council on the Sustainable
Recreational Use of National Assets.

### Hearing loss compensation and related matters

In our previous Strategy Statements we
referred to the major challenge posed by the
hearing loss issue. Originally, the potential cost
to the Exchequer was being estimated at over
€1bn. Current estimates indicate that the
overall cost to the Exchequer will now be in
the region of €350m. This indicates the
success of our ongoing strategy of reducing
the cost to the taxpayer while ensuring equity
for the genuine claimant.

As at 31st December 2002, we had received
16,522 hearing loss claims and had disposed
of 13,888 of these at an overall total cost of
€258m. Some 35% of these claims were dealt
with under the Early Settlement Scheme which
has been terminated for claims received after
26 July, 2002. Our priority is to deal with the
balance of some 2,634 claims in an equitable
and cost effective manner.

With regard to non hearing loss claims we
referred in our previous Strategy Statement
to the delegation of these claims to the State
Claims Agency (SCA) by Government Order.
The SCA formally took charge of its new
responsibilities in December 2001.

The Order included a list of certain categories
of claim which have been exempted from
delegation to the Agency for reasons of public


-----

and legal policy. Categories of claims which
were not delegated by the Minister for Defence
to the SCA are as follows:

- hearing loss claims;


on those of the public service Ombudsman, but
reflecting the circumstances and demands of
the military environment. It is hoped to have
the Bill enacted in 2003 and to have the Office
of the Defence Forces Ombudsman established
as soon as practicable thereafter.

We intend also to restate for easy reference
and access the Defence Acts and, as mentioned
elsewhere, to update legislation in relation to
the Curragh of Kildare.



- claims arising from personal injury
suffered by member of the Defence Forces
in the course of duty outside of the State;
and

- claims made by State employees arising
from alleged breaches of the Employment
Equality Act, 1998.


Provision was also made for the transfer
of existing claims. By December 2002, 266
cases had been referred to the Agency. The
Department will continue to monitor the
process and support the SCA as necessary.

In relation to claims which have not been
delegated to the SCA, we will seek to continue
to dispose of such claims as expeditiously as
possible and at least cost.


Simplification and reform

Traditionally, the Defence sector was highly
regulated with most military matters governed
by Defence Forces Regulations made by the
Minister for Defence under the Defence Acts.
While this has had little or no adverse
impact on business or the community, it
was recognised in the Department that
simplification and reform was necessary to
keep pace with the ongoing modernisation of
the sector. Much of that simplification has
been carried out but the process will continue
in the period ahead with the objective of
rewriting and modernising regulations and
streamlining administrative procedures.


### Legislative programme and simplification and reform

Programme


In January, 2002 the Ombudsman (Defence
Forces) Bill, 2002 was published. This provides
for the establishment of a Defence Forces
Ombudsman who will be an entirely
independent statutory entity with statutory
powers of inquiry and investigation, modelled


### Strategies and performance indicators

The strategies and performance indicators
associated with the Policy Advice and Support
Objective are set out in the table.


-----

### The Policy Advice and Support Objective


-----

-----

-----

# Section 5: Cross-organisational issues and implementing the Strategy Statement


### Introduction

There are important cross-organisational
dimensions to the work of the Department and
mission success is often critically dependent,
for example, on the inputs and cooperation
of other Departments and State agencies.
It is sometimes the case also that the mission
success of other Departments and agencies
is equally dependent on the inputs and
cooperation of Defence and the Defence Forces.


### Defence modernisation and ongoing management of the Department

Much of the success of the Defence
modernisation process can be attributed to the
very good working relationships which have
been developed with the Department of the
Taoiseach and the Department of Finance.
The support of both Departments in relation to
the rebalancing of Defence resource allocation
and the development of the equipment and
infrastructure programmes was particularly
important. We intend to continue to work
closely with both Departments in relation to
the Defence modernisation and the wider
public service modernisation programmes. In
this regard, there are important pay issues to
be resolved in the Defence sector and we look
forward to working with both Departments
within the context of pay policy and existing
conciliation and arbitration mechanisms.


Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Minister for
Justice, Equality and Law Reform and the Garda
Síochána and referred to the criticality of the
structures and arrangements now in place at
Government level, at Interdepartmental level
and at operational level between the Gardaí
and military authorities for integrated service
planning and delivery. These arrangements
have worked very well over a considerable
period and will be maintained.

We also have very effective liaison
structures in place with the Department
of Communications, Marine and Natural
Resources which has policy responsibility for,
amongst other things, fishery protection and
marine Search and Rescue. The Naval Service
and the Air Corps play a very significant role in
each of these areas and the liaison structures
have been successful in the planning and
integration of service delivery. We have similar
arrangements in place with the Department of
Justice, Equality and Law Reform and with the
Department of Health and Children and the
Health Boards in relation to, respectively, the
broad internal security area and air ambulance
services.


### National and international security

In describing national and international
security issues above, we outlined the relevant
responsibilities of the Minister for Defence, the


As mentioned in Section 4, we will work with
each of these Departments and agencies to
develop Service Level Agreements which will
specify in certain areas the level and quality
of service or assistance to be provided.

Close contact is maintained with the
Department of Foreign Affairs in relation to
EU matters and in particular to the Common
Foreign and Security Policy and European
Security and Defence Policy. In Brussels, the
Delegation of Ireland to the Political and
Security Committee is comprised of staff from


-----

the Department of Foreign Affairs and from
Defence, including military staff. A similar
approach is in place in relation to PfP.
Developing bilateral arrangements with
Defence counterparts within these structures
will be an important element in the promotion
of Ireland’s interests.

### Emergency planning

The Government Task Force on Emergency
Planning, which is chaired by the Minister for
Defence, and the Interdepartmental Working
Group on Emergency Planning continue to
promote co-ordination across all departments
and agencies involved in the emergency
planning process. The existing lead roles of
Departments in respect of specific emergency
planning arrangements remain unchanged.

### Civil Defence

Given the nature and extent of Civil Defence
activity and the community and other support
roles played by the organisation, we have a
range of formal and informal linkages with
many Government Departments and State
agencies. These arrangements work very well
and we expect that the new management
Board will seek to maintain and develop these
in the period ahead.


### Implementing the Strategy Statement

We are determined to implement this Strategy
Statement and to continue to report on
progress annually to the Minister as required
under the Public Service Management Act and
to publish those reports.

We believe that our objectives, strategies and
performance indicators are results-focused and
specific so that implementation can be more
easily measured and corrective action taken,
if necessary. These objectives, strategies and
indicators will be mainstreamed into our
ongoing business planning processes, key
aspects of which include the preparation of
annual business plans in consultation with
staff interests, approval at Secretary General
or Chief of Staff level, the ongoing monitoring
and review of progress, and regular reporting
to the Minister. Where necessary, difficulties
with plan implementation can be dealt with at
Management Advisory Committee or Strategic
Management Committee level as appropriate.

The drafting of annual plans will proceed
against the background of the ongoing
assessment of the environmental factors
mentioned above and in the light of any
relevant or expected developments in
these factors.


-----

# Appendix 1: Details of projected Defence Vote expenditure for 2003 by category


Expenditure Category 2003

**€m** %

PDF pay and allowances 424 58%

Pay and allowances of civilian employees and RDF 41 6%

Defensive equipment 30 4%

Air Corps: equipment, fuel, maintenance, etc. 34 5%

Naval Service: equipment, fuel, maintenance etc. 11 2%

Barracks expenses, repairs and maintenance of lands 26 4%

Buildings – capital 24 3%

Military Transport: new vehicles, fuel, repairs and maintenance 15 2%

Compensation 51 7%

Other non-pay military expenditure 49 7%

Administrative budget 21 3%

Civil Defence, Irish Red Cross Society and Coiste and Asgard 6 1%

Total (Gross) 731 100


_Note: Any discrepancies are due to rounding._


-----

# Appendix 2: Major investment projects commenced or completed in the period 1997 - 2002


Project Description Cost

Equipment:

8 Fixed Wing Training Aircraft for the Air Corps (for delivery in 2004) €60m

40 Armoured Personnel Carriers for the Army (all delivered and in service) €50m

25 Armoured Personnel Carriers for the Army (for delivery in 2004) €33m

Naval Service ship: LE Roisín commissioned in December 1999 €25m

Naval Service ship: LE Niamh commissioned September 2001 €25m

_Equipment Subtotal_ _€193m_

Infrastructure:

Curragh:

Vehicle workshop & garaging €14m

New stores & workshops €11m

New Ordnance/Transport School & Combat Support College €10m

New pool and gym upgrade €8m

NCOs Messes €7m

Ammunition depot €6m

Conversion project for student accommodation €3m

Cathal Brugha Barracks, Dublin 6:

New Communications/Engineering Building €3m

Collins Barracks, Cork:

New storage facilities €3m

Gymnasium €3m

Dún Uí Mhaoilíosa, Renmore, Galway:

Cookhouse & dining hall €4m

Naval Base, Haulbowline:

New galley/dining complex €4m

Casement Aerodrome, Baldonnel:

New hangar €6m

Runway resurfacing €6m

Headquarters No. 3 Support Wing €3m

_Infrastructure Subtotal_ _€91m_

Overall Total **€284m**


-----

Published by

Department of Defence
Parkgate
Infirmary Road
Dublin 7

Tel: 01 804 2000
Fax: 01 670 3399
Lo-Call: 1890 251 890

PRN No: 283


-----

