##### THE CHIEF OF DEFENCE
 STRATEGIC CONCEPT

###### 2022


-----

-----

#### THE CHIEF OF DEFENCE STRATEGIC CONCEPT

SEPTEMBER 2022


-----

-----

##### THE CHIEF OF DEFENCE STRATEGIC CONCEPT

**FOREWORD**

_he Armed Forces are projected into a_
_historical phase marked by phenomena of_
_great political and strategic significance,_

# Twhich have radically changed our way of life and

_our perception of the future._
_The invasion of Ukraine by the Russian Federation_
_marked a breaking point and, at the same time, an_
_acceleration of dynamics. Some of these dynamics_
_are pre-existing and some are new, and require_
_us to strengthen defence and deterrence policy._
_At the NATO Summit in Madrid in June 2022, it_
_was emphasised that strategic competition is set to grow rapidly in the_
_coming years in the light of the changed geopolitical scenario due to the_
_competitive drive developed, at the same time, by Russia and China._
_The Armed Forces must be able to tackle the expanding threat to collective_
_security and ensure operational effectiveness in the service of Italy. For the_
_international community, the Ukrainian crisis represented a harsh realisation_
_of the danger of the so-called hybrid war, which is unfolding according to_
_increasingly complex and lethal dynamics. Thanks to technological progress,_
_there is the possibility of bringing together the classical domains (land, air,_
_naval) with the cyber and space domains and the cognitive environment as_
_a whole. The synergy between these dimensions shapes conflicts without_
_rules or limits, with a theatre of war that involves civilian populations,_
_networks and the international community._
_Among the future challenges is the evolution towards a new ‘deterrence_
_paradigm’. This paradigm is, in fact, increasingly connected with_


-----

_‘technological development’, including through the expansion of deterrence_
_tools. Deterrence cannot disregard a state-of-the-art military instrument_
_that interprets a joint and multi-domain operational model and is a full_
_player in the ongoing revolution in military technology._
_Another aspect of primary importance concerns the values underpinning_
_our strategic and military policy. The protection of international stability_
_and peace and the safeguarding of human rights and dignity are a primary_
_aspect of our strategic and military policy and part of the core tasks of_
_the Armed Forces. At the same time, they are one of the cornerstones of_
_Italy’s action on the international stage. These ethical principles are at the_
_heart of our Constitution and of the international values embodied by the_
_United Nations, the European Union and NATO, to which our Country is_
_firmly anchored. The field of action in this area continues to expand day_
_after day and we are aware that the defence of these values, which are_
_at the basis of civil coexistence among peoples, represents a real global_
_challenge that will require a renewed, focused and determined commitment_
_from everyone, including Italy._
_In this geo-strategic scenario, missions abroad for peace, international_
_stability and the protection of human dignity are the epitome and_
_operational transposition on an international level of the heritage of values_
_that inspire the Armed Forces. Our commitment is growing steadily: for_
_the first time since World War II, the national military force is deployed_
_in a geographical arc of unprecedented breadth: from the Arctic region_
_and the Baltic southwards through the Alliance’s Eastern Flank, from the_
_Persian Gulf westwards through the Horn of Africa and the Middle East,_
_the Mediterranean, North Africa and the Sahel to the Gulf of Guinea. In all_
_those areas, the Armed Forces’ activities could expand and continue, also_
_and inevitably as a result of the aftermath of the Ukrainian crisis._
_The Armed Forces will increasingly rely on a joint organisational structure_
_that is fully integrated and interoperable nationally and internationally, on_
_the modernisation of means and systems, on the adaptation of infrastructure,_
_on the optimal planning of available resources, on the education and_
_motivation of the most important resource at our disposal: the women and_
_men of the Services who serve our homeland._
_I would like to thank the President of the Republic, the Minister of Defence,_


-----

_the Parliament and the Government for their political guidance, for their_
_attention and sensitivity to the human and financial requirements that the_
_Armed Forces express as they meet and tackle the challenges that await_
_us._


**Admiral**


-----

-----

**INDEX**

THE INTERNATIONAL SCENARIO AND THE ARMED FORCES
ALLIANCES AND CHALLENGES
THE ARMED FORCES IN THE INTERNATIONAL SCENARIO
THE MILITARY INSTRUMENT
HUMAN RESOURCES
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE INDUSTRY
INFRASTRUCTURES
FINANCIAL SUSTAINABILITY
CONCLUSIONS


1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.


11
17
21
23
25
27


-----

-----

**THE INTERNATIONAL SCENARIO AND THE ARMED FORCES[1]**

he current geopolitical scenario is characterised by multifaceted
dynamics of strategic competition accelerated by the crisis in Ukraine.
That is why the Wider Mediterranean[1] has become central as a space

# Tof primary strategic interest for Italy, where historically-rooted criticalities

intersect with hybrid threats, conflicts of varying intensity and multidomain confrontations within the framework of invasive and destabilising
communication strategies. It is now a widely shared opinion that this
multidimensional geographical quadrant – an area that falls naturally within
Italy’s sphere of interest – will face growing instability as a result of the
crisis in Ukraine, among other things.
Faced with an increasingly competitive and complex world, strengthening
the military component of national power[2] has become key. This process is
widely supported by our partners in the European Union and the Atlantic
Alliance.
Therefore, the security of Italy and the international community is a
challenge that is evolving rapidly and has become much more complex. The
quick and widespread development of new technologies makes drawing a
clear difference between defence and security or, simply, between war and
peace difficult. This is also due to the increasing use of irregular militias, of
so-called ‘sub-threshold’ hybrid actions, and of information or disinformation
campaigns.
Against this background, competition in the cyber and space domains, and

1 Wider Mediterranean: an area of priority national strategic interest and a complex multidimensional
geopolitical system. It is a hub of economic, commercial and social flows and a region that includes areas
immediately contiguous to the Mediterranean ‘in the narrow sense’. It encompasses the Middle East and
the Arabian Gulf, the sub-Saharan strip extending to the Gulf of Guinea from the Horn of Africa through
the Sahel (see “The Security and Defence Strategy for the Mediterranean” - edition 2022).

2 Also known in English as DIME (Diplomatic, Informative, Military, Economic).


-----

the potential effects generated in the information and electromagnetic
environments, considerably broadens the concept of threats to national
security. Similarly, albeit at a different scale, communication networks
are already the place where confrontations occur, mainly in the cognitive
dimension, the intensity and complexity of which will grow in the near
future. The CBRN (Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear) threat should
be added to the picture outlined above. The pandemic crisis marked its
return to the stage with a disruptive cross-sectional character, emphasising
the vulnerability of national security, which can potentially be attacked by
emerging infectious diseases.
In this scenario, the Armed Forces must be able to meet the challenges
posed by emerging environments and technologies. The Armed Forces’
planning should focus on resources that achieve continuity and innovation.
They should also seize and exploit the opportunities arising from European
and international cooperation programmes through a clear medium- to
long-term vision. Today, as never before, we must lay the foundations so
that Defence can successfully be part of the industrial initiatives that will
give rise to a technological revolution in the classical domains, in the cyber
and space domains, and in the cognitive environment.
At the organisational level, we endeavour to achieve a fully joint model
that is integrated with other State bodies, with our European and Atlantic
Alliance partners, and that can develop effective and structured synergy
with national industry and with the world of research and culture.
To this end, the Armed Forces must be provided with trained and specialised
human resources, as well as stable and adequate financial means for a
planning timeframe of at least ten years. The men and women of Defence,
as well as equipment and infrastructures, are investments for the security
of the Country, which can be harnessed immediately if needed to tackle a
wide range of contingencies, as emergency interventions, the contribution
to internal security, and the fight against the pandemic have shown.
This document, which updates the 2020 Edition, supplements the guidelines
issued by the Minister of Defence, in particular, the National Military Policy
Directive (2022), the Security and Defence Strategy for the Mediterranean
(2022) and the Defence Industrial Policy Directive (2021).


-----

**ALLIANCES AND CHALLENGES**

ithin the framework of alliances, the United Nations, NATO and
the European Union are the bearers of our values and political
references for the protection of security and economic and social

# Wdevelopment.

Our Country recognises the United Nations as the inescapable and
shared instrument for legitimising and safeguarding peace and stability:
our increased participation in UN peacekeeping missions is urged in light
of Italy’s substantial and competent contribution that is internationally
recognised and appreciated.
NATO is the Alliance of reference for defence and deterrence. The national
strategy envisages a marked commitment on the Alliance’s Eastern Flank in
line with the developments of the recent Ukrainian crisis and the conclusions
of the Madrid Summit (June 2022). Such commitment is a dutiful response
to the security threat of the most exposed countries in that quadrant, while
safeguarding, through the national posture, the attention and commitment
to Cooperative Security and Crisis Management requirements.
Within the European Union, we must pursue a stronger integration of
resources and capabilities among Member States and strengthen the
Common Security and Defence Policy in synergy and complementarity
with the Atlantic Alliance. We must favour the consolidation of the socalled ‘European pillar’ of NATO and make full use of the Union’s integrated
approach. The ambition is that expressed in the 2016 European Union
Global Strategy (EUGS), with which the Union aims to become a global
security provider. It is a goal for which the ambitious action plan outlined in
the Strategic Compass represents a quantum leap.
Within the framework of these alliances, the recent bilateral treaty with
France – known as the ‘Treaty of the Quirinal’ and signed in Rome on 26


-----

November 2021 – the strengthened cooperation with Germany and the
historic and solid relationship with the United Kingdom may also represent
an opportunity to develop joint initiatives aimed at shifting NATO’s and the
European Union’s focus towards the Mediterranean.
Since the Atlantic and European dimensions represent the cornerstones of
our international positioning, the Wider Mediterranean is an area of primary
importance in which Italy’s interests are projected and must be protected
for the purposes of national security. It represents a crossroads of influences
and a wide field of action in terms of hard security, but also of opportunities
of a commercial and financial nature and for economic and energy supply. A
significant role is played by maritime routes, which are key to ensuring our
Country’s economic, social and cultural interdependence.
This geopolitical space is characterised by challenges that are increasingly
complex and interconnected with the neighbouring macro-areas. Indeed,
state fragility, economic gaps, social imbalances, illegal flows, ethnic and
religious tensions are now almost endemic phenomena. The result is the
progressive deterioration of the security conditions due to the presence
of a wider range of threats - terrorist, traditional and non-terrorist. As a
result, instability has turned into competition, and sometimes conflict. The
activist stance taken by Russia, which has expanded its military presence
and political influence in all of the Wider Mediterranean’s crisis area is
accompanied by the increased, and tangible strategic and economic
influence of China, which can only be expected to become a constant in
the near future.
Turkey is the architect of politico-military initiatives in areas where our
Country’s strategic interests lie - namely the Caucasus, the Middle East,
the Horn of Africa, Libya, the Mediterranean, Eastern Europe and the
Balkans. In the long term, it sees itself as an important player and partner for
regional stability. Israel is another key element of stability in the area. It has
established more structured political and economic relations with Bahrain,
the United Arab Emirates, Morocco and Sudan (known as the Abraham
Agreements) and is developing a constructive dialogue with Ankara.
In parallel, the Ministry of Defence is paying increasing attention to the Arctic
region, which will take on significant strategic and economic importance in
the medium term. There is a possibility that new routes of communication
(North-West passage) will emerge as an alternative to current ones. There


-----

are also signs of a possible competitive push by some countries - Russia,
above all - aimed at securing privileged positions for the exploitation of the
important mineral and energy resources in the area.
Finally, power relations are also constantly evolving in the Indo-Pacific
region. The ‘AUKUS’ strategic agreement between the United States, the
United Kingdom and Australia is part of a system of relations that includes
the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue or ‘QUAD’ among the US, UK, India
and Japan; ASEAN and the strengthened relationship with India, with a
view to containing China’s expandism in the Indo-Pacific region. Beijing and
Washington play a leading role and prompt Brussels to give more substance
to its strategy with a view to a more incisive presence and strengthened
cooperation with the Indo-Pacific region. It would be of fundamental
importance for EU interests. The scenario outlined above will influence
which areas will emerge as those of priority interest, and highlight both
possible needs for intervention and opportunities for Italy to seize.


-----

-----

**THE ARMED FORCES IN THE INTERNATIONAL SCENARIO[3]**

he Armed Forces will continue to be engaged at the nerve centres
of the political-strategic space detailed above. This space remains
crucial for global stability, and is where the main national interests

# Tto be pursued and defenced lie. The processes underway call for increasing

and pragmatic participation to combine – by involving the entire Country
system – realism and the ability to create operational and institutional
relationships that foster lasting and respectful collaboration and dialogue
and facilitate the management of existing tensions. This approach relies on
the concept of interoperability and the ability to project hard power and
soft power to increase our internationally recognised ‘capital of credibility’,
protect national interests and open up new spaces for manoeuvre.
Stability in our region of interest also depends on countries of crucial
strategic importance such as Germany and France. The latter, together
with Spain, Greece and the aforementioned Turkey, is an important factor
of equilibrium and cooperation for the security of the Mediterranean and
the Southern Flank of the Alliance.
In the Balkans, we will increase our efforts and consolidate the support for
the international community’s action to contain ethnic/political tensions
and promote the region’s inclusion in the European and Atlantic security
space. In this area of priority national interest, all our efforts to foster the
development of multilateral cooperation – e.g. the Defence Cooperation
Initiative (DECI) with its NATO Framework Nation Concept; the Adriatic
Ionian Initiative (ADRION) in the Western Balkans and the Adriatic Ionian
region; and bilateral cooperation – will be enhanced by sharing common
visions on missions and operations. This will allow us to seek convergence
of views and strategies and convey them in international fora, starting with
the UN, NATO and the EU.


-----

Libya and its future, which the actions of external actors, including Russia,
are making more uncertain, will be a priority for the coming years, on par
with the stability of Tunisia and Lebanon.
Jordan and Egypt remain pillars of regional stability and the international
fight against terrorism.
We remain firmly committed to the Sahel area, which is strategic in the fight
against the terrorist threat and illicit trafficking, and we promote stability
in the area. The expansion of the Russian presence in the Sahel through
the Wagner Group makes the situation even more critical, particularly
considering the recent cooperation activities launched in Sudan. We will
focus capacity building activities in this area, particularly in Niger through
the MISIN bilateral mission, as well as develop potential synergies with
other European countries operating there.
We will continue our efforts in countering piracy and crime in the Gulf of
Guinea, where Nigeria has become an important partner for our interests
in security, migration flows and energy supply.
Our presence in the Gulf of Aden and Somalia will remain among our
priorities as a contribution to the international community for the security
of sea-lanes, regional stability and countering illicit activities.
The Persian Gulf is at the center of new political, technological and economic
dynamics (see for example the recent Abraham Agreements). With these
countries, cooperation in the military and security field has also gained
further importance in developing a broader relationship at the political and
economic level.
On the Asia side, our disengagement from Afghanistan has made both our
presence in Iraq and the development of relations with Pakistan, an eastern
hub within our geostrategic area of interest, even more important. With
Pakistan, the Ministry of Defence will develop more intensive collaborative
relations while supporting a necessary evolution of bilateral relations with
India.
In the light of the evolution of the international security framework and
of the Wider Mediterranean scenario, Defence will have to face a twofold
challenge. On the one hand, it will have to undertake a profound upgrade
of its military equipment to make it fully integrated and able to effectively
take part in the new competition in the cyber and space domains, two


-----

fundamental enablers for all operations. On the other, it will have to
preserve the ability to operate effectively in the traditional domains and
consolidate tangible combat capabilities, readiness, projectability, logistical
sustainability and overall effectiveness.
At the same time, the following will be necessary:

-  stimulating urgent and in-depth reflection on the mechanisms for the
deployment of the Armed Forces and the financing of their operations
abroad, currently governed by Law 145/16. Indeed, given the dynamism
and complexity of modern scenarios, ensuring strategic and operational
flexibility as well as speed of response and deployment of the military
instrument, in particular the rapid reaction forces, is indispensable;

-  implementing an interdepartmental approach to adapt the legal and
financial mechanisms and procedures relating to Defence Capacity
Building initiatives in favour of partner countries in areas of priority
national interest and consolidating a structured approach to military
assistance. As a concrete multiplier of the effectiveness of our initiatives,
through such an approach we will be able to achieve the desired strategic
effects and, at the same time, make the national role and presence more
competitive vis-à-vis other countries, further strengthening links with
the host nation;

-  paying increasing attention to inter-ministerial collaborations, with a view
to a more effective contribution to the desired whole-of-government
action. The ministries of the Interior, Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation, Sustainable Infrastructure and Mobility, Economic
Development and Ecological Transition will be our first partners. At the
same time, we will develop fruitful relations with all other State bodies
that support the activities of the Armed Forces. Within the framework
of national initiatives, we will make our resources available and seek the
best synergies with the National Cybersecurity Agency (Italian: Agenzia
di Cybersicurezza Nazionale, ACN[3]), the Interministerial Committee for
Space Policy and Aerospace Research (i.e. the future Space Department),
the Office for Space and Aerospace Policy of the Presidency of the
Council of Ministers, and the Civil Protection Department;

-  carrying out adequate reflections on Homeland Security Operations, i.e.
on the sustainability of the Armed Forces’ commitment in the framework


-----

of the operations in support of the Police Forces/Public Authorities and,
more specifically, of the ‘Safe Streets’ Operation (Italian: “Strade Sicure”,
under Law 125 of 2008);

-  setting up joint logistic hubs distributed in the area of national strategic
interest to support the national action at a regional level and contribute
to a stable Defence presence in sectors of interest in support of Italy’s
economic, diplomatic and cooperation interests.

3 ACN has responsibility over cyber security and resilience, i.e. one of the four national pillars of cyber domain
management. It stands alongside cyber intelligence, manged by Security Intelligence Department; cyber
defence, under the responsibility of the Ministry of Defence; and cyber-crime and investigation, under the
responsibility of the Ministry of the Interior.


-----

**THE MILITARY INSTRUMENT**

he development of the Armed Forces is rooted in the commitments
undertaken in the international arena, within the political and military
Alliances to which Italy belongs. The main references of general

# Tplanning activities for the Armed Forces’ capability development are the

strategic scope of the NATO Political Guidance and the EU Strategic
Compass, the capacitive value of NATO Capability Targets and the
opportunities offered by European initiatives.
As recalled in the 2015 White Paper and the most recent Defence Minister’s
Policy Guidelines, by 2026 Defence will have to consolidate its capabilities
to conduct joint operations. To do so, it will have to build a force capable
of operating in all domains, including cyber and space, either autonomously
or integrated in multinational task forces for regional-scale deployments
(Limited Small Joint Operation).
The rapid evolution of the cyber and space domains directs the military’s
capability development towards greater integration, deeper interoperability
and, the implementation of integrated-by-design systems and platforms.
The recent regulatory change that gives Defence responsibility for the
management of cyber and space activities of a military security nature,
thus becoming one of the pillars of the national system, is part of this
framework. To ensure maximum effectiveness and interoperability within
the international organisations of reference, Defence must refine its
strategic vision and policy with respect to the new dimensions of strategic
confrontation. It will also have to provide for dedicated forces, which the
Services will have to generate and place under joint command.
As far as the space domain is concerned, we are witnessing a real global
competition that presages possible kinetic conflicts and that sees private
and institutional actors as protagonists, with greater risks related to the


-----

growing threats ‘from space, to space and in space’. If, until a few years
ago, space was considered an enabler of classical domains due to the
presence of systems capable of providing vital services in support of military
operations, today it has become an operational domain in its own right.
This requires new capabilities to ensure the protection of national military
and civil satellite systems in Europe and NATO with a unified vision. It is
therefore necessary to pursue the objective of consolidating and increasing
existing military capabilities (SATCOM, EO and PNT)[4], developing sensors
and capabilities for observation and analysis (military SSA[5]) to know the
actual situation in space (SDA[6]). With this in mind and in a broader future
perspective, it is appropriate to invest in and evaluate the possibility of
acquiring an autonomous capacity for accessing space, also in view of the
increasing miniaturisation of certain satellites.
The cyber domain now has strategic relevance in the national and
international scenario. Safeguarding the security of military networks is part
of the institutional tasks of Defence, which, at the same time, cooperates
with the National Cybersecurity Agency to protect the Country’s system, and
with the Intelligence Services to implement counter intelligence measures
in the cyber domain. As part of coordinated action with these entities,
acquiring the capacity to conduct the full range of cyber operations will be
important. The necessary resources will therefore have to be dedicated and
the required operational capabilities developed through the involvement of
academia and domestic industry.
The exponential growth of digital services has also made data a key factor.
This is a central issue, not least because of the need for agile and innovative
management methods, but also for the protection of information assets.
We will therefore have to create a single classified info-structure cloud
(Defence Cloud), based on data centres with centralised computing and
storage capacities. These will ensure full interoperability between the
systems in use for data analysis and exploitation in a single environment.
This architecture will have to support all Defence components (joint force
and Services), and allow secure information exchange with NATO/EU and

4 Satellite communications, Earth Observation, Positioning-Navigation-Time.

5 Space Situational Awareness.

6 Space Domain Awareness.


-----

mission networks. It must also be able to exploit Artificial Intelligence, Big
Data Analysis and simulation engines, or emerging technologies such as 5G
as an enabler of infostructure from the tactical to the strategic level.
With great determination, we must move towards the creation of true multidomain capabilities to synchronise actions and effects across all domains
(land, sea, air, cyber and space). However, we cannot generate a concrete
multi-domain defence without a decisive and coordinated acceleration of
the joint integration process. Even if it has already started, the latter will be
outdated and will eventually be included in the Multi-Domain Operations
(MDO) concept itself. It is therefore necessary to develop a cultural and
capacitive modus operandi that goes beyond the vision of conflict linked
to traditional domains. Such an MDO should lead to operating, with a very
strong inter-agency approach, in the multi-domain.
Developing multiple actions capable of generating convergent, simultaneous
and combined effects in the different domains is the goal. This potential will
find its fullest expression when combined with an ability to understand the
objectives and overall actions of our potential adversaries well in advance
through enhanced strategic anticipation and situational awareness.
The project to strengthen the Command and Control capabilities of the
Joint Force Summit Operations Command through the newly established
Joint Operations Centre (JOC) fits into this approach The JOC will be the
information hub for Defence operations. This implies a more integrated
training and the enhancement of the potential of the LVC (Live, Virtual and
Constructive) synthetic environment. Such an approach should be enhanced
by implementing a joint and interagency approach that implements realistic
multi-domain training scenarios.
Strategic communication, an essential element of the cognitive dimension –
even more so in today’s hyper-connected society – is a capability that must
be further enhanced and, above all, better understood. Thanks to marked
technological progress and through the expansion of publicly accessible
communication networks, today’s cognitive activities - which play the role
propaganda played in the 20th century - have evolved and grown to the
potential size of an operational domain.
The cognitive environment in which fake news, media control, the and the
manipulation of social networks and information are employed, is for all
intents and purposes a battleground where contemporary weapons are


-----

used to shape public opinion and ultimately influence decision-makers.
To successfully address these challenges, the development process
mentioned above must follow three main lines of effort:

-  modernisation, by fully grasping the opportunities of the most advanced
technological progress;

-  efficiency, by optimising the use of available resources, including energy
resources, and rationalising structures and articulations;

-  enhancement, through widespread integration between the components
of the Services. This integration is intended to achieve a genuine
joint construct to exploit the potential offered by the multi-domain
environment, for deployment in any operational context, from highintensity combat to low-intensity and extended operations.
To this end, medium- to long-term capability choices are required. These
choices must follow principles of prioritisation, cost-effectiveness analysis,
even accepting and mitigating temporary gaps, and support a clear and
indispensable strategic vision.
Technological coherence, across and within the components, will be
necessary to achieve full integration between and within the Services, also
in anticipation of the progressive introduction of particularly advanced
technologies, which are essential to successfully transition to a multidomain operational construct.
In this regard, Defence will have to implement:

-  new capabilities across the entire spectrum of operations, including
space and cyber;

-  decisive, low-lethality weapon systems;

-  integrated air and missile defence to be framed within the broader
framework of NATO’s Integrated Air and Missile Defence (IAMD[7]) to
ensure protection against all evolving threats, including from space and
aerospace;

-  capabilities to counter emerging forms of attack often also employed
by non-state actors such as, for example, armed drones and loitering
munitions;

-  modern tools for preventing, detecting and countering CBRN threats
and enhancing, in parallel, our health capabilities;

-  tools and modes of action in the cognitive dimension;


-----

-  a transition to the digital mode of operation, completing the technological
upgrade of systems and the adaptation of internal processes;

-  propulsion systems not depending on traditional energy sources.
We should also approach the process of technological innovation through
the implementation of national ‘incubators’, in line with what other countries
and NATO are developing[8]. The recently established Office for Defence
Innovation (Italian: Ufficio Generale Innovazione Difesa, UGID) is evidence
of the need for a single, uniform point of reference for innovative strategic
thinking within Defence.
Our attention should also be devoted to sustainability and the impact of
climate change through the development of Green Defence initiatives. In
the face of the international community’s goals to reduce climate-changing
emissions and embark on an energy transition, the Armed Forces will have
to seek efficient and sustainable solutions to reduce their energy and
environmental footprint while preserving full operational capability. The
implementation of the Defence Energy Strategy Plan (DESP) falls within this
framework. The DESP aims, on the one hand, to pursue the national goals
of sustainability, improved efficiency and reduced emissions with positive
effects on expenditure, and, on the other hand, to increase the levels of
security of energy supply[9].

7 It includes Ballistic Missile Defence (BMD) and aims to protect European territory and Allied Forces
deployed in theatres of operations from the short- and medium-range missile threat.

8 NATO is developing its own network of incubators and accelerators through the establishment of the system
called DIANA - Defence Innovation Accelerator for the North Atlantic.

9 At the same time, it is keeping in line with the goals set by the National Integrated Energy and Climate
Plan (NIPEC) for 2030.


-----

-----

**HUMAN RESOURCE**

he availability of adequate human resources, both military and civilian,
is the first pre-requisite for the Armed Forces to successfully tackle
the manifest expansion of their institutional tasks, starting with the

# Tincreasingly complex and broad challenges at the national and international

level. To these are added those related to technological development, the
modernisation of operational processes, cyber and space activities and the
increased need for internal support in major emergencies. Therefore, the
Armed Forces have warmly welcomed the force model reform envisaged
by Law No. 244 of 2012 (i.e., 150k personnel across the Armed Forces)[10].
Through this model, the military will adapt to the changed geostrategic
context and consolidate its ability to operate effectively in the new space
and cyber domains.
Selection, education and deployment are three essential functions that
must be designed and implemented in a systemic and integrated manner to
ensure that adequately prepared personnel are assigned ‘to the right post
and at the right time’. Particular attention should be given to the selection
of resources deployed in the new cyber and space domains and to the
acquisition of innovative and specialised expertise through specific selection
methodologies adopted by all services. In parallel, given the central role
of education, the contents of the 2022-2024 Three-Year Training Plan for
Defence Civilian Personnel will have to be exploited to the full in order to
better map the training needs of the same personnel. All this, while being
aware that qualitative advances through individual improvement and the
enhancement of specific characteristics of each individual will lead to the

10 The new text of the law approved on 3 August 2022 provides for the delegation of authority to the
Government to revise the model of the fully professional Armed Forces, as well as the extension to 2033
rather than 2024 of the deadline for reducing the total number of personnel to 150,000.


-----

most efficient use of human resources.
For both civilian and military personnel, education should be oriented
towards a ‘flexible’ paradigm modelled according to needs and integrating
innovative methodologies enabled by technological progress.
This educational path – which is inspired by modern education models
and consistent with the concept of open innovation – will have to adapt
to the new digital environment. We will be able to borrow best practices
from the business and university world and capitalise on the potential of
new technologies such as artificial intelligence and virtual reality. We will
have to pay equal attention to the education of joint operational planners
through dedicated courses.
Particular emphasis will have to be placed on leadership education at all
levels. An increasingly transversal and balanced set of skills[11] will be required,
both of a managerial nature and related to the so-called soft skills in the
cognitive and relational domains. The Centre for Higher Defence Studies
(Italian: Centro Alti Studi della Difesa, CASD) will play an essential role: it
will be transformed into a Special-order School of Higher Education for high
qualifications and research in the field of defence and security sciences.
Through this project, supported by the Ministry of University and Research,
a military training institution will be elevated to university level for the first
time[12].
The Centre for Higher Defence Studies will therefore act as a driver of
strategic level education, research and consultancy for the Ministry of
Defence and the Country, with PhDs Programmes in ‘Innovation Sciences for
Defence and Security’, with special reference to innovation, organisational
development, strategic sciences, international legal studies for innovation,
digital transformation, cyber security and new technologies. The Centre
for Higher Defence Studies is now also the Defence cyber training centre
for the specialisation of military personnel and personnel from outside the
Ministry of Defence[13]. The programmes available are up to the doctoral

11 Examples of soft skills, in the cognitive area are critical thinking, problem solving, creativity and imagination,
cognitive flexibility, the ability to intercept relevant information, the ability to condense large amounts of
information. In the relational area, the ability to collaborate, empathy, inclusiveness, coaching skills (self
and others).

12 Under Law no. 77 of 17 July 2020.

13 Minister of Defence Decree of 5 August 2021.


-----

level and promote collaboration and exchange of experiences with similar
organisations at the national and international level.
The employment of human resources within Defence will have to be
increasingly careful, targeted, and take advantage of structured vocational
development. Careful evaluation and enhancement of skills and experience
acquired over the years will have to be carried out, taking into account
the natural inclinations of individuals. Virtuous personnel management will
have to develop according to a medium- to long-term vision that adopts
innovative models and processes and involves the personnel concerned.
Identifying and proposing the most suitable profiles to represent Italy within
national and international organisations will require increasingly adequate
and timely planning. The quality and professionalism of our candidates will
have to be based on the construction of structured professional pathways
and dedicated training activities.
At the operational level, the women and men of the Ministry of Defence
are called upon to be prepared to act with professionalism, determination
and an exemplary spirit of sacrifice for long periods, even in environments
characterised by discomfort and potential danger that entail high levels of
psychic stress and physical exhaustion.
This is why it is important to adapt personnel support by making it more
and more responsive to the new needs of individuals and their families. In
addition, more emphasis will have to be placed on internal communication
to share plans and directions and to receive input to identify corrective
actions and improve support policies.
We will have to pay increasing attention to the integration of the welfare
state, as well as to safeguarding and enhancing social security instruments.
We will have to recognise more adequate compensation for strenuous and
hazardous activities and support military relocations, with special reference
to dependants. In parallel, we will have to allocate more resources to
improving and increasing housing capacities for families and commuters.
We will also have to promote legal protection formulas for military personnel,
in particular for compensation for damages to third parties as a result of
civil liability in the performance of their duties. In addition, starting from
the rules on the exercise of trade union freedom regulated by Law 46 of 28
April 2022, we will need to adapt the disciplinary and sanctioning rules and
identify appropriate instruments for exercising command action at every


-----

level. One of the priorities in this area is the completion of initiatives for the
‘Protection of Commanders’ and Professional Associations of a trade union
nature.
Support for the families of the fallen and veterans must be constantly
ensured with dedicated policies in respect of those who daily bear the
consequences of their sacrifice in the service of the Country.
Last, but not least, is the need to implement a vigorous policy to support
the redeployment of personnel in pre-secured detention at the end of their
period of service. Similarly, it will be necessary to reintegrate into civilian
employment those who, as bearers of Defence culture and values and for
personal reasons, should decide to leave active service.


-----

**RELATIONSHIP WITH THE INDUSTRY**

n addition to depending on the operational capabilities of its Armed
Forces, a Country’s defence potential is proportional to the level of
technology and production capabilities expressed by its industrial

# Isystem.

Defence therefore supports the development of an increasingly solid,
modern and efficient industrial and technological base with the support of
both large groups and small and medium-sized enterprises.
The Armed Forces will have to expand the synergy with the defence and
aerospace industry to embark on a shared path and face the challenge of
modernity. Like a few other countries in the world, Italy has a domestic
defence industry, which is an essential sector of the ‘Country system’ and
a multiplying factor for economic, technological and employment growth.
It also ensures strategic capacity and autonomy is available to the military.
Defence intends to take determined action to support this strategic sector
of the national economy. We will therefore have to strengthen and preserve
national strategic autonomy, as well as technological sovereignty in areas
of priority Defence interest, and maximise collaboration, standardisation
and interoperability among the Services and with our Allies. We will also
take full advantage of opportunities arising from European and international
cooperation programmes. This effort will capitalise on the contribution of
the other state agencies involved in the support and export processes, as
well as the definition of a regulatory framework in line with European and
Western standards.
In terms of international relations, the defence industry and related
cooperation activities contribute significantly to the Country’s strategic
positioning and open up important prospects for penetration of foreign
markets to other sectors of the national economy.


-----

In the area of industrial cooperation, Defence should strive to foster
Government-to-Government (G2G) agreements also with countries outside
the European and Atlantic perimeter through existing legal instruments.
G2G agreements, which represent an effective industrial policy tool, will
have to aim at launching cooperation programmes on common platforms
and consolidating partnerships capable of generating interoperability
in the engineering, operational and training fields. The countries that
have unreservedly adopted the G2G model – namely the United States,
France, the United Kingdom, and Germany – enjoy a strategic competitive
advantage. Having recognised this, we will have to define appropriate
strategies involving the entire ‘Country system’.
Research and innovation are the key to remaining competitive and to
developing cutting-edge and interoperable systems in joint and multinational
operations. Hence the need for Defence, industry, institutional actors and
academia to act as a system. The National Military Research Plan and other
national and multinational initiatives, especially in the European dimension,
represent an excellent stimulus to the research and development activities
of national industrial realities. Within this framework, the innovation process
must reflect the needs of the Armed Forces and enhance interactions with
the Defence procurement area to create a collective advantage for the
Country as a system.


-----

**INFRASTRUCTURES**

he effectiveness of the military instrument is closely related to the
availability of infrastructural assets in line with the modern needs and
challenges the military faces, with special attention to sustainability,

# Tenvironmental impact and energy efficiency.

Along with highlighting strengths and weaknesses, the pandemic has also
highlighted the need for Defence to adapt its facilities and infrastructure
that have been facing a progressive and constant reduction in financial
resources for years.
At the national level, the pandemic has made it necessary to enact
extraordinary measures to contain the dramatic health emergency and to
ensure that Armed Forces can respond appropriately to the needs of the
Country and its citizens in terms of logistical structures, support and health
hubs.
The need has clearly emerged to define a strategic planning process that
ensures that financial resources are allocated to the overall infrastructural
adjustment. Reference is also made to the logistical capabilities of the
military health sector, so that Defence can guarantee a prompt and effective
response in case of collective need.
We will also have to ensure greater impetus to the major infrastructure
projects presented individually by the Services for a progressive renewal
of Defence infrastructure according to the Smart Military District model
applied specifically to barracks, ports and airports.
In addition to being financed by the ordinary Defence budget and by interministerial funds, it is desirable that the above-mentioned projects are also
developed by resorting to public-private partnerships and to the allocation
of the ‘Fund for the financing of investments and the national infrastructural
development’.


-----

Finally, in the operational arena, it will be crucial to give importance to the
role of personnel employed in the logistics/infrastructure sector, supporting
an adequate and progressive training process for all Services.


-----

**FINANCIAL SUSTAINABILITY**

The objectives set out are ambitious but achievable and require stable
and secure financial resources. In this regard, the Defence Multi-Annual
Investment Fund has certainly made it possible to revitalise the modernisation
and renewal process of the military instrument, whose development and
consolidation will only be guaranteed through an annual allocation to the
fund itself.
Through Joint General Planning - i.e. the capability and financial planning
tool based on operational needs - it will be possible to define the resources
required to support and modernise the Services. As a result, we will have an
integrated, balanced, sustainable military instrument that is consistent with
Italy’s needs and standing, as well as with our commitments to International
Organisations.
Unfortunately, there are organisational and structural factors that limit
Defence’s ability to invest in the industrial sector, which has a high
technological coefficient capable of guaranteeing multiplicative effects on
the overall supply chain. Among the main factors that we will have to better
manage and mitigate are – among others – the procedural complexities
of the Procurement Code, the shortage of contracting personnel and the
introduction of the so-called ‘consolidated cash budget’[14], with its rigidity in
the management of investment programmes.
These critical factors are even more evident in the case of urgent acquisitions,
such as those referred to the operational theatres[15]. In the specific case of

14 Regulations requiring that the multi-year payment schedule of each undertaking be defined and adhered
to, albeit with the possibility of modification, requiring that the sums allocated be committed and spent
for each Financial Year to which they have been attested.

15 Mission Need Urgent Requirement.


-----

‘urgent procurement’, we will have to provide for regulatory adjustments and
the simplification of the criteria for contractual and accounting exceptions.
In this delicate historical moment, in which the arguably more negative
effects of the Russian-Ukrainian conflict are overlied by the effects of the
pandemic, the Services are ready to play a significant part in the Country’s
economic recovery and support activities. They can take advantage of
partnership opportunities with other ministries and public and private
entities in areas of common interest within the framework of the National
Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP).


-----

**CONCLUSIONS**

he rapid succession of historic events that have marked the
international scene in recent months, together with its contents,
define the strategic nature of this document. We are at a point of

# Tno return: future challenges can no longer be evaded, except at the price

of abdicating our primary interests and the very values of freedom and
democracy. We cannot take anything for granted, not even in the Old
Continent.
The Italian foreign policy and the values on which it is based make the
Armed Forces an important instrument to guarantee peace and international
stability, to safeguard democratic values, civil society and the dignity of
the human person. The need to participate unsparingly and to protect our
personnel in almost all the crisis areas of the ‘Wider Mediterranean’ require
us to engage in close dialogue at all levels with allied and friendly countries.
In doing so, we present ourselves for what we do: provide added value
to peace and international stability. The commitment of the Italian Armed
Forces is always viewed with favour and appreciation because our history
precedes us and we are met with confidence and friendship.
The determination to support the Armed Forces and the need to provide
them with adequate resources and attention must become a stable and
entrenched element in national public opinion. Indeed, only long-term
planning and commitment will enable us to achieve the technological
deterrence necessary to deter aggression and armed conflict, to protect our
interests and safeguard future generations. The Atlantic Alliance and the
European Union are moving forward in a cohesive manner. They generate
mutual trust and conviction, two indispensable conditions for dealing with
possible energy supply shortages and the difficult international economic
situation.


-----

We are at the beginning of a long and very demanding path. It lies on
Italy’s political and social cohesion for the years to come and on our ability
to evolve rapidly towards an entirely joint model of Armed Forces that is
deployable simultaneously in the classical, cyber, and space domains, or in
the vast cognitive environment. The relationship with industry must lead to
the production of systems and equipment with high technological content
and fully in line with Defence operational requirements.
The organisational overhaul at all levels must proceed consistently and
rapidly: modernity and technology do not wait, but require timely and
effective choices on personnel, education, infrastructure and logistics. These
are fundamental building blocks of an Armed Forces model that is projected
into the future. Failure to give timely attention to these priorities means
paying a very high price in the future, as the experience of the Ukrainian
crisis itself shows.
We are the protagonists of a historical phase that is just beginning and
that will demand unreserved commitment of dedication from us, as well as
planning and courage, with a view to ensure Italy is effective on operations
at the service of the Nation.
I am confident that Defence will be fully up to the challenges of the future
and will work successfully to stand close to the Nation, safeguard its
interests and protect its citizens, the latter being the true lodestar of the
commitment of the women and men of the Armed Forces.


-----

##### www.difesa.it


-----

###### STATO MAGGIORE

### DIFESA

ITALIAN DEFENCE GENERAL STAFF

Texts authored by:
Office of the Chief of Defence

Graphic project:
Public Information and Communication Division
Communication branch

www.difesa.it


-----

