National Security Strategy for Jamaica
Towards a Secure and Prosperous Nation

A Green Paper

Revised May 2006

Prepared by the National Security Strategy Development Working Group for the Ministry
of National Security


-----

## Table of Contents

Table of Contents …………………………………………………………………………i
FOREWORD ……………………………………………………………………… ii
MESSAGE FROM THE MINISTER OF NATIONAL
SECURITY…………………………………… ……… iii

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
……………………………………………………………………………………iv
GLOSSARY ……………………………………………………………………………viii
THE VISION FOR NATIONAL SECURITY FOR JAMAICA ………………………ix

CHAPTER 1 – STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS ………………………1
Introduction ……………………………………………………………………1

Setting the
Context ……………………………………………………………………………1
The Impact of International Geo-Politics ………………………………………2

The Global Economy …………………………………………………………3

Trans-National Organized Crime ……………………………………………3

Domestic Political Maturity and Human, Social and Economic Development 3

Global Environmental Hazards and Disasters ……………………………………3

Summary of Jamaica’s Security Concerns ………………………………………4

CHAPTER 2 – THREATS TO JAMAICA’S NATIONAL SECURITY ………………5
Threats Relating To Crime …………………………………………………… 5

Terrorism ………………………………………………………………………9

Military and Para-Military Threats ……………………………………………10

Disasters & Unsustainable Loss of Natural Resources …………………………11

Socio-Economic Threats………………………………………………………12

Key Capabilities……………………………………………………………… 16


-----

CHAPTER 3 – THE STRATEGY……………………………………………………17

The Approach
……………………………………………………………………………… 17

Jamaica’s Strategic Security Goals ………………………………………… 17

Cross-Cutting Issues ………………………………………………………… 17

Special Security Initiatives ……………………………………………………18

Action Plan for Strategic Security Goals …………………………………… 22
Goal 1 – To Reduce Violent Crime and Dismantle Organized Criminal Networks
……… 22
Goal 2 – To Strengthen the Criminal Justice System and Promote Respect for the
Rule of Law 26

Goal 3 – To Protect Jamaica from Terrorism ……………………………… 28

Goal 4 – To Protect and Control Jamaica’s Territory ……………………… 31

Goal 5 – To Strengthen the Integrity of Institutions of Democratic Government 35
Goal 6 – To Increase Jamaica’s Contribution to Regional and International
Security …………… 38

Goal 7 – To Provide the Environment for a Stable Economy, and an Effective

Delivery of Social Services……………………………… 40

Goal 8 – To Protect Jamaica’s Natural Resources and Reduce the Risks of
Disasters…………… 43

CHAPTER 4 – COORDINATING AND MONITORING MECHANISMS …………47
Conceptual Framework …………………………………………………… 47

National Security Strategy Implementation Unit ……………………………… 47

Specific Mechanisms ……………………………………………………… 48

Coordination of Intelligence ……………………………………………………48

Enhancing Programmes to Promote Community Safety and Security ……… 48

The Public’s Involvement in Implementing the NSS ………………………… 48

Funding Priorities …………………………………………………………… 49


-----

REFRENCES
……………………………………………………………………………………… 50

ANNEX A – NSS Development Process including Methodology 1
[Please Click here to view the ANNEX - A diagram (ANNEX A)](http://www.cabinet.gov.jm/docs/pdf/NSS_DOCS/ANNEX_A.pdf)

ANNEX B – NSS Schedule 1
[Please Click here to view the ANNEX – B diagram (ANNEX B)](http://www.cabinet.gov.jm/docs/pdf/NSS_DOCS/ANNEX_B.pdf)

ANNEX C – Committees 1
ANNEX D – Stakeholders Consulted 4

ANNEX E – Matrix – Responsibilities
[Please Click here to View The ANNEX – E diagram (ANNEX E)](http://www.cabinet.gov.jm/docs/pdf/NSS_DOCS/ANNEX_E.pdf)

ANNEX F – Jamaica’s Future Security Sector
[Please Click here to View The ANNEX – F diagram (ANNEX F)](http://www.cabinet.gov.jm/docs/pdf/NSS_DOCS/ANNEX_F.pdf)


-----

## Foreword

**Prime Minister The Most Hon. Percival J. Patterson, O.N. P.C. Q.C. M.P.**

The foremost responsibility of the Government is to provide for a secure and safe
environment conducive to the wellbeing of the citizens and the development of the
country. We face as a nation the monumental task to rid our country of crime and
violence. In addressing this most urgent matter the Government is aware that the issue of
National Security encompasses many more factors than domestic crime and violence.
However, by addressing the multifaceted aspects of national security, crime and violence
should also be contained.


-----

This document presents the Government’s overarching policies on national security
matters through a process of a strategic environmental analysis relating to security,
describing the threats that work against the full achievement of the country’s security
goals, determining Jamaica’s security priorities in relation to the capabilities and policies
required to counter those threats, and establishing the responsibilities, structures, and
timelines for implementation. Careful attention has been given to providing just enough
detail for implementers to have sufficient guidance to understand their responsibilities
and how they relate to others involved. The National Security Strategy aims to enhance
coordination and cooperation among the different ministries and national security
agencies as the new security environment results in a blurring of traditional agency
boundaries.

Whilst maintaining its sovereignty, Jamaica will continue to meet its international
obligations and play its full role in contributing to the security and development of its
partners in the Caribbean, Americas and the global international community. This
includes providing for substantial linkages with the evolving CARICOM security
initiatives endorsed by the Heads of Government in July 2005, bilateral and multi-lateral
security arrangements. Together with such partners, it aims to eradicate transnational
organized crime, illicit trafficking and international terrorism and move towards
international peace and  sustainable development.

The Ministry of National Security (MNS) will not lead on all aspects of the NSS
implementation, as some of the capabilities that impact on security are outside the direct
scope of the MNS. Most Ministries and agencies have specific direct or supporting roles
in implementing and sustaining this security strategy. Further, notwithstanding the
Government’s role and responsibility to secure the nation, this cannot be achieved
without the same focus from every citizen of Jamaica. Now is the time for all of us   to
make a stand together.

In fulfilling the foremost responsibility of providing for a secure and safe environment
conducive to the wellbeing of the citizens and the development of the country, the
Government is committed to making all reasonable effort to provide the necessary
resources, the strategic guidance, policies and legislation as determined by the NSS and
supporting analyses. It is then up to all of us as citizens, individually and collectively, to
play our part in ensuring the safe and secure environment for which we yearn.

The Most Hon.
Percival J. Patterson, O.N. P.C. Q.C. M.P.
Prime Minister


-----

# Message from the Minister of National Security

**Dr. The Hon. Peter Phillips, MP**

National security may be described as the measures taken by a State to ensure its
survival, security and protection of its interests. Sometimes national security is
considered to be synonymous with defence from external threats in particular. In reality,
and particularly in the Jamaican context, national security includes the maintenance of
armed forces; maintenance of order by non-   military agencies, including   emergency
preparedness; creation of resilience and redundancy in national infrastructure;
maintenance of intelligence services to deter threats; protection of sensitive information,
and maintenance of law and order internally through the police and other arms of the
Criminal Justice System.


-----

A National Security Strategy (NSS) is crucial at this time to pull together the several
initiatives already implemented by the Government and to put in place other mechanisms
that are required to ensure a comprehensive, multifaceted approach to Jamaica’s security
issues.

This NSS integrates Jamaica’s major security goals, policies, responsibilities and actions
into a cohesive whole, ‘…to provide an environment in which Jamaicans experience
freedom and the other benefits guaranteed by the Constitution’ (Vision), can realize their
full potential and enjoy a good quality of life. This NSS is an overall master plan for
accomplishing national security goals through the combined use of the instruments of
national power, which are political, economic, social and military in nature. It provides
overall strategic guidance and establishes the limits within which security decisions can
be made at a lower level. The intention is to make individuals and organizations more
aware of their roles as part of a broader security sector and to better coordinate their
activities within resource constraints.

The NSS is not a crime fighting plan or a blueprint for military action in defence of the
Nation. The NSS does not replace current initiatives against crime and violence but is
supportive of these and all other initiatives aimed at ensuring a safe and secure national
environment. At the highest policy level, it is designed to provide for cooperation and
collaboration on national endeavors for more coordinated actions through optimum
utilization of resources for the best possible results. At the same time, the NSS
recognizes Jamaica’s obligations to current CARICOM security initiatives, bilateral and
multi-national arrangements.

Currently, the local police and military tend to be seen as the only agencies responsible
for national security although there are other agencies, such as Customs and Immigration,
which traditionally have not been formally recognized as a part of the national security
apparatus. The NSS will seek to build a more integrated and cohesive national security
network encompassing most ministries and several agencies. Some of these will have
lead and/or coordinating or supporting roles in the implementation of the NSS generally
and in the achievement of the strategic security goals in particular.

It is expected that all Government organizations identified as having a part to play in
Jamaica’s national security will embrace this NSS, critically examine its directives and
conduct their own internal assessment of its implications on their roles and structure, and
will take the necessary actions required to contribute to national security efforts. It is also
expected that the citizens of Jamaica will now further appreciate the important role they
have to play in their own security and the security of their fellowman.

Dr. the Hon. Peter Phillips, MP
Minister of National Security


-----

# Executive Summary

Security is a public good to be delivered by the state through its agents and institutions.
The vision of the Government of Jamaica for national security is to establish a “safe and
secure environment in which it can focus on achieving a prosperous, democratic, peaceful
and dynamic society which upholds the fulfillment of human rights, dignity for all
persons, and build continual social progress based on shared values and principles of
partnership…” In essence, the vision is for all Jamaicans to enjoy a better quality of life
and realize their full potential.

National security issues greatly affect the nation’s chances of achieving all of its social
and economic goals. These issues also have local, regional and international dimensions.
Jamaica must compete within a global economy that demands that goods and services
from this country be internationally competitive. Open trading  practices must be
embraced and the smooth  transit of goods and movement of persons facilitated through
its ports.

The trading systems are at risk due to the threat of illicit movement and proliferation of
small arms and light weapons. The trafficking of arms and ammunition is also known to
be an integral  element of the illegal drug trade. This is of  particular concern, because
it has a direct bearing on the level of violence and crimes involving assault. And, a
parallel system of enforcement based upon the use of unlawful force has developed to
protect the lucrative gains from these illegal activities.

Not only has the level of violent crime increased over time, but the pattern has also
changed and a higher degree of organization and coordination has emerged.

Over the decades, the police-community relationship has broken down and an unhealthy
mutual     distrust prevails, with a frequent cry of “we want justice” from citizens. The
increased frequency of mob killings is indicative of the growing lack of trust or
confidence in our Criminal Justice System and respect for the law.

The country is also grappling with an extremely high homicide rate. These homicides are
concentrated in known areas, but the phenomenon of murderous conflicts is robbing
Jamaica of   thousands of citizens in the prime of their youth. The continuous growth in
the number of violent incidents causes many Jamaicans at home to live in fear, and
influences those in the Diaspora to abandon their dream of resettling on the ‘rock’.  It is
now conceded that Jamaica has spawned a culture of violence in its most negative form,
which is abhorrent to its values and stands in the way of every kind of social progress.
These  developments and the breakdown of social mores have led to a widespread
disrespect for the Rule of Law and the devaluation of human life.


-----

Essentially, threats to Jamaica include those relating to crime, terrorism, military and
Para-military  concerns, disasters and unsustainable loss of  natural resources, and
socio-economic issues. Following a careful analysis of the many threats to national
security and their associated vulnerabilities, it was determined that there are fifteen key
capabilities that are required to counter or  mitigate the extent of the country’s exposure
to these threats. These are the capacity to:

- Control entry and exit through ports of entry and coastline/land of Jamaica

- Monitor, regulate and control use of Jamaica’s airspace, coastal waters and
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ)

- Ensure an effective CJS

- Prevent crime (including armed groups an insurgents)

- Counter corruption to ensure public ownership of and confidence in the CJS

- Regulate and control arms

- Dismantle organized criminal networks

- Gather, assess and use effective intelligence (major cross cutting priority)

- Plan to limit vulnerability and respond effectively to disasters and unsustainable

degradation of resources (CJS)

- Maintain a stable and healthy economy

- Address social and economic causal factors of alienation and crime

- Implement public education programmes (important overall cross-cutting issue)

- Ensure adequate healthcare and education

- Influence regional and international policies and activities (important cross
cutting priority)

- Deter, counter or defeat ‘Traditional Military Threats’

Many initiatives have been developed to deal with the scourge of crime and violence with
varying degrees of success; but there is now full recognition that national security
encompasses much more than concerns about crime and violence, as critical as that is.


-----

National security may be described as the measures taken by a state to ensure its survival,
security and protection of its interests. In the Jamaican context, national security takes on
a broader meaning beyond military defence from external threats. It encompasses civil
defence measures, including emergency preparedness, and the maintenance of law and
order internally through the police and other arms of the criminal justice system.

The current challenging security environment locally, coupled with the threat of
international terrorism, results in a blurring of traditional agency boundaries with many
entities now recognizing that they have a role to play in promoting national security.
Hence, there is a need to enhance coordination and cooperation among the different
ministries and national security agencies.

The National Security Strategy (NSS) cohesively integrates the country’s major security
policies, goals, responsibilities and actions into an overall master plan for the fulfillment
of the vision for Jamaica. The NSS outlines the combined use of the political, economic,
social, informational and security instruments of national power, including the military. It
clarifies the institutional framework within which the armed forces and civil institutions
of the state will coordinate their activities to create an integrated and cohesive national
security network to safeguard national interests. It also prescribes the complementary
roles and   responsibilities of public and private sectors, as well as members of civil
society in supporting national security.

All Jamaicans must play a part in safeguarding the country’s national security. Certainly,
the JDF and JCF have critical roles to play that are central to the effective
implementation of the NSS. Notwithstanding, all Government ministries, departments
and agencies (MDAs) should critically examine their directives and conduct their own
internal assessment of the implications of their roles and structures.

Individual citizens, the private sector and members of civil society groups are invited to
join in this process of transformation and take the necessary steps to contribute to the
achievement of the national security goals.

The NSS approaches this bold process of transformation in a three-fold way, as it
requires the transformation first of attitudes, then processes and systems and finally
practices.

The NSS aims to TRANSFORM ATTITUDES to promote security awareness and zero
tolerance. National security is everyone’s business! National security must have first
priority and a culture of zero tolerance for disorderly, corrupt and criminal conduct
promoted.

The NSS aims to TRANSFORM PROCESSES to achieve unity of effort. Existing
mechanisms must be developed and strengthened to encourage cooperation and
collaboration for multi-agency security efforts locally and with international partners.


-----

The NSS aims to TRANSFORM PRACTICES for greater efficiency. Capacity must be
built and strengthened in all areas of need and the sustained provision of appropriate and
affordable resources ensured.

The National Security Strategy has identified eight Strategic Security Goals to effectively
address the challenges currently facing the nation. The goals are to:

1. Reduce violent crime and dismantle organized criminal networks

2. Strengthen the criminal justice system and promote respect for rule of law

3. Protect Jamaica from terrorism

4. Protect and control Jamaican territory

5. Strengthen the Integrity of Institutions of Democratic Government

6. Increase Jamaica’s Contribution to Regional and International Security

7. Provide the Environment for a Stable Economy and an Effective Delivery of
Social Services

8. Protect Jamaica’s Natural Resources and Reduce the Risks of Disasters

Matters relating to the effective analysis and use of intelligence, and the enhancement of
public education and awareness were also identified as crosscutting issues.

An Action Plan has been developed for each of the Strategic Security Goals. The plan
outlines the specific capabilities, objectives and actions required by named Ministries,
Departments and Agencies which contribute significantly to security within given
timeframes. An Implementation Matrix is given as an aide in Annex E to allow for the
swift identification of primary and supporting responsibilities. As a priority, there are
five Special Security Initiatives which underpin the thrust of the NSS in establishing that
national security is everyone’s business. These are:

1. Strengthening of the country’s national intelligence system

2. Conducting strategic reviews of critical national security bodies and accelerating
modernization efforts

3. Establishing a National Task Force to strengthen the overall effectiveness of
Jamaica’s Criminal Justice System and to review and strengthen Jamaican Laws
and the Law-Making Processes

4. Enhancing programmes to promote community safety and security


-----

5. Promoting a National Strategic Communications Programme to enhance public
information and Awareness, solidarity and support relating to the NSS

The National Security Council (NSC) chaired by the Prime Minister will be responsible
for the implementation of the NSS.  The NSC will report to the Cabinet, and the Cabinet
to the Parliament for public account.

A National Security Strategy Implementation Unit (NSSIU), to be appointed by the NSC,
and established in the OPM will undertake the day-to-day coordination and drive the
transformation process on behalf of the NSC. However, these government mechanisms
alone will not lead to the transformation in Jamaica that all of its citizens desire.

Funding priorities are mentioned, but the   development of detailed security related
budgets remains the responsibility of the implementing bodies as they incorporate
security projects into their annual corporate plans, and ensure that they are implemented
through the performance   management system.

Stronger partnerships must be developed between citizens, the private sector, civil society
and all Government organizations involved in delivering security services. Every member
of the public has a key role to play in helping to make Jamaica a safer and more secure
place to live, visit and enjoy. This requires greater public involvement and support of
law enforcement activities and increased police accountability toward a relationship that
is more directly   responsive to the citizens.

The underlying message of the NSS is that National Security is everyone’s business; and
everyone must get involved.

**Glossary**

Civil Defence - Connected with ordinary citizens and organizations to protect the
lives and welfare of the people as opposed to measures adopted by
civil organization.

Civil Society - Persons or organizations that comprise but are not limited to nongovernmental, non-political or non-commercial enterprises.

Community Policing - An approach to policing in which police, citizens and community
groups work together in an accepted partnership to solve mutually
agreed policing problems

Diversion Programmes - Programmes designated to overlook stereotypes and provide

alternate means of gainful employment for persons normally
engaged in illegal activities.


-----

First Responders - Persons from authorized MDAs who are legally tasked with
providing the requisite medical assistance and/or technical
expertise at the of a disaster, accident, or life-threatening
situations.

Garrison Community  - Political enclave that largely supports a major political party and
where state authority is generally undermined

Governance - Exercise of power in the economic, political and administrative
management of a country’s resources.

Illegal Paramilitary Groups - Groups of civilians who are organized in military fashion
and are lacking the legitimate authority.

Industrial Property - Inventions, trademarks, industrial designs, stock and
interest- bearing securities of industrial companies.

Intellectual Property - Original creative work manifested in a tangible form
(inventions, literary and artistic works, symbols, names, images
and designs used in commerce( that can be legally protected by a
patent, trademark or copyright.

Narco-trafficking - Illegal trade in narcotics and psychotropic substances.

National Security
Strategy (NSS) - A master plan providing strategic guidelines for the accomplishing
of national security goals in support of national interests

Recidivism - Tendency of criminal offenders to relapse into their previous

undesirable and illegal type of behaviour.

Restorative Justice - An approach to justice that emphasizes restitution, forgiveness and
restoration of persons where a wrong has been committed.

Retributive Justice - Something done or given as punishment for a crime or deed that
has done.

Security Forces - Term normally used to refer to the JDF and JCF when working
together on joint operations.

Transnational Threats - Threats that transcend national boundaries.

Vulnerable Groups - Groups of persons who are susceptible to social malaise as a result
of their age, disability, or the stigma that is associated with there

lifestyles.


-----

Zero tolerance - Absence of any leniency or exception in the enforcement of a law,

rule or regulation.

# Acronyms

AAJ – Airports Authority of Jamaica

ATF – Action Task Force

CAA – Civil Aviation Authority

CCN – Constabulary Communication Network

CJS – Criminal Justice System

CWC
2007 – Cricket World Cup 2007

DCS – Department of Correctional Services

DPP – Director of Public Prosecution

FAT – Financial Action Task Force

FID – Financial Investigations Division

JCF – Jamaica Constabulary Force

JDF – Jamaica Defence Force

JIS – Jamaica Information Service

MAJ – Maritime Authority of Jamaica

MCST – Ministry of Commerce, Science and Technology

MDAs – Ministries, Departments and Agencies of Government

MEYC – Ministry of Education, Youth and Culture

MFAFT – Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade

MFP – Ministry of Finance and Planning

MIT – Ministry of Industry and Tourism


-----

MLE – Ministry of Land and the Environment

MLGCDS Ministry of Local Government, Community Development and Sport

MLSS – Ministry of Labour and Social Security

MNS – Ministry of National Security

MOA – Ministry of Agriculture

MoD – Minister of Development

MoI – Minister of Information

MOJ – Ministry of Justice

MOH – Ministry of Health

MTW – Ministry of Transportation and Works

MWH – Ministry of Water and Housing

NBC – Nuclear Biological and Chemical

NCC – National Contracts Commission

NIA – National Intelligence Agency

NIB – National Intelligence Bureau

NIIA – National Independent Investigative Authority

NSS – National Security Strategy

NSSG – National Security Strategy Steering Group

NSWG – National Security Strategy Working Group

OCG – Office of the Contractor General

ODPEM Office of Disaster Preparedness and Emergency Management

OPM – Office of the Prime Minister

PAJ – Port Authority of Jamaica

PSRA – Private Security Regulation Authority


-----

SSG – Strategic Security Goal

SSI – Special Security Initiative

SALW– Small Arms and Light Weapons

SDC – Social Development Commission

## A Vision for National Security for Jamaica

Jamaica aims to establish a safe and secure environment
in which it can focus on achieving a prosperous,
democratic, peaceful and dynamic society which upholds
the fulfilment of human rights, dignity for all persons,
and builds continual social progress based on
shared values and principles of partnership.
It aims to provide an environment in which Jamaicans
can experience freedom and the other
benefits guaranteed by the Constitution.

# Chapter 1 – Strategic Environmental Analysis

- Introduction

- Setting the Context

- The Impact of International Geo-Politics

- The Global Economy

- Trans-National Crime

- Domestic Political Maturity and Human, Social and Economic Development

- Global Environmental Hazards and Disasters

- Summary of Jamaica’s Security Concerns


-----

# Introduction

In keeping with its vision for national security, Jamaica aims to establish a “safe and
secure  environment in which the country can focus on achieving a prosperous,
democratic, peaceful and dynamic society that will uphold the fulfillment of human
rights, dignity for all persons, and build continual social progress based on shared values
and principles of partnership…”

National security embraces all of the measures taken by a state to ensure its survival,
security and protection of its interests. Sometimes national security is considered to be
synonymous with defence from external threats, but in the Jamaican context, national
security includes the maintenance of armed forces, the provision of human security, civil
defence measures and emergency preparedness, creation of resilience in national
infrastructure, maintenance of intelligence services to detect and deter threats, protection
of sensitive information, and maintenance of law and order internally.

The National Security Strategy (NSS) seeks to integrate the country’s major security
policies, goals, responsibilities and actions into a cohesive whole, “to provide an
environment in which Jamaicans experience freedom and the other  benefits guaranteed
by the Constitution.” The aim is for all Jamaicans to realize their full potential and enjoy
a better quality of life. This NSS is an overall master plan for the fulfillment of the vision
for Jamaica through the combined use of political, economic, social, informational and
security instruments of national power. It clarifies the   institutional framework within
which the armed forces, law enforcement and civil institutions of the state will coordinate
their activities to create an integrated and cohesive national security    network to
safeguard Jamaica’s National Interests, as well as to prescribe the complementary roles
and responsibilities of citizens and civic groups in supporting national security.
Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDA) identified, as having a part to
play in Jamaica’s national security will embrace this NSS, critically examine its
directives and conduct their own internal assessment of its implications on their roles and
structures. Likewise, individual  citizens and members of civil society groups must
examine themselves and everyone concerned must take the necessary actions required to
contribute to the achievement of the national security goals. The methodology used, and
stakeholders involved in its development, are shown in Annex A.


-----

**Setting the Context**

Having attained political independence, the task of succeeding generations was to ‘secure
economic independence’ as perceived by the Right Excellent Norman Manley. The
changes in the new global economy have caused that vision to be adjusted to reflect
economic inter-dependence. National achievements over the four decades of
independence are to be consolidated and appropriate measures instituted to protect them.

Policies intended to defend and protect the national interest, Jamaican values, and what is
noble in the Jamaican way of life have to be formulated within the context of the reality
of both internal and external environments. This strategic environmental analysis must
take into account not only the state of human, social and economic development in the
country, but also the impact of international geo-politics, the global economy, transnational organized crime, and global environmental hazards.

The purpose of this analysis is to synthesize what are those things that need to be
protected from the vagaries of the environment. It will confirm what ought to be held up
as strategic security goals and identify the sources of the principal threats. In subsequent
chapters, detailed examination of the threats and gaps in the capacity of the State to
neutralize them will unearth the areas in which the State may be considered vulnerable.
The reality of resource constraints demands optimization in task organization, resource
allocation and coordination. The NSS articulates how Government intends to employ the
instruments at its disposal to fulfill what is its most important role of protecting and
ensuring the safety of its citizens, and also how Jamaica will continue to meet its
obligations of being a responsible member of the international community.
Jamaicans at home and in the diaspora desire a homeland which is characterized by the
rule of law, where the sanctity of life is treasured and  residents and visitors are able to
enjoy the fruits of their legitimate endeavours without undue   exposure to hostile
foreign interests, human greed, mal-administration by the state and unmitigated
environmental hazards.

**_Jamaica Places High Value On:_**

- A peaceful and mutually respectful society where individuals are safe and able to
exercise their rights and freedoms responsibly;

- A strong, diverse and stable domestic economy;

- The democratic ideal in its systems of governance;

- Harmonious international relations; and

- Its natural resources, natural physical beauty and the cultural heritage that is the
distinctive and authentic Jamaican identity.


-----

**The Impact of International Geo-Politics**

Jamaica is faced with the reality of being a small, developing island state, positioned on
the ‘third border’ of the world’s most powerful nation and largest economy. Once a
centre of world trade, Jamaica with its excellent sea ports and hub for  air traffic, retains
strategic importance for trans-atlantic trade, and is a vital link between South and North
America.  Jamaica has maintained a significant influence relative to its size in
international discourses on issues such as the International Economic Order, the Law of
the Sea, the struggle against racism, and poverty. Jamaican culture and varied artistic
forms, its language, sporting prowess, and cuisine have established the Jamaican Brand
internationally. Within the  CARICOM region Jamaica has often been called on to offer
leadership in negotiations on behalf of the grouping and in the arena of combined Peace
Keeping Operations involving the armed forces of member States.

**_Implications for National Security_**

- Jamaica is in a position to capitalize on areas of mutual security interests shared
with our traditional partners, CARICOM, Canada, United Kingdom and the
United States of America, and with our new partners in the wider Americas.

- It is in the national interest to maintain a strong lobby on security, anti-terrorism
and defence matters with decision makers in Washington, Ottawa and London,
and in other areas of mutual security interests.

- The country’s air and sea ports are strategic national assets which must be kept
operating at all costs. Redundant capabilities therefore have to be provided to
sustain passenger and cargo flows. The use of these facilities for the transit of
contraband and the movement of terrorists must be denied.

- Jamaica should be prepared to continue to provide leadership within CARICOM
on defence and peacekeeping initiatives, and security cooperation.

**The Global Economy**

Jamaica must compete within a global economy which demands that goods and services
from this country be internationally competitive. Jamaica must also embrace open
trading practices and facilitate the smooth transit of goods and persons through its ports.
The demand for primary products has been steadily declining and so too the value of low
skill and unskilled labour.  While there has been significant tightening of immigration
policies by our neighbours, attractive opportunities for the professional and highly skilled
segments of the labour force have grown. This has contributed to a ‘brain drain’ with
adverse effects on the nation’s health, and educational sectors, as well as managerial
competency. Major conflicts in oil producing countries have influenced significant
upward movement in the price of oil from which Jamaica has not escaped despite
favourable agreements with our main suppliers of oil.


-----

The impact of regional economic arrangements, such as the Caribbean Single Market
Economy (CSME), that permits the freer movements of  CARICOM nationals will
introduce new challenges.

**_Implications for National Security_**

- Jamaica’s alliances with its primary suppliers of oil, capital goods and basic
commodities such as food are of strategic importance and should be broadened
and protected.

- The integrity of our exports must be protected from contamination by contraband.

- Jamaica may seek to take advantage of the international demand for competent
security personnel, or teams, for United Nations peace keeping and other duties
by having available trained personnel who are a part of the regular security
apparatus.

     - The country’s border control concerns will be impacted by the need to
balance security with freer movement.

**Trans-National Organized Crime**

The growth in free trade and the dynamics of information technology have made it easier
for organized criminal networks to extend their reach across borders.  Communication
links for the movement of commodities and financial networks of international commerce
also facilitate the movement of contraband and money laundering. Drug syndicates
involved in the trans-national trade between drug producers from South America and
drug consuming countries of North America and Europe, seek out intermediaries and
facilitators where security systems for their detection and prosecution are weak or
corruptible.

**_Implications for National Security_**

- Jamaica must be transformed into a hard target for drug syndicates in both its
practical capabilities and its image, by establishing appropriate counter-measures and by
developing the means to prevent penetration of Jamaica by transnational criminal
networks, and the perpetration of crime by Jamaican nationals within criminal networks
abroad.

- Jamaica must become the most difficult zone for the transit of narcotics and the
proceeds of crime in the region.


-----

**Domestic Political Maturity and Human, Social and Economic Development**

There has been some convergence on the part of the major political parties contending for
office, but the legacy of the period of sharp ideological differences still lingers among
party loyalists. Enclaves of dominant one party loyalty remain, although internal
cohesion has weakened significantly leading to fragmented communities with informal
power centres that are in frequent conflict and are not accountable to traditional authority.

Social progress has been retarded in many poor urban communities that are characterized
by squalor, high levels of poverty, unemployment, illiteracy, corner crews, dominant
gangs, easily accessible firearms and ammunition, fatherless children, and the
inconsistent delivery of public services.  Over the decades, the police-community
relationship has broken down and an unhealthy mutual distrust prevails, with the
frequent cry of “we want justice” from residents. The unstable and often violent
environment in these communities has been hostile to formal commercial activity, and
the more progressive young people with the potential to offer constructive leadership tend
to relocate at the  earliest opportunity.

Notwithstanding the concentration in some known pockets, the phenomenon of
murderous conflicts is robbing Jamaica of thousands of citizens in the prime of their
youth.  The continuous growth in incidents of violence causes the majority of Jamaicans
at home to live in fear, and many of those of the diaspora to abandon the dream of
resettling on the ‘rock’. It is now conceded that Jamaica has spawned a culture of
violence in its most negative form which is contrary to our values and stands in the way
of every kind of social progress.

**_Implication for National Security_**

- It is vital to the survival of Jamaica that the phenomenon of murderous conflicts is
stopped and that communities are liberated from the dominance of violent armed gangs.


-----

# Global Environmental Hazards and  Disasters 

The effects of global warming and other phenomena that could lead to rising sea levels
do not escape the island of Jamaica. The Caribbean is one of the few regions with active
volcanoes and although tsunamis may be rare, the region is not immune to them. Climate
change could significantly affect rainfall patterns impacting agricultural production and
food security. Hurricanes have been impacting the region with increased regularity and
intensity and even when spared direct hits, Jamaica can occasionally expect severe effects
from these systems. A satisfactory solution for nuclear waste disposal in this region of the
hemisphere is still being sought. In the meantime, shipments of nuclear wastes may
transit through the region, and without the capacity to detect this, Jamaica could become
exposed to the potential threats associated with the transportation of these hazardous
substances.

**_Implications for National Security_**

- The scientific community in Jamaica must be challenged to keep the State
informed as to the real and potential dangers as they develop and also to propose
appropriate mitigating measures.

- Jamaica must remain engaged with international organizations with an interest
and the capacity to track the movement of hazardous materials.

- Zoning regulations have to be publicized and enforced to protect the population
from the effects of natural and man made disasters.

**Summary of Jamaica’s Security Concerns**

In the context of the current strategic environment, national security concerns centre
around several themes, which will lead to the identification of Strategic Security Goals
(SSGs). The themes are summarized below:

- How does the state stop murderous conflicts, protect its key assets and reassure
the populace?

- How does the state prevent trans-national criminal syndicates and terrorists from
using its land, air and sea space to facilitate their activities?

- How does the state eliminate from the social and business environments, the
extraneous factors that negatively impact quality of life and normal market
forces?

- How should Jamaica’s exposure to disasters be mitigated, and its natural
resources be better protected?


-----

- How much more should Jamaica capitalize on mutual security interests with
international partners and continue to offer within the region, leadership on
defence, security and peacekeeping matters?

- How best should the State organize, equip and utilize its security apparatus for
greater effectiveness?

A detailed examination of the more significant threats existing in the environment is
presented in the next chapter.


-----

# Chapter 2– Threats to Jamaica’s National Security

**•** **Crime**

**•** **Terrorism**

**•** **Military and Para-Military**

**•** **Disasters & Unsustainable Loss of Natural Resources**

**•** **Socio-Economic**

**•** **Key Capabilities**

Threats to national security greatly affect Jamaica’s chances of achieving its social and
economic goals. These threats have local, regional and international implications.

Of critical importance is the country’s vulnerability to these threats. The lack of
structured and coordinated intelligence by the various law enforcement arms of the State
leaves an unacceptable gap in the defence of law and order, which is exploited by those
who do not share in the national interest.

**Threats Relating To Crime**

**The Rule of Law is at risk of collapsing**

The level of crime has increased over the years and consequently the pattern of criminal
activities reflects a greater degree of organization and coordination. The situation has
worsened by what appears to be an increased tolerance of crime and criminals within the
wider society.

It should be noted that many define social status by the amount of wealth that one
possesses. However, very little thought is given to the source of wealth. To gain wealth
and social status by any means has propelled persons into illegal  activities, which are
usually financially attractive.

In order to protect the gains from these illegal activities, an accompanying system of
enforcement has developed where extreme force is used to  protect turf, routes and
profits as well as to ensure loyalty.

These developments and the breakdown of social norms have led to a widespread
disrespect for the Rule of Law and the devaluation of human life. The extremely high
homicide rate which the  country is experiencing has to be viewed in this context.

A generally violent environment along with a Criminal Justice System (CJS) which
works slowly, causes two things: (a) the perception that justice cannot be guaranteed by
the State and (b) that the only solution for even relatively minor matters is death.


-----

The high level of violence encourages more violence. The slow working of the CJS leads
to a lack of confidence in it, and the perception that some persons are above the law,
which further weakens the respect for law. The increased    frequency of mob killings
is an indication of a growing lack of trust and respect for the law, and lack of confidence
in the CJS.

**Threats Relating To Crime**

- The Rule of law is at risk

- The High Levels of Violence, Particularly Armed Crime and Homicide

- Organized Crime

- Trafficking in Narcotics

- Illicit Flow of Arms and Ammunition

- Gangs and Gang Activities/Warfare

- The Effects of Violence on Communities

- Extortion

- Kidnapping

- The State of Remand Facilities and Correctional Centres

- Community Orders

- Endemic Corruption

- White Collar Crime

- Human Trafficking

- Cyber Crimes

Abusive behaviour and the use of excessive force by members of the police and the
military have not aided the efforts of building respect for law and order. These types of
actions have contributed to a growing sense of alienation among some persons in the
society who feel that they are being denied justice. The sense of  alienation manifests
itself through illegal road blocks as well as open displays of disrespect and distrust in the
constituted authority. As a result, parallel systems of ‘justice’ have evolved with the
assent of the dons and informal area leaders, as well as vigilante justice and arbitrary
community enforcement.

The CJS is perceived as being oppressive especially to the less affluent and this
perception is perpetuated when the delivery of justice is slow.

Regarding the Witness Protection Programme, no participant has ever been lost but there
still remains a lack of confidence in the programme as witnesses, albeit some outside of
the programme, have been intimidated and have met untimely deaths.

What is required is an ethos of sustained investigation that will lead to the successful
prosecution of criminals. It is this outcome that will better engender respect for the Rule
of Law.
To prevent the collapse of the Rule of Law, Jamaica needs sufficient capacity to monitor,
regulate, investigate, prosecute and penalize  criminal activities, with special focus in
the area of financial crime, particularly money laundering.


-----

**The High Levels of Violence, Particularly Armed Crime and Homicide**

The Report of the National Committee on Crime and Violence acknowledges that there
are no fewer than ten classifications of personal crimes that are continually in the news
and to which a significant number of Jamaicans would consider themselves vulnerable1.
These are property crimes and crimes against the person which include  murder, sexual
assault, aggravated assault and  robbery. The statistics on violent deaths since the
decade of the 1970s have revealed a grim picture; up to April 2004 over 19,600 cases of
homicide have been recorded. This high incidence of homicide and violence is
attributable primarily to political tribalism, domestic violence, drug/gang related
conflicts, reprisals and mob killings, and breakdown in the social order.

**Techniques of Organized Crime**

**•** **Learns quickly from its defeats, and is competitive**

**•** **Moves assets quickly and is skilled at exploiting the laundering**
**opportunities of the global financial and property markets**

**•** **Aided by technology and the speed of communications**

**•** **Has simple, if any, rules; ruthlessness and success can easily go together. It**
**threatens or uses violence**

**•** **Corrupts law enforcement, governments and depletes a weak state’s**
**resources.**

**Organized Crime**

In a globalized environment organized criminal syndicates are characterized as ‘stateless,
decentralized networks that move freely, quickly and stealthily across borders, and are
powerfully  motivated by either religious and political goals or enormous greed and
financial gains, to commit acts that threaten global security’2.

The Caribbean manifestation of criminal networks, at present, is deemed to be motivated
by greed and financial gains. The trafficking of illegal drugs, small arms and people has
netted enormous profits for a minority at substantial costs for the majority in the
Caribbean. Jamaican  officials have acknowledged that the drug trade nurtures the
violence and lawlessness pervading the society. If allowed to continue and if left
unchecked, the very survival of the State will be at grave risk. Where organized crime
succeeds, the State will ultimately fail; “…as drug cartels, street gangs and warlords
move from hierarchical to ‘internetted’ international criminal actors, they pose an
increasingly insidious threat to the   legitimacy and even solvency to the State as they
are refining their ability to co-opt, corrupt and challenge State institutions”3.


-----

**Illicit Trafficking in Narcotics**

The illicit drug trade in Jamaica is part of a wider international network. The geographic
location of Jamaica makes the island attractive to international traffickers who exploit
this location and have made the island one of the key cocaine trafficking routes for South
American narcotics en route to North America and Europe. The use of maritime vessels
provides the primary mode for smuggling large quantities of cocaine through the region.
While go-fast boats are common conveyances for the traffickers, bulk cargo freighters
and containerized cargo ships are vulnerable to exploitation by drug smugglers.
Additionally the traffickers also employ the use of single and twin-engine aircraft to land
at both clandestine and unprotected airstrips or to drop cocaine on land or sea for
collection by vehicles and vessels. Couriers also provide another mode of smuggling
smaller quantities via commercial flights leaving the region for Europe and North
America.

Efforts to protect the island and its citizens from the drug trade should include strategies
to reduce the level of demand. The need for a comprehensive and integrated strategy that
deals with both supply and demand is critical in light of the strategy of South American
cocaine traffickers to increasingly pay Caribbean drug traffickers in kind, leading to
increased distribution and consumption of cocaine in the region. The evidence from
seizures      indicates that traffickers are seeking to establish a Caribbean transit route
for synthetic drugs into North America. The possibility exists that the   traffickers may
also use these drugs to pay local smugglers and thus increase the distribution and
consumption of these drugs in the region.


-----

**Illicit Flow of Arms and Ammunition**

The illicit movement and proliferation of small arms and light weapons are of particular
concern and have a direct bearing on the levels of violence and crimes involving assault.
The trafficking of arms and ammunition is an integral element of the illegal drug trade.
The availability of large numbers of arms and ammunition poses a direct threat to
national security by the mere fact that there are so many of these weapons in the hands of
unauthorized persons.

The sources of illicit arms range from illegal  trafficking and smuggling from overseas,
the    purchase or rental of these arms locally to theft from both licensed and unlicensed
firearm holders, and to a lesser extent local manufacturing (home-made). The process of
issuing firearm licences is corrupt, the result of which is that persons of questionable
character have received legal firearms.

As an island state, the country needs to ensure that its borders are not porous. Although
manpower and equipment have an impact on the capacity to secure the borders, effective
vigilance by the State agents entrusted with border security at authorized air and sea ports
can have a significant effect. There should also be sufficient monitoring of nonauthorized entry points. Adequate intelligence regarding trafficking, purchases and
rentals of firearms as well as adequate security of firearms by licensed holders will help
to eliminate Jamaica’s vulnerability to this threat.

There is also concern about the adequacy with which private security firms are monitored
especially as it relates to the potential misuse of arms and ammunition held by them.
This misuse could occur either because of criminal intent, simple negligence or the
arming of persons who are not sufficiently trained to handle firearms.

**Gangs and Gang Activities/Warfare**

A 1998 study4 of Jamaican gangs clearly states that it is a myth to believe that gangs and
dons serve a positive social function in the communities in which they operate. The
value system of these groups constitutes a sub-culture of violence which is often used as
a rite of passage. ‘Making a duppy’ (killing an individual) is used as a means of initiation
and to achieve status. The researchers of this study viewed the emergence of area leaders
as resulting from the failure of the community and politicians to provide basic necessities.

The financial resources of gangs come primarily from extortion, drug smuggling and
remittances from overseas-based members and supporters.

The threat presented by gangs could be minimized if the country significantly reduced the
political and social tolerance of criminal dons; the facilitation of garrison politics and the
coercive control of communities with a power base rooted in large financial resources.
Political and social tolerance of gangs/dons/garrison political communities could
eventually lead to a failed state.


-----

**The Effects of Violence on Communities**

The World Health Organization (WHO) Report on Violence and Health has defined
violence as “the intentional use of physical force or power, threatened or actual, against
oneself, another person, or against a group or community that either results in or has a
high likelihood of resulting in injury, death, psychological harm, mal-development or
deprivation.5 The rapid increase in homicides and other acts of violence pose serious
security threats and health risks to Jamaica and its citizens. The WHO experts have
stated that violence is a major issue for public health. The impact of violence on
individuals, communities and the society should therefore not be underestimated.

Domestic violence is one of the more pervasive and common forms of violence plaguing
the society. It contributes to the overall pattern of crime and violence due to its
debilitating effects on the social fabric and its role in socializing the youths to violence as
a means of dispute resolution. Women and children are disproportionately at risk from
domestic violence.

Failure to protect the groups that are most vulnerable increases the risk that these groups
will remain in or enter long-term poverty, which will help to fuel the cycle of violence
and abuse.

The organization and administration of the CJS is a critical factor in the effective
management of crime and violence. This has to be supported by an understanding of
crime and violence as not being purely a law enforcement problem, but also as problems
in education, family, and other spheres. These structures, if dysfunctional, incubate
deviance and delinquency, and thus crime and violence. It is important to treat causes
and not only the effects of crime and violence.

**Extortion**

The crime of extortion manifests itself primarily as part of the protection racket where
persons in business are approached by criminals who demand payment for providing
protection from criminal victimization. There has been growing evidence within the
construction and general  business sectors, particularly in the urban areas, that extortion
has increased the cost of security, and hence the overall cost of doing business in
Jamaica. This puts Jamaica at a competitive   disadvantage with its trading partners and
serves as a deterrent for investments, social and economic development. Additionally,
this has caused migration of businesses from high-risk areas, to areas less volatile and not
zoned for commercial/ industrial use. The victims’ fear of reprisal on their businesses and
low level of confidence in the security forces’ ability to combat extortion has led to low
reporting and little or no prosecution. Anecdotal sources suggest that this state of affairs
has led to the practice of extortion becoming so pervasive that it has now infiltrated the
public transport sector as well as the private construction of homes.


-----

**Kidnapping**

Kidnapping is not prevalent in Jamaica but has the potential to become a major problem
especially as the incidence of kidnapping in other Caribbean territories and Latin
America is a growing problem. In recent years, there have been a few cases of
kidnapping for ransom perpetrated mostly by gangs.

**The State of Remand Facilities and Correctional Centres**

In 2003, the population in the correctional system in Jamaica was 48% above capacity in
the adult institutions. The two major reception institutions (Tower Street and St Catherine
Adult Correctional Centres) are severely overcrowded, poorly   maintained and
inadequately staffed. These are 19th century buildings that are in disrepair, are very
costly to secure, and present major challenges for the treatment and care of inmates. As a
result, the integrity of the security systems in these institutions can be easily
compromised.

Escape from correctional centres undermines the morale of those involved in the CJS
who have worked to remove these criminals from the streets. It also undermines the
confidence of the general population in the CJS.

**Community Orders**

Community Orders (non-custodial sentences) are sometimes violated and often lead to
repeat offences and criminal associations in communities. It is often due to lack of
proper monitoring resulting from poor collection and verification of pre-sentence data on
offenders by officers of the court. This is a continued threat to public safety.

**Endemic Corruption**

In Jamaica, corruption in its various forms is a serious threat to the social order and the
rule of law. It manifests itself in many ways and inhibits the ability of the State to
effectively discharge its responsibilities and obligations. Systemic weakness in the
organization and management of   various functions of government, public and private
sectors have contributed to this malaise.

Examples abound, including the illegal issue of driving permits, motor vehicle licences,
firearm licences and the bribery of public officials. Political institutions and freedoms can
also be affected by corruption. This could occur through the corruption of public officials
which may not only be encouraged through rewards but may also be coerced through
direct threats i.e. through an offer of ‘gold or lead’. Penetration and weakening by
criminal networks of the CJS, government and the political process could eventually lead
to the demise of the State.


-----

**White Collar Crime**

The risk and cost to businesses from the theft of intellectual property, financial crimes
and the fraudulent use of commodity and service brands run into billions of dollars
annually. Much of the white collar and organized criminality is beyond present public
law enforcement capabilities6 and this adds to the levels of insecurity within the society.
It also results in a diversion of tax revenues away from the Government.

**Human Trafficking**

The smuggling and trafficking of persons by illegitimate means between countries is of
increasing concern in the Caribbean region. This is another lucrative source of income for
organized criminal networks.

**Cyber Crimes**

Networked information systems play an increasingly important role in our socio-political,
economic and financial infrastructure, in terms of critical information services within
telecommunications, commerce and banking sectors. The recent spate of ‘hacker attacks’
on Microsoft and other operating systems around the world, have highlighted the
weaknesses of existing technology, in offering protection against such attacks.

Attacks on networked information systems exploit vulnerabilities that arise from flaws in
the software systems, from the failure of system administrators to properly configure
such software, or from organizational policy failures that leave ‘back doors’ (such as
unauthorized modems) through which intruders can gain access.

There needs to be more specific legislation to address this problem, in addition to
sufficient skills training and increased awareness of the risks associated with electronic
commerce and other internet activities.


-----

**Terrorism**

**Direct Threats**

It is widely acknowledged that international terrorism entails the deliberate use of
violence or threat of violence against civilians and/or property in order to cause fear and
instability in a larger population. Jamaica is not immune from the threat of terrorism, as
we exist in a global environment where the actions of non-state actors can create
instability and insecurity.

Direct threats of terrorism include hostage taking, hijacking, various narco-terrorism
incidents, release of toxic chemicals and biological agents into the environment, and the
use of nuclear weapons.

The potential for terrorist incidents originating locally is real. Based on the country’s
proximity to the United States, groups with terrorist intent could seek to use Jamaica for
training and as a base from which to launch assaults. Overseas economic interests in
Jamaica, such as investment by multi-national corporations, and foreign States’ interests,
including diplomatic missions and  international organizations, could make us indirectly
susceptible to terrorist activities. The presence of foreign nationals including overseas
visitors and other persons who may be the target of terrorists increases this vulnerability.
Jamaica has limited ability to identify and monitor individuals entering the country with
terrorist intent. This difficulty is particularly acute given that the majority of traffic
which passes through the airports is foreign tourists (70%) about which the immigration
services would have very little information.

Jamaica’s tourist industry, particularly the resort areas and cruise shipping, has been
expanding and could be regarded as a soft target for terrorist attacks aimed at nationals of
the major Western powers, particularly since the events of September 11, 2001. The
security of these areas poses a challenge in light of limited financial, technological,
human and other resources.

There is a need to improve Jamaica’s intelligence and monitoring systems. And efforts
should be made to better coordinate and share information locally, regionally and
internationally. More efficient controls on immigration are also necessary. Other
resources including the legal framework and technology are to be enhanced to identify
and monitor persons passing through our borders whether legally or illegally. Also of
importance are specific legislation and controls designed to prevent and counter terrorism
in its various forms.


-----

The mechanisms to detect and counter the financing of terrorist networks are to be
improved. Jamaica is to control the flow of illicit arms, explosives, and nuclear,
biological and chemical (NBC) hazards to reduce the opportunities for terrorist
operations. Other measures to be implemented include: the improved national
identification   system; increased public awareness and knowledge of the potential
dangers of terrorism; as well as adequate preparedness of security agencies and key
government institutions. A formal operational protocol and agreement should be
established between the operational arms of the security sector. The human resources
and financing provided are to be adequate. There should be sufficient specialist training
in anti-terrorism measures.

**Indirect Threats**

Sustainable development in the areas of tourism, investments and the country’s ability to
earn foreign exchange are indirectly threatened by terrorist acts committed overseas.

The flow of visitors to the island was severely reduced immediately after September 11,
2001. There was a reduction in the volume of exports and foreign exchange earnings as a
result of the new security measures associated with the inspection of Jamaican exported
goods, particularly to North America.

If the situation exists where a terrorist organization penetrates political institutions,
Jamaica could become a haven for terrorists and a launch pad for terrorist activity.
Depending on the extent of this infestation, Jamaica could find itself becoming the target
of international counter-terrorist activities. The country should therefore ensure that there
are sufficient controls on the sources of funding for, political organizations and political
representatives.

**Military and Para-Military Threats**

**Illegal Paramilitary Groups**

Illegal paramilitary groups may be defined as groups of civilians organized in military
fashion (armed and using organized tactics), without legitimate authority. In the face of
the real danger posed by heavily armed criminal groups in Jamaica, the potential exists
for them to evolve into a more potent and cohesive force that could pose a very serious
threat to security institutions and State apparatus. There is recent evidence of efforts to
form such a coalition of small gangs.

**There is evidence of a strong operational paramilitary group in the region. The link**
**between this group with its drug trafficking activities could expand to take in**
**Jamaica’s criminal groups, as well as other groups in the Caribbean and Latin**
**America with the threat of them attempting to create a narco-state.**


-----

**Insurgency**

It is arguable that the country is not particularly threatened by insurgents, if insurgency is
defined as the rebellious rise in revolt against civil authority or a government in power.
Insurgents are typically organized as armed paramilitary groups or rebellious elements
within the armed forces. They disregard constitutional authority, the democratic tradition
and the legitimacy of armed forces as the agents of State power.

This national security strategy recognizes the  probability of the rise of insurgents if not
with overt, direct political goals, then as a front for organized crime. Vulnerability to this
threat exists because of the ease with which an evolving  insurgent group could initially
mask their motives under the cover of existing gangs or political organizations. Jamaica’s
strategic intelligence process will need to be strengthened to lessen this vulnerability.

There should be adequate monitoring of private security firms. Although there is no
evidence that private security companies are likely to engage in undesirable activities,
they do however constitute an organized armed body. It is also possible for such an
organization, under misguided influence, to become a threat to the constituted authority.

**External Military Threats**

One of the main arguments against a standing  military or for a significantly smaller
standing   military in Jamaica is that there has been no apparent external conventional
military threat to the country. In the post Cold War period, many states have faced
greater threats to their stability and security from within, than from external sources
owing to the prevalence of intra state  conflicts. Jamaica must therefore be in a position
to respond swiftly to any such threat. The threat of intra state conflict in the region is
real. Additionally, there are a number of countries in the region that could be viewed as
being insecure due primarily to border disputes and as such Jamaica, as a member of
CARICOM, the Commonwealth and the OAS should be in a position to contribute to the
region’s security.

The important point is that Jamaica could be vulnerable to conventional military threats
because of its insufficient resources and a large unprotected coastline. The present
military resources are insufficient to defend against any reasonable military effort and
this is compounded by the fact that an invading force has so many options for entering
the country. There is also a need for adequate strategic intelligence; improved capacity to
detect and provide early warning; increased ability to resist for sufficient time for
assistance to arrive; and adequately developed defence relationships (bilateral, regional,
international), to provide assurance in event of attack. Ultimately, Jamaica should be able
to cover all probable avenues of approach to the country in addition to having
arrangements in place to manage the effects of NBC hazards and other weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs).


-----

**Disasters & Unsustainable Loss of**
**Natural Resources**

**Natural Disasters**

Jamaica is vulnerable to natural disasters primarily because of its geography,
geomorphology, and its state of economic development. It is situated along the path of
the hurricane belt, and is   threatened by hurricanes and tropical storms. The island is
also located in an earthquake zone and suffers from the effects of seasonal climatic
changes and is not immune from tsunamis.

The island was impacted by Hurricane Ivan between the 11th and 12th of September
2004. An interim figure of J$40.4 billion has been recorded for direct and indirect losses
in addition to 17 persons having lost their lives. It was   estimated that 14% of the total
population, that is, 369,685 persons, were directly affected by the hurricane.

Also of concern are gaps in enforcement of building regulations and poor physical
planning/ zoning of developments. While in principle there is acceptance of the
Caribbean Unified Building Code (CUBIC) adoption has been less than robust. The local
laws regarding building standards are being flouted, due largely to lack of awareness and
inadequate enforcement. There is anecdotal evidence that the process of building
approvals have been subject to corruption, resulting in unsuitable sites being used.

**Man-made Disasters**

Jamaica is also vulnerable to man-made disasters which include fires, chemical spills,
biological and radioactive contamination and other major accidents. Domestic fires are
the major man-made hazards that affect the island. In 2002, an estimated J$1.4 billion
was lost due to domestic fires. The majority of these fires occurred in inner-city
communities and were triggered by shared or illegal electrical wire connections and
through the use of domestic oil lamps/candles.

Other man-made disasters, for example, marine spills from vessel and land-based
sources, can  create severe environmental pollution that can negatively impact tourism,
fisheries and marine transportation. Also, severe leaking of pollutants into aquifers
would affect sustainable water supply sources. Aviation disasters can also cause severe
destruction and disruption to normal airline traffic.


-----

**Unsustainable Exploitation & Loss of Natural Resources**

Through inadequate or poor enforcement of regulations both on land and within the
marine  environment there is severe pressure on the natural resources both living and
non-living. There is a general lack of control over Jamaica’s marine  environment. The
overexploitation of the fisheries has resulted in stock depletion and bio-mass reduction.
Poaching by foreign flag vessels   contribute significantly to the problem, particularly
during closed seasons. Improper fishing methods also impact the fisheries in a negative
way. Marine pollution from land-based sources at approximately 87%, and vessel
sources at 13%, continue to pose a threat to our pristine waters and beaches on which
tourism heavily depends.

Illicit sand mining is still a prevalent crime in Jamaica. The impact on river courses and
land stabilization are well documented. Other illegal mining activities also take place
with similar  consequences for the land. Unplanned human settlements increase the
susceptibility to both  natural and man-made hazards. Inadequate development orders
and improper monitoring of informal settlements in volatile, marginal and  ecologically
sensitive areas have allowed the growth and mushrooming of vulnerable communities in
the urban areas. This threatens the stability of the land and can be a danger itself to the
safety of persons who occupy dwellings in these marginal areas.

While Jamaica has not been a victim of the  trans-boundary movement of wastes such as
garbage and other waste matter, there is always a danger that this could occur from a
major marine incident due to a vessel casualty within our Exclusive Economic Zone.

**Socio-Economic Threats**

**External Economic Shocks**

As with other Small Island Developing States (SIDS), Jamaica is economically
vulnerable and is subject to a number of special constraints and threats, which pose
serious challenges for the achievement of sustainable economic development. These
threats and vulnerabilities arise from    exposure to adverse external shocks, which are
beyond the country’s control, as well as from structural, financial, physical, social and
other internal handicaps.

These handicaps include a high degree of openness, high dependence on strategic imports
and other scarce resources such as oil, a narrow export base, small tax base, inadequate or
inefficient infrastructure, high levels of crime and violence, and susceptibility to natural
disasters. In addition, the presence of corruption erodes investor confidence, the country’s
national image and is antithetical to good governance within the society.


-----

**Financial Crimes, Including Tax Evasion & Fraud**

Financial crimes constitute a serious threat to national security and to Jamaica’s
economy. These crimes, some of which involve complex transactions and international
connections, include tax     evasion, tax fraud, commercial smuggling and money
laundering. If left unchecked, they will continue to undermine the integrity of the
country’s financial institutions and deprive the government of vital tax revenues, which
are required to finance myriad recurrent and capital projects and programmes for the
people of Jamaica. In the case of tax crimes, Jamaica suffers primarily from commercial
smuggling and General Consumption Tax (GCT) fraud.

The presence of tax fraudsters creates two effects: firstly, a reduction of investment and
employment opportunities by tax-compliant businesses and  secondly, an incentive for
tax-compliant businesses to become tax cheats.

The State is also exploited by non-payment of taxes, fees and other public charges, and
collection efforts are strongly resisted or ignored. GCT fraud, whereby persons collect
GCT, falsify their returns and hence fail to pay what is due to the government, is at an
unacceptable level. The   perception of an inequitable tax regime, gaps in the legislative
and policy framework as well as corruption and dishonesty are some of the factors, which
have enabled such activities to take place. Such conduct undermines the social order by
legitimizing corruption, as well as distorting and disrupting equitable commercial
transactions. These also have the tendency to threaten the   economic viability of the
State. The non-compliance with the law in this area is due to deficiencies in legislation
and the administrative machinery.

Money laundering is also of serious concern, since it affects the soundness and stability
of the financial system, distorts the economy and undermines development efforts. It
attempts to assure drug and arms-related criminals that they can hide their financial and
other assets, which provide the fuel to operate and expand their criminal enterprises. Due
to weaknesses in the Money Laundering Act and other relevant legislation, the detection,
investigation and successful prosecution of this crime has been difficult for the entities
involved.

Drugs and arms traffickers are also targeting  commercial importers and/or exporters in
an effort to avoid detection at authorized ports of entry. The contamination of legitimate
cargo has the potential to seriously disrupt the flow of Jamaica’s international commerce.

Financial crimes are also being committed by a number of illegal/unlicensed currency
exchanges or cambios. This crime affects the exchange rate, creating instability within
the financial system, which in turn adversely affects the economy. Jamaica is currently
experiencing a relatively small threat of counterfeiting of Jamaican banknotes, which if
allowed to escalate could pose a direct economic threat, with consequences for national
security.


-----

There is a strong correlation between good governance, sustainable development, and a
competent and effectively functioning security sector. A stable and secure environment
allows the country to capitalize on global economic opportunities.

**High Crime & Violence Preventing**
**Increased Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)**
**and Sustainable Development**

Criminal activities such as murder, gun crimes, extortion, arson and kidnapping, increase
security and insurance costs (relating to personal and  property protection), the timeliness
of project implementation and overall capital and     operational costs. There is,
therefore, a direct link between security, the levels of efficiency achieved and the growth
and financial viability of many companies.

There is also a relationship between the    prevalence of crime and violence and FDI
flows. Foreign, as well as domestic companies, prefer to operate in stable and secure
environments, thus high levels of crime influence capital investment decisions.

In Jamaica, where State security is in need of  further improvement, key economic
sectors such as tourism, transportation, mining and agriculture can be adversely affected
by crime and violence, which can result in a reduction in revenue inflows as well as the
flow of investment capital. The tourism sector is of particular concern. In the past,
violence and disorder in Jamaica have had a negative impact on tourism flows and
development. The high cost of countering the effects of negative perceptions and
damaging travel advisories in major foreign markets, result in a less than  optimal use of
scarce resources.

**International Commodity and Financial Shocks**

External shocks resulting from globalization and the internationalization of financial
markets can threaten Jamaica’s economy and jeopardize important strategic interests.
The country could be adversely affected by international commodity shocks due to the
high dependence on strategic imports such as energy, raw materials, capital  goods and
food staples.

The country could also be affected by international financial shocks as a result of the
currency composition of assets and liabilities in the domestic financial sector. This has
the potential to create instability within the financial system and can impair government’s
macro-economic programmes. Global financial instability can be manifested in terms of
high interest rates, high inflation and unstable currency.


-----

**Caribbean Single Market and Economy**

The introduction of the CSME which allows for freer movement of CARICOM nationals
will facilitate the movement of those nationals with criminal intent. This raises additional
border security concerns for identifying CARICOM nationals with criminal connections
or intent.

**Trade in Contraband**

Jamaica Customs is actively involved in the facilitation of trade, revenue collection and
border protection. Despite the Department’s efforts, contraband trade/smuggling, which
includes illegal drugs, firearms, ammunition and commodities such as tobacco products
and alcoholic beverages, remains a major problem. Any connection between corrupt
Customs officials and persons involved in organized crime, with their significant
financial resources, would also ensure that inbound and outbound smuggling operations
continue in a highly sophisticated manner and with great potential for corruption and
violence. It is therefore critical that such practices are eliminated or drastically curbed.

**Abuse of Jamaica’s Intellectual and Cultural Property Rights**

Intellectual Property (IP) refers to creations of the mind: inventions (patents), literary and
artistic works, symbols, names, images and designs used in commerce. IP, which is
regarded as one of the drivers for economic growth, is divided into two categories:
Industrial Property and Copyright. Industrial Property includes inventions, trademarks,
industrial designs and geographical indications of source. Copyright covers literary and
artistic works such as plays, novels, poems, musical works (including the rights of
producers and performing artists), films, drawings, paintings, photographs, sculptures and
architectural designs. Abuse of IP rights can seriously erode potential income and
therefore impact economic growth negatively.

**Ineffective Security Operations of Ports**

Under new international maritime and aviation security rules, Jamaica is required to
comply with the provisions of the international instruments or suffer the consequences of
being by-passed by trading vessels and downgraded at our international air and sea ports.
This could have severe implications for our international trade and passenger flows and
hence the level of economic activity; additionally, uncontrolled aerodromes and
makeshift airstrips abound. While our international trading ports are generally
functioning effectively with 100% compliance with the International Ship and Port
Facility Security Code, they need to be monitored to ensure continued compliance.


-----

**Erosion of Social and Moral Values**

There is an increasing erosion of social and moral values evidenced by the disregard for
the sanctity of life and authority figures. The resulting culture manifests itself in:
breakdown of family life; the replacement of positive socializing agents with negative
ones; dependence on criminal proceeds; negative political partisanship; increased levels
of indiscipline; decline in social order and the lack of respect for basic human rights.
This has been reinforced by the effective use of threats, corruption and extortion against
public officials, civil society and citizens.

**High Unemployment and Poverty**

Unemployment impacts on national security considerations because of the relationship
between unemployment, poverty and crime. Crime is, to a certain degree, a rational act
in the sense that perpetrators weigh the relative returns from legal and illegal activity and
balance these against the respective costs. In a context of high and chronic (that is, long
duration) unemployment, where the probability of obtaining legitimate opportunities for
economic advancement is perceived to be low, the net payoff from illegal activity may be
compelling. This incentive is  particularly strong in instances where the probability of
detection, apprehension and prosecution is perceived to be low.

A growing core of persons in Jamaica has remained poor. Although having in place many
social intervention programmes, Jamaica is still dogged by high levels of poverty. This
has been contributory to high crime levels in some communities.

**Inadequate Support for Vulnerable Groups**

Vulnerable groups comprise the children, elderly, indigent, the homeless, street people
and the disabled. Of these vulnerable groups, the children, including street boys, and
adult drug addicts living on the street present the most significant threat.

The threat presented by these children of marginalized families increases the potential for
juvenile delinquency. According to the Keating Report in 2002, most children’s homes
and places of safety are not in keeping with international standards and have contributed
to the abuse of our children.

**Abuse of Civil Rights**

The illegal imposition of the State’s power and authority over its citizens, including the
application of physical and moral abuse constitutes a threat to good order and
governance. This malaise can lead to serious alienation of, and disrespect for not only
law enforcement agencies, but also Government itself.


-----

**Disorder**

There is a perception that the growing sense of mistrust and lack of confidence in the
ability of government to ensure social equity and to facilitate sufficient economic
opportunities, have led to the development of distorted loyalties to ‘drug dons’ who work
with Jamaican criminal groups operating in the United States and the United Kingdom.

The high incidence of homicides in Jamaica has resulted in not only the fear of crime but
also the fear of victimization. People tend to have fairly accurate perceptions of their
victimization    potential based on key variables such as risk and opportunity. The fear
of crime and of victimization leads to anxiety and an almost paralyzing effect  on the
minds and actions of citizens.

Violent crime does not occur in isolation as an environment with low enforcement, lack
of respect for authority, and non-compliance with the applicable rules and regulations
have     contributed to the breakdown of public order   and civility in Jamaica. This
disorder stems from indiscipline and social discontent and also    manifests itself in the
unregulated use of land, and frequent disruptive protest actions such as illegal roadblocks
and industrial disputes. These threats have had a significant negative impact on public
safety and security.

**Entrenchment of Garrison Communities and Informal Settlements**

Garrison communities may be defined as densely populated urban areas, which profess a
faithful allegiance to one political party, and demonstrate a total intolerance to any
objectors. They are   characterized as being closed and they undermine and disregard the
legitimate authority but exercise a separate system of law and order directed by an area
leader who metes out ‘justice’ through the use and/or threat of violence. The social
arrangements within a garrison community inhibit the ability of the security forces to
function properly. The physical layout of informal settlements could restrict the ability of
security forces to gain access, patrol and respond to emergencies in order to provide
adequate security.


-----

**Alienation of Youth and Other Groups**

The prevalence of idle youths, their affinity to gangs, involvement in illicit activities and
disrespect for order are evidence of the social threat existing in many communities in
Jamaica. These are manifestations of anti-social behaviour which further result in the
assault and abuse of citizens, as well as disrespect for authority.

A high percentage of youth, mainly boys, face an uncertain future because they leave
school before completing their secondary education. They also exhibit traits of low selfesteem, leading to dependence and possibly inappropriate adult behaviour.

Of particular concern are the breakdown in social order, unregulated use of public spaces,
social discontent and reduced public safety.

**Recidivism**

Recidivism or the tendency to return to crime among the incarcerated population
significantly decreased over a ten-year period. However, in 2001 and 2002 recidivism
stabilized at 18.7% and increased to 23.8% by the end of 2003. This early rise in the
recidivism rate presents an   immediate threat to public safety as an ex-inmate’s repeat
convictions may occur within a year and rise to over five imprisonments in a four-year
period. The inadequacies in the rehabilitation and re-integration systems increase the
cases of  repeated offences.

**Industrial Unrest**

The industrial climate in Jamaica has been tempered over the last decade as a result of the
employment of more mature approaches to negotiations. Threats include violent or
damaging conduct of industrial disputes, breakdown in labour/management
relationships, and lack of confidence in dispute resolution mechanisms. Industrial
disputes in the gasoline trade have particular implications for national security,
oftentimes causing dislocation of traffic and severe disorder at service stations.

In addition, animated negotiations between the Constabulary and Government,
particularly over pay rates, often cause tensions, severe anxiety and also serve to
embolden criminals.


-----

**Unmanageable Flow of Refugee/ Asylum Status Seekers**

Any instability in neighbouring States can pose a security threat to Jamaica’s territorial
integrity if there is an outflow of persons due to political unrest or severe economic
problems. The recent problems in Haiti need not be overstated, however Jamaica’s
vulnerability will not disappear and therefore this threat must not be treated lightly. The
resources required to receive, process and accommodate refugees are enormous.
Currently, Jamaica does not have a structured procedure for processing refugees, and
there is no permanently designated, and suitably equipped, facility for accommodating
refugees. In recognizing the problem, we must be mindful of international treaty
obligations regarding the proper treatment of refugees, including asylum seekers.

**HIV/AIDS and Other Infectious Diseases**

HIV/AIDS is a global concern. The Caribbean, with an HIV infection rate of 2.0 percent,
is the global sub-region with the second highest HIV prevalence rate, surpassed only by
Sub-Saharan Africa. The HIV/AIDS pandemic poses a serious threat to the productive
sector as the majority of AIDS cases occur among the productive and reproductive age
group 20-29 years and 30-39 years.

**Substance Abuse**

Substance abuse has become a grave social problem as well as an important cause of
morbidity and health expenditure in Jamaica. Survey results estimated that in 2001, 12%
of the population aged 12 to 55 years was abusing or dependent on alcohol and/or drugs.
Illicit substances include marijuana, cocaine, crack, heroin and ecstasy. This pattern of
drug use is consistent with previous findings in which people in their late teens and early
twenties often    experiment with drugs, but withdraw from it in later years. Marijuana
users represented 99% of all users of illicit substances. Lifetime use was 19% (or
approximately 1 in 5 persons) and current usage was estimated at 10%. Of particular
concern are the trends among the youth in Jamaica to experiment with drugs and the
likelihood of persons being exposed to gateway drugs at an early age7.

**The Effects of Education on Security**

The education system is ineffective. It helps to foster the environment for criminal
behaviour. The contributory factors are the inability of some to meet the cost of
education, the negative attitude of parents and children, and the inadequacies that exist.
The current functional  literacy rate at the end of the primary level is 70 %, which is not
considered satisfactory as government aims for ‘full literacy’. A number of criminal acts
are committed by young persons who should otherwise be in schools, or training
institutions. One of the issues posed by early school leavers is their exploitation by
‘career’ criminals who recruit them for various crimes including drug smuggling and the
conveyance of firearms.


-----

**Key Capabilities**

From the above analysis of the threats to national security, the capacity to mitigate the
extent of Jamaica’s vulnerability was identified and outlined in the Strategic Security
Goals (see Chapter 3).

Jamaica will need to create the capacity to:

- Control entry and exit through ports of entry and coastline/land of Jamaica.

- Monitor, regulate and control use of Jamaica’s airspace, coastal waters and EEZ

- Ensure an effective CJS

- Prevent Crime (including armed groups and insurgents)

- Counter corruption to ensure public ownership and confidence in the CJS

- Regulate and control arms

- Dismantle organized criminal networks

- Gather, assess and use effective Intelligence  (Major cross cutting priority)

- Limit vulnerability and respond effectively to disasters and unsustainable
degradation of resources

- Maintain a stable and healthy economy

- Address social and economic causal factors of alienation and crime

- Develop messages for a Public Education campaign (important overall crosscutting issue)

- Ensure adequate Health Care and Education

- Influence Regional and International Policies and Activities (Important cross
cutting priority)

- Deter, counter or defeat ‘Traditional Military Threats’


-----

# Chapter 3– The Strategy

**•** **The Approach**

**•** **Strategic Security Goals**

**•** **Cross-cutting Issues**

**•** **Special Security Initiatives**

**•** **Action Plan for Strategic Security Goals**

The environmental and threat analyses served to gauge the scope of Jamaica’s national
security malaise, to which the main contributors were the multi-faceted problems of:
crime, violence and disorder, disregard for the rule of law, border issues and terrorism.

Key required capabilities that will lessen the   vulnerabilities and counter the threats to
national security will therefore form the core of the Jamaica National Security Strategy.

Following the underscored general Approach is a specific list of Strategic Security
**Goals (SSG) and an illustration of common Cross Cutting issues.**

Each SSG is broken down into specific capabilities objectives and actions, including the
lead and supporting organizations responsible for their timely implementation. Annex E
gives a detailed matrix summary of the action plan in order to assist Ministries,
Departments and Agencies (MDAs) in identifying specific actions which fall within their
portfolios.

The NSS also identified five areas which warrant attention to lay the ground for
maximizing the outputs from other action. These have been labeled Special Security
Initiatives.


-----

**The Approach**

The general approach presents the security framework that seeks to steer the NSS
implementers in a common direction. This should result in a well-coordinated package of
effective national security measures.

The dominant theme of transformation requires new ways of thinking, acting, searching
for and applying more efficient processes and technologies. The approach is divided into
three parts:

- **TRANSFORMING ATTITUDES to promote security awareness and zero**
**tolerance. Development of information programmes to encourage all stakeholders to see**
national security as everyone’s business; to put national security first and to promote a
culture of zero tolerance for disorderly, corrupt and criminal conduct.

- **TRANSFORMING PROCESSES to achieve unity of effort. This is to be**
achieved through the development of mechanisms to encourage cooperation and
collaboration for multi-agency security efforts locally and with international partners.

- **TRANSFORMING PRACTICES for greater efficiency. Accomplished**
through capacity building in all areas of need, including the sustained provision of
appropriate and affordable resources.

**Strategic Security Goals for Jamaica**

The recurring security related themes emerging from the Strategic Environmental
Analysis and Threat Analysis have led to the identification of eight Strategic Security
Goals (SSGs).


-----

**Jamaica’s Strategic Security Goals**

**•** **Goal 1 – To Reduce Violent Crime and Dismantle Organized Criminal**
**Networks**

**•** **Goal 2 – To Strengthen the Criminal Justice System and Promote Respect**
**for Rule of Law**

**•** **Goal 3 –To Protect Jamaica from Terrorism**

**•** **Goal 4 – To Protect and Control Jamaica’s Territory**

**•** **Goal 5 – To Strengthen the Integrity of Institutions of Democratic**
**Government**

**•** **Goal 6 – To Increase Jamaica’s Contribution to Regional and International**
**Security**

**•** **Goal 7 – To Provide the Environment for a Stable Economy and an Effective**
**Delivery of Social Services**

**•** **Goal 8 – To Protect Jamaica’s Natural Resources and Reduce the Risks of**
**Disasters**

**Cross-Cutting Issues**

Two main issues are common to several SSGs. These are, the need for effective
intelligence which is a vital tool for focused security operations, and well-coordinated
public affairs programmes aimed at increasing public awareness and education on
security issues.

**Effective Analysis and Use of Intelligence**

The ability to address several of the SSGs depends on current and reliable intelligence.
There is   room for improvement in the collection, analysis and dissemination of
actionable intelligence throughout the security architecture of Jamaica. This includes
better utilization of existing data  collected by non-intelligence entities.


-----

**Capabilities required for effective intelligence gathering, analysis and use**

- Effective collection, analyses and use of tactical intelligence for operations, policy
development and direction.

- Mechanisms to allow for local effective inter-agency cooperation and information
sharing.

- Mechanisms to allow for effective mutual cooperation with regional and
international intelligence and enforcement bodies.

- Ability to identify and monitor criminal deportees, suspect persons, high-risk
visitors and goods transiting Jamaica, and persons with terrorist intent.

- Ability to monitor Jamaica’s borders in order to control movement of people and
potentially dangerous materials.

- Ability to monitor and regulate financial flows, particularly cross border
activities.

- Ability to monitor possible insurgents and prevent insurgency.

- Mechanisms to allow for utilization of existing data collected by non-intelligence
entities.

**Objectives to enhance intelligence systems across Jamaica’s security sector**

- Establish a national intelligence body primarily to collect and analyze information
for strategic purposes distinct from existing Sectoral security entities in the
military, police, Customs and FID.

- Enhance inter-agency coordination in intelligence matters at the tactical,
operational and strategic levels. This coordination must enable MDAs to
systematically share and receive relevant information.

- Improve cooperation regionally and inter-nationally between relevant agencies in
matters of mutual interest by strengthening agreements and protocols.

**Public Education and Awareness**

There is a need to strengthen support for the State apparatus and programmes that
enhance national security. To do this, public awareness of the impact of national security
on sustainable development should be stimulated and maximized.

**Capabilities required for coordinating public education and awareness**

- Programmes to make the general public aware of the operations of the CJS and
outcomes of judicial proceedings

- Programmes to educate the public on what national security means

- Programmes to draw on societal support for the prevention of terrorism

- Programmes to build public confidence in, and respect for, constitutional
authority

- Programmes to garner public support for sustainable use of natural resources

- Programmes to deal with social issues which include values and attitudes, poverty
alleviation, health threats (HIV/AIDS in particular) and substance abuse


-----

- Programmes to make the public aware of non-violent dispute resolution methods

**Objective to enhance public education and awareness of national security**

The public sector is to develop and implement more comprehensive public awareness and
education programmes relevant to its national security responsibilities in order to inform,
garner support and build public confidence in the national security system, and to
strengthen international partnerships by exerting some international influence.

**Special Security Initiatives**

The main purpose of the Special Security Initiatives outlined below is to focus attention
on a small number of areas where concerted effort should be made in the short term. To
this end, the efforts of the public sector must be coupled with effective and consultative
engagement of the private sector and other civil society stakeholders.

1. **Strengthening of Jamaica’s National  Intelligence System**
In order to strengthen the intelligence apparatus of Jamaica, a National
Intelligence Consultative Group (NICG) will be established by the National
Security Council and the MNS. This group will seek to develop terms of
reference, functional responsibilities, cooperative mechanisms (local and
overseas), coordinating functions, reporting responsibilities and over-sight
arrangements for Jamaica’s intelligence system.

**a. Establish a State Intelligence Capacity to Provide Strategic Intelligence**

The Government of Jamaica requires strategic intelligence to inform government
decision-making on strategic or policy issues that go beyond supporting tactical
operations. For this purpose, a National Intelligence Agency (NIA) will be
established. This body will not replace any existing intelligence organization, but
instead will fill a major gap in existing national capabilities.


-----

**Special Security Initiatives**

**1.** **Strengthening of Jamaica’s National Intelligence System**

**2.** **Conducting Strategic Reviews of Critical National Security Bodies and**
**Accelerating Modernization Efforts**

**3.** **Establishing a National Task Force to Strengthen the Overall Effectiveness of**
**Jamaica’s Criminal  Justice System and to Review and Strengthen**
**Jamaica’s Laws and Law-Making Processes**

**4.** **Enhancing Programmes to Promote Community Safety and Security**

**5.** **Promote a National Strategic Communications Programme to Enhance**
**Public Information and Awareness, Solidarity and Support Relating to the**
**NSS**

This NIA will be an independent civilian State agency mandated to gather
strategic information, process that information into strategic intelligence, and provide the
GOJ with timely advice on matters of strategic importance. Also covered within its mandate will be the establishment of bilateral and other agreements. This is to ensure that
there is adequate information/intelligence sharing with international partners. The
Director of the NIA will be a reputable member of civil society, and its structure will
allow for appropriate parliamentary oversight.

This new body will not have control over the existing operational intelligence arms of the
Government, though it must necessarily link closely with them, performing some
coordinating roles. Necessary protocols will be developed to ensure effective exchange
of information and assessments with operational intelligence bodies, including
those of the JDF, JCF Jamaica Customs, FID, Immigration Citizenship and Passport
Division, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade. The NIA will be accountable to
the NSC and could initially be located at the MNS but in the long term should be in the
Cabinet Office.

**b.** **Improve Capacity and Co-Ordination of Existing National Intelligence**
**Bodies**

Measures are needed to enhance the capacities of the existing intelligence bodies
so that they provide reliable and useful intelligence in their spheres of
responsibility and add to the overall effectiveness of Jamaica’s national
intelligence system. This requires additional and strengthened programmes and
mechanisms that will enhance information exchange and co-ordination amongst
the existing intelligence bodies to ensure effective co-ordination with the new
NIA.


-----

The role of the National Security Advisor, who currently functions within the MNS,
should at this time include:

- Overseeing the proposed National Intelligence Agency and coordinating
the existing intelligence bodies

- Monitoring, from the strategic level, overall security threats and concerns

- Providing advice to the NSC and the Minister of National Security

- Providing intelligence briefs for the Ministers of Finance, Foreign
Affairs, and other Ministers as necessary.

**c.** **Extend and Develop Information-Sharing Systems for National Intelligence**
**Purposes**

A key objective of the NSS is to ensure that all parts of Jamaica’s government and
society contribute appropriately to achieving its security goals. Numerous government or
public bodies that are not part of the national intelligence system collect or hold
information that is useful and relevant to national strategic or operational intelligence
needs. Systems need to be established to enable and ensure that such information is
available for use by Jamaica’s intelligence system, subject to appropriate constraints and
safeguards. Protocols for such information sharing will be developed and customized to
each department or agency concerned, and mechanisms and capabilities will be
established to ensure appropriate information provision. Similarly, measures will be taken
to ensure and develop appropriate arrangements for information sharing by private
bodies, such as financial institutions or private security companies.

**2.** **Conducting Strategic Reviews of Critical National Security Bodies and**
**Accelerating Modernization Efforts**

Every relevant MDA will conduct reviews of their policies, programmes and capabilities
to ensure that they contribute appropriately to the implementation and further
development of the NSS. The JDF and JCF each plays a critical role, in meeting the
SSGs. To ensure they are adequately positioned to implement the NSS. They are to
conduct and complete detailed and thorough strategic reviews. The scope and focus of
these strategic reviews will be customized according to the particular context and
responsibilities of each responsible organization. The Government of Jamaica will
provide specific guidance on the mandate, scope and priorities for such reviews in due
course, in accordance with the following guidelines:


-----

**a. Strategic Review of JCF**

The JCF is central to the effective implementation of most of the key goals of the NSS.
The JCF which has been undergoing substantial development and reform based on its two
Corporate Strategies has been the focus of several studies such as the Wolfe Report and
the National Consultative Committee on Crime and Violence.

This report recommended fundamental changes to the style and manner of policing in
Jamaica. To date, in spite of the JCF’s efforts through its Corporate Strategy, these far
reaching changes have yet to occur. It is therefore necessary for the JCF, at some point in
the near future, to go beyond its Corporate Strategy and have a systematic and structured
strategic review process completed in order to provide the modern framework and
institutional mechanisms through which the full transformation of the JCF into a well
balanced, respected and capable police service can be achieved.

It is recognized that one of the fundamental problems to be addressed is the leadership
and management capacity of the JCF, particularly as it relates to selection, recruitment,
orientation, preparation, training, promotion and career advancement of gazetted officers.
These subjects have not been adequately addressed in previous reviews.

In addition to the issues highlighted above the JCF Strategic Review would examine
legislative and higher level administrative structures, such as the Police Services
Commission (PSC) and Police Public Complaints Authority (PPCA), in order to
Facilitate an effective civilian oversight mechanism for proper accountability for its
performance and conduct.

Such a Strategic Review requires that Government through the MNS establishes an
independent body to oversee the process. This review process should consult the JCF,
agencies, experts and stakeholders from other relevant branches of Government, as well
as a wide cross section of civil society. The aim is to:

- Determine the vision that the people of Jamaica have for policing.

- Recommend changes to the JCF Act and its Regulations.

- Determine appropriate oversight mechanisms to ensure effective democratic,
legal and financial accountability.


-----

**b. Strategic Defence Review of JDF**

A detailed and thorough Strategic Defence Review (SDR) will be conducted
immediately,  to ensure that defence policies, capabilities and roles that are in
accordance with those required to meet relevant goals and requirements in the NSS,
are in place. This SDR should seek to: establish the roles and functions (inclusive of
jurisdiction and primary/supporting roles) of the JDF in cooperation with other security
bodies; identify the policies and capabilities required; and detail how existing gaps or
inadequacies in capabilities will be addressed, and how effective co-ordination will be
achieved with other relevant Jamaican departments and agencies and regional and
international partners.

This review should be conducted within the framework of goals, priorities, capabilities
and responsibilities set out elsewhere in the NSS, including the division of roles and
responsibilities between the JDF and JCF outlined.

The JDF will play a leading role in the preparation of the technical elements of this SDR,
under the Minister for National Security, Defence Board and the Cabinet. However,
the Review should also involve experts and stakeholders beyond the JDF, to help to
ensure co-ordinated and effective use of appropriate resources across Government
departments and agencies. It should also consult with experts and stakeholders from
**civil society and regional or international partners.**

**c.** **Functional Reviews of Security Related Responsibilities of MDAs**

In order to achieve the SSGs, a series of functional reviews are to be carried out among
MDAs, such as Customs, Immigration, FID and others. Such reviews will aim to
reorient the organizations in relation to their role in the overall NSS. They will further
establish and clarify the organizations’ roles and functions (inclusive of jurisdiction and
primary/supporting roles), the capabilities required, identify the existing capability gaps
and articulate how such gaps may be filled.  The organizations should include suitable
**external parties in its review. Subject to normal security vetting, the inclusion of**
independent parties will add to the transparency of the process and give credibility to the
results. Functional reviews must include:

     - Determining their direct national security responsibilities within the NSS

     - Confirming, and seeking where necessary, the resources to ensure that
they possess the required capabilities

     - Reviewing their structure as necessary

     - Ensuring that their other policies and programmes do not conflict with the
SSGs

     - Establishing their own coordinating mechanisms which link to the
National Security Council, and enhancing internal, external and public
information exchange Whilst it is recognized that their modernization
programmes are in progress, these efforts will be accelerated.


-----

3. Establishing a National Task Force to Review the Overall Effectiveness of Jamaica’s
Criminal Justice System to include Jamaica’s Laws and Law-Making Processes

An effective Criminal Justice System (CJS) is essential in order to achieve the
NSS’ Strategic Security Goals. It is important to enhance the performance and role of
each of the CJS’ institutions, including the JCF, prosecution services, courts, judiciary,
and correctional services. It is equally important to ensure that each of the elements work
effectively together.

The review of existing laws and the drafting of new legislation are of critical
importance to achieving the SSGs. In order to ensure the timely and expeditious review
of current laws, the ambit of the Legal Reform Department needs to be reviewed and any
deficiencies addressed.

A Law Commission should be established to ensure that the laws of Jamaica are
relevant and current, meeting both domestic and international requirements, customs and
practices. Furthermore, this Commission will examine the adequacy of existing laws,
including the provision for realistic fines, fees and punishments consistent with modern
imperatives, global trends and international conventions. Their strict mandate would be
the continuous proactive amendment and creation of legislation to ensure the continued
viability of the CJS.

In order to achieve the strategic aims to improve and strengthen Jamaica’s CJS, a
temporary CJS Review Task Force will be established by the Cabinet Office, MOJ and
MNS to review and oversee the necessary changes. This Task Force will:

     - Review the legal framework, systems, structures, support services (some
multi-disciplinary), human resources, infrastructure and equipment of the
entire CJS and make recommendations to effect the necessary changes

     - Oversee the implementation of the new measures

     - Accelerate current modernization measures

     - Oversee the creation of the Law Commission and its initial output

**4.** **Enhancing Programmes to Promote Community Safety and Security**

There are currently several initiatives that support community safety and security which
include the involvement of citizens in those communities and state agencies responsible
for delivering social services, the JCF community policing drive, NGOs, schools and
sports development groups, the church and other significant community based
organizations. The concern is the need to coordinate these social interventions in order to
provide sustainable and effective services to communities, thus countering any
dependency on alternative, illicit governing structures. A coordinating mechanism will
be established through the OPM to ensure proper coordination of all parties involved and
the provision of adequate resources.


-----

**5. Promote a National Strategic Communication Programme**

Successful implementation of the NSS requires the full support of all citizens and civil
society.  There needs to be a radical change in the way in which everyone views his or
her own responsibilities for community safety and security. There needs to be recognition
that “Security is everybody’s business,” and not the sole responsibility of the police and
other law enforcement agencies. A communication programme should seek to change the
nature of group relationships in the society. It must offer opportunities to build trust and
new partnerships among Government and it agencies, the citizens and civil society. An
effective communication strategy should also counter negative images and promote
positive aspects of Jamaica both locally and internationally to assist in attracting
investment and visitors to the island. Therefore, a comprehensive National Strategic
**Communications Programme needs to be developed and sustained.**

This Programme is less about public information and public relations and more about
seeking to have a more transparent and responsive relationship between the Government,
the people and civil society. Through the oversight of the Minister of Information, state
machinery such as the Ministries through their Public Information Officers in
collaboration with the JIS and other media houses (print, radio and television) are
envisioned to be the vehicles of delivery.

**Action Plan for Strategic Security Goals**

Each Strategic Security Goal will be examined in turn to show the capabilities required
to counter the threats. Broad objectives are set to fill the gaps where these capabilities
either do not exist or are inadequate, and specific actions required identified, with
milestones against which progress can be measured. Responsibilities are assigned to the
relevant MDAs with timelines. Short Term is within 2 years, Medium Term 2 -5 years,
and Long Term is beyond 5 years These are not intended to be exhaustive, nor
prescriptive, as it is recognized that effective implementation of the NSS will require
each MDA to review in detail its own roles, responsibilities and actions. MDAs also
must ensure that their other policies and programmes are not in conflict with the SSGs,
but contribute to achieving the key goals of the Strategy. See Annex E for a summary
**Implementation Matrix.**

**Goal 1 – To Reduce Violent Crime and Dismantle Organized Criminal Networks**

There is an absolute need to prevent and reduce violent crime and disorder in Jamaica
and to eliminate organized criminal networks, which include countering the proliferation
of narco-trafficking, illegal arms, kidnapping and extortion. The major concern relating
to the high levels of violence in Jamaica stems from the existence of organized criminal
gangs fuelled by the illegal trade in narcotics and arms. These criminal activities, which
in some cases exploit existing political divides, threaten the viability of the State and
have had a significant negative impact on public safety and security.


-----

**Specific Capabilities, Objectives and Actions**

**Capability 1**
**a.** **A highly effective Police Force that is properly structured, manned with well**
selected, suitably trained and properly equipped personnel who are held
accountable for performance and conduct at every level, and managed by high
quality leadership with strengthened oversight and safeguards against potential
disruptive industrial actions.

**Objective**

**•** **Transform JCF and fully implement Community Policing, Review,**
**adequately finance and expedite police reform and modernization plans.**

**Specific Actions - Short Term**
a. **MNS and JCF will conduct a strategic review of the JCF within 6 – 12 months**
and expedite the provision of a credible civilian oversight mechanism. Its roles
must go beyond the appointment of senior personnel and must include
accountability measures, setting and monitoring operational standards,
performance and conduct.

b. **MNS and JCF will develop and implement a public education programme to**
inform citizens of their roles in community policing, and to garner their support.

c. **OPM, MNS and JCF will within 6 - 12 months develop a coordinating**
mechanism to ensure greater accountability for the relevant social agencies
responsible for shelter, community services and economic empowerment/job
creation, in order to support the community policing effort.

**Effective Police Force**

**•** **Motivated and Performance Driven**

**•** **Attractive as a Professional Organization**

**•** **Properly Structured, Staffed and Resourced**

**•** **Transformational Leadership (Strong and Effective)**

**•** **Highest Levels of Conduct, Integrity and Accountability**

**•** **External Oversight**

**•** **Proactive Non-Paramilitary Orientation**

**Capability 2**
**a.** **A well coordinated, efficient and effective intelligence system, with adequate**
**resources and strategic oversight.**

**Objective**

**•** **Improve coordination of intelligence.**

**•** **Specific Actions - Short Term**


-----

**•** **MNS will take the lead in establishing a communication system among**
intelligence agencies, including the development of an intelligence database with
all MDAs, with necessary MOUs.

- **MNS will enhance collaboration amongst all agencies that relate to organized**
crime including narco-trafficking and improve collaboration with regional and
international security agencies. This includes providing for substantial linkages
with the evolving CARICOM security initiatives endorsed by the Heads of
Government in July 2005, such as the Co-coordinating Information Management
Authority (CIMA).

**Capability 3**
a. To identify and dismantle criminal gangs and to discourage the gang culture by
ensuring that programmes are put in place to fill the vacuum created by the
elimination of the gangs, mainly to ensure that the gangs will not reconstitute
themselves.

b. A national policy framework that facilitates police and community
**partnership in the drive for greater public safety:**

c. Social intervention complementary to policing efforts.

d. Strengthening of citizens awareness of their rights and responsibilities

e. Improving coordination of multiple social response agencies /community services

f. Provide for economic empowerment/job creation

g. Strengthened re-socialization programmes to promote the development of
**positive and wholesome values and attitudes particularly among youth to**
dissuade them from joining youth gangs and the attraction of the criminal
lifestyle.

h. A capability to promote and sustain a culture of peaceful co-existence among the
various groups in the society particularly where there is political tribalism or
informal settlements.

**Objective**

- **Transform garrison communities, including dismantling the illicit and**
**coercive networks, and regularize or dismantle informal settlements.**


-----

**Specific Actions - Short Term**
a. **Parliament, MNS and MOJ will pilot reforms to force the severance of**
unwholesome ties between politicians and criminals or community leaders of
questionable character within the short term. To further support this, the JCF will
continue to aggressively investigate and prosecute suspected “dons” for financial
and other crimes.

b. **The Development Division (Cabinet Office) will coordinate the development of**
multi-agency/Sectoral programmes to improve the delivery of social services and
provision of amenities in garrison communities. This will include the channelling
of community power through legitimate and transparent structures and institutions
to break the dependency syndrome and the attraction of criminal lifestyle,
particularly among youth in the inner city communities. Intensify existing resocialization programmes to restore good values and attitudes especially among
young people, in the long term. Take steps to reduce unemployment in the
affected communities. This will be done in collaboration with MNS and other
**State actors, and in partnership with the business sector, NGOs and other**
**civil society groups including the church. The coordination mechanisms will be**
established within 6 to 12 months followed by the ongoing implementation of
these programmes.

c. The JCF, with the support of the MNS **and legitimate community groups,**
including churches, will encourage the establishment of proactive Neighbourhood
Watch groups in order to increase collaboration between the JCF, community
groups and private sector corporations, particularly as it relates to enhancing its
public image.

d. Through the collection and analysis of good intelligence, the JCF, supported by
the JDF, will aggressively seek to eliminate the proliferation of illegal guns and
ammunition in these communities.

e. Development, updating and strict enforcement of zoning, safety (e.g. fire) and
building codes by the MLGCDS, MLE, MWH and MTW.  This will be done
within the short term, and consideration will be given to the inclusion of
appropriate consultation by both the JDF and JCF in these development orders.
This would ensure, for example, that housing schemes are constructed in a
manner that would allow for safe patrolling by the security forces in terms of nonrestrictive road layouts, or building configurations that do not allow for the
concealment of snipers.

f. The MWH will continue to expand existing relocation programmes, such as
Relocation 2000, and ensure that abandoned structures are demolished quickly to
avoid any re-occupation. Those being relocated must also share in the cost of the
housing solutions on a concessionary basis and this will be done in the short term.

g. **MEYC to lead re-socialization programmes particularly aimed at youth.**


-----

h. **MOJ to enhance dispute resolution mechanisms to help resolve social**
**conflicts and promote conflict resolution so that restorative justice replaces**
retributive justice.

**Capability 4**
a. Improved and sustained systems or mechanisms to detect and eliminate
**corruption at all levels of law enforcement and the Criminal Justice System with**
independent civilian oversight, appropriate resources and staffing. Concerning
corruption in the broader government structure and society, there needs to be
strengthened policies and practices, including sanctions, to promote transparency
in government and society such as in the awarding of contracts, where processes
may be unduly influenced, and in revenue collection within fee based agencies.

**Objective**

**•** **Bolster and More Rigorously Implement Anti-Corruption Measures.**

**Specific Action - Short Term**
a. A review of the Office of the Contractor General (OCG) and the National
Contracts Commission (NCC) will be conducted within six months in order to
improve their efficiency, enhance the requisite guidelines for the
procurement of contracts and launch an awareness programme to highlight the
correct procedures involved in awarding contracts.

**Capability 5**
a. Strengthened regulatory systems and border control measures to control the
possession, use, and trade of small arms, light weapons and ammunition.

**Objective**

**•** **Improve regulation of firearms and explosives and strengthen border control**
**measures.**

**Specific Actions - Short Term**
a. **MNS will introduce the necessary legislation for the improved regulation of**
firearms licensing and the establishment of a National Firearm Licensing
**Authority with primarily civilian over-sight and administration.**

b. **MNS will within six months review and enhance existing regulations for the**
importation, storage and use of explosives to ensure full compliance.

c. Customs to ensure that items entering our ports, including parcels and mail, are
properly inspected


-----

**Capability 6**
**a.** **Effective regulation and monitoring of the private security companies to**
make them more accountable and to ensure that their operations will complement
and support the law enforcement agencies. For example, the regulating authority
must conduct regular audits and spot checks of companies to ensure their
compliance on arms and ammunition security, staff vetting and training, and it
must have an appropriate investigative capacity.

**Objective**

**•** **Effectively regulate and monitor private security companies.**

**Specific Action - Short Term**
**a.** **MNS to determine whether the powers and resources of the PSRA are adequate to**

effectively deal with the dynamic factors impacting security within 6 months.

**Capability 7**
a. **Public education programmes to encourage public order in communities and**
**urban centres as well as to encourage respect for constitutional authority. These**
programmes must bolster sustained political and public support of efforts to
dismantle organized criminal networks, and remove the tolerance of criminal
‘dons.’ This includes garnering the support of the business and local communities
against organized criminal networks and the strengthening of citizens’ awareness
of their rights and responsibilities.

**Objective**

**•** **Promote public awareness and education programmes to reduce criminal**
**activities**

**Specific Actions - Short Term**
a. **MNS will take the lead, assisted by the MOI, MOJ and relevant NGOs, to**
formulate public education programmes within six to 12 months. Within the short
term, the MEYC, supported by the MLGCDS will ensure that schools include
courses geared towards alerting them to the impact of crime and violence in the
society (included in civics), highlighting alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms and promoting, social intervention programmes. There is a need to
first review existing programmes within four to six months and to implement and

monitor new programmes as long as necessary.

b. **MEYC and MLGCD will further develop programmes to encourage respect for**
authority and public order in communities.

c. **MNS supported by MOJ and MEYC will alert citizens about the damaging**
effects of criminal activities, and where permitted under law, expose criminals
and their actions.


-----

**Capability 8**
a. **Mechanisms to pre-empt and respond to kidnapping and extortion**

**Objectives**

**•** **Prevent the proliferation of kidnapping and extortion. Respond promptly**
**and adequately to incidents of kidnapping**

**Specific Actions – Short Term**

a. **MNS, assisted by MOJ, will establish special legislation to provide for increased**
punishment for kidnapping and extortion.

b. **OPM, assisted by MNS, will encourage the establishment of codes of conduct in**
the public sector to make it easier to detect suspicious activities.

c. **MOI assisted by MNS, will develop and conduct a public information and**
awareness campaign to denounce cases of extortion, have suspicious activities
reported and resist payments of ransoms and extortion demands.

d. **MNS will implement a dedicated secure system for receiving information from**
the public and following up kidnap and extortion cases.

e. **MNS will ensure training of security personnel to include negotiating skills and**
appropriate use of force.

f. **MNS will ensure the preparation of appropriate contingency plans for responses**
to incidents of kidnapping.

**In addition to the action points above, there are points in SSGs 2 (Strengthening of**
**the CJS), 4 (Protecting and Controlling Jamaica’s Territory) and 5 (Strengthening**
**the Integrity of Democratic Government) that impact directly on the achievement of**
**this Goal. These include issues relating to the efficiency of the CJS, and the**
**improvement of border control and anti-corruption measures.**

**Goal 2 - To Strengthen the Criminal**
**Justice System and Promote Respect for the Rule of Law**

There is need for an effective CJS which is accountable and demonstrates fairness in the
way people are treated and decisions made. The application of law should be without fear
or favour, requiring that all persons, regardless of their role in society, comply with the
law and deal justly with others. Legislation ought to be continuously reviewed and
revised as offenders use new methodologies, new technology and other creative ways to
avoid prosecution.


-----

Upholding the rule of law will serve the interest of both primary and secondary violence
prevention, public disorder and any disillusionment about the quality and exercise of
justice. This goal also addresses the need to effectively bring to account those who
choose to offend the law with little fear of legal consequences.

**Capability 1**

a. A more integrated and efficient CJS which engenders public confidence.

**Objective**

- **Transform Criminal Justice System to be better able to prevent and**
**investigate crime, prosecute, convict, punish and rehabilitate offenders.**

**Specific Actions – Short Term**

a. A temporary CJS Review Task Force will be established by the Cabinet
**Office, MOJ and MNS to review and oversee the necessary changes to the**
overall CJS, including legislation.

b. **MNS and DCS to continuously monitor the provision of diagnostic services to**
assess offenders (in support of sentencing decisions with information on levels of
risk to society especially for young/first offenders.

c. **MOJ and MNS to ensure the availability of adequate multi-disciplinary support**
including psychiatrists, forensic scientists and other medical practitioners, and
increased access to social workers for both the investigative and rehabilitative
processes.

d. **MOJ and MNS to install a comprehensive Criminal Justice Management**
Information System.

e. **MOJ and CPC to ensure more effective policy formulation and preparation of**
drafting instructions by the responsible ministries. All Ministries should also
examine the adequacy of the laws they are required to administer.

f. With guidance from MOJ, all Ministries will broaden consultation among the
relevant stake holders including civil society in policy formulation and legislative
drafting processes in order to ensure participation, support and

Collective ownership.

g. **MOJ to ensure the timely and effective disposal of legal matters through**
modernized court processes (e.g. computerization, steno recording, court hours),
and continued strengthening of  administrative capability of the courts.


-----

h. **MNS supported by MFAFT and MOJ will develop extradition treaties**
including the development of reciprocal working arrangements with countries
with which Jamaica does not currently have this arrangement. On an ongoing
basis, JCF supported by the DPP, MNS and MOJ will increase its use of, and
expedite and exploit the opportunities of the extradition process.

**Capability 2**

a. Legislation to enhance the effectiveness of the rule of law.

**Objective**

**•** **Continuously review and amend as necessary all legislation to confirm their**
**relevance, levels of punishment and remedies, and to enhance the**
**administration of justice.**

**Specific Actions – Short Term**
a. **MOJ supported by MNS will establish a Law Commission to identify required**
legislation for drafting/enactment, with the mandate to carry out the continuous
proactive amendment and creation of legislation to ensure the continued viability
of the CJS.

b. **MNS with the support of MOJ will develop, expeditiously enact and**
systematically enforce effective laws that would lead to the dismantling of
organized criminal gangs and networks (e.g., racketeering laws, Proceeds of
Crime Act, money laundering legislation). Citizenship laws, regulations and
procedures to make it more difficult for marriages to be arranged to provide cover
for organized criminal activity, will be strengthened. Improved mechanisms,
including a regulatory framework, to eliminate illegitimate business enterprises,
which provide outlets for hiding the proceeds of crime, are also to be
provided.

**Capability 3**
a. Law enforcement agencies in the broadest sense need to accept, develop and
enforce a zero tolerance approach to public order issues when conducting their
duties.

**Objective**

**•.** **To accept, develop and enforce a zero tolerance approach to public order**
**issues.**


-----

**Specific Actions – Short Term**
a. **MOJ, MNS, JCF and all other MDAs with law enforcement responsibilities**
are to put in place the necessary measures to enforce a zero tolerance approach to
public order issues. Concurrently, MNS and MOJ will conduct a review of the
components of the CJS (JCF, Courts, Corrections) to ensure that the necessary
supporting procedures, laws and systems are put in place in a timely manner, to
cope with the anticipated initial increased burden on the system. Law enforcement
personnel would include diverse appointments such as traffic wardens, local
government building inspectors, forest rangers, fisheries inspectors, customs and
police officers. There may be a requirement to increase the levels of the law
enforcement authority of non-JCF organizations.

**Capability 4**
a. Sentencing guidelines that support restorative justice and reflect current realities,
including the use of non-custodial sentences.

**Objective**
**a.** **Review and update sentencing guidelines and supporting structures to**
**for greater use of non- custodial sentences where appropriate.**

**Specific Action**
a. Periodic reviews of sentencing guidelines and supporting supervisory structures
by the MOJ in collaboration with the MNS, will be done, taking into
consideration alternative sentencing options in order to reduce the burden on the
correctional centres and to provide for appropriate punishment for low risk
offenders.

**Capability 5**
a. Anti-corruption measures in all arms of the CJS should be strengthened in order
to address the apparent prevalence of corruption.

**Objective**
**a.** **Elimination of corruption in all arms of the CJS.**

**Specific Action – Short Term**
a. **MOJ, MNS and DPP will re-examine and strengthen anti-corruption measures.**

**Capability 6**
a. Extensive public education system on the functions and operations of the
Criminal Justice System, including information on procedures at service
locations.

**Objective**
**a.** **Educate citizens about their rights and responsibilities, and the meaning and**
**application of justice within the context of the Constitution and Laws of**
**Jamaica.**


-----

**Specific Action– Short Term**
**a.** **MOJ and MNS to expand existing programmes to educate the public on the CJS.**

**Capability 7**
a. Humane facilities for safe, secure custody in police lock-ups, remand and
correctional centres.

**Objective**

**•** **Provide safe and secure facilities to accommodate detainees, remandees and**
**prisoners.**

**Specific Action– Short Term**

- **MNS, JCF, DCS and MOJ will re-examine their detention facilities in**
accordance with international standards and modify or rebuild where possible.

**Capability 8**
a. Mechanisms to promote acceptance of alternative methods of dispute resolution
as a problem-solving tool in order to counter the pervasive use of violence,
including domestic violence.

**Objective**

- Promote use of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms.

**Specific Action– Short Term**
a. **MOJ, MNS, MEYC** **and JIS, with the support of NGOs, the church and other**
civil society groups to enhance public education efforts concerning alternative
methods of dispute resolution.

**Capability 9**
a. Quality legal aid, witness protection and victim support services.

**Objective**
a. Expand access to strengthened legal aid, witness protection and victim support
services.

**Specific Action – Short Term**
a. MOJ and MNS will identify sustainable finance schemes regionally and
internationally to fund enhancement of legal aid, witness protection and victim
support services, promote their availability through a public awareness
programme and increase accessibility to those in need.


-----

**Capability 10**
a. Mechanisms to improve the preparation of cases for prosecution to include
enhancing collaboration between the DPP and the relevant investigative agencies
including the JCF.

**Objective**

**•** **Improve the preparation of cases for prosecution.**

**Specific Actions– Short Term**
**a.** **MOJ, DPP and MNS and all other MDAs  with prosecutorial powers are to**
strengthen formal mechanisms to provide for better collaboration in the
preparation of cases for prosecution.

b. JCF to improve its investigative capacities through increased training and
effective coordination between intelligence and all law enforcement agencies.

**Capability 11**
a. Mechanism to act in consort with CARICOM in developing a common
negotiating position with regards to the issue of criminal deportees.

**Objective**

**•** **Strive to conclude agreements with deporting countries to have consultations**
**before final decisions for deportations are made.**

**Specific Actions– Short Term**
**a.** **MNS supported by MFAFT, where it is not inconsistent with Jamaica’s**
immediate national interests, will seek to adopt a common negotiating position on
relevant issues with respect to deportees as discussed in the meeting of
CARICOM minister’s responsible for national security. These issues include:
verification procedure for identification; pace of deportation; health status;
duration of domicile in the deporting country; support for reintegration

programmes.

**Capability 12**
a. Policies and programmes geared towards effective rehabilitation and reintegration
of ex-offenders, criminal deportees and youth at risk.

**Objective**

- Effective rehabilitation and reintegration of ex-offenders, criminal deportees and
youth at risk


-----

**Specific Actions– Short Term**

a. **MNS, JCF and DCS to develop/enhance policies and programmes with**
appropriate legislative support geared towards effective rehabilitation and
reintegration of ex-offenders, criminal deportees and youth at risk.

b. **MNS supported by MOJ, MLGCDS and MLSS will ensure that existing social**
support systems, in addition to visible referral and follow-up programmes are
expanded to meet the needs of all ex-offenders and criminal deportees.

c. A database system will be established by MNS, to identify and monitor criminal
deportees who may re-engage in criminal activities and high security risk visitors,
and provide for increased and effective collaboration between MNS and
**Immigration, JCF, MFAFT and CAA.**

**Capability 13**
a. Diversion programmes that provide intervention for misguided youth in order to
prevent/minimize delinquency and criminal activity.

**Objective**

**•** **Provide diversion programmes to allow for alternative means of gainful**
**employment for persons normally engaged in illegal activities with emphasis**
**on youth.**

**Specific Actions– Short Term**
a. **MOJ, MNS and DCS to introduce diversion programmes that provide**
opportunities for misguided youth in order to prevent/minimize delinquency and
criminal activity.

**Goal 3 - To Protect Jamaica from Terrorism**

a. The scope of this goal includes the prevention of terrorist incidents, having
contingency plans to adequately respond to incidents and having the capability to
mitigate the effects of terrorism. The capabilities that are needed to adequately
address these vulnerabilities are geared towards the ability to monitor and analyze
potential terrorist activities; the ability to prevent or respond to terrorist incidents
in terms of immediate action, mitigation of direct effects, recovery and
rehabilitation; and the ability to engage the public internally and externally to
mitigate the indirect effects that may arise due to inaccurate or exaggerated
perceptions of the situation. Indirect effects include economic fallout from
negative perceptions within the international community. The need for regional
and international co-operative mechanisms is paramount.


-----

**Specific Capabilities, Objectives and Actions**

**Capability 1**
a. **Preventing Terrorist Incidents - Of paramount importance in this regard is the**
ability to sustain an effective intelligence mechanism to include cooperation with
intelligence and enforcement bodies regionally and internationally. This is to
ensure the effective monitoring and tracking of people and goods transiting
Jamaica as well as the monitoring and control of financial flows, particularly
cross-border activities. Jamaica is unlikely to have adequate direct access to

foreign intelligence resources without increased international cooperation.

b. An adequate border control and national identification system is required as
elaborated in SSG 4 (Protect and Control Jamaica’s Territory) and systems to
maintain an adequate level of public awareness should exist as elaborated in the
Cross Cutting issues section.

c. Additionally, effective anti-terrorism legislation and mechanisms for its
enforcement need to be maintained in order to act on collated intelligence. They
should conform to inter-national obligations and responsibilities, and also meet
national requirements. This capacity should encompass the ability to prevent the
use of, and confiscation of funds associated with terrorist activities. This should
be supported by the capacity for effective interagency co-operation and
information sharing in Jamaica and the ability to draw on societal support for
prevention of terrorism, through public education, increased awareness and
improved community-police relations for confidence building.

**Objectives**

**•** **Assess the new anti-terrorism legislation to determine its effectiveness and its**
**conformity with international obligations. This should include appropriate**
legislation relating to the control and confiscation of funds linked to terrorism
and ensure the enforcement of these legislations and the signing/ratification of
the relevant international agreements on terrorism that are in keeping with
Jamaica’s national interests

- Improve the capabilities of relevant agencies to enforce legislation to prevent the
use of, and allow for the confiscation of funds linked with terrorist activities.

- Make Jamaica’s intelligence apparatus more effective by instituting measures to
improve coordination amongst national, regional and international agencies with
regard to terrorism related intelligence, and by establishing a State intelligence
agency to handle strategic intelligence needs.


-----

**Specific Actions - Short Term**
**a.** **MOJ and MFAFT will implement the associated regulations concerning the**
Anti-Terrorism Act. MNS and MFP needs to provide the necessary structures
and resources to enable the effective enforcement of the legislation, including the
training of the police and other investigation authorities, within a year. They also
need to ensure that the required institutional arrangements are in place in the same
time frame.

b. **MOJ and MFAFT will ensure that there are provisions in the Money**
**Laundering and Proceeds of Crime Bills to address terrorism issues,**
**including preventing terrorist financing and the confiscation of funds.**

c. **MFAFT and MOJ will ensure the signing/ratification of the relevant**
**international agreements. This will be supported by the establishment of review**
processes to check which international obligations should be ratified into
domestic law. They will also ensure that terrorist offences are included in the
terms of mutual extradition treaties. The supporting

regulations should be in place within 6 months of the enactments.

d. **MNS will take a number of steps to maintain an effective intelligence system.**
This includes the establishment of protocols and mechanisms to facilitate sharing
between national agencies, and regional and international partners; putting
systems in place to facilitate sharing with INTERPOL and other like international
agencies; the review and establishment of a system for coordination and sharing
of high level intelligence and of tactical/operational intelligence; establishing the
NIA, or similar agency, as the national focal point for inter-national coordination
of intelligence sharing and reviewing the intelligence sharing between JDF &
JCF as a part of their strategic reviews.

e. As detailed at SSG 4 (Protecting and Controlling Jamaica’s Territory), the MNS
will review the roles and function of its agencies, ensuring they are clearly
specified according to areas of responsibility and lead. As a part of the protocol
on JDF/JCF relations proposed for SSG 4, the JCF will lead on the detection and
initial monitoring of terrorist threats until the proposed NIA is established, and the
JDF will lead on operational response to these threats.

f. In keeping with SSG 4, the MOH supported by the MNS and other interested
MDAs will within two years ensure the establishment of compulsory national
registration system for Jamaican citizens, and review the possible need for a
national ID card.


-----

g. **MNS will implement systems and regulations requiring all Jamaicans to have**
machine readable passports on entry and exit; complete computerization of the
**immigration system; provide a database/network that links ports of entry, and**
enables tracking of entry and exit of all persons; promote and coordinate regional
minimum identification system requirements for entry and exit through
CARICOM; and review requirements for citizenship.

h. As Jamaica is host to several international and multinational organizations and
international events, MNS and MFAFT will put enhanced  measures in place to
ensure the security of international groups and individuals who participate or
attend, such as Cricket World Cup 2007 (CWC 2007).

**Capability 2**
**a.** **Contingency Planning to Respond to Incidents - There needs to be effective**
‘civil defence’ contingency plans, by the responsible institutions. They should
include the capacity to respond effectively to warnings of terrorist incidents and
the ability to respond to terrorist incidents through the implementation of
contingency plans. The provision of resources needed to implement the
contingency plans is an essential requirement. These resources should include
effective information management and efficient communications systems.

In order to effect the contingency plans there needs to be trained response teams.
These response teams should have the ability to execute counter-terrorism
operations based on rehearsed contingency plans through realistic exercises.

**Objective**

- Establish and maintain contingency plans for responding to terrorist incidents as
well as improving public awareness and knowledge of the potential dangers of
terrorism.

**Specific Action –Short Term**
a. **MNS will lead in the tasking of a multi-agency body to review and define**
**planning needs and capabilities required to address full range**
**of anti-terrorist contingencies including investigation protocols and training to**
handle situations before, during and after terrorist incidents. In keeping with these
requirements, the JDF supported by the JCF and ODPEM should, within a year,
establish trained and equipped response teams with the ability to execute counterterrorism operations based on contingency plans which have been rehearsed and
updated through realistic exercises.


-----

**Capability 3**
**a.** **Public Information Programmes to Mitigate Indirect Effects - Without an**
effective information management and communication system, Jamaica is
susceptible to damage to its reputation and loss of economic activity in the event
of a terrorist incident or threats thereof. Jamaica should have the capacity to
effectively communicate with the local and international community in order to
limit damage to its reputation and interests in such eventualities.

**Objective**

**•** **Maintain an effective local and international communications system.**

**Specific Action – Short Term**
a. **MNS with the support of the JIS will ensure the existence of effective**
**information management and communication systems including launching**
public information programmes relating to: sensitization of the public on
suspicious activities and reporting geared at reducing risks of terror acts and how
to act in event of terrorist incidents.

**Goal 4 – To Protect and Control Jamaica’s Territory**

Transnational threats, including organized criminal activities, undermine regional and
international peace and security, and national sovereignty. The complexity of the threats
requires regional and international cooperation for the development and implementation
of effective counter measures. Jamaica needs to adopt and implement the best border
management practices, to encompass the maritime, air and land mass/spaces and ports of
entry and to minimize the risk of transnational threats. This is important because of the
growing ability of non-State actors to act transnationally.

**Capability 1**
**a.** **Capacity to ensure cooperation between agencies with similar or overlapping**
**responsibilities. It is only by doing so that the limited resources can be**
effectively utilized to realize the full benefits of their employment. Without clear
demarcations of responsibilities and lead roles there could be unnecessary
redundancy in allocated resources and the employment of personnel.

**Objective**

- **A protocol will be established governing cooperation between agencies with**
**similar or overlapping responsibilities particularly the JDF and JCF**
**ensuring the clear indication of lead roles.**


-----

**Specific Actions – Short Term**
a. The MNS in consultation with the JDF and the JCF will establish a protocol
governing cooperation and the division of responsibilities between JDF and JCF
including lead roles as indicated below. This should be effected within six
months. The establishment of the protocol itself requires appropriate legal
staff and representatives from the affected agencies; however detailed strategic
reviews of the JDF and JCF should be conducted to ensure they are adequately
structured, equipped and financed to effect their responsibilities as defined by the
protocol.

The JDF should lead on all National Security matters within Jamaica’s maritime
territory including counter narcotics and arms trafficking. JDF has constabulary
powers for offences in the maritime environment based on the Maritime Areas
Act, the Exclusive Economic Zone Act and the Fisheries Act. The present practice
is for JDF to search, apprehend and detain, then hand over to the JCF, with the
knowledge of NEPA, Customs and/or the Fisheries Division at a designated port.
This practice works and should continue with no decrease in the present JDF
powers. The JCF is neither trained nor equipped for deep sea or ‘blue water’
operations or to cover extensive maritime areas. Any attempt to so equip them
would result in duplication and redundancies and is not recommended.
Delineation of authority is important to avoid overlap. It is recommended that
areas outside the baseline from which the territorial seas are measured
(approximately half a mile from the main land to the north and to encompass
Portland Bight in the South) should be the responsibility of JDF. Areas within the
baseline of the landward side should be the responsibility of the JCF excluding
the areas around the Morant and Pedro Cays.

The JDF should lead on traditional military threats (including NBC attack). Initial
insurgent activity would be within the purview of the JCF but would be handed
over to the JDF at some point of escalation to be determined by the NSC.

The JCF should lead on all Internal Security  matters under normal circumstances.
There should be the delineation of three levels of JCF/JDF involvement in
Internal Security matters:

b. Level 1 - JCF operating alone. This should remain the status quo, as it is not
desirable for military forces to be routinely involved in law enforcement
operations.

c. Level 2 - JCF leading with JDF assisting as directed by the PM/Minister of
Defence. This should be specific time-limited operations in the case of situations
that call for joint operations to address serious threats to national security. In
extreme cases, this would include the JDF acting with increased powers as

Provided under the Emergency Powers Act to restore and maintain law and order.


-----

d. Level 3 - JDF leading with JCF assisting as declared by the Governor General or
other constitutional arrangements. This should be until the status quo is restored.
– The initial detection and monitoring of suspected terrorist groups will be
the responsibility of the JCF, until the proposed NIA is established. The
JDF will lead on the operational response to terrorist threats, to include
acting on intelligence to pre-empt an incident. The response to incidents
is within the purview of the JCF until terrorist involvement is clearly
established at which point JDF would take the lead. The NSC would
authorize such a change of lead.

e. MNS will lead in development of a national  security programme covering
national policy, overarching legislation, Sectoral responsibilities and a mechanism
for implementation for aviation and maritime security at airport and seaports.
This programme will be consistent with national security policy objectives and
international rules provided by the relevant  conventions of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and the International Maritime Organization
(IMO) adopted by Jamaica, and the specific civil aviation and maritime Sectoral
responsibilities of the CAA, PAJ and MAJ. The CAA will improve the capability
to detect unauthorized aircraft, particularly through use of radar systems, and
relay information on unauthorized aircraft activities to both the JDF and the JCF
for their respective responses by land, air and sea.

**Capability 2**
a. **Capacity to Identify Jamaican Nationals and to Track Migrants, Criminals,**
**Deportees and other Individuals of Possible Concern - Jamaica is susceptible**
to threats to territorial integrity due to vulnerabilities associated with the
monitoring of individuals including the lack of a comprehensive national
identification system and the inability to track migrants, convicts, deportees and
other individuals that  could constitute threats. Jamaica should have the capability
to accurately identify all citizens, residents and visitors in order to effectively
control its borders and to track the movement of migrants, criminals, deportees
and other persons of concern. This is fundamental to maintain the integrity of our
national security system.

Furthermore, Jamaica should seek to restrict the number of ways by which
Jamaican citizenship can be obtained, with a view to preventing abuse.


-----

**Objective**

**•** **Establish an adequate national identification system**

**Specific Actions – Medium Term**
a. MOH is to expedite action on a national identification system, incorporating
biometrics, that should be assigned at birth and be a requirement for all official
activities including schooling, employment and conducting business. They
should also conduct a review of the national identification card system to
determine whether a unique card bearing the national identification number is
required and whether this can replace other national identification cards such as
the voter registration card.

**Capability 3**
a. **Capacity to Manage Refugees, Asylum Seekers and Migrants - The risk of**
instability in neighbouring countries is likely to result in a significant influx of
refugees, asylum seekers and migrants. Jamaica should have the capability to
manage extraordinary numbers of these categories of persons to include
having systems and facilities in place locally, and the ability to coordinate with
international government entities and non-governmental organizations. The
management systems should include the capability to receive and process
applications for asylum as well as related appeals. Jamaica requires legislation to
fully implement the provisions of the 1951 Convention on the Status of Refugees
and its  1967 Protocol. See SSG 6, which relates to Jamaica’s contribution to
regional and international security, for specific objectives relevant to this issue.

**Objective**

**•** **Establish a formal system/mechanism for the management of refugees,**
**asylum seekers and migrants.**

**Specific Actions**
a. **MNS assisted by the MFAFT will review the function and operation of the**
existing ad hoc- management system; carry out consultations and to co-ordinate
approaches with the relevant government entities and non-governmental
organizations to formulate and establish an effective management system;
develop adequate standards for the provision of facilities, medical care and food
for refugees, asylum seekers and migrants; establish a formal structure to deal
with applications and interviews for refugee and asylum status; and develop and
establish a formal appeal procedure for applicants for refugee and asylum status.


-----

**Capability 4**
**Capacity to Control Entry and Exit Through Ports of Entry and Coastline/Land of**
**Jamaica - Jamaica’s susceptibility to threats to territorial integrity due to vulnerabilities**
associated with the monitoring of individuals is compounded by vulnerabilities relating to
the control of the borders and ports in particular, including an inadequate ability to
monitor and control persons and goods accessing the country. This will be exacerbated
by the threats associated with the introduction of the CSME.

Jamaica should have the capability to adequately and effectively monitor and control
goods and persons entering and exiting the country irrespective of the means and access
points used. These include authorized points of entry (POE) such as sea ports, airports
and post offices; and unauthorized POEs including the coastline and private fields that
can facilitate aircraft operation. Ports that are only occasionally trading and/or admitting
persons are also included.

There should be a capacity to ensure that the urgent need for relief supplies in times of
national emergency does not facilitate breaches of security.

The cruise-ship industry has already implemented comprehensive strict maritime security
control measures under the International Ship and Port Facility Security (ISPS) Code.
However, Jamaica should have the capacity to ensure that proper liaison is carried out
between the Port Facility Security Officers (PFSO), the Port State Control Officers
(PSCO) and immigration. This should include General Declarations of the passenger
manifest, where this is not already being done, consistent with national and international
requirements.

**Objective**

**•** **The overhaul and strengthening of the system of border control should be**
**completed; including mechanisms to improve cooperation and coordination**
**of Immigrations, Customs and Police where appropriate, to ensure that**
**processing at ports for relief cargo and personnel is sufficient. This overhaul**
should include a review of procedures to ensure better monitoring of private
airfields; the development of policies and the building of capacity to monitor and
control access to unauthorized points of entry and ensuring adequate surveillance,

monitoring and control of Jamaica’s air space and marine areas.

**Specific Action – Short Term**

- The overhaul and strengthening of the system of border control is primarily
the responsibility of the MNS agencies, but also includes the MFP (Customs),
**MFAFT, and the MTW. The reorganization of the operations of**
**Immigration and Customs should be completed within one year. In that process,**
the implications of the freer movement of CARICOM nationals occasioned by the
implementation of the CSME should be taken into consideration.


-----

Particular arrangements must be made for enhancing border control processes for
major international events which Jamaica hosts. Cricket World Cup 2007 will be
the first significant test of the updated systems and procedures.

The need to coordinate the operations of the JCF, Immigration and Customs to
include a shared database should be considered as a part of this reorganization.
Further protocols should be established to facilitate intelligence agencies’ sharing
information with Customs, Immigration and the JCF. This would be the joint
responsibility of the relevant intelligence agencies, Customs and Immigration and
can be effected within six months. There is an ongoing requirement to ensure that
appropriate technology is available to affected agencies. This would be the
primary responsibility of the MNS with the required backing from the MFP.

**Capability 5**
**a.** **Capacity to Monitor, Regulate and Control Use of Jamaica’s Airspace,**
**Coastal Waters and EEZ - In addition to the issue of access to the country,**
Jamaica is vulnerable to territorial threats due to an inability to fully monitor and
control the use of areas within the EEZ including the airspace.

b. In order to maintain territorial integrity it is essential that Jamaica has a
capability to under-take regular surveillance of the EEZ by air and  sea to detect
vessels and aircraft and to monitor and control their use of the air and sea space.
This should include the necessary regulatory framework to allow for effective
enforcement of all laws including the Customs Act, Fisheries Act and the
maritime environmental protection laws.

**Objective**

- Ensure that there are sufficient resources and an adequate structure to undertake
regular surveillance of the EEZ by air and sea to detect vessels and aircraft and to
monitor and control their use of the air and sea space. This should include the
necessary regulatory framework to allow for effective enforcement including
customs, fisheries and environmental protection.

**Specific Action – Short Term**
a. MNS and the MFP will improve resources available to the JCF and JDF to make
them better able to monitor coastal areas, and within two years ensure adequate
resources for air and maritime surveillance. The JCF and JDF should, on an
ongoing basis, identify and put out of use locations that are utilized for the illegal
operation of aircraft and increase the monitoring of locations that provide
potential landing strips.


-----

**Capability 6**
a. **The Ability to Prevent and Suppress Insurgency - Jamaica is susceptible to**
insurgent activities due to vulnerabilities which include: the widespread disregard
for the constitutional authority and the democratic tradition; insufficient public
awareness of the silently treacherous nature of the illegal armed groups they
indirectly support by accepting favours; the inadequacies of the legislative
framework to deter and suppress insurgency, and the lack of a full intelligence
capability for early detection of potential insurgent groups.

b. A crucial element in the genesis and survival of insurgency elements is the failure
of the community to inform the authorities of suspicious activities, whether
through direct  support for these groups, complacency or lack of confidence in the
ability of the State to protect them after information is passed. Jamaica
should have the capacity to educate the public and thereby build confidence to
ensure respect for constitutional authority. This would help to discourage any
perceived need to initiate or support insurgency. Related to this is the
necessary capacity of Jamaica as a democratic State to command wide national
respect and to manage and resolve grievances that could destabilize the country
and result in insurgencies.

c. Effective State surveillance of suspect groups whose philosophy and practices
may threaten the democratic framework of the country is critical. There needs to
be an intelligence capacity to detect and monitor such groups, as well as the
ability to apprehend, prosecute and dismantle possible insurgents. Existing
criminal gangs and organized criminal networks would be included in this
category. Jamaica also needs to expand information sharing arrangements with
regional and international partners, to detect and prevent negative external
influences from infiltrating the country. This will take into account current
CARICOM security initiatives and other bilateral and multi-lateral arrangements.

d. Of particular concern is the capability of the  law enforcement agencies to deal
with the issues of internal security relating to insurgency to include the
operational aspects. One key element is a strong legislative framework to control
undemocratic and otherwise unacceptable groups, and to deter and suppress

insurgency.

**Objective**

- **Jamaica’s intelligence apparatus should be made more effective with a**
**number of complementary enhancements. Measures to improve coordination**
amongst agencies with regards to intelligence gathering and analysis, and
effective use of its products must be put in place. Develop and ensure a national
intelligence system to effectively enable the protection and control of Jamaica’s
territory, and to discover possible development of paramilitary groups through the
analyses of strategic intelligence.


-----

**Specific Actions**
a. **MNS will establish protocols, within six months, to ensure more formal and**
**consistent information sharing between private security companies and the**
**police. The MNS should establish, within 6 months, protocols with non-**
intelligence agencies that frequently handle potentially useful data such as CAA,
Immigration and Customs.

b. MNS will also assign a mandate to intelligence agencies to monitor suspect
groups and individuals to determine the possible development of illegal
paramilitary groups.

**Capability 7**
a. **Capacity to Counter Military Threats - There is a risk that Jamaica could be**
caught unprepared due to the widespread belief that the country is not threatened
by external militaries. Although this threat is in fact remote, the country would be
well advised to be prepared. Jamaica is susceptible to military threats from other
States due to vulnerabilities including inadequate strategic intelligence to
facilitate early warning; weak military capacity to control the sea and airspace of
Jamaica and very limited capacity to adequately counter direct military threats of
more than moderate strength.

b. While Jamaica acting alone may not be able to provide for traditional defence of
the country against a superior external military force, at a minimum there should
be a capability to provide sufficient delay to allow for the triggering of other
contingencies. The most effective  employment of this capability should be
informed by a strategic information gathering and intelligence processing
capability locally, and in collaboration with international partners.

c. This must be necessarily supported by the capacity to mobilize or draw upon
external military and related support from the region, such as CARICOM and the
OAS, and from the international community, such as, the Commonwealth and
the UN. This capacity should not rely solely on the goodwill of these countries
and organizations to respond in times of need, but should also be secured through
bilateral arrangements, (such as with the USA, Canada and the UK) or within the
ambit of multilateral treaties.

**Objective**

- **A military capability able to provide a meaningful resistance to external**
**military threats should be ensured, supported by formal agreements with**
**international allies. This will be relative to the strength and disposition of the**
actual threat but should at a minimum protect the country from falling fully into
offensive control while awaiting external support from allies.


-----

**Specific Actions**
a. The JDF will conduct, within six months, a comprehensive Strategic Defence
**Review to ensure the appropriate military structure. This could subsume the**
review mentioned above regarding JDF/JCF collaboration on IS matters.

b. The MNS and the MFP will provide, within a year, the necessary resources to
**ensure the required military capability to defend against or delay external**
**military threats. The JDF should ensure that adequate training takes place to**
meet this requirement.

c. The MNS supported by the MFAFT will immediately initiate discussions
**with existing and potential allies with a view to securing agreement for**
**Jamaica’s security. They should, within a year, review existing agreements,**
whether formal or informal, that relates to Jamaica’s security, and within three
years, negotiate, sign and ratify improved agreements relevant to Jamaica’s
security.

i. The MNS and the JDF will lead on the policy direction and operational
response, respectively, to nuclear threats. The MOH will lead on the
response to incidents involving the use of biological agents, and MLE
**(ODPEM) will coordinate the response actions to chemical incidents.**
The NIA will be mandated to advise on the specific threats.

**Goal 5 – To Strengthen the Integrity of Institutions of Democratic Government**

Governance is the exercise of power in the economic, political and administrative
management of a country’s resources. Good democratic governance includes openness,
justice, equity, inclusiveness, and accountability and embraces the respect for civil rights.
It comprises the traditions, institutions and processes that determine how power is shared
and exercised; decisions made and how authority responds on issues of public concern.
Jamaicans demand improved efficiency, economy and effectiveness of Government
resources. The Government faces increased pressure to decentralize operations, decrease
the levels of bureaucracy and reduce the size of the public service. An effective public
service will lead to public confidence and contribute to providing a stable and secure
environment for Jamaica.

Structures, laws and procedures need to be enhanced or established to aggressively
eradicate corruption in public life primarily, and to remove the culture of corruption in
the society as a whole. In order to strengthen the integrity of the institutions of
democratic governance the government and people of Jamaica need to join in partnership
to combat the negative effects of social discrimination through the exclusion of certain
groups from the democratic process, garrison politics and the associated ills, poor
physical and other conditions of service under which some public servants work,
centralization of essential services and real and perceived corruption among public
officials.


-----

**Capability 1**
a. There needs to be amendments to existing legislation and new enactments in order
to increase the effectiveness and appropriateness of the legislative framework
governing the operations of the institutions of democratic governance. The
proposed National Independent Investigative Authority (NIIA) will specifically
address civil rights abuses. The NIIA is intended to carry out investigations
into abuses and corrupt practises. These must be rigorously enforced in order to
ensure that current, perceived or real weaknesses in enforcement practices are
eliminated. This will ultimately improve the society’s perception of the operations
of the state machinery, reduce the level of state bureaucracy and build public
confidence in the system.

b. More effective policing of communities is needed, in order to effectively combat
high incidences of domestic violence which, though not confined to these areas, is
probably under-reported. Such policing actions must incorporate a willingness to
prosecute the perpetrators of rape, incest and carnal abuse. This will ensure that
the male family members of the victims are not ridiculed and that the victims and
witnesses have a sense of security when these offences are reported to the
police.

c. Localised extortion will also be dealt with thus enabling those persons working in
the communities to enjoy the proceeds of their labour with out the illegitimate
taxation of the dons and gangs operating in these communities.

d. In order to effectively combat the low productivity, poor work ethics and the
perceived and real absence of strong values and attitudes with-in the public sector,
there needs to be a greater fostering of professionalism and institutionalisation
of core values in government. This will improve the public’s perception of the
sector and the levels of satisfaction with respect to services accessed.

e. In order to meet the demand for responsive and effective public policies there
needs to be a more consultative approach to the development of policies. This
will facilitate greater participation in the development and implementation
process.

f. Comprehensive public education and awareness and social reintegration
programmes which promote respect for constituted authority are required. This
will provide the requisite knowledge to the public which will assist in minimizing
the exploitation of vulnerable groups and replace the prevailing ignorance which
fosters the creation and sustaining of garrison culture (politics and communities).
The social reintegration programmes will provide alternatives to the dependence
on the ill-gotten proceeds of crime through the creation of a sense of civic
responsibility.


-----

**Objective**

- **An open and impartial public service in which valued and respected**
**professionals deliver high quality services efficiently and effectively in order**
**to safeguard the public’s interest.**

**Specific Actions– Short Term**
a. **MLGCDS will establish security sub-committees within local government**
(Parish Councils) that  will examine and coordinate action on public order
security related issues, particularly as it relates to law enforcement agencies, to
better safeguard communities island wide.

b. In order to effectively address the problem of poor work ethics within the public
sector,  Office of the Cabinet supported by the MLGCDS and MEYC will
identify the necessary programmes for the enhanced training and development of
the existing public sector staff.  Concurrently, there will be need to increase the
public’s awareness of the role and value of local government. This will be
completed within one year and implemented in six months.

c. **Office of the Cabinet supported by the MLGCDS (the SDC) will expedite the**
implementation of the Code of Consultation for the Public Sector within one year.
The implementation will encompass the establishment of capacities and
mechanisms for conducting effective consultation processes across Government
and regular evaluation of practices.

d. The institutionalization of core values and formal training opportunities based on
a comprehensive needs analysis within the public sector will be completed by the
**Cabinet Office as a priority.  Ultimately, this will lead to increased retention of**
quality staff and the improved delivery of services and overall professionalisation
of the public service. This needs analysis will be completed within eighteen
months by the MEYC. Once completed, each MDA will be mandated to
complete the implementation.

e. **MLGCDS and MLSS in collaboration with the MEYC will seek to improve and**
increase the number of programmes designed to mentor youth. The identification
of areas for improvement and new initiatives will be completed within six months
followed by implementation. MEYC, MLSS and MLGCDS will continually
develop, improve and implement educational and skills training opportunities
aimed particularly at youth-at-risk. The aim is to increase public confidence in the
constituted authority and provide a viable alternative to the lure of criminality
within Jamaica.


-----

**Specific Actions– Medium Term**

a. **MLGCDS will establish effective framework/models, based on domestic and**
international best practices, for the development of regional, parish and
community development committees. Concurrently, the framework for the
implementation of joint public/private sector programmes aimed at the sustained
financing of the development committees will also be developed.

b. **MFP and MLSS will continue the review and improvement of the public sector**
compensation schemes and seek to improve the working conditions within the
public service. Additionally, the professional development and training of public
officials will be significantly enhanced to include increased access to tertiary level

educational opportunities as well as in-service training.

**Capability 2**
a. Effective systems to promote and sustain transparency within the public sector are
necessary to tackle the perceived and real lack of transparency in the operations of
many of the public sector institutions. These systems would also facilitate
improved access by the public to government and other public sector institutions
and services. Systems implemented must include the necessary checks and
balances to ensure their efficacy. There must also be scheduled review periods to
facilitate their currency and appropriateness. Built into such checks and balances
must be the collective responsibility of the particular organization, and by
extension government, to the society, as well as the individual accountability of
the leadership elements for their performance.

b. An enhanced code of conduct for Ministers,  Parliamentarians and other public
and private sector officials needs to be implemented and enforced. This will
ensure that the perceived and actual lack of ethics with respect to Government and
other public officials as well as members of the private sector will be addressed.

**Objective**

**•** **Strengthen the integrity of public institutions and eradicate corruption by**
**preventing, detecting and deterring corruption, and consistently enforcing**
**law and order.**


-----

**Specific Actions– Short Term**
**Cabinet Office will enhance measures to prevent, detect and deter corruption in the**
public service. The reinforcement of this will include the review of current systems and
procedures and the rationalization of staff within a year. Effective sanctions and
penalties will be introduced and existing ones strengthened in order to adequately and
expeditiously deal with breaches.

a. **MOJ will enhance the analytical and investigative capacity of the Commission**
for the  Prevention of Corruption until the establishment of the proposed NIA,
which is intended to carry out investigations into abuses and corrupt practises.
This enhancement will address increased staffing and facilitate the review and
amendment of the legislative framework over time. The review and necessary
implementation will be completed within 6 - 12 months.

b. Provisions will also be made to protect persons who provide information on
corrupt actions which will be done through the passage of legislation and/or the
appointment of a ‘ Confidential Ombudsman’, and to consider expanding the
jurisdiction of the Commission beyond the public sector. MNS and MOJ will
establish the monitoring framework within a year. There must also be periodic
updates of the security vetting system within the public sector, particularly for
sensitive positions.

c. Stringent security vetting standards will be enforced for the beneficiaries of
Government contracts. The review and necessary changes will be completed by
the MOJ in collaboration with the Contractor General.

d. Cabinet Office will also aggressively pursue the institutionalization of the
Performance Based Management System (PBMS) within the public sector. MLSS
will develop standards and performance measurement parameters in order to
facilitate the full implementation of the PBMS. This will establish a framework
to allow for public scrutiny of the operations of MDAs, which will serve to
complement the Access to Information Act and other GOJ initiatives aimed
at greater disclosure within the public sector.

**Goal 6 - To Increase Jamaica’s Contribution to Regional and**
**International Security**

- Jamaica is integrally involved in regional and international efforts to promote and
maintain international peace and security. In this regard, the country continues
to co-operate and to play an active role in the development and implementation of
regional and international security initiatives and measures with the primary
national security objective being to, secure Jamaica’s borders, to protect its
sovereignty and integrity, to secure its maritime areas of jurisdiction and air space
and ultimately to protect its nationals.


-----

- The State’s interests and contributions in regional and international security are
also viewed with-in the context of the country’s need to create a secure
environment for its nationals to experience freedom and to effectively contribute
to economic growth and development.  Additionally, the security and economic
stability of Jamaica’s trading partners in the Caribbean, the wider hemisphere and
the global community are relevant to the country’s security and development
process.

- A CARICOM Regional Task Force on Crime and Security has proposed the
establishment of a management structure for the regional crime and security
agenda. Included in this structure is an Implementation Agency for Crime and
Security (IMPACS) and a Co-coordinating Authority for Information
Management (CIMA), which would both assist in the co-ordination and
processing of relevant security information.  The NSS recognises the importance
of these mechanisms and provides for the appropriate linkages at the policy
making level and imple-mentation stages.

**Capabilities**

a. The wide ranging issues affecting regional and international security require
effective and co-ordinated policies and operational measures among countries for
improvement in peace and security. Jamaica is expected to maintain its
leadership role in the region and, as such, will be fully prepared to effectively
contribute to regional security with the required capabilities to counter the
dynamic security challenges,  which threaten national and regional security.
Jamaica should therefore have the necessary capabilities to strengthen its
commitment to international efforts in the maintenance of global peace and
security and to implement international security measures, including the implementation of relevant UN Security Council resolutions.

b. Jamaica requires legislation to fully implement the provisions of a number of
international legal instruments to which it is a signatory, including the
International Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its
Protocols, the International Convention against the Illicit Trafficking in Narcotics
and its Protocols, and the International Convention against Terrorist Financing.

c. The security concerns in the region and the international community are
compounded by the potential for increased terrorist activities, the illicit
trafficking in narcotic drugs, the illegal trade in small arms and ammunition, and
the prevalence of money laundering and transnational organized crime. The
following capabilities are required:

d. Security cooperation agreements with regional and international partners

e. Structured Intelligence sharing with partners


-----

f. Comprehensive and up to date laws and regulations

g. Regional and international security-related agreements

h. Effective mechanisms to monitor, regulate and enforce agreements.

i. Enhanced capacity to influence the development of regional and international
policies relating to peace and security.

j. Effective communication systems to heighten public awareness.

k. Capacity to monitor, assess and respond to regional and international security
events.

l. Capacity to contribute to regional and international conflict prevention, crisis
management, peace-keeping activities and other interventions including
humanitarian assistance.

m. Regional and international engagement to prevent and reduce instability in
neighbouring  states.

n. Improved capacity to process and manage refugees/migrants.

**Objectives**

**•** **Strengthen regional and multi-lateral cooperation in the promotion of**
**regional and international peace and security.**

**Specific Actions– Short Term**
a. MFAFT supported by the MNS will engage  States with security problems that
can impact negatively on Jamaica.

b. MFAFT supported by technical experts from other MDAs will actively
participate in regional and international security meetings, at all levels, and
continue to collaborate with countries within CARICOM, ACS and OAS.

**Enhance security partnerships and intelligence sharing arrangements.**

**Specific Actions – Short Term**
a. MFAFT supported by the MNS will initiate consultations to establish intelligence
sharing procedures and guidelines with countries that share similar security
concerns including building of security profiles on suspect individuals and
groups.

- Strengthen diplomatic representation overseas, including the provision of a
security remit for all missions.


-----

a. MFAFT supported by the MNS will provide security advisers in overseas
missions in States where there are substantial security matters of interest to
Jamaica. Diplomatic staff to be sensitised to security matters.

b. Improve the national management system for refugees, migrants and other
displaced persons, consistent with international agreements established through
United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) and other
internationally recognized bodies.

c. MFAFT supported by the MNS, ODPEM and MOH will review the function and
operation of the existing ad hoc management system and  formalise adequate
standards for the provision of facilities, medical care and food for refugees,
asylum seekers and migrants. This requires cross-Sectoral consultations in order
to co-ordinate approaches with the relevant government entities and NGOs to
formulate and establish an effective management system.

- Maintain a permanent capability within the security forces to provide for
peacekeeping missions.

**Specific Action – Short Term**
a. **MNS will ensure that JDF and JCF maintain and enhance the capability to assist**
any UN, OAS or CARICOM peacekeeping and specific law enforcement related
requirements. Similarly, the JCF is to be prepared to provide the required support
for law enforcement operations overseas.

- **Improve national capacity to provide external humanitarian assistance.**

**Specific Action – Short Term**
a. **MNS supported by MFAFT, JDF and JCF will maintain a cadre of trained**
personnel for any Government approved overseas deployments, to include the
conducting of regular exercises with regional forces, to provide external
humanitarian assistance as required.

**•** **Ensure signature/ratification of regional and international security**
**agreements which promote peace and security consistent with Jamaica’s**
**interests.**

**Specific Action – Short Term**
a. **MFAFT supported by the MNS will regularly review the instruments affecting**
Jamaica’s regional and international security interests in order to ensure that
those interests are better protected and enhanced.

**•** **Ensure adequate domestic legislation to ensure compliance with regional and**
**international security obligations.**


-----

**Specific Action – Short Term**
a. **MFAFT supported by the MOJ (CPC) and MNS will expedite the drafting,**
and facilitate the enactment of, the necessary legislation to enable accession to
the current regional and international agreements which are of interest to
Jamaica, taking into account the various international rules and laws.

- **Implement regional and international agreements to which Jamaica has**
**acceded, including recent CARICOM security initiatives.**

**Specific Action – Short Term**
a. **MFAFT supported by the MNS will ensure that security measures are**
implemented so that Jamaica carries out its obligations to comply with the
provisions of the agreements. Effective units/departments are to be established to

co-ordinate the implementation activities and to monitor the agreements.

b. **MFAFT and MNS will actively participate in regional and international**
discussions and negotiations on security matters.

**Goal 7 – To Provide the Environment for a Stable Economy, and an Effective**
**Delivery of Social Services**

The Government has a responsibility to combat financial crimes and to implement sound
macro-economic policies and programmes to   create a society in which each citizen has
the prospect for a better quality of life. There is need to ensure that regulatory and other
measures are geared towards strengthening the financial system, stimulating investment,
encouraging tax compliance and facilitating sustainable economic growth and
development in a secure and stable environment. It is also essential to counter the
methods used by individuals, groups and organizations to earn, move and store illicit
funds. This will help to enhance and maintain the integrity of Jamaica’s economic
system and to close the conduits in which national security are targetted. The
Government will also foster an environment that provides access to economic
opportunities and reduce the dependency on illegal activities, particularly among persons
in the lower socio-economic bracket.


-----

The Government has a role to protect and preserve the fundamental human rights of all
Jamaican citizens and to provide access to basic education, health, shelter, and effective
systems for the provision of other social services. The protection of the most vulnerable
and the alleviation of poverty are also government objectives for a stable and secure
environment. Social stability and development are essential contributing factors to the
strengthening of national security, hence it is critical that the social dimension is
incorporated in Jamaica’s national security strategy. Unemployment, low standards of
living and poor social infrastructure contribute to social, economic and political
instability. Improvements in the social sector are required and the country needs the
capability to ensure that social threats can be eliminated or reduced.

For this goal, the capabilities, objectives and   specific actions are listed collectively
and not as developed in previous cases.

**Capability 1**

a. A more effective legislative and supervisory framework for the entire financial
sector is required. This is to facilitate a high level of compliance with
appropriate sanctions to address tax evasion, fraud, corruption and
illegally-sourced individual or business-related income and assets. It should also
protect intellectual and cultural property (IP) rights.  Such a framework should
reduce systemic risk  and the country’s vulnerability to financial crises.

b. Enhanced computer security in critical areas, such as the financial infrastructure,
to prevent, detect and respond rapidly to cyber crimes and avoid catastrophic
data loss or related problems is required.

**Objectives**

**•** **A strong and effective security sector to reduce crime and violence, which**
**impact negatively on investment and growth.**

**Specific Actions for a Stable Economic**
**Environment – Short Term**

a. **MIT supported by MNS, MTW, MLE will provide enhanced and visible land,**
sea and air security systems in key resort areas for the protection of the tourism
sector, including a coor-dinated emergency response capability.  Substantial
**private sector support will be necessary.**


-----

b. **MTW supported by MNS and MFP will seek to strengthen security and customs**
clearance policies and procedures at the international seaports, airports and other
points of entry to detect and deter the trade in contraband, especially arms and
narcotics. Existing Customs laws will be reviewed to address inadequacies,
including the need for increased penalties and provisions to deal with problems
that are associated with smuggling and unlicensed Customs Brokers. The
timelines for implementation will vary, but the maximum time frame will be
approximately eighteen months.

**•** **Effective policies and programmes to monitor, detect, investigate and**
**prosecute financial crimes, supported by relevant legislation,  are required.**

**Specific Actions**
a. **MFP, MNS and MOJ will strengthen policies, laws and regulations to combat**
money laundering, terrorist financing and other illegal or irregular financial
transactions.

b. Regional and international co-operation must be expanded and improved to adopt
the recommendations/standards of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF),
Caribbean Financial Action Task Force (CFATF) and other recognised bodies,
in matters relating to financial crimes and terrorist financing. This is the primary
responsibility of the MFP, with support from the MNS/JCF and MFAFT.

c. MCST and Fiscal Services Limited/MFP, with support from other relevant
agencies, will ensure the continued enhancement of computer security to
facilitate effective prevention and detection of cyber crimes. This will be an
ongoing process.

d. Formal mechanisms will be established including permanent inter-agency
committees for the  detection, investigation and prosecution of financial
crimes. The proposed NIA is intended to be one of the mechanisms to carry out
these functions. MFP (BOJ, FSC, FID, Jamaica Customs, Taxpayer Audit
and Assessment Department (TAAD)) will lead with support from, MOJ, DPP,
and JCF.

- Effective combating of money laundering, tax evasion and other
financial/economic crimes

**Specific Actions**
a. **All MDAs will ensure that adequate risk mitigation, prevention and response**
contingency plans are developed and implemented to protect critical economic
and physical infrastructure and the essential services from disasters and criminal
activities, such as sabotage, terrorism and accidents. Emergency response
programmes will be coordinated and  filed with the National Disaster Committee,
ODPEM and JDF as is relevant.


-----

**•** **Providing for economic diversification, energy security and systems to**
**reduce the impact of economic shocks**

**Specific Actions**
a. To forestall the impact of any sudden energy shocks the national energy policy
will be enhanced and vigorously implemented. The imminent exploration of
Jamaica’s territorial waters for natural resources such as crude oil  and natural
gas will continue to be promoted on an ongoing basis. MCST and its energyrelated agencies would have primary responsibility for implementation.

b. **MCST, with support from MFAFT, MNS, MOJ,  will strengthen the protection**
of ‘Brand Jamaica’ and associated intellectual property (IP) rights. This will be
done through appropriate legislation, monitoring, investigation, prosecution of
violators and a robust public awareness campaign.

**Capability 2**

**Delivery of Social Services**

a. Established and effective conflict management mechanisms to prevent or
resolve industrial, community and domestic conflicts in a non-violent manner,
thus reducing crime and preventing the destruction of critical infrastructure and
public or private property.

b. Effective measures to address socio-economic problems that contribute to crime
and violence and the institution of programmes to counter  social ills, such as
illiteracy, unemployment and poverty, which have a direct impact on the level
of crime, economic growth and development.

c. The capability to prevent and to respond effectively to the problem of drug abuse
and to strengthen demand management policies and programmes.

d. Security services to ensure safer school environments through the efforts of both
Government and relevant private sector interests.

e. Enhanced security facilities at major health facilities.

f. Programmes to promote positive values and attitudes.

g. Coordinated social reintegration programmes, to provide opportunities for the
reintegration of ex-offenders, including youth offenders and youth-at-risk.

h. Mechanism to coordinate the myriad organizations, programmes and initiatives
relating to youth in order to avoid fragmentation and possible duplication of
effort.


-----

i. Capability to expand and ensure better coordination of community programmes to
enhance parenting skills.

j. Programmes which highlight mentoring and positive role models, recreational and
sports development, educational and cultural achievements.

k. HIV policies in the workplace and HIV prevention and control programmes in
schools and the health services.

**Objectives**

**•** **Commitment to enforce laws and regulations which affect social values and**
**practices, such as the use of expletives, lewd behaviour, indiscipline, lack of**
**respect and invasion of privacy.**

Specific Actions for Delivery of Social Services – Short Term
a. MOH supported by MEYC will enforce public order and social legislation,
particularly those aimed at minors; and strengthen rehabilitation and therapeutic
programmes.

- Sustained community programmes in support of existing security related
initiatives and other community development initiatives.
– Such programmes should encompass the expansion of care centres,
shelters, residential training and placement in mentoring and /or
apprenticeship groups, and others designed for the level of intensity of the
intervention needed.

**Specific Actions**
a. **MEYC will expand parenting skills training and mentoring programmes in**
schools and communities and encourage service clubs and professional groups to
participate. Expand the family life component of the guidance

counselling programmes in schools.

b. **Development Division (Cabinet Office) supported by MLGCDS will expand**
community development programmes and provide opportunities to develop the
community economy, in partnership with the private sector.

- Seek funding from legitimate sources to sustain various community security
initiatives
– Supported by massive public education and  incentive programmes,
communities, business enterprises, civic groups and families should be
encouraged to sponsor their selected programmes.

a. MOH, with support from MEYC and MNS,  will expand social intervention
programmes to provide guidance and support for vulnerable children.


-----

- Expand poverty alleviation and employment programmes.

**Specific Actions**
a. **MEYC will institute measures to ensure increased inter-agency coordination of**
issues relating to youth.

b. **MLSS supported by MLGCDS will enhance social welfare programmes that**
would protect  the most vulnerable citizens and groups from abuse (e.g. people
who are institutionalized, homeless, mentally and physically challenged).

c. **MLGCDS, MEYC and MIT will expand community training programmes in**
business development (self-start, micro businesses) in order to reduce poverty
and expand employment opportunities. Assistance will be sought from relevant
NGOs and private sector firms.

d. **Development Division (Cabinet Office) supported by MLGCDS, MEYC and**
**MIT will facilitate opportunities for alternate income-generating projects in**
communities to replace income from illicit activities.

- Expand programmes for literacy and skills development, particularly to youth at
risk.

**Specific Actions**
a. **MEYC will expand access to basic educational facilities for the young and**
expand adult literacy programmes. Provide alternative education/ skills training
programmes for persons who are unable to progress beyond Grade Nine

education.

b. **MNS will expand and coordinate social reintegration programmes for ex-**
offenders, including youth offenders and other youth-at -risk.

c. **MEYC will expand access to basic educational facilities for the young and**
expand adult literacy programmes whilst providing alternative education/skills
training programmes for Grade Nine school leavers. Employment readiness
programmes will be created for these young persons who are without employable
skills and who do not qualify for HEART/NTA programmes.

d. **MNS, MOJ, MLGCDS and MLSS will review and expand community**
programmes in the various parishes, to ensure that they cater to social
reintegration programmes for ex-offenders, youth offenders and other youth-atrisk.

e. **MNS and MOJ will develop community correction programmes, targeting youth**
and first offenders. This will involve the provision  of supervised facilities
within the community, such as appropriately trained churches, to house and
rehabilitate non-violent, first time, low risk offenders.


-----

- **Sustain and strengthen drug eradication programmes and intensify**
**programmes for the reduction of drug demand and use, including public**
**education about the types and inherent dangers of substance abuse.**

**Specific Actions**
a. **MOI supported by MEYC will intensify programmes to create better public**
awareness of civic responsibilities and include promotion of positive values and
attitudes.

b. **MEYC, with support from MOH and MNS, will include preventive substance**
abuse programmes in the curricula of schools and training institutions.
Concurrently, public education programmes about substance abuse will also be
expanded via the MOI and the JIS. MOJ will also ensure that the Drug Court is
expanded, by providing for special sittings in each parish, to facilitate early
intervention for first time offenders.

- **Promote the establishment of comprehensive security systems for health and**
**education facilities supported by partnerships with relevant stakeholders**
**within the public and private sectors.**

**Specific Actions**
a. **MEYC, in partnership with the MNS, Schools Boards of Management and**
Parent Teachers’ Associations will ensure the development of comprehensive
school security systems, aimed at preventing and reducing violence in schools.
Additionally, dispute resolution and anger management programmes in schools
will be  and ‘peace ambassadors’ appointed.

b. MOH, supported by MNS, will, in partnership with ‘Friends’ of Hospitals/Health
Centres, community organizations and other stakeholders within the public and
private sectors, develop comprehensive security systems to reduce crime and
violence at health facilities. Where possible, sterile areas/security zones will be
created around health facilities for patrol and surveillance purposes.

c. **MEYC, with support from PTAs, School Boards and other community**
**stakeholders, will expand parenting skills training and mentoring whilst encouraging**
Service Clubs and professional groups to participate.


-----

# Goal 8 - To Protect Jamaica’s Natural Resources and Reduce the Risks of Disasters

Jamaica’s natural resources are important national assets which need to be protected.
Measures to prevent, limit and respond to activities which cause unsustainable
degradation of precious   natural resources are a security concern. With sustainable
development as an underlying theme, this goal first focuses on the protection of natural
resources by ensuring sustainable use of land, marine and ecosystems resources through
education, enforcement and further development of environmental regulations. It also
includes regional and international co-operation to prevent and reduce global
environmental problems, including climate change and desertification.

Jamaica has continuously been affected by natural and man-made hazards that have
created significant physical damage, severely disrupted the livelihoods of many, impeded
the country’s economic growth and threatened national security.

This goal further concentrates on Disaster Management, which includes the development
or revision of disaster plans for all hazards, national awareness programmes,
development planning, forecasting and improved response capabilities. Implementation
of sustainable mitigation measures from international, regional, national (which includes
all sectors) and community levels is included. The goal additionally focuses on the
island’s capability to deal with emerging man-made disaster risks such as terrorism and
major shipping accidents involving nuclear materials.
First responder to disasters, such as the JDF and the Jamaica Fire Brigade, require
adequate resources and additional training in specialised areas. These include the
capacity to respond to a fire in a skyscraper; the capacity to handle    hazardous,
noxious spills and other man-made disasters, including chemical and other fires.

In the case of a major airline accident, Jamaica is adequately equipped to respond to
incidents at the two international airports but responders should receive additional
training and resources as there may be challenges should an aviation disaster occur
elsewhere. In the case of a major shipping accident, Jamaica has a first response
capability, but the resources to sustain effective actions are limited. In the specific case
of nuclear hazards, Jamaica will need to discourage the transit of such materials through
international and regional lobbying. The handling procedures and processing of relief
cargo is, for expedience, sometimes not carried out in sufficient detail to avoid
compromising security.

For this goal the capabilities and objectives are listed collectively and not as developed in
SSGs 1 - 6.


-----

**Capability 1**

**Protection of Natural Resources**

a. The capability to provide for the surveillance and monitoring of the use of natural
resources on land, air and sea, and the enforcement of the necessary legislation and
appropriate government policies, laws and penalties to deter- overexploitation,
encroachment on and damage to Jamaica’s natural resources.

b. Mechanisms for increased public awareness and education in order to have active
public participation in planning processes and the reporting of violations.

c. Measures to implement appropriate regional and international agreements
relating to sustainable environmental development.

**Objectives - Protection of Natural Resources**

- **Increase capacity on land, sea and in the air for surveillance and monitoring**
**of the use of natural resources for enforcement purposes.**

**Specific Actions– Protection of Natural**
**Resources - Short Term**
a. **MLE** **and MOJ will strengthen the overall monitoring and enforcement**
capabilities of NEPA. This revamping will begin by conducting a comprehensive audit
of the islands natural resources and will require the input of all the other agencies which
have similar resource management mandates.

b. **MLE will initiate a training programme to sensitize the ISCF to the various**
environmental and planning issues that will require enforcement monitoring, and improve
the interface between ISCF and the NEPA.

c. **MLE and MNS will formalize arrangements for support by way of air and sea**
assets for monitoring and enforcement of natural resources protection laws.

d. **MLE and MNS will provide adequate equipment and training to the regulating**
body’s enforcement mechanism to improve enforcement.

- Revise and strengthen Jamaica’s environmental and physical planning laws and
improve legislation and enforcement capacity to prevent unregulated exploitation of
natural resources for improved deterrence, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement.

**Specific Actions**
a. **MLE will promote proactive physical and environmental planning, and**
implement a standard- ized Geographic Information System (GIS) for resource
management and planning.


-----

b. **MLE with MNS will carry out a programme to enable the relocation of**
communities presently sited in marginal, vulnerable or environmentally sensitive areas.

- Improve legislation to regulate the transportation and disposal of hazardous
materials.

**Specific Actions**
**a.** **MLE and MOJ will enhance legislation to regulate the transportation and**
disposal of hazardous materials within the island, and designate areas and facilities as
disposal sites. Attention will also be given to transiting of hazardous materials through
Jamaica and its maritime space, with support from relevant international bodies.

- **To encourage active public participation in planning processes and the**
**reporting of violations through public awareness and education programmes.**

**Specific Actions**
**a.** **MLE and MOI will increase efforts at informing the public about environmental**
and physical planning issues and recommendations. Additionally, conservation
incentives will be developed and implemented to reward sound conservation and
environmental management practices.

**Capability 2**

**Disaster Management**

a. A strengthened national disaster management organization and National Disaster
Committee is required, in order to focus on a more coordinated approach to disaster
response, damage assessment, rehabilitation and recovery. Existence of a more
collaborative relationship among stakeholders in disaster management, including
Government, private and non-government organizations will be sought. Community
based organizational structure which facilitates networking between zonal committees
and community groups will be further developed.

b. Existence of a dedicated robust National Disaster Fund, given the island’s
vulnerability to natural hazards will be initiated. This would facilitate the establishment
of facilities island-wide for the pre-positioning of National Emergency Relief supplies to
expedite the distribution process.

c. The establishment of legislation and policies to provide for disaster mitigation.
Guidelines will also be developed to include disaster mitigation in the development
planning process and demarcation of specific vulnerable areas.

d. Increase the capability for Emergency Management Agencies to adequately
respond to unconventional disaster scenarios (e.g. bio-logical and chemical attacks), and
manmade disasters such as fires, chemical and oil spills and explosions.


-----

e. Mechanisms for increased public awareness and education in order to promote
security related aspects of disaster management.

**Objectives - Disaster Management**

**•** **Strengthen the parish and community net-working capabilities in times of**
**disaster particularly in vulnerable communities.**

**Specific Action**
**a.** **MLE and ODPEM will review existing disaster mitigation policies and**
programmes and update them where necessary.

- **Strengthen interagency communication information sharing and public**
**awareness to support the disaster management process.**

**Specific Action**
a. **MLE will upgrade the communication system to allow operation down to**
community level for effective uninterrupted communication before, during and post
disaster recovery.

**•** **Expand capacity of national disaster management agency (ODPEM) to**
**coordinate response to expected increase in disaster occurrences.**

**Specific Actions**
a. **MWH and MLE will expand programs for the relocation of vulnerable**
communities on an ongoing basis, along with the necessary public education programme.

b. **MLE will prepare comprehensive hazard inventory maps for the entire island to**
include identification of areas considered to be high risk for development.

- **Increase capability of Emergency Management Agencies to respond to**

**unconventional situations (e.g. mass casualties from terror attack, aviation**
**and marine disasters).**

**Specific Action**
a. **MNS, MLGCDS and MLE will implement phased training of first responders to**
adequately manage a post terrorist attack scenario.

- **Fully incorporate disaster mitigation planning into physical planning and**
**formalize the acceptance and enforcement of national building codes.**

**Specific Action**
a. **MLE and MLGCDS will complete the review and update of the National**
Building Code, to reduce the vulnerability of the islands structures to natural hazards, in
collaboration with Jamaica Institution of Engineers.


-----

- **Increase budgetary allocation to first responders for disaster mitigation,**
**preparedness programmes and community mitigation projects, in**
**collaboration with international donors. Provide for a dedicated managed**
**national Disaster Response Fund for major national disasters.**

**Specific Action**
a. **MFP will seek to establish a dedicated disaster fund to respond to natural**
disasters, in order to reduce the response time. This will also include funding for
establishment of strategically located storage facilities for the pre-positioning of
emergency relief supplies.

b. **MLE will seek to secure continued international** support for disaster related
projects funded for ODPEM.

# Chapter 4 – Coordinating and Monitoring Mechanisms

- Conceptual Framework

- National Security Strategy Implementation Unit (NSSIU)

- Specific Mechanisms

- Coordination of Intelligence

- Enhancing Programmes to Promote Community Safety and Security

- National Strategic Communications Programme

- The Public’s Involvement in Implementing the NSS

- Funding Priorities

**Conceptual Framework**

Taken together, the policy direction and actions articulated in this strategy are intended to
bring about nothing short of transformation in attitudes, processes and practices in
relation to how Jamaica goes about assuring its security. The analysis identified many
capabilities that already exist in some form and initiatives that are at various stages of
implementation; these provide a very good base on which to construct Jamaica’s desired
future.

Transformation does not result from the normal course of development. The many
laudable actions being undertaken by Ministries of Government, private sector groups,
churches, NGOs, academia and the rest of civil society will lose the potential to transform
unless there is unity of purpose, mutual support, and continuous reinforcing.
Transformation requires first an injection of energy at several institutional levels to drive
change processes in the direction of unity of purpose for collective survival. Secondly an
injection of capital to close the critical capabilities gap to neutralize our critical
vulnerabilities, must accompany the other change processes. Thirdly, unity of effort and
capacity building should be sustained for real and lasting transformation.

Existing mechanisms for coordinating government priorities were examined and it has
been determined that the National Security Council (NSC), chaired by the Prime


-----

Minister, is best suited to own the responsibility for the implementation of the NSS.  The
mandate of the NSC is to be expanded to reflect this added responsibility and to include a
formal biennial review of the National Security Strategy. It may be necessary to include
on the Council, the ministers holding responsibility for finance, foreign affairs and
information. This additional mandate will necessitate a schedule of regular meetings
with specific agenda items relating directly to the implementation of the NSS. The NSC
will report to the Cabinet, and the Cabinet to the Parliament.  Parliament has recently
established a Select Committee on National Security. See Annex F for a diagram of
Jamaica’s future security sector and coordinating mechanism.

**National Security Strategy Implementation Unit**

**A National Security Strategy Implementation Unit (NSSIU), to be appointed by the**
NSC, is to be established in the OPM in the short term. The NSSIU will be established
temporarily until a  permanent secretariat is put in place for the NSC. The permanent
secretariat that replaces the NSSIU will be led by the National Security Advisor (NSA).
It will undertake the day to day coordination and monitoring, in addition to    driving
the transformation process on behalf of the NSC. The coordinator of the NSSIU should
be of the ranking of Permanent Secretary and be accountable to the NSC. Other members
of the team would be drawn from relevant ministries with a primary stake in security and
development. A small research, evaluation and administrative staff will be required. It is
conceivable that the task of the NSSIU could take up to two years.

Functions to be performed by the NSSIU include:

- The convening of joint meetings to confirm responsibilities, actions and time lines
as mandated by the NSS. The Unit will be responsible for developing a full
process monitoring mechanism which will allow for easy identification of actions
required, responsibilities and the effective meeting of deadlinesby the relevant
organizations.

- Monitoring the progress of the implementation. The evidence of implementation
will include confirming that the required structures,policies, infrastructure,
personnel and equipment are in place where necessary.

- Evaluation of general implementation and Special Security Initiatives in
particular. The unit will determine benchmarks in order to verify that the actions
being carried out are effective in meeting the Strategic Security Goals and
Objectives. Indicators of Progress will be devel- oped. This will include sector
performance targets.

- Channelling of information on the progress of the implementation process to the
NSC. The unit will do some measure of trouble shooting and will keep the NSC
regularly informed on progress and any challenges encountered


-----

- Resolving conflicts that arise during the course of implementation as Departments
and agencies seek to coordinate their actions.

- The coordination of actions as directed by the NSC.

- Continuous review of the National Security Strategy and annual report to the
NSC.

**Specific Mechanisms**

Specific mechanisms to facilitate the effective functioning of the NSSIU will include:

- **Establishment of Joint Committees at the levels of:**

– Relevant Permanent Secretaries

– Heads of Departments and Agencies

– Relevant Local Government authorities and Civil Society Groups

– Regional and International Partners

- **Establishment of agreed standards, procedures and indicators of progress.**

- Formalization of written reporting systems, visits and consultations.

- **Special meetings with stakeholders as necessary.**

The head of the NSSIU (Coordinator), who will also function as Secretary to the NSC,
will report ultimately to the Prime Minister, but routinely to the Cabinet Secretary. His
main functions would include:

- Providing direction and control of the NSSIU.

- Scheduling and preparing for NSC meetings, and follow up actions.

- Preparing regular updates and reports.

- Coordinating NSS implementation meetings.

- Ensuring that the NSS is implemented across Government on behalf of the NSC.

**Coordination of Intelligence**

The National Security Advisor (NSA) will oversee the establishment of the new
**National Intelligence Agency (NIA) for strategic purposes and will also coordinate the**
existing operational intelligence bodies through the use of agreed protocols. In the
medium to long term, the position of the NSA will be established at the Cabinet Office as
the head of the NSC permanent staff, and he/she will provide progress reports on
strategic security initiatives, advice on current major national security
developments, and the impact of regional and international security concerns on Jamaica.
When the NSSIU is dissolved, the NSA will assume responsibility for outstanding issues
in relation to the implementation of the NSS.


-----

**Enhancing Programmes to Promote Community Safety and Security**

A policy framework for action on revitalising  community security, social inclusion and
the social contract is to be approved by government. The Development Division (Cabinet
Office) has the mandate to coordinate the initiatives and   programmes, which will fall
within the ambit of the social intervention, given the existence of an adequately stable
environment.  In communities which pose high risk for the social agencies of the state,
the Ministry of National Security will use appropriate means to provide a secure
environment for the regular delivery/provision of essential   public services such as
policing, solid waste   management, public lighting and sewerage     disposal. When
conditions for stability have been set, the Development Division will exercise its
mandate on the ground. The profile of the Development Division is to be enhanced and
additional resources provided.

Parish level and Community Safety and Security Groups, which have begun to be
established, are to be linked in a network extending across the island, community by
community through a steady process of expansion. These volunteer groups will harness
the inputs of community   representatives, businesses, youth, emergency services,
service clubs, and the local authorities. The Ministry of National Security will coordinate
this social movement and will embrace legitimate community based organizations. MNS
will,   within available resources, provide critical support to assist groups to achieve
safety and security goals agreed by the community that are in harmony with the priorities
of national security policy.

**The Public’s Involvement in Implementing the NSS**

In keeping with the initiative to develop a stronger partnership between citizens, civil
society and all Government organizations involved in delivering security services, it is
important for all members of the public to understand the critical role that they are
required to play in helping to make Jamaica a more and safe secure place to live and visit.
Generally, public interpretation of policing tends to be narrowly confined to the role of
the JCF. It is not easily recognized that there are other    government bodies with
enshrined law enforcement functions and powers that when not effectively discharged
lead to disorder and can ultimately  foster criminal activity. It requires greater public
involvement and commitment in supporting all aspects of law enforcement activities.
The society should therefore be less tolerant of deviant and antisocial behaviour.


-----

Public participation and partnership with the police in dealing with security issues needs
a structured medium for this to work effectively. It requires that bodies/councils be
established with set criteria for their composition, function and  performance. In every
parish of the island there are significant stakeholders such as the Fire Brigade, the NWA,
and Health Services who along with the Police and the JDF play a critical role in public
safety and security. An integrated approach through sets of codes of practice should guide
partnership amongst these entities. These bodies should have mandatory meetings open to
members of the public where citizens can voice their concerns, give feedback on the
performance of the police and other protective agencies and more importantly allow
citizens to question the police and the other agencies.

The bodies to be established should, therefore, serve as a forum where local policing
issues can be identified and help the local police establish policing priorities. The body
should also have an advisory, monitoring and evaluating role on  security and safety
matters. In this way, the true philosophy of community policing can be better served
through a strengthening of the partnership between the JCF and the communities as set
out the 2005-8 Corporate Strategy. This type of   partnership should lead to a
broadening of the democratic police accountability that is desirous since it provides a
way for the police to become more directly responsive to the citizens. It should, therefore,
become easier to get public cooperation in dealing with crime and disorder.

**Funding Priorities**

**Security affects all areas of life in Jamaica and is in fact the number one priority for**
**consideration at this stage of Jamaica’s development. While it is recognized that there**
are limited resources available, security must be seen as the most urgent sector to which
priority must be given in providing financial and other resources in both the public and
private sector. When the security  sector has responded to the various actions required
of the NSS, and the environment becomes safer and more stable, the strategic    reallocation of financial resources consistent with the improving security environment can
be done. A more careful and efficient management of resources on the part of the
security forces will also bring in major savings. Development of detailed security related
budgets is beyond the scope of this policy document but MDAs are required to complete
that exercise in keeping with their security mandates.

Areas to receive immediate allocation include the Special Security Initiatives already
outlined, along with the provision of resources to continue the ongoing modernization of
key security organizations and all elements of the Criminal Justice System. This must
include the establishment of a National Intelligence Agency, the provision of modern
forensic equipment and the maintenance of a viable capability to provide for sustained,
effective surveillance and     monitoring of Jamaica’s maritime borders.


-----

# References

Education System Document prepared by MEYC.

The Emergency Powers Act : 2

Francis, A., and K. T. Campbell “A Supply function For Violent Crime in Jamaica, 1970
– 1999”, University of the West Indies, 2001. (Cited in World Bank “The Road to
sustained Growth in Jamaica” Country Study, 2004)

Gang Study: The Jamaican Crime Scene, Ministry of National Security & Justice 1998.

Harriott, A, A. Francis, C. Kirton and G. Gibbison “Crime and Development: The
Jamaican Experience”, University of the West Indies, 2003. (Cited in World Bank, op.
cit.).

Horace Levy et al “They Cry Respect!: Urban Violence and Poverty in Jamaica”
University of the West Indies, Centre for Population, Community and Social Change,
1996.

JASPEV 2015: 13 and 43

JCF Statistics Department.

John P. Sullivan and Robert J. Bunker, ‘Drug Cartels, Street Gangs, and Warlords’, Small
Wars and Insurgencies, Summer 2002, pp40-53

K.D. Knight (Hon.), Sectoral Debates Jamaican Parliament 2000

Moises Naim, The Five Wars of Globalization, Foreign Policy, Jan/Feb 2003, pp29-36

PIOJ 2000: Patterns of Substance Use and Abuse among Post Primary Students in
Jamaica

PIOJ and World Bank Report

RCDS Lecture on Organized Crime March 2003

Report of the National Committee on Crime and Violence, June 2002

The WHO World Report on Violence and Health


-----

ANNEX C - Committees

The names that appear in brackets are the replacements for the persons who were the
original members of the groups.

NSS Steering Group (NSSG) - Senior executives (including some Permanent Secretaries
and Heads of Organizations)  appointed to guide the NSS Working Group in the
development of the NSS

Dr. the Hon. Carlton Davis, OJ - Cabinet Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister

Mr. Gilbert Scott - Permanent Secretary, Ministry of National Security
(MNS)

Miss Carol Charlton - Senior Director, Immigration, Citizenship &
Passport Division, MNS

Major (Ret’d) Richard Reese - Commissioner of Corrections, MNS

Rear Admiral Hardley Lewin - Chief of Staff, JDF

Mr. Francis Forbes - Commissioner of Police, JCF

(Mr. Lucius Thomas)

Ambassador Douglas Saunders - Permanent Secretary, Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade

Dr. Alwin Hales - Permanent Secretary, Ministry of
Transportation and Works

Dr. the Hon. Noel Hylton, OJ - President/CEO, Port Authority of Jamaica

Miss Shirley Tyndall - Financial Secretary, Ministry of Finance and
Planning (MFP)

Mr. Hector Jones - Acting Commissioner of Customs, MFP

Mr. Michael Surridge - Chief Technical Director, Finance
Investigation Division, MFP

Mrs. Carole Palmer - Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Justice

Mr. Michael Hylton, QC - The Solicitor General, MOJ

RAdm (Retd) Peter Brady - NSS Team Leader


-----

Dr. Owen Greene - NSS Facilitator, University of Bradford, UK

Lt Col Richard Sadler - Coordinator, NSS Secretariat

NSS Working Group (NSWG) - Group of senior directors nominated by their MDAs
to study, develop and report on the progress of the NSS.

RAdm (Retd) Peter Brady - NSS Team Leader/Chairman

Major (Retd) Vincent Anderson - National Security Advisor, Ministry of
National Security

(MNS)

Miss Annmarie Barnes - Senior Director, Strategic Planning,
MNS
(Lt Col Oral Khan)

Mr. Wesley Moss - Director Private Security Regulation
Authority, MNS
(Mrs. Thelma Ellis- Scott)

Mr. Leighton Wilson - Immigration, Citizenship and Passport
Division, MNS

Mrs. Sonia Wallace - Department of Correctional Services, MNS

(Miss Laura Plunkett)

Colonel Stewart Saunders - Colonel General Staff, JDF

C - 1
Lt Col Rocky Meade - Headquarters, JDF

Miss Novelette Grant - Asst. Commissioner of Police, JCF

Mr. Allan Campbell - Cabinet Office

Mrs. Angella Brown - Asst. Director International Organization
Department,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade

Miss Sybil Williams - Ministry of Finance and Planning (MFP)

Mr. Cecil Brown - Assistant Commissioner of Compliance,
Jamaica Customs Department, MFP


-----

Mr. Omar Walker - Director Customs, Jamaica Customs
Department, MFP

Mr. Keith Darien - Financial Investigations Division, MFP

Miss Valerie Simpson - Director of Policy, Ministry of
Transportation and Works (MTW)

Mrs. Jodi Barrow - MTW

Maj (Retd) Christopher Naylor - Airports Authority of Jamaica

Supt. James Forbes - Port Authority of Jamaica

Lt Col (Retd) Oscar Derby - Jamaica Civil Aviation Authority (JCAA)

Mrs. Judith Goodison - JCAA

Mr. Canute Brown - Consultant Advisor of Justice Reform,
Ministry of Justice (MOJ)

Mrs. Marilyn Dunbar - MOJ

Mrs. Symone Mayhew - Solicitor General’s Office, MOJ

Mr. Brian Moodie - Attorney General’s Chamber, MOJ

Mr. Rollin Alveranga - Senior Director Policy Planning and
Standards Division, Ministry
of Land and Environment

Mr. Peter Wilson-Kelly - National Environment and Planning Agency

Dr. Barbara Carby - Office of Disaster Preparedness and
Emergency Management
(ODPEM)

Mrs. Joe-ella Mitchell - ODPEM

Mrs. Onika Campbell - Senior Director Planning, Ministry of Local
Government,
Community Development and Sport

Major (Retd) H. G. Benson - Commissioner, Jamaica Fire Brigade

Mr. Fred Whyte - Jamaica Fire Brigade


-----

Mr. Rupert Johnson - Director Facility and Property Management,
Ministry of
Agriculture

Mr. Lauriston Wilson - Director Technical Services, Ministry of
Education, Youth and Culture

Mr. Ernest Smith - Spectrum Management Authority,
Ministry of Commerce, Science and
Technology

Mr. Wilbert McKnight - Director of Security and Transport, Ministry
of Water and Housing

Mrs. Veronica Robinson - Director of Work Permits, Ministry of
Labour and (Mrs Faith Innerarity) Social Security

Mr. Denton Edwards - Ministry of Industry and Tourism

Mr. Lloyd Maxwell - Director Policy Planning and Development,
Ministry of Health

Dr. Peter-John Gordon - Planning Institute of Jamaica (PIOJ)

Mr. Everton McFarlane - PIOJ

Lt Col Richard Sadler - Coordinator, NSS Secretariat

Lt (sg) Judy-Ann Neil - Asst. Coordinator, NSS Secretariat

(Capt. Godphey Sterling)

NSS Drafting Team - Select members of the NSS Working Group
tasked with the actual writing of the NSS document

RAdm (Ret’d) Peter Brady - NSS Team Leader/Chairman

Mrs. Sonia Wallace - Department of Corrections, MNS

Lt Col Oral Khan - MNS

Mr. Leighton Wilson - Immigration, Citizenship and Passport
Division, MNS


-----

Mr. Hugh Thomas - Immigration, Citizenship and Passport
Division, MNS

Col Stewart Saunders - JDF

Lt Col Rocky Meade - JDF

ACP Novelette Grant - JCF

Miss Sybil Williams - Ministry of Finance and Planning (MFP)

Mr. Omar Walker - Jamaica Customs, MFP

Mr. Keith Darien - Financial Investigations Division, MFP

Mrs. Angella V Brown - MFAFT

Mr. Brian Moodie - MOJ

Mr. Everton McFarlane - PIOJ

Mrs. Onika Campbell - MLGCDS

Mr. Frederick Whyte - Jamaica Fire Brigade

Mr. Lauriston Wilson - MEYC

Mr. Lloyd Maxwell - MOH

Mrs. Joe-Ella Mitchell - ODPEM

Mr. Peter Wilson-Kelly - NEPA

Lt Col. Richard Sadler - Coordinator, NSS Secretariat


-----

ANNEX D - Stakeholders Consulted

Listed below are the persons/organizations from civil society who were invited to make
public contributions or otherwise consulted. The highlighted list (**asterisk) denotes
those persons who had attended a Public Consultation Session or contributed otherwise.

** Dr. Tony Harriott, Lecturer, University of the West Indies (UWI)

Prof. Brian Meeks, Lecturer, UWI

** Prof. Barry Chevannes, Lecturer, UWI

** Mr. Headley Bernard, Lecturer, UWI

Jamaica Association of Evangelicals

** Jamaica Chamber of Commerce

Dispute Resolution Foundation

Jamaica Bar Association

Independent Jamaica Council for Human Rights Ltd

** Jamaicans for Justice

Jamaica Bankers’ Association

** Private Sector Organization of Jamaica

Jamaica Manufacturers’ Association

** Jamaica Employers’ Federation

Jamaica Council of Churches

** Jamaica Hotel and Tourist Association

Tourism Product Development Company

Jamaica Society for Industrial Security

** The Peace Management Initiative

Joint Trade Union Research Development Centre


-----

Environmental Foundation of Jamaica

The Press Association of Jamaica

St. Mary Parish Council

Westmoreland Parish Council

** Clarendon Parish Council

D - 1

Manchester Parish Council

Portland Parish Council

St. Ann Parish Council

St. Catherine Parish Council

St. Elizabeth Parish Council

St. James Parish Council

St. Thomas Parish Council

Hanover Parish Council

** Kingston and St. Andrew Corporation

Trelawny Parish Council

Custos of Clarendon

Custos of St. Catherine

Custos of St. Andrew

Custos of Hanover

Custos of Kingston

Custos of Westmoreland

Custos of St. James


-----

Custos of Manchester

Custos of St. Ann

Custos of Portland

Custos of St. Elizabeth

Custos of St. Thomas

Custos of Trelawny

Custos of St. Mary

** The Jamaican Diaspor


-----

