[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

# DEFENSE BUILDUP PROGRAM

December 16, 2022

Table of Contents

I Program Guidelines
II Major Programs Regarding SDF’s Capabilities

1 Stand-off Defense Capabilities
2 Integrated Air and Missile Defense Capabilities
3 Unmanned Defense Capabilities
4 Cross-domain Operation Capabilities
(1) Capabilities in the Space Domain
(2) Capabilities in the Cyber Domain
(3) Capabilities in the Electromagnetic Domain
(4) Capabilities in the Ground, Maritime, and Air Domains

5 Command and Control / Intelligence-related Functions

(1) Enhancing Command and Control Functions
(2) Enhancing Information Gathering and Analysis Functions
(3) Responses to Integrated Information Warfare With Special Regard to the

Cognitive Dimension

6 Mobile Deployment Capabilities / Civil Protection

7 Sustainability and Resiliency

(1) Procurement of Various Ammunitions
(2) Securing Fuel
(3) Improving the Operational Availability of Defense Equipment
(4) Facilities Improvement
Ⅲ Organization of Self-Defense Forces (SDF)
1 Joint Operation Structure
2 Japan Ground Self-Defense Force (GSDF)
(1) Level of Defense Capability to Possess
(2) Reorganization of the Major Units
3 Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force (MSDF)
(1) Level of Defense Capability to Possess
(2) Reorganization of the Major Units

4 Japan Air and Space Self-Defense Force (ASDF)

1


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

(1) Level of Defense Capability to Possess
(2) Reorganization of the Major Units
5. Optimizing Organizational Capacity
IV Strengthening the Japan-U.S. Alliance
1 Strengthening Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation
2 Steady Implementation of Measures to Support Stationing of U.S. Forces in Japan
V Collaboration with Like-minded Countries and Others
1 Bilateral/Multilateral Training and Exercises

2 Equipment and Technology Cooperation
3 Capacity Building Assistance
VI Elements Supporting Defense Capabilities

1 Training and Exercises
2 Reinforcing Collaboration and Cooperation with the Japan Coast Guard
3 Collaboration with Local Communities
4 Reinforcing Policy Making Functions

VII Protection of Life, Person and Property of Japanese Nationals / Utilizing Defense

Capability and Measures for Global Security Cooperation

1 Measures to Large-Scale Disasters

2 Efforts for Maritime Security and Use of the Airspace based on Existing

International Rules

3 International Peace Cooperation Activities

Ⅷ New Measures for Early Deployment of Defense Equipment

Ⅸ Defense Production and Technological Base as Virtually Integral Part of a Defense

Capability

1 Reinforcing Defense Production Base
2 Reinforcing Defense Technological Base

(1) Stand-Off Defense Capabilities
(2) Capabilities to Respond to HGVs, etc.
(3) Capabilities to Respond to Drones and Swarm Attacks
(4) Measures for Unmanned Assets
(5) Measures for Next-Generation Fighter Aircraft
(6) Reinforcing Other Deterrence and Response Capabilities

3 Promoting Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology

4 Promotion of Various Measures and Institutional Development
Ⅹ Reinforcing the Foundation for SDF Personnel, to Fulfill Abilities as Core of Defense

Capabilities

2


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

1 Reinforcing Human Resource Base
(1) Reinforcement of Recruitment Measures
(2) Utilization of SDF Reserve Personnel and Others
(3) Effective Use of Human Resources
(4) Improvement of Living and Working Environment, etc.
(5) Human Resource Development
(6) Improving Treatment and Reemployment
2 Transformation of Medical Functions

XI Optimization Efforts
1 Equipment
2 Personnel
XII Quantities of Major Procurement
XIII Expenditures
XIV Notes
Appendix 1
Appendix 2
Appendix 3

3


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

**I. Program Guidelines**

In accordance with the “National Defense Strategy” (approved by the

National Security Council and Cabinet on December, 16, 2022), Japan will
fundamentally reinforce its “Multi-Domain Defense Force,” through the
synergy of organically integrated capabilities including space, cyber, and
electromagnetic domains, and is capable of sustained conduct of flexible
and strategic activities during all phases from peacetime to armed
contingencies, focusing on the capabilities of our opponents and new ways

of warfare. By FY 2027 or by five years from now, Japan will strengthen its
defense capabilities to the point at which Japan is able to take the primary
responsibility for dealing with invasions against its nation, and disrupt and
defeat such threats while gaining support of its ally and others. Furthermore,
in approximately 10 years from now, Japan will make further efforts to
better attain this defense objective and will reinforce its defense capabilities
to the point at which it will be possible to disrupt and defeat invasions
against its nation much earlier and at a further distance.

Given the guiding thoughts above, Ministry of Defense/Self-Defense

Forces (hereinafter referred to as “MOD/SDF”) will effectively and
efficiently build, maintain and operate defense capabilities based on the
following program guidelines.

1 The functions and capabilities required for the defense of Japan are,

firstly, Japan needs capabilities with which to disrupt and defeat invading

forces over long distances, thereby defending invasion itself. Japan
therefore will reinforce “stand-off defense capabilities” and “integrated
air and missile defense capabilities”.

Secondly, should deterrence fail and invasion of Japan occur, Japan

would need to ensure asymmetric advantage by leveraging, in addition to
these capabilities, manned as well as unmanned assets and gain
superiority across domains such as underwater, surface, and air. To this
end, Japan will reinforce “unmanned defense capabilities,” “crossdomain operation capabilities,” and “command and control/intelligence
related functions”.

Lastly, Japan would also need to operate in a swift as well as persistent

manner so as to force the opponent to give up invasion. For this, Japan

will reinforce “mobile deployment capabilities/civil protection” and

4


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

“sustainability and resiliency.”
Additionally, Japan will also place emphasis on the defense production
and technology base, characterized as virtually integral part of a defense
capability, as well as areas such as the human resource base that supports
our defense capability.

2 In procuring equipment, by properly combining the introduction of new,

high performance equipment, along with life extension and improvement

of existing equipment, MOD/SDF will efficiently secure necessary and
sufficient quality and quantity of defense capability. In this regard,
MOD/SDF will strengthen its project management throughout its
equipment life-cycle, including during its research and development
activities, and reduce the life-cycle costs to improve cost-effectiveness.
In addition, MOD/SDF will steadily realize acceleration of defense
equipment deployment which is particularly urgent and significant from
a policy perspective of the areas that could directly affect the SDF's
current and future ways of warfare by incorporating advanced civilian
technologies.

3 In the face of Japan’s aging population with a declining birth rate, and

with no prospect of an increase in the number of recruits, MOD/SDF will
comprehensively promote various measures to reinforce human resource
base such as strengthening recruitment efforts, utilizing SDF Reserve

Personnel and others, promoting women’s participation, raising the
retirement age for uniformed SDF personnel, utilizing diverse and
distinguished personnel including retired uniformed SDF personnel,
improving living and working environment, developing the human
resources, improving treatments, and supporting reemployment, etc.

4 To further reinforce the joint deterrence capabilities of Japan and the

United States in an integrated manner, Japan will promote cooperation,
etc. related to cross-domain operations, including space, cyber, and
electromagnetic domains. In addition, in order to reinforce the
infrastructure to support effective joint response capabilities in all phases,
Japan will reinforce efforts related to information security and

cybersecurity, as well as equipment and technology cooperation to

5


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

promote information sharing between Japan and the United States. In
addition, measures to support the stationing of U.S. Forces in Japan will
be steadily implemented.

In line with the vision of the Free and Open Indo-Pacific (FOIP), to

strategically promote multifaceted and multilayered security operations,
Japan will further promote establishing policy frameworks such as
Reciprocal Access Agreement (RAA), Acquisition and Cross Servicing
Agreement (ACSA), General Security of (Military) Information

Agreement (GSOMIA/GSOIA), and transfer of defense equipment and
technology agreement, while also promoting defense cooperation and
exchanges including bilateral/multilateral training and exercises, defense
equipment and technology cooperation, capacity building, and

interchanges among military branches.

5 In fundamentally reinforcing defense capabilities, Japan will, while

adhering to scrap-and-build approach, optimize SDF’s organization and
authorized strength as well as equipment. We will also further our
ongoing efforts toward more efficient procurement, which have achieved
significant cost reductions. In addition, to account for Japan’s aging
population with a declining birth rate, Japan will robustly promote
automation, labor-saving and optimization.

**Ⅱ Major Programs regarding SDF’s Capabilities**

In order for Japan to buildup defense capabilities to the point at which

Japan is able to take the primary responsibility for dealing with invasions
against its nation, and disrupt and defeat such threats while gaining support
of its ally and others by FY 2027. Japan will place emphasis on
implementing the following major programs listed from 1 to 7 in
fundamentally reinforcing defense capabilities.

1 Stand-Off Defense Capabilities

In order to reinforce capabilities to conduct diverse responses from

outside of the threat envelope and against vessels and landing forces
invading Japan, MOD/SDF will continue development and production
of the prototype of upgraded Type-12 surface-to-ship missile

(develop surface-, ship-, and air-to-ship models), upgraded Hyper

6


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

Velocity Gliding Projectile and hypersonic missiles. MOD/SDF will
extend the ranges of its various missiles, such as by upgrading Hyper
Velocity Gliding Projectile and hypersonic missiles. In order to
fundamentally reinforce defense capability as soon as possible,
MOD/SDF will procure mass-produced rounds for the abovementioned standoff missiles, and will also continue to steadily
procure foreign-made stand-off missiles, such as U.S.-made

Tomahawks.

In addition, MOD/SDF will proceed research and development for

further diversifying launch platforms, and will develop and procure
vertical missile launch system (VLS) that can be equipped on submarines
and a system that can be equipped on transport aircraft, aiming to
improve the operational capability of standoff missiles.

In order to ensure the effectiveness of stand-off defense capabilities,

MOD/SDF will enhance functions of information collection and analysis
as well as command and control by acquiring imagery intelligence, etc.
using satellite constellations and introducing unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAV) and target observation rounds, from the perspective of effective
collection of target information. Since the operation of these stand-off
missiles requires a series of command and control including the
collection of target information and the assignment of targets to each unit
to be conducted in a unified manner, a posture based on joint operation
will be established. In addition, a series of functions necessary for the

development and operation of stand-off missiles will be established by
building additional ammunition storage facilities for storing stand-off
missiles and other equipment, as well as facilities necessary for testing
and maintenance, including securing facilities that can be used for livefiring.

2 Integrated Air and Missile Defense Capabilities

In order to enhance capabilities to detect and track threats such as

Hypersonic Glide Vehicles (HGV), MOD/SDF will procure and upgrade
ground-based warning and control radars (FPS) etc., as well as procure a
future warning and control radar. In addition, MOD/SDF will improve its
capability to respond to HGVs and other such weapons with interceptor

missiles with upgraded capabilities (PAC-3 MSE) by upgrading the

7


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

surface-to-air guided missile PATRIOT system and introducing a new
radar (LTAMDS).

In order to respond more effectively to various situations, MOD/SDF

will begin reviewing the organization and deployment of fire units and
establish a multi-layered air defense system in key areas together with
mid-range ground-to-air guided missile units, and conduct unit
operations for deployment from peacetime. MOD/SDF will also promote
the upgrade of base air defense surface-to-air missile (SAM). In addition,

research and studies will be conducted on a guided missile system which
is capable of responding to HGVs and other such weapons at the glide
phase.

In order to enhance the capability to respond to HGVs and other such

weapons, MOD/SDF will upgrade the Type 03 medium-range surfaceto-air guided missile (modified), and also procure missiles such as
interceptor missiles for ballistic missile defense (SM-3 Block IIA),
interceptors with upgraded capabilities (PAC-3MSE), and long-range
ship-to-air missiles (SM-6).

To achieve effective and efficient response through networking,

MOD/SDF will acquire a network system that enables fire control
network between destroyers and other vessels (FC network) and will
possess Cooperative Engagement Capability (CEC). In addition, by
modifying the information coordination central (ICC) of the surface-toair guided missile PATRIOT system, various guided missile systems will

be networked together.

To strengthen Japan's air defense capabilities, MOD/SDF will

procure Aegis System Equipped Vessels that will primarily conduct
BMD operations.

MOD/SDF will expeditiously develop capabilities to deal with small

unmanned aircraft, etc., by non-kinetic means through a combination of
directed energy weapons such as high-power lasers and high-power
microwaves (HPMs).

Counterstrike capabilities are SDF’s capabilities that leverage stand
off defense capability and other capabilities. In cases where armed attack
against Japan has occurred, and as part of that attack ballistic missiles
and other means have been used, counterstrike capabilities enable Japan

to mount effective counterstrikes against the opponent’s territory.

8


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

Counterstrikes are done as a minimum necessary measure for self-defense
and in accordance with the Three Conditions for Use of Force. Operation
of this counterstrike capability will be conducted under unified command
and control based on joint operations.

3 Unmanned Defense Capabilities

In order to accomplish missions while minimizing human loss, SDF will

expeditiously procure various types of unmanned assets, promoting

initiatives to optimize the existing equipment system and personnel
deployment. In procuring these assets, MOD/SDF will aim to secure both
safety and capability to effectively carry out our mission.

To conduct seamless intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance, and

targeting (ISRT), SDF will procure long-endurance UAVs and ship-borne
unmanned assets that contribute to maritime surveillance, reconnaissance
UAVs that can continuously collect target information in the threat
envelope of an opponent, as well as a variety of unmanned assets for
ISRT. In addition, to implement rapid transport of supplies to widely
dispersed deployed units, remote bases, and naval vessels, MOD/SDF
will consider introducing transportation UAVs and take necessary
measures.

To disrupt and defeat an invasion against Japan, MOD/SDF will

procure utility/attack UAVs and miniature attack UAVs that effectively
retains various attack functions to enable itself to search and identify

personnel, vehicles, naval vessels from the air and quickly respond to
targets.

MOD/SDF will develop and procure unmanned surface vehicles

(USVs) that can be linked to naval vessels and effectively conduct
various operational maneuvers. Various types of unmanned underwater
vehicles (UUVs) will also be developed to gain underwater superiority.

In addition, unmanned ground vehicles (UGVs) and UAVs will be

effectively combined to improve the efficiency of security and protection
systems at garrisons, bases, and critical facilities. MOD/SDF will also
enhance collaboration between manned and unmanned aircraft, as well as
strengthen its ability to operate multiple unmanned assets simultaneously.

4 Cross-Domain Operation Capabilities

9


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

(1) Capabilities in the Space Domain

In order to improve cross-domain capabilities, including the

operation of stand-off missiles, various capabilities such as
information gathering and communications utilizing the space domain
will be further improved. Specifically, MOD/SDF will establish
satellite constellation to improve the detection and tracking of target,
with enhancing Japan-U.S. cooperation and using images from
commercial satellites as supplementary endeavors. In addition,

MOD/SDF will conduct required technological demonstrations to
improve capabilities such as detection and tracking of HGVs using
satellites, considering the possibility of cooperation with the U.S.
Furthermore, in order to cope with the increasing demand for satellite
communications, MOD/SDF will make efforts to establish multiple
layers of communication band with higher resiliency in addition to the
conventional X-band communications.

In response to the space domain, SDF will further enhance

capability to disrupt C4I and other capabilities of opponent. In
addition, in order to enhance the capability for Space Domain
Awareness (SDA), MOD/SDF will promote various efforts, including
the development of SDA satellites scheduled for launch in FY2026, as
well as further studies on the operation of multiple SDA satellites.
Furthermore, in order to enhance the resilience of Japan's space system
including satellites, MOD/SDF will promote the use of multiple

positioning signals including Quasi-Zenith Satellite System (QZSS)
and commercial satellites, and start development and demonstration of
technology related to resilience of satellite communication.

Regarding cooperation with other countries, in addition to

promoting information sharing with the U.S. and other countries on
SDA, MOD/SDF will strengthen cooperation such as multilateral
shared use of communication waves with high resiliency.

In order to strengthen the organizational structure and human

resource base for the space domain, MOD/SDF will engage with
relevant organizations such as JAXA, as well as allied and like-minded
countries such as the U.S. to secure necessary human resources for
space, such as by establishing a framework to effectively utilize

knowledge and experience on space gained among relevant ministries.

10


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

(2) Capabilities in the Cyber Domain

In line with the government-wide cybersecurity policy which will

be comprehensively coordinated in a centralized manner, MOD/SDF
will enhance its cybersecurity capability, while also promoting
initiatives that contribute to strengthening cooperation with relevant
ministries and agencies, critical infrastructure providers, and defense
industry. MOD/SDF will establish a posture to secure command and

control capabilities and high-priority equipment systems, to assure
SDF’s ability to perform its mission, and to support the cyber defense
of the defense industry even under cyberattacks.

Therefore, considering the latest cyber threat situation, capability

of MOD/SDF in the cyber domain will be strengthened, based on an
assumption that there is no longer safe network, transitioning from
the traditional idea that perimeter security is sufficient to maintain
the network safety. Introducing security functions based on the "Zero
Trust" concept will be considered. "Risk Management Framework
(RMF)" based on a mindset that manages risks continuously, by
analyzing, assessing and appropriately managing risks continuously
after introduction of information systems, will be introduced.
Protection posture of equipment systems and facility infrastructure
systems will be strengthened. Based on an assumption that threats
may have already intruded into our network, cyber threat hunting

capability will be improved to detect the threats early. In addition,
efforts will be made to support strengthening cybersecurity measures
for defense industry, etc.

In order to strengthen the cybersecurity posture of MOD/SDF,

MOD/SDF will reorganize the GSDF Signal School into the GSDF
System and Signal/Cyber School to expand the educational
infrastructure to train cyber personnel. Furthermore, efforts to
develop capability to disrupt opponent’s use of cyberspace for an
attack against Japan, will be strengthened.

In order to strengthen the capability to implement these initiatives

as an organization as a whole, the number of cyber personnel
belonging to cyber-related units such as the SDF Cyber Defense

Command will be expanded to approximately 4,000 by the end of FY

11


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

2027, and MOD/SDF will provide training to its personnel engaged
in cyber-related tasks such as system procurement, maintenance, and
operations. In addition to the increase of cyber personnel belonging
to cyber-related units, these efforts will bring the total number of
MOD/SDF cyber personnel to approximately 20,000 by around
FY2027. Further reinforcement of cyber defense architecture is
intended in the future.

(3) Capabilities in the Electromagnetic Domain

Along with reinforcing SDF’s communication and radar jamming

capabilities, MOD/SDF will strengthen electronic warfare capabilities
by enhancing ability to detect and identify electromagnetic waves and
acquiring means of deception using electromagnetic waves. In addition,
MOD/SDF will expand its use of electromagnetic waves to take
countermeasures against small UAVs using lasers and other means.
Furthermore, MOD/SDF will reinforce electromagnetic domain
management functions which reasonably manage and coordinate
SDF’s use of electromagnetic waves.

To this end, MOD/SDF will make the following efforts: Procurement

of network electronic warfare system (NEWS) with communication
and radar jamming capabilities, development of stand-off electronic
warfare aircraft to jam communications and other functions from
outside of their threat envelope and stand-in jammers to use various

types of electronic jamming within the threat envelope; Improvement
of signal detection and identification capabilities of naval vessels and
fixed-wing patrol aircraft by installing radio wave detection
equipment; development of anti-aircraft electronic warfare equipment
to jam radar from ground. Furthermore, MOD/SDF will verify the
provision of jamming capabilities to fixed-wing patrol aircraft and
take measures as necessary. In addition, MOD/SDF will start operation
of vehicle-mounted laser devices for responding to small UAVs and
take measures for early deployment of directed energy technologies
such as high-power laser systems and high-power microwaves (HPM).
Along with adding the functions to monitor and manage the use of
electromagnetic domain in each SDF system, MOD/SDF will work

closely with the relevant ministries and agencies to ensure SDF’s use

12


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

of spectrum necessary for its activities.

(4) Capabilities in the Ground, Maritime, and Air Domains

MOD/SDF will accelerate the acquisition of equipment, etc. and

capability improvement, etc. in each of the SDF services, and
strengthen capabilities in the ground, maritime, and air domains that
form the basis of cross-domain operations. MOD/SDF will actively
utilize advanced technology to steadily upgrade equipment, etc. in each

of the SDF services, and enhance advanced operational capabilities to
collaborate with unmanned assets.

5 Command-and-Control and Intelligence-related Functions

(1) Enhancing Command-and-Control Functions

In order to ensure a swift and reliable command and control,

MOD/SDF will establish resilient communications, system network,
and data infrastructure, establish a real-time command and control
posture, conduct studies on command and control capabilities that
enables unified command of each SDF service, and take measures as
necessary.

To this end, MOD/SDF will develop a cloud as a common

infrastructure to reinforce information sharing function for crossdomain operations; upgrade the SDF central command system to
strengthen the command and control function and its connection with

related ministries and agencies; procure a future command and control
system to strengthen GSDF’s autonomous operational capability;
upgrade the command and control system to further speed up the
decision-making cycle in the MSDF; upgrade Japan Aerospace Defense
Ground environment (JADGE) to strengthen the resilience of the
command and control function in the ASDF; and enhance the mobility
and flexibility of command and control function ; procure a space
operation command and control system which centrally commands and
controls the operation of space-related equipment and reinforce
resilience of the satellite use. Additionally, MOD/SDF will enhance the
Defense Information Infrastructure (DII) necessary for sharing those
information.

13


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

(2) Enhancing Information Gathering and Analysis Functions

MOD/SDF will establish a seamless intelligence gathering and

analysis scheme by persistently collecting information on military
trends in the vicinity of Japan and fundamentally reinforcing our
capability and posture to process, analyze, and disseminate such
information, as well as establish a posture that can promptly provide
information that contributes to policy decisions and SDF unit
operations. In addition, MOD/SDF will examine the ideal state of

information sharing with U.S. forces and joint operations for
unmanned assets, and take necessary measures.

To this end, the Defense Intelligence Headquarters (DIH), which

plays a central role in intelligence functions for the defense of Japan,
will strengthen the capabilities of each function, such as signal,
imagery, human, and open-source intelligence (SIGINT, IMINT,
HUMINT, and OSINT), while expanding the training base for
analysts, etc., enhancing the system for intelligence collection and
analysis, including the utilization of geospatial intelligence
(GEOINT), and augmenting its defense attaché system. The SDF will
build a satellite constellation for acquiring target detection and
tracking capabilities, which will be complemented by various
initiatives such as the strengthening of cooperation with the United
States and the use of commercial satellites, as well as the
strengthening of information gathering capabilities from space

domain using information-gathering satellites and commercial
satellites. In addition, various types of UAVs, etc. that are
indispensable for effective ISR implementation will be procured.

(3) Responses to Integrated Information Warfare with Special Regard to the

Cognitive Dimension

In the international community, emphasis is being placed on

information warfare, which is an attempt to create a favorable security
environment by influencing the public opinion and decision-making of
other countries through disinformation and strategic communications,
etc., and minimizing the impact to one's own decision-making, even
when conflict has yet to arise. MOD/SDF will establish a system and

posture that ensures the capability to cope with information warfare.

14


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

To this end, the DIH, which plays a central role in responding to

integrated information warfare, will strengthen the system for
information collection, analysis, and communication. In addition, the
following functions will be developed: automatic collection and
analysis of open-source information using artificial intelligence (AI),
which will enable continuous collection and analysis of information
on trends in each country; automatic collection of information on
social networking sites, etc., to determine the authenticity of

information communicated by each country; and future forecasting
functions for estimating the security situation.

6 Mobile Deployment Capabilities / Civil Protection

In order to secure capabilities for swift and reliable transportation

of necessary units to defeat the invasion of islands to the southwest
region, MOD/SDF will procure various transportation assets such as
transport ships (LSVs, LCUs and maneuverable boats), transport
aircraft (C-2), aerial refueling/ transport aircraft (KC-46A, etc.), and
transport/ utility helicopters (CH-47J/JA, UH-2). In addition,
MOD/SDF will secure additional private finance initiative (PFI)
vessels specialized for mass transportation of vehicles and containers
to supplement the maritime transportation capability.

To enhance self-sufficiency in transportation to southwestern

regions, MOD/SDF will procure transportation vehicles (container

trailers) and cargo handling equipment (large cranes and large
forklifts). In addition, MOD/SDF will conduct research and
development of a landing support system to improve the efficiency of
transportation toward islands where the size of seaports is limited. At
the same time, MOD/SDF will make efforts to reduce transportation
needs by stockpiling supplies in the southwestern region.

In addition, in order to enhance the effectiveness of the SDF's mobile

deployment and civil protection, the government as a whole will work
on measures to develop and strengthen airports and seaports, and
others, particularly in the southwestern region, and take necessary
measures to enable SDF to use facilities such as existing airports and
seaports, as operational infrastructure. Furthermore, the government as

a whole will deepen collaboration with relevant organizations

15


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

regarding the expansion of the use of civilian vessels and aircraft for
SDF’s maneuver and deployment, and coordinate and cooperate to
systematically implement civil protection measures employing various
transport assets of the SDF, in addition to civilian vessels and aircraft.
In doing so, the government as a whole will strengthen civil protection
training for armed attack situations as well as secure various
evacuation facilities. In addition, MOD/SDF will promote various
measures such as reinforcing SDF units capable of also responding to

civil protection, and utilizing SDF Reserve Personnel.

7 Sustainability and Resiliency

(1) Procurement of Various Ammunitions

Procure required quantities of various ammunitions, including

standoff missiles such as the Type 12 surface-to-ship guided missile,
interceptor missiles for ballistic missile defense (SM-3 Block IIA),
interceptor missiles with upgraded capabilities (PAC-3MSE), longrange ship-to-air missiles (SM-6), and Type 03 medium-range surfaceto-air guided missile (modified) promptly. In order to mass-produce
ammunitions quickly and stably, MOD/SDF will encourage the defense
industry to expand its domestic manufacturing capacity. Furthermore,
MOD/SDF will strengthen maintenance posture for the various
ammunitions.

In addition, in order to meet the increasing storage requirements

for ammunitions, MOD/SDF will promote the expansion of
ammunition storage facilities and the disposal of unused ammunitions.

(2) Securing fuel, etc.

MOD/SDF will secure necessary amount of fuel for SDF operations.

In addition, in order to secure fuel requirements quickly and stably,
MOD/SDF will build new fuel tanks while also renting private fuel
tanks. In addition, MOD/SDF will secure necessary quantities of food
and clothing.

(3) Improving the Operational Availability of Defense Equipment

By securing necessary budget for maintenance and material, with

lead time in consideration, while dealing with the increasingly

16


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

sophistication and complexity of defense equipment, MOD/SDF will
eliminate the number of non-mission capable equipment caused by
material shortage and maximize the number of operationally available
equipment by FY 2027. To this end, the supply warehouse will be
renovated to improve the precision of supply and demand forecasts and
to shorten the time it takes for units to receive parts. In increasing the
number of operationally available units, MOD/SDF will promote the
outsourcing of maintenance and other operations to outside parties in

order to make effective use of limited resources. In addition,
MOD/SDF will promote the introduction of digital transformation
(DX) in the logistics support field to optimize maintenance and upkeep.
In addition, MOD/SDF will expand comprehensive contracts,
including Performance Based Logistics (PBL) where outcomes are
acquired through performance-based arrangements that will deliver
SDF’s requirements in maintenance.

(4) Facility Improvement

In conjunction with the acquisition of various types of ammunition,

including standoff missiles, SDF will secure necessary ammunition
storage facilities. In securing the ammunition storage facilities, SDF
will pursue and promote efficient joint operations among the SDF
services, joint use of U.S. ammunition storage facilities, and dispersed
deployment to islands from the viewpoint of ensuring the resiliency of

the ammunition.

In order to protect major equipment and command posts, etc., and

ensure a tenacious fighting posture, MOD/SDF will establish
underground basing, reinforce facilities, take electromagnetic pulse
(EMP) measures for command posts, construct dispersal pads for
fighter aircraft, build hardened alert shelters, and establish redundant
utility infrastructures. In addition, the base security function will be
strengthened while reducing the number of personnel.

In addition, MOD/SDF will develop facilities to enable efficient

operation of new equipment such as unmanned assets.

When renovating existing facilities, protective measures against

explosives, nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons,

electromagnetic waves, and guerrilla attacks shall be provided.

17


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

Structural reinforcement of facilities in accordance with their
functions and importance, and relocation and consolidation of
facilities to ensure stand-off distance shall also be implemented.

In order to prevent the functional decline of SDF facilities in the

event of large-scale disaster, MOD/SDF will promote countermeasures
against disasters such as tsunamis, starting from bases and camps that
are expected to be damaged significantly and are important for
operations. In the future, SDF will improve the resiliency of defense

facilities and infrastructure in bases and camps in order to adapt and
respond to various challenges associated with climate change, and to
fulfill SDF’s missions and roles.

MOD/SDF will smoothly execute facility improvements in a focused

manner over a five-year period, while utilizing the knowledge of
relevant ministries and agencies as well as private sector.

**III Organization of Japan Self-Defense Forces**

Based on the program guidelines, the structures of each SDF services

shall be developed as described in 1 through 5.

1 Joint Operation Structure

(1) A Permanent Joint Headquarters will be established in order to build

a system capable of seamlessly conducting cross-domain operations
at all stages from peacetime to contingency, with the aim of

strengthening the effectiveness of joint operations among each SDF
services. In this regard, in light of the rapidly increasing severity of
the security environment surrounding Japan, MOD/SDF will make
every effort to pursue the establishment of a Permanent Joint
Headquarters as soon as possible and, upon the new establishment of
the Permanent Joint Headquarters, SDF will examine how each unit,
including joint units, should be structured.

(2) For further improvement of capabilities in the cyber domain,

including constant and continuous monitoring of MOD/SDF's
network and systems as well as the capability to disrupt opponent’s
use of cyberspace for an attack against Japan, SDF will possess a
cyber defense unit as a joint unit, in order to fundamentally reinforce

cyber defense capability.

18


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

(3) In addition, a new maritime transport unit will be established as a

joint unit to improve the mobile deployment capabilities to the
southwestern region.

2 Japan Ground Self-Defense Force

(1) Level of Defense Capability to Possess

(a) Regarding the basic operational units, the 15th Brigade will be

reorganized into a division in order to strengthen the defense

architecture in the southwestern region. The other eight divisions,
five brigades, and one armored division will be operated on the
basis of rapid deployment in order to deter and respond
immediately to various situations effectively and rapidly. In
addition, units with specialized functions such as airborne units,
amphibious rapid deployment units and air rapid deployment units
will be also operated on the basis of rapid deployment.

In this regard, based on a favorable training environment, one

division, two brigades, and one armored division that maintain a
high level of proficiency will be placed in Hokkaido on the premise
that they will be deployed and transported rapidly by the integrated
transport capability.

As a premise for the above measures, GSDF will thoroughly

ensure optimizing organizational capacity, and will consider how to
structure the posture in the mid- and long-term span.

(b) In order to strengthen stand-off defense capabilities, surface-to
ship missile units equipped with upgraded Type 12 surface-to-ship
missiles will be retained. Furthermore, units equipped with Hyper
Velocity Gliding Projectile, and a long-range guided missile unit
equipped with upgraded Hyper Velocity Gliding Projectile and
hypersonic missiles will be newly established.

(c) In order to protect important bases, etc. from various airborne

threats, surface-to-air missile units equipped with upgraded Type 03
medium-range surface-to-air guided missiles (modified) will be
retained.

(2) Reorganization of the Major Units.

(a) In order to strengthen cross-domain capabilities, GSDF will newly

19


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

establish a new anti-aircraft, and the electronic warfare unit and
reinforce the electronic warfare unit on islands. Furthermore, a new
multi-purpose unmanned aerial vehicle unit that retains information
gathering and attack capabilities, etc., will be established. In
addition, a new unit will be established to ensure advantages in
information warfare, including in the cognitive dimension, in
coordination with cyber and electronic warfare.

(b) In order to strengthen sustainability and resiliency, the logistics

support system will be strengthened by establishing a new branch
depot in the southwestern region, and reorganizing the Ground
Material Control Command to centrally operate each logistic depot.

(c) In order to secure the increased personnel necessary to strengthen

stand-off defense capabilities, cyber capabilities, etc., MOD/SDF
will abolish units mainly composed of the SDF Ready Reserve
Personnel, and allocate the regular uniformed SDF personnel
belonging to the units to fulfill the personnel requirements. In
addition, MOD/SDF will manage SDF Ready Reserve Personnel as
replacements.

3 Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force

(1) Level of Defense Capability to Possess

(a) To conduct persistent and multilayered information gathering

and surveillance in the waters around Japan in peace time, MSDF
will possess surface units strengthened by the introduction of
patrol vessels and other vessels so that it can persistently respond
to an increasing volume of activities, such as ensuring security of
maritime traffic, which is the foundation of stable economic
activities, and conducting overseas deployment for security
cooperation with other countries. And in a contingency, in order
to secure Japan's territory and the waters around Japan and to
ensure security of maritime traffic, MSDF will possess

strengthened and increased destroyer units and minesweeper units,
as well as strengthened patrol helicopter units to enable effective

and sustained execution of various operations such as anti
20


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

submarine warfare, anti-surface warfare, and anti-mine warfare. In
addition, MSDF will procure Aegis System Equipped Vessels that
will primarily conduct BMD operations

(b) To conduct information gathering and surveillance in the waters

around Japan continuously in peace time, and to gain and maintain
underwater supremacy, a critical area for cross-domain operations,
during contingency, MSDF will possess strengthened submarine

units.

(c) To conduct persistent and multi-layered information gathering

and surveillance in the waters around Japan in peace time, and to
conduct various operations including reconnaissance, targeting,
and anti-submarine warfare in a contingency, MSDF will possess
strengthened fixed-wing patrol aircraft units.

(2) Reorganization of the Major Units

(a) To enhance the capability of responding to integrated information

warfare, including the cognitive dimension, and to develop a
posture to enable swift decision-making, MSDF will conduct
necessary research and development. In addition, MSDF will
newly establish an Information Warfare major unit to carry out
comprehensive information warfare through consolidating units

with intelligence, cyber, communications, meteorology and
oceanography functions.

(b) To establish a multilayered surveillance posture, to secure

underwater and maritime superiority, and to reduce loss of human
resources, MSDF will introduce various unmanned assets, such as
UAVs, USVs including the use of existing manned vessels, and UUV,
as well as newly establishing unmanned asset units.

(c) MSDF will establish a system that can sustainably carry out unit

operations that require a high level of speed and volume of
activities, under the joint operation system, through reorganizing

the structure of the major units and establishing new units as

21


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

necessary.

(d) MSDF will improve the capability of Self-Defense Fleet

Headquarters, etc. responsible for the operation of the Joint Task
Force, to improve warfare sustainability. In addition, MSDF will
initiate a review of logistics posture and take necessary measures
to ensure the sustainability and robustness of MSDF.

(e) Destroyers and Frigates (DDG, DD, FFM), and other vessels will

be equipped with stand-off missiles, such as upgraded Type-12
surface-to-ship missile.

(f) In addition to (e) above, to gain underwater supremacy, MSDF will

develop a submarine (SS) equipped with Vertical Launching System
(VLS) with the aim of acquiring stand-off missiles carrying
submarines.

(g) MSDF will decommission vessels that have been in service for a

considerable amount of years and have limitations in expandability,
etc., and increase the number of labor-saving frigate (FFM), etc., at
an early date. In addition, in order to enable diverse operations such
as distributed maneuver operations, MSDF will increase the number
of air defense destroyers and improve the air defense and electronic

warfare capabilities of destroyers and frigates (DDG, DD, and FFM).
Furthermore, to enhance mine warfare capabilities, the number of
minesweepers that control unmanned minesweeping assets will be
increased, and the number of replenishment ships will be increased
to strengthen logistical support capabilities on the sea. In addition,
in order to respond to air attacks in a contingency, etc., the
modification of destroyers ("Izumo" type) will be promoted to
enable the operation of fighter aircraft (F-35B).

(h) MSDF will procure fixed-wing patrol aircraft (P-1) with

enhanced capability and patrol helicopter (SH-60K (upgraded
version)), and improve the electronic warfare, anti-ship attack,

and other capabilities of fixed-wing patrol aircraft.

22


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

4 Japan Air Self-Defense Force

(1) Level of Defense Capability to Possess

(a) ASDF will possess a warning and control unit equipped with a

grounded-based warning and control radar to conduct persistent
warning and surveillance of the airspace around Japan including
the vast airspace over the Pacific Ocean, as well as to detect and
track new airborne threats such as HGVs in addition to ballistic

missiles flying toward Japan. In addition, ASDF will possess
airborne warning and control units consisting of reinforced
airborne warning units to effectively monitor and control the
airspace around Japan for a longer period of time in times of
heightened tensions such as the so-called gray-zone situations.

(b) The ASDF will possess a greatly enhanced fighter aircraft unit

in terms of both quality and quantity, where fighter aircraft and
their supporting functions can work in unison to provide a
comprehensive posture for Japan's air defense and other operations.
In addition, to ensure fighter units can continue to fight
tenaciously in various air operations of increasing intensity in the
airspace around Japan, etc., ASDF will possess an enhanced aerial
refueling/transportation unit and air rescue unit.

(c). ASDF will possess an enhanced air transport unit to effectively

conduct mobile deployment of troops, etc. and international peace
cooperation activities, etc.

(d) In addition to coordinating with the GSDF's surface-to-air

missile units in conducting air defense in critical areas, ASDF will
possess an enhanced fire unit to respond to increasingly diverse
and complex airborne threats, with the capability to respond in the
terminal phase, providing multi-layered protection to Japan from
ballistic missile attacks.

(e) ASDF will possess a specialized space domain unit with

enhanced SDA capabilities to ensure the stable use of space.

23


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

(f) ASDF will possess an unmanned aircraft unit to collect

information in areas relatively remote from Japan and to conduct
persistent surveillance in the air when the situation becomes tense.

(2) Reorganization of the Major Units.

(a) In order to further refine and strengthen the quality and quantity

of Japan's air capability, ASDF will accelerate the pace of

replacement of fighter aircraft that are not suitable for
modernization (F-15) with fighter aircraft (F-35A and F-35B). In
addition, ASDF will continue to upgrade capabilities for
modernized fighter aircraft (F-15), such as improving its
electronic warfare capability, equipping stand-off missiles, and
increasing the number of equipped missiles. Furthermore, with
regard to fighter aircraft (F-2), from the viewpoint of
strengthening stand-off defense capability, upgrade program will
be promoted for a total of two squadrons for them to carry
upgraded Type 12 surface-to-ship missile, etc. In addition, ASDF
will conduct necessary studies by FY2027, and take necessary
measures in order to further advance the quantitative

enhancement of air capability. In this regard, studies on the
possibility of utilizing unmanned aerial vehicles will be
conducted.

(b) Joint development of the next-generation fighter aircraft with

the UK and Italy will be promoted, while ensuring freedom of
modification and interoperability with the allied country, so that
by the end of FY 2035, when fighter aircraft (F-2) are expected
to start retiring, fighter aircraft capable of securing and
maintaining air superiority in the future can be delivered. In
addition to the fighter aircraft itself, development of systems
including unmanned aerial vehicles, etc., will be undertaken with
the possibility of international collaboration in sight.

(c) Furthermore, for the sake of efficient training of pilots of

cutting-edge fighter aircraft such as the F-35 and next-generation

24


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

fighter aircraft, ASDF will take necessary measures after
studying the ideal education system, including the integration of
ground training and flight training by training aircraft as one
education system.

(d) In order to continue the battle tenaciously, a system for rapid

development of deployment infrastructure, etc. will be

established so that mobile and dispersed operations can be

carried out at various locations. In addition, necessary studies
will be conducted on operational concepts of air capability so
that air capability can be flexibly concentrated and directed to
the front of the aggression of Japan.

(e) In order to respond to high-intensity air operations and from

the viewpoint of persistent combat, the aerial refueling and
transport aircraft (KC-46A, etc.) will be increased in order to
strengthen the aerial refueling function and rescue aircraft (UH60J) will be replaced. In addition, in order to strengthen the air
defense posture in the airspace around Japan, including the vast
airspace over the Pacific, ASDF will promote the deployment of
mobile warning and control radars, etc., on the islands on the
Pacific side, as well as increase airborne early warning aircraft
(E-2D). In order to implement rapid maneuvering deployment of

ground units, etc., ASDF will procure transport aircraft (C-2).

(f) In order to improve the operational capability of stand-off

missiles, ASDF will introduce unmanned aerial vehicles that can
persistently collect target information inside the opponent's
threat envelope, and new operational intelligence units will be
established to strengthen the intelligence function necessary for
the execution of the unit's mission.

(g) ASDF will continue to upgrade the capabilities of surface-to
air missile PATRIOT system and others in order to respond to
increasingly diverse and complex airborne threats.

25


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

(h) In order to strengthen the space operation capability,

development of SDA posture will be promoted steadily, and a
new specialized space domain missions unit commanded by a
general will be established, and the "Air Self-Defense Force" will
be renamed to "Air and Space Self-Defense Force".

5 Optimizing Organizational Capacity

The number of SDF personnel in the GSDF, MSDF, and ASDF will be

reviewed as necessary to optimize organizational capacity, targeting the
level at the end of FY2022. In addition, the capacity necessary to
strengthen the joint operation system will be transferred from each SDF,
and GSDF personnel will be transferred to MSDF and ASDF, to meet the
increased personnel requirements of MSDF and ASDF. To this end,
approximately 2,000 GSDF personnel will be transferred to joint unit,
MSDF and ASDF, respectively.

During the period of this plan, necessary measures will be taken to

secure the necessary number of personnel without increasing the total
number of SDF personnel.

**IV Strengthening the Japan-U.S. Alliance**

1 Strengthening Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation

In order to further reinforce deterrence capabilities of Japan and the
United States in an integrated manner, Japan will establish a posture to work

together with the United States on a regular basis and promote cooperation
with the United States in cross-domain operations including space, cyber
and electromagnetic domain and measures to improve interoperability,
cooperation in the use of Japan’s counterstrike capabilities, air-defense,
anti-surface warfare and anti-submarine warfare, mine warfare, amphibious
operations, airborne operations, ISRT, protection of assets and facilities,
and logistic support. In addition, Japan will improve its responsive
capabilities, including the readiness and interoperability of the Alliance,
through more advanced and practical exercises and training.

In order to deter unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such

attempts and occurrence of various situations, Japan will further expand and
deepen joint Flexible Deterrent Options (FDO) and intelligence,

surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR), and will on a regular basis increase

26


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

joint/shared use of Japanese and U.S. facilities, and promote mutual
deployment of both units to their respective facilities for training or other
purposes. In addition, Japan will further develop coordination functions
between Japan and the United States, and will realize closer operational
coordination with like-minded countries and others with the Japan-U.S.
Alliance as its core.

In order to reinforce the infrastructure to support effective joint responses

in all phases, Japan will reinforce measures related to information security

and cybersecurity for facilitating information sharing between Japan and
the United States, and will further enhance defense equipment and
technology cooperation through joint analysis and joint research in cuttingedge technology, joint development and production of defense equipment,
improvement in mutual interchangeability, sharing and reinforcing of
various networks, expansion of production and maintenance capability of
U.S. military equipment in Japan, and reinforcement of supply-chain.

2 Steady Implementation of Measures to Support the Stationing of U.S.

Forces in Japan

From the perspective of not only supporting the stable presence of U.S.

Forces in Japan but also strengthening deterrence and response capabilities
of the Japan-U.S. Alliance, Japan will steadily secure funding for expenses
related to the stationing of U.S. Forces in Japan, including Host Nation
Support.

**V. Collaboration with Like-minded Countries and Others**

While guided by the vision of Free and Open Indo-Pacific (FOIP), Japan

will further promote bilateral and multilateral defense cooperation and
exchanges based on the recognition that creating a security environment
that is desirable for Japan is an extremely important and essential
initiative that contributes to Japan’s defense itself and also relates to its
basic foundations. In particular, considering the policy on collaboration
with like-minded countries and others indicated in the National Defense
Strategy, in addition to high-level exchanges, policy dialogues, service-toservice exchanges and personnel exchanges such as liaison officers, Japan
will appropriately combine, depending on characteristics of each SDF

services, and strategically implement specific initiatives taking

27


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

characteristics of the region as well as situation of each country into account,
such as strategic port calls and air visits, bilateral/multilateral training and
exercises, defense equipment and technology cooperation, capacity building,
and International Peace Cooperation Activities, in order to improve
interoperability among SDF and armed forces of like-minded countries and
to strengthen Japan's presence.

Based on such significance of defense cooperation and exchanges, in

order to further collaborate mutually and conduct specific and

thoroughgoing initiatives, Japan will proceed with the improvement of
operation procedures, development of organizational systems, review of
institutions including treatment, and establishment of infrastructure such as
hotlines between countries including secure communications, and will
further reflect needs concerning defense cooperation and exchanges in SDF
operations. Japan will also strive to collaborate with relevant ministries and
agencies as well as with other countries, nongovernmental organizations
and the private sector, and strategically disseminate information on Japan’s
initiatives. In doing so, Japan will particularly emphasize the following.

1 Bilateral/Multilateral Training and Exercises

Taking their significance as defense cooperation and exchanges into

account, Japan will promote bilateral/multilateral training and exercises
including logistics cooperation. Through this, Japan will demonstrate the
intention and capability to create a desirable security environment and

will also seek to improve interoperability with like-minded countries and
strengthen cooperative relationships with them.

2 Equipment and Technology Cooperation

Considering that cooperation in defense equipment is an initiative that

spans more than half a century from conception to retirement, Japan will
strengthen initiatives for equipment and technology cooperation
including overseas transfers of defense equipment and international joint
development and strive to enhance our partners’ military capabilities and
strengthen mid- and long-term relationships with those countries. In
particular, these initiatives should be combined with other efforts such
as defense cooperation and exchange, training and exercises, and

capacity-building to be promoted effectively. In this regard, Japan will

28


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

consider the transfer of equipment that has reached a considerable
number of years in service and has limited expandability to like-minded
countries through early decommissioning or early removal from service.

3 Capacity Building

Japan will further strengthen its efforts of capacity-building to armed

forces and others of countries in the Indo-Pacific region, aiming to create
a desirable security environment for Japan, while promoting the

strengthening of relations with the countries to be assisted. In this regard,
Japan will coordinate thoroughly with diplomatic policy, and work
together with its ally and like-minded countries such as the United States
and Australia, so as to maximize results. In addition to those for
Southeast Asian countries, capacity-building for Pacific Island countries
will be expanded

**Ⅵ Elements Supporting Defense Capabilities**

1 Training and Exercises

To effectively respond to various contingencies and enhance the

deterrence effectiveness, MOD/SDF will conduct bilateral and

multilateral training and exercises with Australia, India, and European
and Southeast Asian countries in addition to SDF’s joint training and
exercises and Japan-U.S. bilateral training and exercises, in a planned
and visible way to demonstrate Japan’s intention and capability that

unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such attempts will not
be tolerated. In doing so, MOD/SDF will seek to enhance and strengthen
training and exercises as FDO which are flexibly implemented
according to the situation, as well as enhance the content of training
and conduct new training utilizing favorable training environments
overseas, based on the development of Reciprocal Access Agreement
(RAA) and other measures.

In addition, to maximize the capabilities of SDF units in a

contingency, MOD/SDF will expand the establishment and utilization
of training areas and other facilities in Hokkaido and other areas in
Japan, and steadily establish and enhance the necessary training
infrastructure in Japan. In addition to expanding the joint/shared use of

U.S. military facilities and areas by SDF and the use of civilian airport

29


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

and seaport facilities, MOD/SDF will enhance training for rapid
deployment of its units to islands such as those in the southwestern
region, joint training, and civil protection training, etc., with relevant
organizations such as the police, Japan Coast Guard, firefighting
services and local governments to appropriately respond to

infringements that do not amount to armed attacks from outside as well
as armed attacks in the vicinity of remote islands.

In order to expand such training, it is necessary to obtain the

understanding and cooperation of related local governments and local
residents. Therefore, while taking all possible measures to ensure the
safety of training, MOD/SDF will give due consideration to the
surrounding environments of training infrastructures, including training
ranges in Hokkaido and other areas in Japan.

2 Reinforcing Coordination and Cooperation with the Japan Coast Guard

In order to appropriately respond to any types of contingencies,

coordination and cooperation with Japan Coast Guard will be further
strengthened. To this end, MOD/SDF will deepen the information
sharing and coordination mechanism with Japan Coast Guard, as well as
enhance various response procedures and training, including developing
procedures to have the Minister of Defense control the Japan Coast
Guard in an armed attack situation and conducting joint training.

3 Collaboration with Local Communities

To enable SDF and U.S. Forces in Japan to seamlessly and effectively

conduct activities on a daily basis, Japan will strive to gain
understanding and cooperation from local governments and residents
around their facilities.

Japan will actively engage in public relations activities regarding the

policies and activities of MOD/SDF and also the role of U.S. Forces in
Japan on a regular basis, and coordinate to accommodate the requests
and situations of the local communities, while fulfilling accountability.
At the same time, Japan will continue to promote measures to improve
the living environment of areas around defense facilities including those
against noise the perspective of promoting cooperation to the defense

of Japan.

30


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

In addition, in light of the fact that in some regions, the very

existence of SDF units contribute greatly to the maintenance and
revitalization of local communities, and the transportation of emergency
patients by SDF support the local medical service, MOD/SDF will give
due consideration to the characteristics of the regions and the
contribution to the local economy in order to gain understanding of the
local governments and residents upon reorganization of units as well as
placement and operation of SDF camps and bases. In addition, based on

the national government's policy on contracts concerning small and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), MOD/SDF will promote various
measures that contribute to local economies, such as securing
opportunities for local SMEs to receive orders, while also taking
efficiency into consideration.

4 Reinforcing Policy-Making Functions

In order for SDF to fully exert its capabilities and response to the

increasingly severe, complex, and rapid-paced strategic environment,
strategic and agile defense policy planning and making are required
including such domains as space, cyber and electromagnetic spectrum
and MOD/SDF will fundamentally reinforce its functions. In this regard,
MOD/SDF will establish a consultation framework to obtain policy
advice from experts. Also, MOD/SDF will strengthen its posture to
comprehensively advance future way of “warfare” for SDF and how to

utilize and nurture cutting-edge technologies as well as apply those
technology to defense necessary for this from a strategic perspective,
while closely cooperating with relevant ministries and agencies, private
research institutions, and private companies particularly defense
industry as their core. Furthermore, in order to promote such efforts and
support the formulation of policies, MOD/SDF will review and reinforce
its research system led by National Institute for Defense Studies and
reinforce its functions as an intellectual base.

In addition, MOD/SDF will contribute promoting security education

by dispatching lecturers to educational institutions and enhancing
public symposiums, etc., so that citizens can accurately recognize
knowledge and information on security policy. MOD/SDF will also

promote various measures to further utilize social networks, which are

31


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

becoming increasingly diverse, and to enhance our ability to
disseminate information, including in foreign languages. In addition, in
order to further strengthen the research and education functions of
MOD/SDF, centering on National Institute for Defense Studies,
MOD/SDF will expand networks and organizational collaboration with
domestic and foreign research and education institutions, universities,
think tanks, and other organizations.

**Ⅶ Protection of Life, Person and Property of Japanese Nationals and**
**Measures for International Security Cooperation**

1 Response to Large-Scale Disasters

In the event of various types of disasters including natural disasters

such as the Nankai Trough Earthquake, nuclear disasters, and other
special disasters, MOD/SDF will take all possible measures to ensure
initial response promptly by transferring and deploying units of
sufficient scale, while maintaining joint operations as the basis of its
operations.

At the same time, measures will be taken to strengthen the response

posture, such as the procurement of UAVs(near-field), helicopter
satellite communication systems (helicopter SATs), lifesaving systems,
and emergency power supplies.

In addition, in close coordination and cooperation with related

ministries and agencies, local governments, and the private sectors,

MOD/SDF will promote various measures such as conducting various
training and exercises, formulating plans, and securing alternative
functions and deployment infrastructure in the event of a disaster.

Furthermore, including in areas where many nuclear power plants are

located, MOD/SDF will conduct training in cooperation with related
organizations, verify coordination procedures, and take necessary
measures after examining such issues as securing deployment
infrastructure in the vicinity of nuclear power plants.

2 Measures for Maritime Security and Use of the Airspace based on Existing

International Rules

Recognizing that open and stable seas and the use of the airspace

based on existing international rules are the foundation of peace and

32


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

prosperity of Japan as a maritime nation, and based on the vision of a
FOIP, MOD/SDF will promote efforts such as port calls by naval vessels
and aircraft on various occasions with other countries that share
awareness of maritime security and the use of airspace based on existing
rules such as through joint training and exercises, equipment and
technologies cooperation, capacity building and information sharing. In
this way, MOD/SDF will actively and visibly demonstrate our
willingness and capability for the stability of the maritime order and

the use of the airspace based on existing international rules.

3 International Peace Cooperation Activities

In line with the Legislation for Peace and Security, Japan will

continue to promote international peace cooperation activities, while
giving comprehensive consideration to such factors as purposes of
mission, situation in host country, and political and economic relations
between Japan and host countries. In particular, by making good use of
accumulated experiences, Japan will actively promote activities such as
dispatch of embedded personnel to mission headquarters, capacity
building related to UN PKO such as the UN Triangular Partnership
Program (TPP), and the dispatch of staff members to UN headquarters,
etc., in order to contribute to the improvement of the security
environment. In addition, in order to strengthen the systems concerning
international activities including rescue or transportation of Japanese

nationals overseas in the unstable international situation, the Central
Readiness Regiment and the International Operations Training Unit will
be integrated to form a new international operations force with high
readiness and high technical capabilities in the field of facilities and
unmanned aircraft operation, etc.

MOD/SDF will expand curriculum of the Japan Peacekeeping

Training and Research Center, and given the importance of cooperation
with relevant ministries and agencies, foreign countries, and nongovernmental organizations, MOD/SDF will strengthen the cooperation
with them through efforts such as providing educational opportunities
to not only SDF personnel but also other personnel from various
backgrounds.

Regarding the SDF's operation facility in Djibouti for counter-piracy

33


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

operations, MOD/SDF will promote renewal/upgrade to ensure its longterm and stable utilization for regional security cooperation, including
the protection and transportation of Japanese nationals abroad in the
Middle East and Africa.

**Ⅷ New Measures for Early Deployment of Defense Equipment**

MOD/SDF will steadily realize acceleration of defense equipment

deployment which is particularly urgent and significant from a policy

perspective of the areas that could directly affect the SDF’s current and
future operations. Those areas include stand-off defense capabilities,
maritime assets, soft kills, unmanned defense capabilities, AI, nextgeneration information and communications, space domain, DX, highpower energy and integrated information warfare. For acceleration of
defense equipment deployment, MOD/SDF will receive proposals from the
defense-related companies or incorporate advanced civilian technologies
through start-up companies, domestic research institutes and other
organizations.

To this end, MOD/SDF will establish a new framework to deploy

defense equipment within the next five years and to operate it with intensive
iterations of operational verification, evaluation, and improvement, in
addition to flexibly reviewing administrative procedures, contracting
methods and other rules of MOD/SDF that might be obstacles to this
acceleration of deployment efforts, and to realize its full-scale operation

within approximately the next 10 years.

**Ⅸ Defense Production and Technological Base as Virtually Integral Part**

**of a Defense Capability**

1 Reinforcing Defense Production Base

While Japan's defense industry is responsible for each stage of the

equipment life cycle, the equipment and defense industry are
inseparable. In this context, the defense production and technological
bases are virtually integral part of a defense capability.

While the defense business requires a large investment of

management resources to meet advanced performance requirements and
maintenance measures, companies are facing diverse issues;

34


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

profitability is lower than the level defined by the procurement system,
the industry is currently considered as unattractive because sales
channels are limited to SDF, and growth is not expected, and various
risks, such as supply chain risks and cyberattacks, are apparent.

In order to address these issues, MOD/SDF will make defense

industry more attractive, by adopting method to evaluate each
company's quality management, cost management and delivery
management for defense business to calculate company’s costs and

profits accurately. In addition, MOD/SDF will adopt a method of
acquiring equipment that further emphasizes the viewpoint of
maintaining and strengthening the domestic infrastructure while
developing company’s predictability for projects, such as the plan-andproposal method. As for equipment to be procured under the Foreign
Military Sales (FMS) procurement, efforts will be made to promote the
participation of domestic companies, as well as to streamline and
improve efficiency.

In order to cope with various risks and maintain and strengthen the

defense production bases, appropriate fiscal measures and financial
support will be provided for companies’ initiatives such as upgrading
manufacturing and other facilities, strengthening cybersecurity, making
supply chains more resilient, and business succession.

MOD/SDF will conduct supply chain surveys to identify supply chain

risks and promote new entrants to the supply chain to strengthen the

supply chain and incorporate advanced commercial/basic technologies.
Furthermore, MOD/SDF will cooperate with defense authorities of
allies and like-minded countries, etc., to mutually complement supply
chains. In this way, the supply chain will be strengthened to contribute
to stable procurement.

Since the protection of information from intelligence activities and

cyberattacks by foreign countries, or other cause, is a prerequisite for
defense production and international equipment and technology
cooperation, MOD/SDF will reinforce industrial security system while
taking measures for steady implementation of Standards on

Cybersecurity Measures for Defense Industry as well as for formulation
and application of Defense Industrial Security Manual. In addition,

MOD/SDF will implement sensitive technology security in conjunction

35


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

with economic security measures such as the patent application nondisclosure system.

2 Reinforcing Defense Technology Base

MOD/SDF will realize acceleration of defense equipment

development through various efforts concerning R&D by identifying
specific projects necessary for future warfare and organizing the entire
picture up to the acquisition. Based on the integrated equipment system,

which is systematically organized for future battles from the viewpoint
of joint operations, MOD/SDF will intensively invest in

equipment/technology fields (1)-(6) that are directly linked to future
battles. Furthermore, by improving the efficiency of the R&D process,
including improving the capabilities of conventional equipment, and by
introducing new methods, MOD/SDF will realize shortening the time
required for R&D and lead to the acceleration of defense equipment
deployment.

At the same time, MOD/SDF will establish a mechanism to promptly

abolish projects for research and development with low prospects for
results.

In order to secure technological superiority in the future, and realize

advanced capabilities ahead of other countries, MOD/SDF will pursue
and implement technological cooperation, including international joint
research and development and research and development that

incorporates a wide range of advanced commercial/basic technologies,
and at the same time will invest heavily in technologies that can be
directly linked to defense applications, aiming to acquire technologies
at an early stage. In doing so, MOD/SDF will promote collaboration
with projects in related ministries and agencies and actively utilize the
results of those projects.

Based on the above, the policy division, the operational division, and

the technological division will work in unison to promote measures
related to the study of future battle strategies and the utilization of
advanced technologies.

From the perspective of gathering Japan's scientific and technological

capabilities, MOD/SDF will strategically release the information on

technological fields and research and development prospects that it

36


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

enhances predictability for companies and others. In addition, in order
to fundamentally reinforce the functions to produce defense innovation
and groundbreaking equipment, etc., a new research institute will be
established in Acquisition, Technology and Logistics Agency (ATLA)
after FY2024 through scrap-and-build, the R&D -related organizations
of the agency, and the strengthening of the R&D system will be
implemented. In addition, from the viewpoint of effective

implementation of initiatives related to advanced technologies,

MOD/SDF will strongly promote technological cooperation not only
with domestic research institutes but also with allies and like-minded
countries such as the United States, Australia, and the U.K.

Promote the development of equipment that anticipates equipment

transfer from the development stage and review of SDF's original
specifications. In developing equipment, MOD/SDF will consider cost
reductions in the mass production and maintenance phases. In addition,
regarding conventional technologies such as ammunition and vehicles,
measures would be taken to maintain the production and technological
infrastructure.

(1) Stand-Off Defense Capabilities

Japan will acquire capabilities to deal with vessels and landing

forces invading Japan, including its remote islands, from locations
outside of threat zones.

a. Continue development of upgraded Type-12 surface-to-ship

missile (surface-, ship-, and air-to-ship missiles), aiming to
complete development of the surface- type by the end of FY2025,
the ship- type by the end of FY2026, and the air-type by the end
of FY2028 for the air-type.

b. Buildup submarine-type stand-off defense capabilities that can

be launched from submarines that can operate in a highly covert
manner.

c. Continue research on Hyper Velocity Gliding Projectile

(HVGP) for island defense that fly at high altitude and high
speed to hit ground targets, aiming to complete the project for
the early deployment by the end of FY2025. In addition,
upgraded HVGP for island defense will be developed to defeat

the opposing forces invading the islands, from more distant areas

37


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

in the mainland, etc.

d. Promote research on hypersonic weapons, which are difficult

to be intercepted by traveling at hypersonic speeds, aiming to
complete the project by FY2031, and consider the development
of derivative types.

e. Research on new anti-ship guided missile for island defense

that has a longer-range, low radar cross section (RCS), and
higher mobility, while having multiple functions through

modularization.

(2) Capabilities to Respond to HGVs, etc.

MOD/SDF will acquire technologies to deal with Hypersonic

Glide Vehicle (HGV) threats and others that are difficult to detect
or intercept with existing equipment.

a. Develop upgraded Type-03 Medium-Range SAM (modified)

with capability of responding to HGV and ballistic missiles in
addition to cruise missiles, etc.

b. Conduct research and studies on guided missile systems for

responding to HGV threats that travel at hypersonic speeds at
high altitudes with high maneuverability.

(3) Capabilities to Respond to Drones and Swarm Attacks

MOD/SDF will aim to acquire and promptly equip technologies to

economically and effectively respond to the rapidly growing
airborne threat of drone swarms.

a. Continue research on various types of high-energy lasers to

intercept drones and other airborne threats.

b. Continue research on technologies to intercept drones and other

objects by radiating them with high-power microwaves (HPM).

(4) Unmanned Assets

In order to promote unmanned and labor-saving defense

equipment, MOD/SDF will acquire technologies related to UUVs
while reviewing existing equipment systems and personnel
assignments.

a. Conduct research on technologies such as UUV-UUV control to

38


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

enhance operational capabilities in the underwater domain.

b. Conduct research on operational support technology to control

multiple unmanned combat vehicles (UGVs) from a manned
vehicle, autonomous driving technology, etc.

c. Conduct research on technologies related to USVs in order to

further reduce personnel and achieve unmanned waterborne
vessels.

(5) Measures for Next-Generation Fighter Aircraft

a. Steadily promote joint development of the next-generation

fighter aircraft with the UK and Italy, aiming to complete
development by the end of FY2035. Research and development
will also be promoted for a combat support unmanned aircraft to
be collaborating with manned aircraft such as the nextgeneration fighter aircraft.

b. In conducting research and development of these technologies,

Japan-led development will be realized by ensuring freedom of
modification for timely and appropriate upgrade in the future
and domestic production and technological bases for high
readiness, etc. on the premise that the aircraft maintains the
capability to effectively counter numerically superior opponents.

(6) Reinforcing Other Deterrence and Response Capabilities

a. Continue research on future railguns to improve the capability

of intercepting various airborne threats.

b. Conduct research on technology of jamming device that

misleads radar and other radio wave equipment into believing
that multiple threats exist by giving false information.

c. Conduct research to reflect the technology to support

commanders’ decision-making into equipment by analyzing the
course of action using AI to cope with the complex and fast
changing combat situations.

d. Research and develop the next generation signal intelligence

aircraft, which will be the successor to the multipurpose aircraft
(EP-3), with improved target information collection capability,

etc.

39


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

e Develop new small mines that are compact and can be controlled

remotely in order to lay mines quickly from naval vessels on
alert watch, etc.

f. Begin research and development of hypersonic surface-to-air

guided missiles utilizing the results of elemental research on
hypersonic guided missiles.

3 Promotion of Defense Equipment Transfer

Transfer of defense equipment and technology overseas is not only a

strategic tool of foreign and defense policy to build effective
partnerships with allied and like-minded countries and to deter
unilateral changes to the status quo by force or invasion of Japan, but
also effective in ensuring the growth of the defense industry through
the expansion of defense equipment market. From this perspective, the
government will take the lead in promoting appropriate overseas
transfer of defense equipment and technology by further cooperation
between the public and private sectors. The government will also
establish a fund and provide corporate assistance as necessary.

4 Promotion of Various Measures and Institutional Development

In order to implement the above policies, necessary budgetary

measures, etc., as well as necessary legislation and financing of projects
with a high policy nature through the use of government financial

institutions, etc., will be provided, and the status of their execution will
be constantly verified and the system will be revised as necessary.

**Ⅹ Strengthening the Foundation for SDF Personnel to Fulfill Abilities as**
**Core of Defense Capabilities**

1 Reinforcing Human Resource Base

In order to fundamentally reinforce defense capabilities, MOD/SDF

will reinforce the human resource base by securing necessary uniformed
SDF personnel and civilian officials and others, and by conducting
study of necessary systems, while paying attention to the facts that
individual SDF personnel are required to have more knowledge, skills,
and experience than ever before and that MOD/SDF needs to develop

SDF personnel who have a background to reliably deal with cross
40


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

domain operations, information warfare, and others. In this regard SDF
personnel who work on research and development will be secured and
their knowledge and skills will be developed. In addition, MOD/SDF
will reinforce its education, especially focusing on domains such as
cyber, and utilize civilian workforce in these domains. To this end, an
environment will be created in which all SDF personnel can demonstrate
their abilities even as they face life events such as childcare, childbirth,
and nursing care, and MOD/SDF will take comprehensive measures

focusing on the entire life cycle starting from recruitment, including
reskilling of SDF personnel.

(1) Enhancing Recruitment Efforts

In order to stably secure excellent human resources in the severe

recruiting environment with a declining number of people eligible
for recruitment due to a declining birthrate, MOD/SDF will promote
various recruiting measures such as digitalization of recruitment PR,
and strengthen the functions of the Provincial Cooperation Offices
and the cooperation with local governments and related

organizations.

In addition, from the viewpoint of improving the attractiveness of

fixed-term SDF personnel, MOD/SDF will review the system of
Candidates for SDF personnel and improve support for the reemployment and learning at universities, etc., after the completion

of their term of service. Furthermore, in light of the declining
birthrate and higher education level, measures to expand the
recruitment of untenured officers and to broaden the recruitment
base to include college graduates, etc., should be promoted. At the
same time, MOD/SDF will secure high-quality human resources at
an early stage through the expansion of the SDF scholarship student
system.

Furthermore, in order to incorporate human resources with

specialized knowledge and skills who are expected to be active in
fields such as cyber and space domains, a new SDF personnel system
will be established to enable flexible recruitment and appointment,
and necessary measures will be taken to utilize human resources

from the private sector, including retired SDF personnel.

41


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

(2) Utilization of SDF Reserve Personnel and Others.

In order for SDF Reserve Personnel and others to effectively

supplement regular SDF personnel in the changing operational
environment and diversifying missions of SDF, MOD/SDF will not
only improve their sufficiency rates but also fundamentally review
and reinforce the system of SDF Reserve Personnel and others. To
this end, after reviewing the roles of SDF Ready Reserve Personnel

and SDF Reserve Personnel, MOD/SDF will expand the recruitment
of them from civilians with no experience in the SDF and review the
current system in light of their age limits and training periods, and
other issues.

(3) Effective Use of Human Resources

MOD/SDF continues to actively recruit female SDF personnel and

appoint them according to their motivation, ability, and aptitude, as
well as develop an educational infrastructure that supports their
activities, and systematically develop women's quarters in the
military barracks and naval vessels with an eye to increasing the
number of female SDF personnel.

In addition, in order to further utilize human resources with

abundant knowledge, skills, and experience, the retirement age for
SDF personnel will be raised while paying attention to their military

strength, and the duties in which re-enrolled SDF personnel can be
engaged in will be greatly expanded.

Curbing mid-career retirements is an urgent issue, therefore a

survey on SDF personnel’s attitude towards mid-career retirement
will be conducted in order to contribute to the consideration of
effective measures to curb mid-career retirement. Taking into
consideration the special nature of the missions and service
environment, MOD/SDF will constantly review and implement
necessary measures.

(4) Improvement of Living and Working Environment, etc,

Recognizing that there is no place for harassment which ruins the

mutual trust among SDF personnel and shakes the very foundation

42


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

of the entire organization, MOD/SDF will establish new measures
based on the findings of the expert panel and other reviews on
harassment prevention, and ensure that all SDF personnel are fully
aware of them. In addition, MOD/SDF will develop an

organizational environment of zero tolerance for harassment with
continuous review of the measures taken to ensure that they are in
line with the times.

In addition, MOD/SDF will steadily develop housing necessary for

introducing and reorganizing units as well as ensuring readiness.
MOD/SDF will also systematically take measures against aging and
earthquake of barracks and housing, including modernization and
preventive maintenance. Furthermore, the living and working
environment for personnel will be improved by ensuring the
required number of living and working equipment, replacing aging
equipment, and ensuring the required number of daily consumables.
In doing so, Japan will place consideration on creating a comfortable
working environment even in special environments such as naval
vessels. Through these measures, MOD/SDF will aim to improve the
morale of SDF personnel.

In addition to promoting efforts to ensure work-life balance,

including the development and dissemination of systems that
support a good balance between family and work, MOD/SDF will
promote measures such as the development of childcare facilities

and temporary childcare for children during emergency visits for the
office based on the needs of SDF personnel. In addition, MOD/SDF
will expand measures to support families in cooperation with local
governments and related organizations.

(5) Human Resource Development

In order to secure human resources who can contribute to more

advanced cross-domain joint operations, MOD/SDF will strengthen
the education on joint operations in the educational institutions such
as the Joint Staff College and staff colleges of each service. Each
SDF service, National Defense Academy, and National Institute for
Defense Studies will strengthen their education and research

contents and architecture for cyber domain and others for securing

43


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

and providing skilled human resources who can become the core of
SDF units. In addition, MOD/SDF will transform the Japan Ground
Self-Defense Force High Technical School into a combined school
of each service, as well as a coeducational school by accepting
female students.

In addition, in order to further promote mutual complementation

between each service of the SDF, MOD/SDF will integrate their
educational programs and promote effective and efficient education

and research by utilizing state-of-the-art technologies.

Furthermore, the 1st and 2nd Service Schools of the Maritime

Self-Defense Force will be integrated in order to implement unified
education and improve educational effects, and the T-7/T-4
successor aircraft and related systems will be upgraded to optimize
the flight education and training environment for the so-called 5th
generation fighter pilot training.

(6) Improving Treatment and Reemployment

Through conducting a survey of SDF personnel's overtime work,

etc., MOD/SDF will make salaries and allowances based on the
special nature of their missions and work environment, and continue
to give due treatment to personnel engaged in harsh missions,
especially on naval vessels and radar sites. In addition, treatment
will be improved given the fact that missions are increasing such as

the counterstrike capability. MOD/SDF will conduct research on the
salary systems of military personnel in other countries, and consider
how SDF personnel should be paid in the future. MOD/SDF will
promote measures concerning honors and privileges for those welldeserved for achievements through many years of diligent services
for their duties as SDF personnel.

In addition, given that it is the responsibility of the government

to secure the livelihood of uniformed SDF personnel after retirement
under the early retirement system or fixed-term service system,
MOD/SDF will further improve and strengthen reemployment
support by enhancing the career guidance and job training
opportunities for SDF personnel scheduled for retirement, and by

strengthening cooperation with local governments, relevant

44


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

organizations, and private companies, etc.

2 Transformation of Medical Functions

In order to cope with various situations and respond to diverse

missions in Japan and abroad, MOD/SDF will promote integrated
medical operations by unifying medical functions common to all SDF
units, build a posture that can mobilize the full strength of SDF’s
medical force, including the National Defense Medical College, and

promote fundamental reforms to improve the combat trauma care
capabilities.

In order to save the lives of personnel who are performing their duties

in a contingency without regard for danger, it is necessary to establish
a seamless medical care and evacuation posture from the front line to
the destination hospital. For this purpose, it is necessary to strengthen
the respective medical functions first aid at the front line, medical
evacuation by utilizing various assets of each service to transport
wounded personnel to the destination hospital, and the SDF hospitals.

First, for the first aid at the front line, MOD/SDF will increase the

number of frontline combat medics certified as assistant nurse and
paramedic, and further strengthen the foundation for education and
training. In addition, a new joint training course for damage control
surgery following first aid at the frontline will be established to
systematically train personnel. Furthermore, MOD/SDF plans to provide

necessary education and training regarding surgical operations on board
naval vessels for those who have completed the above course in order
to strengthen onboard medical care capability.

For aero medical evacuation, new training equipment will be

introduced, and an education and training environment will be
established to improve first-aid capabilities during transport of
wounded and sick. In implementing these education and training
programs, MOD/SDF will standardize, integrate and improve common
knowledge and skills among each force.

MOD/SDF considers enhancing the functions and survivability of the

SDF Naha Hospital is an effective measure in strengthening medical
capacity in the southwestern region. MOD/SDF will take measures for

SDF Naha Hospital such as increasing the number of beds, adding

45


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

medical departments, and building underground facilities. Other SDF
hospitals that can be a destination will be strengthened similarly when
they are reconstructed.

Since most of medical functions are common to all SDF units,

MOD/SDF will promote standardizing medical equipment and materials
in consideration of interoperability between each SDF service. In
addition, in order to enable Self-Defense Forces hospitals and other
facilities to obtain the medical information of each SDF member in a

timely manner without distinction between the SDF services, the
medical record of each member would be digitized, and a system would
be established to enable prompt retrieval and viewing of medical record
for each member.

Most deaths in war are due to exsanguination from bomb wounds,

gunshot wounds, and other similar causes. To prevent such deaths, it is
extremely important to secure blood products for transfusion, and
MOD/SDF would consider establishing a system to autonomously secure
and stockpile blood products. In addition, in order to secure medical
oxygen, which is as important as blood products in war wound care,
MOD/SDF will also acquire oxygen concentrators and other relative
equipment.

In addition, MOD/SDF will strengthen education and research,

including combat trauma care capabilities improvement, at the National
Defense Medical College in light of modern medical technology

evolution. The National Defense Medical College Hospital, which is the
clinical site, is to be strengthened to accommodate the acceptance of
those wounded in war, in addition to advanced medical education for
medical and nursing officers and skill improvement for the medical
personnel of SDF. In order to accommodate the acceptance of those
wounded in war, the hospital will undergo a drastic reform of its
operation, and its functions will be strengthened by utilizing
opportunities such as the reconstruction of the hospital. As a
complement to these efforts, efforts will also be made to ensure that
medical and nursing officers receive training outside the department.

**Ⅺ. Optimization Efforts**

1 Equipment

46


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

For GSDF, in order to optimize the air structure, the air units of

divisions and brigades will be abolished with some exceptions, and
helicopter functions will be concentrated in each district unit, while the
functions of anti-tank and combat helicopters (AH) and observation
helicopters (OH) will be transferred to UAVs and UAVs for
utility/attack and surveillance, etc. The functions of AHs and OHs will
be transferred to UAVs and UAVs for reconnaissance and other purposes.
In doing so, the minimum functions necessary will be maintained by

arming existing helicopters, etc.

For MSDF, the number of fixed-wing patrol aircraft (P-1) acquisitions

will be partially reviewed in conjunction with the acquisition of a dwell
UAV to enhance offshore surveillance capabilities over a wide area. The
number of patrol helicopters (SH-60K (upgraded version)) acquired will
be partially revised due to a review of the shipboard requirements,
including the installation of fighter aircraft (F-35B) on destroyers
(Izumo class). Proceed with the discontinuation of the use of multipurpose aircraft (U-36A).

For ASDF, in order to optimize the aircraft types, it will move

forward with the elimination of the use of rescue search aircraft (U125A) and other aircraft.

Further efforts for effective and efficient acquisition of equipment

include: cost reduction through planned and stable acquisition of
equipment by expanding the application of long-term contracts,

improving the predictability of companies and promoting efficient
production, procurement in consideration of the supply-demand
situation of equipment including that of other countries, and narrowing
down SDF-unique specifications that cause costs to rise. In addition,
the SDF's own unique procurement system, which takes into account the
supply-demand situation of equipment, including that of other countries,
and the narrowing of specifications, etc., will enhance the effectiveness
of project management throughout the equipment life cycle.

2 Personnel

In addition to transferring the capacity necessary to strengthen the

joint operation system from each of the SDF, GSDF personnel will be

transferred to MSDF and ASDF to optimize the organizational capacity

47


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

of the SDF, based on the increase of required personnel by MSDF and
ASDF. To this end, approximately 2,000 GSDF personnel will be
transferred to joint unit, MSDF and ASDF.

In addition, the number of all SDF officers will not be increased, but

rather a review of existing units and the use of outside labor force, such
as private-sector contractors, will be promoted.

**Ⅻ Quantities of Major Procurement**

Targets to be achieved in five years and approximately in ten years

for the defense capabilities to be fundamentally reinforced under this
program are shown in Appendix 1.

The specific scale of the major procurement of defense equipment

listed in II and III above is shown in Appendix 2.

In addition, the major formation quota and the specific scale of the

major procurement of defense equipment, etc. in approximately 10 years
are shown in Appendix 3.

**XIII Expenditures**

1 The expenditure aiming for the implementation of defense capability

buildup described in this program for the next five years from FY2023
to FY2027 amount to approximately ¥43 trillion.

2 The annual defense budgets for FY2023 to FY2027 under this

program amount to approximately ¥40,500 billion in total

(approximately ¥8,900 billion in FY 2027), on the assumption that the
following additional measures will be taken.

(1) Based on the progress of each project, further accelerate the

improvement of SDF facilities in an agile and flexible manner
(approximately ¥1,600 billion);

(2) Utilize the settlement surplus in the general account further

when the surplus is larger than the expected settlement surplus in
6 (approximately ¥900 billion).

In light of the increasingly severe fiscal conditions and the

significance of other budgets related to the lives of the people, in
harmony with other measures taken by the Government, further

optimization and rationalization of defense buildup will be

48


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

thoroughly implemented, by means of suspending the use of
equipment whose importance has decreased, reviewing projects of
low cost-effectiveness, optimizing equipment procurement

through cost management/reduction and long-term contracts, and
securing other revenues. If the surplus does not increase to the
above-mentioned level, MOD/SDF will secure financial resources
virtually through these initiatives.

In the budget formulation process of each fiscal year, MOD/SDF

will take care to respond to unforeseen circumstances such as
changes in the security environment. On top of that, MOD/SDF
will examine the progress, effectiveness, and feasibility of each
project, including the equipment procurement shown in Appendix
2, and revise projects flexibly, if necessary.

3 The expenses based on contracts (material expenses) to be newly

concluded to implement this program amount to approximately
¥43,500 billion (excluding the amount corresponding to payments for
the period outside of the program that contribute to improving project
efficiency, such as maintenance), and the future obligation for each
fiscal year is to be managed appropriately.

4 Since measures such as for equipment procurement and maintenance,

facility maintenance, R&D, and system maintenance will be

intensively implemented during the next five years from FY2023 to
FY2027 under this program, MOD/SDF will make efforts to
appropriately take these into account and proceed defense buildup in a
stable and sustainable manner in the subsequent program based on the
FY2027 standard.

5 This program will be reviewed, if necessary, based on the medium

to long-term defense and fiscal outlook, considering various factors at
home and abroad such as the international environment at the time,
trends in technological standards including Information and

Communication Technology (ICT), and the situation of the economic
power and fiscal bases supporting the reinforcement of defense

capabilities.

49


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

6 To secure financial resources for the stable sustainment of defense

capabilities after FY2027 as well as for covering this program from
FY2023 to FY2027, necessary measures will be implemented in both
expenditure and revenue areas, such as reform of expenditures,
utilization of settlement surplus, creation of defense capability
reinforcement funds utilizing non-tax receipts, and tax measures.

**ⅩⅣ Notes**

In order to reduce the burden on Okinawa Prefecture and other local

communities, specific measures regarding the review of the U.S.
military force posture in Japan and SACO (Special Action Committee
on Okinawa) related projects will be steadily implemented.

50


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

**Appendix Table 1 Targets for Fundamentally Enhanced Defense**
**Capabilities and Timeline for Achievement**

Fields By 5 years until FY 2027*

If an invasion of Japan occurs, Japan will
respond with primary responsibility and
buildup defense capabilities to disrupt and
defeat the invasion while gaining support
from its ally and others.

location)

           - cquire practical capability to operate
stand-off missiles

quantities

Integrated Air and Missile - Reinforce capability to respond to

Hypersonic Weapons capabilities

           - einforce capability to respond to
miniature Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) UAV countermeasures

          - xpand the use of UAV to strengthen
capabilities to practically operate multiple unmanned assets

simultaneously, etc.

Cross-Domain Operation - einforce Space Domain Awareness
Capabilities/Civil Protection (SDA), cybersecurity capabilities, and capability

electromagnetic domain capabilities, etc.

           - Reinforce ground, sea, and air domain
capabilities that become basis of cross- entities other than SDF
domain operations

UAV

           - ccelerate decision-making through the

Control/Intelligence-related use of Artificial Intelligence (AI), etc., while

strengthening the resiliency of the network the use of AI, etc., while

           - Strengthen information acquisition and enhancing the system for
analysis in both strategic and tactic
information, including responses in the and sharing
cognitive dimension

51

|Fields|By 5 years until FY 2027*|Approx. 10 Years Later|
|---|---|---|
||If an invasion of Japan occurs, Japan will respond with primary responsibility and buildup defense capabilities to disrupt and defeat the invasion while gaining support from its ally and others.|Further efforts to ensure the defense concept described on the left (buildup defense capabilities to disrupt or to defeat invasion at an earlier and more distant location)|
|Stand-Off Defense Capabilities|●Acquire practical capability to operate stand-off missiles|●Acquire capabilities to operate more advanced stand-off missiles ●Secure required sufficient quantities|
|Integrated Air and Missile Defense Capabilities|● Reinforce capability to respond to Hypersonic Weapons ●Reinforce capability to respond to miniature Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV)|●Reinforce wide-area air defense capabilities ●More efficient and effective UAV countermeasures|
|Unmanned Defense Capabilities|●Expand the use of UAV to strengthen capabilities to practically operate|●Reinforce capability to control multiple unmanned assets simultaneously, etc.|
|Cross-Domain Operation Capabilities/Civil Protection|●Reinforce Space Domain Awareness (SDA), cybersecurity capabilities, and electromagnetic domain capabilities, etc. ● Reinforce ground, sea, and air domain capabilities that become basis of cross- domain operations|●Further reinforce space operation capability ●Further reinforce cybersecurity capability to enable support for entities other than SDF ● Strengthen ground, maritime, and air capabilities to work with UAV|
|Command and Control/Intelligence-related Functions|●Accelerate decision-making through the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI), etc., while strengthening the resiliency of the network ● Strengthen information acquisition and analysis in both strategic and tactic information, including responses in the cognitive dimension|●Reinforce information gathering and analysis capabilities through the use of AI, etc., while enhancing the system for persistent information gathering and sharing|


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

|Mobile Deployment Capabilities|● Reinforce the SDF's transportation and supply capabilities (deployment/civil protection), including enhancement of the SDF's transportation assets and use of PFI vessels, etc.|●Further enhancements of transportation capability ●Accelerate transportation and supply by improving supply centers, etc.|
|---|---|---|
|Sustainability and Resiliency|●Increase quantity of ammunitions and missiles ●Ensure maximum mobility of equipment except during maintenance ●Improve the resiliency of defense facilities for contingencies ●Secure required ammunition depots, etc.|●Maintain and ensure adequate inventory of ammunitions and guided missiles ●Maintain the mobility ratio ●Further strengthening of defense facilities ●Further securing of ammunition depots and other facilities c, etc. commensurate with ammunition requirements|
|Defense Production and Technological Bases|●Establish strong defense production bases through measures to strengthen the supply chain, etc. ●Focused investment in equipment areas directly linked to future warfare, and a significant reduction in research and development periods ●Early deployment of defense equipment|●Realize innovative equipment ●Maintain strong defense production bases ●Maintain strong defense production bases|
|Human Resource Base|●Secure the necessary number of high- quality human resources from a wide range of sources, including the private sector, by strengthening recruitment capabilities and establishing a new SDF personnel system. ●Reinforce education and research (cyber and other domains, joint operations, medical) ●Improvement of living and working environments and treatment by taking necessary measures against aging barracks and housing and eliminating equipment shortages|●Even amid a declining population eligible for recruitment, continuously and stably secure the necessary human resources, including those with specialized knowledge and skills. ●Further strengthen education and research ●Foster an organizational environment in which all members can demonstrate their individual abilities while maintaining high morale|


※ Accelerate investment in improving mobility, securing ammunition, and fortifying key defense

facilities to maximize the use of existing equipment, while focusing on fundamentally strengthening

core areas of future defense capabilities, such as stand-off defense and unmanned asset defense

52

capabilities.


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

Equipment Type

Upgraded Type-12 surface-to-ship missile
(Surface-, Ship-, Air-ship) Units
Hyper Velocity Gliding Projectile (HVGP)
Hypersonic Guided Missile      Ship-to-surface cruise guided missile       (Tomahawk)      
Type 03 Medium-Range Surface-to-Air
Missile (modified)
Aegis System-Equipped Vessels 2 ships
Airborne Early Warning Aircraft(E-2D)
Interceptor Missiles for Ballistic Missile       Defense (SM-3 Block IIA)
Interceptor Missiles with Upgraded       Capabilities (PAC-3MSE)
Long-Range Ship-to-Air Missiles SM-6      
Various UAVs      USV     UGV     UUV     
Destroyer 12 ships
Submarine 5 ships
Patrol Vessel
Fixed-wing Patrol Aircraft (P-1)
Fighter (F-35A)
Fighter (F-35B)
Fighter Upgrade (F-15)
Stand-off Electronic Warfare Aircraft
Network Electronic Warfare System 2 types
(NEWS)

Signals Intelligence Aircraft (RC-2)

Transport Vessels 8 ships
Transport Aircraft (C-2)
Aerial Refueling and Transport Aircraft
(KC-46A, etc.)

53

|Appendix Table 2|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Classification|Equipment Type|Procurement Quantity|
|(1) Stand-off Defense capabilities|Upgraded Type-12 surface-to-ship missile (Surface-, Ship-, Air-ship) Hyper Velocity Gliding Projectile (HVGP) Hypersonic Guided Missile Ship-to-surface cruise guided missile (Tomahawk)|Surface-type 12 Units - - -|
|(2) Integrated Air and Missile Defense capabilities|Type 03 Medium-Range Surface-to-Air Missile (modified) Aegis System-Equipped Vessels Airborne Early Warning Aircraft(E-2D) Interceptor Missiles for Ballistic Missile Defense (SM-3 Block IIA) Interceptor Missiles with Upgraded Capabilities (PAC-3MSE) Long-Range Ship-to-Air Missiles SM-6|14 Units 2 ships 5 aircraft - - -|
|(3) Unmanned Defense Capabilities|Various UAVs USV UGV UUV|- - - -|
|(4) Cross-Domain Capabilities|Destroyer Submarine Patrol Vessel Fixed-wing Patrol Aircraft (P-1) Fighter (F-35A) Fighter (F-35B) Fighter Upgrade (F-15) Stand-off Electronic Warfare Aircraft Network Electronic Warfare System (NEWS)|12 ships 5 ships 10 aircraft 19 aircraft 40 aircraft 25 aircraft 54 aircraft 1 aircraft 2 types|
|(5) Command and Control/ Intelligence-related Functions|Signals Intelligence Aircraft (RC-2)|3 aircraft|
|(6) Mobile Deployment Capabilities and Civil Protection|Transport Vessels Transport Aircraft (C-2) Aerial Refueling and Transport Aircraft (KC-46A, etc.)|8 ships 6 aircraft 13 aircraft|


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

**Appendix Table 3 (approximately 10 years later)**

Classification Future Posture

Cyber Defense Units
Joint Units
Maritime Transport Units

Active-Duty Personnel

Basic Operational Units

１

１

Airborne Units

１

Amphibious Units
Air Transport Units

１

７

Stand-off Missile Units Joint

Self-Defense Major Units

Units

２

Surface-to-Air Guided Missile
８
Units

１

Electronic Warfare Units
(incl. anti-aircraft electronic

warfare units)

１
Unmanned Vehicle Units

Information Warfare Units

Surface Vessels Units
（Destroyers and Minesweeper
vessels）

Major Submarine Units

Self-Defense

Units Patrol aircraft Units（Fixed-wing

Patrol aircraft Units）
Unmanned Vehicle Units
Information Warfare Units

54

|Classification|Future Posture|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|Joint Units|Cyber Defense Units Maritime Transport Units||1 squadron 1 group|
|Ground Self-Defense Force|Active-Duty Personnel||149,000 people|
||Major Units|Basic Operational Units|９ divisions ５ brigades １ armored division|
|||Airborne Units Amphibious Units Air Transport Units|１ airborne brigade １ amphibious rapid deployment brigade １ helicopter brigade|
|||Stand-off Missile Units Joint Units|７ surface-to-ship guided missile regiments|
||||2 battalions (hyper velocity gliding projectile Intended for the defense of remote islands)|
||||２long-range guided missile units|
|||Surface-to-Air Guided Missile Units|８anti-aircraft artillery groups|
|||Electronic Warfare Units (incl. anti-aircraft electronic warfare units)|１ electronic warfare operations unit (incl.1anti-aircraft electronic warfare unit)|
|||Unmanned Vehicle Units|１ multi-purpose unmanned aerial vehicle unit|
|||Information Warfare Units|１ unit|
|Maritime Self-Defense Force|Major Units|Surface Vessels Units （Destroyers and Minesweeper vessels） Submarine Units Patrol aircraft Units（Fixed-wing Patrol aircraft Units） Unmanned Vehicle Units Information Warfare Units|6 groups (21 divisions) 6 divisions 9 divisions (4 divisions) 2 divisions 1 unit|


-----

[Provisional Translation as of January 17, 2023]

Classification Future Posture

Destroyers
(Aegis-Equipped Destroyers)

Major Aegis System Equipped Vessels
Equipment Patrol Vessels

Submarines
Combat Aircraft Approx. 170

Air Warning & Control Units 4 Aircraft Control & Warning

Fighter Aircraft Units 1 AEW wing (3 squadrons)
Aerial Refueling/Transport Units 13 squadrons

Major Air Transport Units 2 squadrons
Units Surface-to-Air Guided Missile 3 squadrons

Self-Defense

Units 4 groups (24 fire squadrons)
Space Domain Mission Units 1 squadron
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Units 1 squadron
Operational Intelligence Units 1 squadron

Major Combat Aircraft Approx. 430
Equipment Fighters Approx. 320

Note 1: 14 out of the 15 divisions/brigades are operated on the basis of rapid

deployment.

Note2 `：` Regarding the number of fighter aircraft units and fighters, necessary

studies will be conducted by FY 2027 and necessary measures will be taken

in order to further advance the quantitative enhancement of air capability.

In this regard, the possibility of utilizing unmanned aerial vehicles will be

studied.

55

|Classification|Future Posture|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
||Major Equipment|Destroyers (Aegis-Equipped Destroyers) Aegis System Equipped Vessels Patrol Vessels Submarines Combat Aircraft|54 (10) 2 12 22 Approx. 170|
|Air Self-Defense Force|Major Units|Air Warning & Control Units Fighter Aircraft Units Aerial Refueling/Transport Units Air Transport Units Surface-to-Air Guided Missile Units Space Domain Mission Units Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Units Operational Intelligence Units|4 Aircraft Control & Warning Wings 1 AEW wing (3 squadrons) 13 squadrons 2 squadrons 3 squadrons 4 groups (24 fire squadrons) 1 squadron 1 squadron 1 squadron|
||Major Equipment|Combat Aircraft Fighters|Approx. 430 Approx. 320|


-----

